PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SIXTIETH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the
Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Demand No. 31 )
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th May, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th May, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)
260
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SIXTIETH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the
Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Demand No. 31 )
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th May, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th May, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-21
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................................... 22-26
6. M INUTES  ............................................................................................................. 27-33

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2014)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri Bhupinder Singh
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Beig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
22. Shri Nana Patole
23. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
(i)

(ii)
24. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
25. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
27. Shri Nagendra Singh
28. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati V asanthi M.
*31. Shri Chirag Paswan
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P . Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
* Nominated w.e.f.  25th March, 2015

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Two Hundred Sixtieth Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the detailed
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences (Demand No.31).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on 9th April, 2015, the Secretary and other Officers of the
Ministry of Earth Sciences gave an overview of the various activities of the Ministry and the Members
sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Ministry to enable it to scrutinise the
Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministry for replying to the clarifications
sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise
the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 6th May, 2015.
   N
EW D ELHI; ASHWANI  KUMAR
 6 May, 2015 Chairman,
Vaisakha 16, 1937 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
ACROSS : Atmospheric Climate Change Research Observations Services
APOORV : Airborne Platforms For Insitu Observations - Ocean Research
Vessels
ARG : Automatic Rain Gauges
AWS : Automatic Weather Stations
CA T : Centre for Advanced Training
CCEA : Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
CMLRE : Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology
CPCB : Central Pollution Control Board
DWR : Doppler Weather Radars
EFC : Expenditure Finance Committee
ESSO : Earth System Science Organisation
HPC : High Performance Computing
ICAR : Indian Council of Agricultural Research
ICDP : International Continental Deep Drilling Programme
ICMAM : Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management
I1TM : Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology
IMD : India Meteorological Department
INCOIS : Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services
IODP : International Ocean Discovery Programme Modelling and Science
MoES : Ministry of Earth Sciences
MPGO : Multi-parametric Geophysical Observatory
MT : Magneto-Tellurics
NCAOR : National Centre for Antarctica and Ocean Research
NCESS : National Centre for Earth Science and Studies
NCMRWF : National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting
NCS : National Centre for Seismology
(iv)

(v)
NGRI : National Geophysical Research Institute
NIOT : National Institute of Ocean Technology
OBS : Ocean Bottom Seismic
OOMSST : Ocean Observations Modelling Science, Services, Survey,
Minerals and Technology
OSE : Observation Simulation Experiments
OSSE : Observation System Simulation Experiments
O-STORMS : Ocean Services, Technology, Observations, Resources Modelling
and Science
PACER : Polar and Cryosphere Research
PROVe : Polar Remotely Operated Vehicle
REACHOUT : Research, Education and Training Outreach
SAGE : Seismological and Geoscience

REPORT
The holistic understanding and study of the Earth and its processes is vital for the mankind. The
Earth, being a single, interlinked and self-regulating system, together with its components i.e. atmosphere,
oceans, cryosphere, geosphere and biosphere exhibit complex interactions. The scientific understanding
of the Earth system becomes necessary in order to provide greater accuracy in the forecast of weather,
climate and hazards. Moreover, the exploration of polar regions, sea bed and optimum use of resources
is significant for the sustenance of life on earth and developing services for societal benefit.
1.2 The Ministry of Earth Sciences was established in 2006 by the Government of India for better
understanding the complex processes of the Earth system namely ocean, atmosphere, cryosphere and
solid work. To monitor and give an overall policy direction to the Ministry, the Earth System Science
Organisation (ESSO) was also established in the year 2007.
1.3 The Ministry is mandated to provide weather and climate services in varied sectors of agriculture,
aviation, shipping, disasters (cyclones, earthquakes, tsunamis), marine resources, coastal and marine
ecosystem, climate change and under water technology. The Ministry also deals with Antarctica/Arctic
and Seismological research in an integrated manner.
2. OBJECTIVES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE MINISTRY
2.1 The Ministry of Earth Sciences has the following objectives and functions:
• Improving weather forecast and provide advisory to agriculture, aviation, shipping, sports
including the Extended Long Range Seasonal Monsoon forecast;
• Providing a wide range of ocean information advisories including fishery information;
• Improving the understanding of Polar Science and its implications for climate change;
• Developing technology for harnessing marine resources;
• Conducting survey for assessing non-living resources;
• Assessing coastal marine productivity and Marine Ecosystems;
• Improving understanding of Clime Change Science;
• Providing early warning of natural hazards viz. cyclone, tsunami, sea level rise; and
• Promoting basic research including capacity building in the Earth Systems Science.
3. ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE MINISTRY
3.1 The Ministry of Earth Sciences functions through the Earth Commission. The executive arm of the
Ministry i.e. 'The Earth System Science Organisation (ESSO)' is responsible for implementing its policies
and programmes. It has four major branches of earth sciences viz., (i) Ocean Science and Technology
Services; (ii) Atmospheric and Climate Science Services; (iii) Geoscience and Technology; and (iv) Polar
Science and Cryosphere. The policies/programmes of the ESSO are being pursued through its autonomous

2
bodies and subordinate offices. The institutions, under the ESSO includes, India Meteorological Department
(IMD), National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF) and Indian Institute of
Tropical Meteorology (IITM), National Centre for Antarctica and Ocean Research (NCAOR), National
Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT), Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS),
Centre for Marine Living Resources (CMLRE) and Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management
(ICMAM).
4. FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS FOR THE EARTH COMMISSION
4.1 The Committee asked the Ministry about the progress made with respect to the devolution of
financial and administrative power to the Earth Commission in order to enable it to function effectively.
The Ministry informed that a note for the Cabinet for giving financial and administrative powers to the
Earth Commission, on the lines of Space Commission and Atomic Energy Commission, was submitted
to the Cabinet Secretariat for necessary action with the approval of the then Honourable Minister for
Earth Sciences.
4.2 After carrying out inter-ministerial consultations with relevant Ministries/Department only the
Department of Expenditure did not support the proposal and raised certain observations which were
examined by the Ministry. The comments on these observations were sent to the Department of Expenditure
seeking their approval for preparing a revised note for the Cabinet for necessary approvals. The Ministry
informed that the approval of Department of Expenditure is still awaited.
4.3 The Committee feels that without the devolution of financial and administrative power to
the Earth Commission, the functioning of the Ministry seriously gets hampered. The Committee
reiterates the recommendation made in its 243rd Report that immediate measures should be
taken to devolve financial and administrative power to the Earth Commission for its effective
functioning.
4.4 The detailed budget allocation of the Ministry of Earth sciences, for the year 2015-16 was considered
by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
and Forests and climate change in its meeting held on the 9th April, 2015.
5. FINANCIAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF MINISTRY – AN ANALYSIS OF TREND OF UTILISATION
5.1 A comparison of the B.E., R.E. allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the Ministry for
the years 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 is given below:-
(` in Crore)
Head 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
Budget Estimates ` 1688.00 ` 1690.00 ` 1699.00
Revised Estimates ` 1195.00 ` 1308.00 ` 1333.65
Actual Expenditure ` 1172.40 ` 1243.30 ---
% Budget Utilization ` 98.10% ` 95.00% ---
with respect to R.E.
5.2 The Committee observes that in the last three years, B.E. allocation has been reduced at
the R.E. level. The Committee takes strong exception to such reduction which causes unnecessary

3
delay in the completion of programmes/projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends to
avoid curtailment of funds at R.E. stage which has been a regular trend in all the years and which
severely hampers the programmes/projects.
6. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015-16
6.1 The Committee had been informed that the budgetary allocations for the Ministry in B.E. 2015-16
is ` 1619.70 crore comprising of ` 1179.00 crore as the 'Plan' and ` 440.70 crore as the 'Non-Plan'
outlay. The Committee finds that there has been a reduction in the budgetary allocation to the Ministry
in this financial year as compared to the allocation of ` 1699.00 crore in 2014-15. The Ministry informed
the Committee that the plan allocation of B.E. ` 1179.00 crore for 2015-16 will be utilized mostly for
sustenance of the routine activities pertaining to various observing systems, ocean vessels, operation and
maintenance of various services rendered by different ESSO-MoES units and salaries of scientists.
Because of minimal funds available, the Ministry will not be able to undertake new activities/initiatives
which are required for accelerated performance of services for benefit of the society. The committee
was informed that the Ministry has an additional requirement of ` 371 crore for undertaking various
activities/initiatives during the current year. The Committee feels that it is a challenging task before the
Ministry in the years ahead to continue with the implementation and completion of a gamut of policies
and programmes with the cuts in the budget.
6.2 The Committee observes that there has been a drastic reduction in the budgetary allocation
in the financial year 2015-16 to the tune of ````` 79.30 crore which is a serious blockade in taking
up new activities/initiatives by the Ministry for which additional finds of ````` 371 crore are required.
The Committee recommends that efforts be made by the Ministry by prudently utilizing the
given allocated budget and by planning and targeting the missions and programmes in an efficient
manner.
7. RATIONALISATION OF THE SCHEMES
7.1 The Committee was informed by the Ministry that during the year 2015-16, as a part of rationalization,
the existing 14 Central Sectoral Schemes have been restructured into 7 major schemes by the Ministry
on the proposal of the Ministry of Finance for effective monitoring, implementation and to ensure
efficient management of public expenditure. The schemes are:-
(1) Atmosphere & Climate Research - Modelling Observing Systems & Services (ACROSS)
(2) Ocean Services, Technology, Observations, Resources Modelling and Science (O-STORMS)
(3) Polar and Cryosphere Research (PACER)
(4) Seismological and Geoscience (SAGE)
(5) Airborne Platforms for in-situ observations - Ocean Research Vessels (APOORV)
(6) High Performance Computing (HPC)
(7) Research, Education and Training Outreach (REACHOUT)

4
7.2 The Budget Estimates of the Schemes in 2014-15 and 2015-16 are given below:-
(` in Crore)
Sl. No. Name of Scheme Budget Rationalised Schemes Budget
Estimates Estimates
2014-15 2015-16
1. Atmospheric observation `190 (1) Atmospheric Climate Change Research `250
& Services Observations Services (ACROSS)
2. AtmosphericProcesses, `100
Modelling
3. Climate Change Research `47
4. Ocean Observations `90 (2) Ocean Observations Modelling `300
Science, Services, Survey, Minerals
and Technology (OOMSST)
5. Ocean Science & Services `80
6. Ocean Technology `100
7. Ocean Survey & Mineral `60
8. Polar Science & `200 (3) Polar and Cryosphere Research (PCR) `294
Cryosphere
9. Seismological Research `100 (4) Seismological and Geoscience (SAGE) `175
10. Geoscience `54
11. Airborne Platforms `20 (5) Airborne Platflorm and Ocean `75
Research Vessels (APORVS)
12. Ocean Research Vessels `45
13. High Performance `90 (6) High Performance Computing (HPC) `10
computing
14. Res. Eduction, Training `105 (7) Research Eduction, and Outreach `75
& Outreach (R EACHOUT)
T
OTAL `1281 T OTAL `1179
7.3 The budgetary allocation for the programme Atmospheric Climate Change Research Observations
Services (ACROSS) has been reduced from ` 337.00 crore in B.E. 2014-15 to ` 250.00 crore in
B.E. 2015-16. The allocation for the Ocean Observations Modelling Science, Services, Survey, Minerals
and Technology (OOMSST) in 2015-16 is ` 300.00 crore which is less than ` 330.00 crore in B.E.
2015-16. Drastic reduction can also be seen in the allocations for programme of High Performance
computing which has gone down from ` 90.00 crore in B.E. 2014-15 to ` 10.00 crore in B.E.

5
2015-16 and similarly, for Research, Education, Training & Outreach, the outlay of ` 105.00 crore in
B.E. 2014-15 has been reduced to ` 75.00 crore in B.E. 2015-16.
7.4 The Committee expresses its unhappiness that for most of the programmes there has been
a reduction in the budgetary allocation including the programme of High Performance Computing
which is an important programme of the ministry. The Committee feels that reduction in the
number of programmes the budgetary reduction in allocation of programmes after clubbing them
together will not ensure rationalisation of expenditure as the funds required for the programme
will not be sufficient enough to meet the expenses of the programmes. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that along with clubbing of programmes, adequate funds should also be allocated to
ensure efficient functioning.
8. POLAR SCIENCES AND CRYOSPHERE
8.1 The Committee was informed that the programme of Polar Sciences and Cryosphere entails the
study of Antarctica, Arctic, and glaciers of Himalayas and the impact of climate and climate change in
these regions and its variability over the Indian region. The study of Antarctica and Arctic regions are
important as these regions not only govern the earth's climate but are also the storehouse which archive
its past climatic history.
8.2 The Ministry informed the Committee that India had successfully commenced operations at 3rd
Indian Permanent Station, Bharati, in the Larsemann Hills, East Antarctica which would give a major
thrust to study in the field of glaciology, atmosphere, paleoclimate and Polar biology. India has been
accorded observer status in the Arctic Council in recognition of India's scientific contribution and
endeavour in Polar research. For the first time, a Multi-sensored Moored Observatory off the Kingsford,
Norway about 1100 km away from the North Pole, to understand interaction between fjord and sea as
well as the response of the Arctic to climate variability was installed. The design, development and
installation of this underwater moored observatory have been executed by ESSO-NIOT (National Institute
of Ocean Technology), in collaboration with ESSO-NCAOR (National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean
Research), Goa. A team of scientists from ESSO-NIOT and ESSO-NCAOR successfully executed its
deployment on 23rd July 2014.
8.3 The Committee desired to know the reasons for increase in the budgetary allocation to the programme
from ` 200.00 crore in B.E. 2014-15 to ` 294.00 crore in B.E. 2015-16 and the details of additional
activities proposed to be undertaken by the Ministry with the enhanced allocation in this scheme. In its
response, the Ministry informed that the Polar Science & Cryosphere Scheme comprises the following
major activities:
• Expedition to Antarctica
• Project on cryosphere and Climate
• Paleoclimatic studies
• Himalayan cryosphere studies
• Indian Arctic Programme
• Southern Ocean studies

6
• National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR) -Manpower, Operation and
Maintenance
• Construction and commissioning of the Polar Research Vessel
8.4 While the outlay for all the activities at (a) to (g) above for 2015-16 has been kept at almost the
same level in 2014-15, the enhanced outlay of ` 94.00 crore is primarily to cater to the requirements
related to the construction of the polar research vessel.
8.5 The Ministry further informed the Committee that 34th Expedition was initiated in December 2014
for Maitri and Bharati - the two permanent stations in the Antarctica and, under the biogeochemistry and
Paleo-environmental studies, a 70 cm sediment core was drilled including the drilling of sediment cores
measuring 95cm and 140cm. The Ministry also informed that a Polar Remotely Operated Vehicle (PROVe)
was indigenously developed and deployed in Antarctica during February - March 2015. PROVe recorded
the scientific data such as bottom imagery, Irradiance, Temperature, Conductivity, Dissolved Oxygen,
etc.
8.6 On being required about initiation of any project to undertake cryosphere/glaciological studies in the
Himalayas, the Ministry informed that NCAOR is undertaking a major research project entitled "Cryosphere
and Climate" during the 12 Five Year Plan. One of the major components of the project is the study of
Himalayan glaciers. As part of the Himalayan Glaciology Project, NCAOR has undertaken major field
based studies during 2013 and 2014 on six glaciers of the Chandra basin in Lahul-Spiti in Himachal
Pradesh. The major glaciers that are being studied include: Samudra Tapu, Sutri Dhaka, Batal, Bara Sigri,
Nal Kanal and Gepang. In the study, observation was made on the melting of glaciers (in Ctype - debris
free and D-type - debris covered glaciers).
8.7 The Committee is of the view that the programme is one of the most important programmes
of the Ministry and the activities pursued in the Antarctica, Arctic and Himalayan region is of
extreme use for better understanding of Indian Climate and other societal benefits. The Committee
also observes that the programme is of strategic importance and in order to make our country's
presence in Arctic and Antarctica felt, this programme is of utmost importance. The research
undertaken in polar regions will help understand the fragile Himalayan region. The Committee
recommends that the programme should be undertaken diligently and in a well-planned manner.
9. POLAR RESEARCH VESSEL
9.1 The Committee was informed that the Polar Research Vessel will help sustain two Indian research
bases in Antarctica (Maitri and Bharti); dovetail research initiatives in the Southern Ocean domain with
those in the proximal regions of the Antarctic continent; widen the thrust on Arctic research disciplines
undertaken through Indian Station Himadri, and provide a suitable research platform for other tropical
sea programmes. Such a vessel can not only perform the dual functions, research and logistics, in the
polar region but also serve as a research platform for scientists undertaking scientific research in the
ocean realm including Southern Ocean contributing substantially and fruitfully for the polar research of
the world community. Indian scientists have been having a sustained presence in the Arctic since 2007.
With India's entry into the Arctic Council as an Observer along with China, Singapore, Japan and South
Korea, it has become strategically important to enhance our scientific investigations endeavour, in line

7
with our shared international commitments towards understanding of the global climate change phenomenon,
to have an increased visibility in the Arctic too, facilitating India to assume a lead role among the Asian
Nations active in the Polar Regions. In the context of India having expanded its scientific presence to
the Arctic as well and the country's growing strategic interests in the polar and ocean domain, a polar
research vessel would serve as the perfect vehicle for building up on our sustained presence and for
enhanced understanding of ocean processes and their linkages.
9.2 The Committee desired to know the progress made so far in procuring Polar Research Vessel. In
response, the Ministry informed that the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA) in its meeting
held on 29th October 2014 approved the proposal of Ministry of Earth Sciences for acquisition of Polar
Research Vessel (PRV) at a cost of `1051.13 crore for a period of 34 months from the date of the
approval. An administrative order in favour of the implementing agency National Centre for Antarctic &
Ocean Research (NCAOR), Goa for acquisition of PRV was issued on 14th November 2014. The
Ministry further informed that more funds are needed for the acquisition of Polar Research Vessel. On
an enquiry the Ministry informed that an amount of ` 315 crore would be required for the vessel in
2015-16 (May 2015 to February 2016) However, the funds available is only ` 140 crore. Thus, additional
funds required by the Ministry for the vessel during the current financial year are ` 175 crore.
9.3 The Committee observes that the progress of the research activities on the polar regions
depends upon the infrastructure that includes Polar Research Vessel. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the vessel be acquired expeditiously. The Committee notes that the amount for
the vessel had been approved but more funds to the tune of ````` 175 crore are required to acquire
the vessel. The Committee, therefore, also recommends that adequate funds be made available
to the Ministry for acquisition of the vessel.
10. SEISOMOLGICAL  AND GEOSCIENCE (SAGE) PROGRAMME
10.1 This programme aims to undertake research relating to solid-earth and geoscience including the
study of earthquakes and to generate inputs for earthquake disaster mitigation. The Ministry informed
the Committee that the Seismological and Geoscience programmes have been clubbed together in view
of the close inter linkages and also in compliance with the directive from Ministry of Finance regarding
rationalization of schemes. The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the clubbing of the two
programmes of different magnitude, one related to Seismology and earthquakes and other with ocean and
deep see drilling. In response, the Ministry informed that the Geosciences is not related to only ocean
and deep sea drilling, it encompasses, geodynamics of the Indian sub-continent and earthquake hazard
assessment, deep imaging of Indian lithosphere, studies related to Andaman-Nicobar subduction zone,
active faults, climate and tectonics etc. In a broader sense, the Geoscience covers the activities related
to Seismological application and vice-versa. The main activities under seismological and Geoscience
(SAGE) programme proposed to be undertaken during 2015-16 are:-
• Drilling and instrumentation of pilot bore hole in Koyna.
• Procurement of broadband seismometer (BBS) systems to augment the existing systems.
• To initiate construction activities related to National Centre for Seismology (NCS).
• Active fault mapping research.

8
• To support existing observational network including Multi-parametric Geophysical Observatory
(MPGO).
• R & D programmes including procurement of small equipments and payment of salary to
National Centre for Earth Science Studies (NCESS).
• Payment of annual contribution to International Ocean Discovery Programme (IODP) and
International Continental Deep Drilling Programme (ICDP).
• To initiate creation of Geochronology facility.
10.2 The details of Budget allocation and utilization under Seismological and Geoscience programme
during 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16 are as under:-
(` in Crore)
Head Name of 2013-14 2014-15 Rationalised 2015-16
Scheme scheme
Budget Seismological ` 80.00 ` 100.00 SAGE ` 175.00
Estimates Research
Geoscience ` 15.00 ` 54.00
Revised Seismological ` 57.00 ` 74.35 SAGE ---
Estimates Research
Geoscience ` 15.00 ` 53.51
Actual Seismological ` 46.97 --- SAGE ---
Expenditure Research ---
Geoscience ` 8.11
10.3 The Budget distribution under the Seismological and Geoscience programme for 2015-16 is as
follow:-
(` in Crore)
Sl. Programmes 2015-16
No.
1 Koyna deep drilling project ` 20.00
2 Observational Network ` 15.00
3 National Centre for Seismology ` 10.00
4 Facility for Geochronology ` 22.70
5 Microzonation of 30 city ` 15.00
6 Seismicity and earthquake precursor programme ` 20.00
7 IODP & ICDP ` 7.80
8 National Centre for Earth Science and Studies (NCESS) `~25.00
TOTAL ` 175.00

9
10.4 The Ministry has undertaken deep drilling project which includes deep drilling, establishment of a
borehole observatory in the Koyna - Warna region and a Bore-Hole Geophysics Research Laboratory in
Karad (Maharashtra). When the Committee enquired about the status of setting up of the lab in the
Koyna-Warna region which faces regular occurrence of earthquakes, the Ministry informed the Committee
that the scientific deep drilling programme in Koyna -Warna region of Maharashtra is being implemented
by Ministry in close association with National Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI) as per the Cabinet
approval.
10.5 As part of the 'Preparatory Phase', various studies/investigations were taken up which included
Broadband Seismology, Magneto-Tellurics (MT), Land-based Gravity-Magnetics, Airborne Gravity and
LIDAR surveys, etc. These studies were supplemented by the exploratory boreholes at a depth of ~ 1.5
km surrounding the seismic zone. Out of the 10 planned boreholes, 8 have been completed to depths
of 1522.5m (Rasati), 1196m (Udgiri), 1134m (Kundi), 1211.6m (Nayari), 1500m (Panchgani), 1503m
(Ukhalu), 1500m (Paneri), 1103m (Khadi) with logging and heat flow measurements. One more borehole
at Phansavale (Warna) has been drilled upto 891 m. The studies helped to delineate the sub-surface
structure around the seismic zone most prospective for scientific deep drilling and fault zone investigations.
The Committee was informed that the main phase has now been started and the activities initiated in
preparatory phase viz. monitoring of seismic activity using borehole and surface seismographs, have been
subsumed in the main project which includes drilling of two 2-3 km pilot boreholes in the next one and
half years followed by drilling of deep boreholes of 5-7 km each. A proposal for construction of office
and core repository in Karad is under consideration of finance division.
10.6 The Ministry informed the Committee that for drilling 1 - pilot bore hole and for setting up of
Research Laboratory, total funds required is ` 52 crore out of which only a meagre amount of ` 4 crore
is available to the Ministry. The additional funds required by the Ministry is ` 48 crore for both the
activities.
10.7 The Committee takes note of the activities undertaken in the preparatory phase which is
relevant for collecting seismological data and for continuing the seismological research activities
in the main phase. The Committee recommends that the main phase of the programme be
carried on taking inputs from preparatory phase and to complete the deep drilling of the bore
holes essential for understanding the regular occurrence of the earthquakes in the region.
10.8 The Committee takes serious note of the fact that additional ````` 48 crore is required and only
meagre amount of ````` 4 crore are available to the Ministry for such an important programme
which is critical in nature seeing the regular occurrence of earthquakes in the region. The
Committee recommends that ensuring funds to the programme should be a high priority as the
research on earthquakes will serve two purposes of monitoring critical parameters in the "near
field" of earthquakes and providing India a unique opportunity to take global leadership role in
this important scientific issue.
11. NATIONAL CENTRE FOR SEISMOLOGY
11.1 The Ministry intimated the Committee that the proposal for the setting up of National Centre for
Seismology (NCS) was considered by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). The EFC decided that
the establishment of the Centre for Seismology will be under the administrative control of Ministry of

10
Earth Sciences and the Centre can be an integral part of the Ministry, as a division or a Directorate with
necessary delegation of powers. As per the recommendation of EFC, the Ministry has now created a
National Centre for Seismology as an Attached Office of the Ministry of Earth Sciences. Also, a
committee has been set up to work out details of separation of manpower, posts, infrastructure, equipment,
etc. from IMD to NCS.
11.2 The Committee notes that the Ministry created a National Centre for Seismology as an
attached office of the Ministry of Earth Sciences. The Committee also takes note of the fact that
the separation of manpower, infrastructure etc. from IMD to NCS and creation of present posts
still needs to be done. The Committee, therefore, recommends for the early creation of manpower,
posts, infrastructure etc. necessary to start the functioning of National Centre for Seismology.
12. MICROZONATION OF CITIES
12.1 On the progress of the seismic hazard Microzonation of metro cities of India, the Ministry informed
the Committee that the Seismic microzonation of Delhi on 1:10,000 scale has been completed and various
thematic maps prepared including, Site classification, Liquefaction susceptibility, Peak Ground Acceleration
at 2% and 10%, Probability of Exceedence, Design spectra and Integrated Hazard index, etc. The
Committee was informed that the Microzonation of Bangalore on 1:20000 scale was completed in 2009.
Microzonation of Kolkata is expected to be completed in the next one year. As a part of 12th Microzonation
of 30 selected cities, falling in seismic zone V , IV and III with 0.5 million population and State capitals,
has also been initiated and Base maps of targeted cites available with Survey of India have been procured
and remaining are in process. Also, an MoU between NCS and GSI has been signed on "General
framework for sharing of geological, geophysical and other data/information for enrichment of Geoscientific
knowledge base for sustainable development" on 25-7-2014. Under provisions of this MoU, digital
geological and other related maps for targeted cities are being acquired.
12.2 The Committee takes note of the importance of microzonation of cities on account of
vulnerability of India's land to severe earthquakes and recommends to Government to take such
purposive measures in consultation with State Governments and stakeholders as would mitigate
the consequences of a potential earthquake in the vulnerable areas. The Committee also
recommends that microzonation of cities particularly those falling in seismic zone V , IV and III
should be taken up expeditiously and necessary geophysical, geological and other information/
data should be acquired from Geological Survey of India so that delay in microzonation of cities
is avoided.
13. OCEAN SERVICES, TECHNOLOGY OBSERV ATIONS, RESOURCES MODELLING AND
SCIENCE (O-STORMS)
13.1 The Ministry intimated that four programmes relating to the ocean sector viz., Ocean Observations,
Ocean Science Services, Ocean Survey and Mineral Resources and Ocean Technology had been clubbed
together on the request of Ministry of Finance to rationalize the programmes for effective monitoring
implementation and to ensure efficient management of public expenditure. The Ministry had also informed
that the various components of O-STORMS require great deal of coordindation and cooperation and
prioritization of fund utilisation to achieve the overall targets.

11
13.2 The details of Budget allocation and utilization under Ocean Services, Technology, Observations,
Resources Modelling and Science (O-STROMS) programme during 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16 are
as under:-
(` in Crore)
Name of 2013-14 2014-15 Rationalised 2015-16
Scheme Scheme
Budget Ocean ` 45.00 ` 45.00 O-STORMS ` 300.00
Estimates observations
Ocean Science ` 86.00 ` 90.00
Services
Ocean Survey ` 70.00 ` 80.00
and Mineral
Resources
Ocean ` 90.00 ` 100.00
Technology
Revised Ocean ` 40.00 ` 45.00 O-STORMS ---
Estimates observations
Ocean Science ` 70.00 ` 71.08
Services
Ocean Survey ` 50.00 ` 60.43
and Mineral
Resources
Ocean ` 83.52 ` 51.00
Technology
Actual Ocean ` 38.57 --- O-STORMS ---
Expenditure observations
Ocean Science ` 68.31 ---
Services
Ocean Survey ` 41.03 ---
and Mineral
Resources
Ocean ` 83.52 ---
Technology
13.3 The Committee finds that the total plan B.E. allocation for the O-STORMS programmes was
` 315.00 crore in 2014-15 whereas in B.E. 2015-16, only ` 300.00 crore have been cumulatively
allocated for this programme. The Ministry informed that the reason is primarily the overall reduction
in allocation for the Ministry by ` 102.00 crore. The cut has been absorbed in all the programs including

12
the O-STORMS. However, efforts will be made by the Ministry to seek additional funds for this
programme at the time of RE stage of 2015-16. Thus, the Ministry assured that the reduction in the
allocation in the current year will be taken care of.
13.4 The Committee takes strong exception to the overall reduction of the budgetary allocation
to the Ministry that resulted in the reduction in the budgetary allocation to the O-STORMS
programme which is a significant programme of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should make all efforts to seek additional funds for this
programme at the R.E. stage without which the activities under this programme will suffer
setback and unnecessary delays.
14. POLYMETALLIC NODULES AND GAS HYDRATES
14.1 Polymetallic Nodules found at the sea bottom at a depth of 4km. to 5km. in the Central Indian
Ocean Basin are important from the perspective of strategic and future resources of essential elements
like copper, nickel, cobalt and manganese. The Committee enquired about the efforts being made to
improve commercial exploitation of polymetallic nodules which will be a source of energy crucial for a
developing country like India. The Ministry informed that commercial mining of polymetallic nodules has
not started and presently, efforts are focused on technology development. A remotely operated submersible
and in-situ soil tester, both capable of operation upto a water depth of 6000 meters, has been successfully
developed and tested in Central Indian Ocean Basin. These instruments are useful to assess the environmental
and sea-bed conditions. As part of phase-wise development of a mining system a shallow bed crawler
base mining system has been developed and tested at a water depth of 500 meters. A demonstration pilot
plant with a capacity to process 500 kg nodules per day was commissioned successfully for extracting
copper, nickel and cobalt at Hindustan Zinc Limited, Udaipur. Dedicated campaigns have been carried out
by the Ministry at the semi-continuous demonstration pilot plant to process 500 kg. of polymetallic
nodules per day.
14.2 On the hydrothermal sulphide exploration program, the Ministry informed the Committee that seven
cruises of 30 day each have been conducted in the Central Indian Ocean Basin for acquisition of marine
and geophysical data. The Committee was also informed that the International Seabed Authority has
approved India's application for exploration of Polymetallic Sulphides in Central and South West Indian
Ridges in its session conducted in July-August, 2014.
14.3 The Ministry informed the Committee that estimation of gas-hydrates in KG basin from Ocean
bottom Seismic (OBS) data had been acquired which is found to be varying between 17% to 20% along
the seismic line.
14.4 The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry for the development of technology
for extraction of polymetallic nodules and gas-hydrates and the explorations significant for
economic and strategic purposes. The Committee recommends to undergo further exploration,
especially the exploration of Polymetallic Sulphides after getting approval from the International
Seabed Authority and more needs to be done by the Ministry in the field of gas-hydrates
exploration. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to take this programme with full vigour and
with all serious efforts so that it plays important role in bridging the gap in energy availability.

13
14.5 The Ministry informed the Committee that in order to cater to the need for scientific and engineering
investigation for survey of mineral resources in ocean basin, it is pertinent to develop a manned submersible
for the depth rating of 6000 m for the Indian ocean. This will aid direct human investigation of
underwater resources. A manned submersible is being developed by ESSO-National Institute of Ocean
Technology (NIOT) - a first of its kind for India. The submersible is expected to be ready by 2019. For
this, the Ministry requires ` 65 crore out of which only ` 25 crore are available. The additional funds
required are ` 40 crore by the Ministry to develop the manned submersible.
14.6 The committee recommends that additional funds as required for the development of the
manned submersible be made available to the Ministry.
15. HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING (HPC)
15.1 The Development of High Performance computers is significant for improving the quality of
atmospheric, oceanic, polar and geosciences services and enhancing accuracy in monsoon forecasts,
studies related to observation simulation experiments (OSE), observation system simulation experiments
(OSSE) and targeted observation experiments, ensemble predictions for weather, ocean state, cyclone
track, short and medium range weather forecast, satellite and in-situ data assimilation, understanding of
the science of climate change and climate variability, etc.
15.2 The Ministry informed the Committee that in order to process and assimilate huge volume of global
scale, weather and climate data for a suite of forecast models, computation facilities have been substantially
augmented to the Petaflop scale.
15.3 The details of the Budget allocation and utilization under High Performance Computing (HPC) during
2013-15, 2014-15 and 2015-16 are as under:-
(
` in Crore)
Head 2012-13 2013-14 2014-15
Budget Estimates ` 125.00 ` 90.00 ` 10.00
Revised Estimates ` 104.00 ` 68.54 ---
Actual Expenditure ` 103.02 --- ---
15.4 The Committee notes that the budgetary allocation to the High Performance computing programme
had been reduced during the last three years. The amount allocated to the programme in B.E. 2013-14
was ` 125.00 crore which was reduced to ` 90.00 crore in B.E. 2014-15 and again it has been reduced
to ` 10.00 crore in B.E. 2015-16. The reduction to the tune of ` 80.00 crore is drastic in the financial
year 2015-16 which is certainly going to greatly hamper the augmentation of the computation facilities
and is a matter of grave concern.
15.5 The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the reasons for reduction of budgetary allocation
to the programme from ` 90.00 crore in B.E. 2014-15 to ` 68.54 crore at the R.E. stage. The Ministry
replied that due to the reduction in R.E. allocation during financial year 2014-15 for the entire Ministry
which was reduced by about 25%, the amount for the programme was subsequently reduced in order
to cater to the requirements of the other ongoing programmes.

14
15.6 The Ministry also informed the Committee that a token provision of ` 10.00 crore has been kept
this year for induction of manpower, preparation of RFP, tender document and initiation of data centre
preparation. Based on the progress, the enhancement of budget will be sought at the R.E. stage.
15.7 The Committee was further informed of the repercussions which the overall reduction of the
budgetary allocation will have on the augmentation of HPC. The augmentation of the computation
facilities will have to be deferred by more than one year for the time being. The planned activities of
utilization of very high resolution models for improved prediction of severe weather, large number of
ensemble members for coupled land, ocean atmospheric models for improved prediction for monsoon
and ocean related services will also have to be postponed.
15.8 The Committee recommends enhancement of budgetary allocation to High Performance
Computing programme so that strategic and essential activities requiring High Performance
Computing are not adversely impacted. The Committee therefore, recommends increase in the
budgetary allocation to the programme at the R.E. stage.
16. ATOMOSPHERE & CLIMATE RESEARCH - MODELLING OBSERVING SYSTEMS &
SERVICES (ACROSS)
16.1 The details of the Budget Allocation and Utilization under the programme Atmosphere & Climate
Research - Modelling Observing systems & Services (ACROSS) during 2013-15, 2014-15 and 2015-16
are as under:-
(
` in Crore)
Head Name of the Scheme 2013-14 2014-15 Rationalised 201-16
Scheme
Budget Atmospheric Observation ` 200.00 ` 190.00 ACROSS ` 250.00
Estimates Systems Network
Atmospheric Processes ` 70.00 ` 100.00
and Modelling and
Services
Climate Change Research ` 65.00 ` 47.00
Revised Atmospheric Observation ` 129.00 ` 87.00 ACROSS
Estimates Systems Network
Atmospheric Processes ` 53.00 ` 64.63
and Modelling and
Services
Climate Change Research ` 30.00 ` 32.59
Actual Atmospheric Observation ` 117.25 --- ACROSS
Expenditure Systems Network
Atmospheric Processes ` 50.08 ---
and Modelling and
Services
Climate Change Research ` 29.82 --

15
16.2 The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the proposed plans and activities under the
programme Atmosphere & Climate Research - Modelling Observing systems & Services (ACROSS). The
Ministry informed the Committee that ACROSS is an integrated programme of three major sub-programmes:-
(1) Atmospheric Observation Systems Network
(2) Atmospheric Processes and Modelling and Services
(3) Climate Change Research
16.3 The expenses for the above three merged sub-programmes shall be met from the Budget Estimate
allocation of ` 250.00 crore for the financial year 2015-16. The Committee notes that the integrated
budgetary allocation had been reduced from ` 337.00 crore in B.E. 2014-15 to ` 250.00 crore in B.E.
2015-16. Further the BE allocation had seen reductions in the R.E. stage in 2014-15 in all the three major
sub-programmes.
16.4 The Ministry informed the Committee that since ` 250.00 crore budgetary allocation for ACROSS
will not be sufficient for fully implementing the planned activities under various sub-components of
Atmospheric observation and Services, additional allocations atleast to the tune of ` 75-100 crore would
be required to meet the capital outflow expected for implementation of high priority programmes like
Himalayan Meteorology Programme and high impact severe weather warning systems, etc.
16.5 The Committee observes that the integrated budgetary allocation for the programme ACROSS
had been reduced to the tune of ````` 87.00 crore which is a matter of serious concern and which
will greatly hamper the planned activities of the programme. The Committee takes note that
additional funds are needed to meet the requirements of important programmes including
Himalayan Meteorology Programme. The Committee, therefore, recommends that requisite funds
be made available to the Ministry so that the programmes of national interest are not mired in
unnecessary delays.
16.6 The Ministry stated that the subject of aerosol and cloud interactions is one of the most important
aspects because of its role in understanding tropical clouds which is crucial for improved weather and
climate predictions. The Ministry is procuring a research aircraft of medium size as the National Facility
for Airborne Research which will be managed by ESSO-Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM),
Pune. This aircraft will be used for all airborne atmospheric research in country and is planned to be
positioned at Pune. But, for this purpose, the Ministry requires an amount of ` 60 crore against which
the fund available to the Ministry is only ` 1 crore. Therefore, additional funds to the amount of ` 59
crore are required by the Ministry for the procurement of the research aircraft.
16.7 The Committee notes that the funds available to the Ministry to procure a research aircraft
for all airborne atmospheric research is very meagre. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the additional requirement of ````` 59 crore be met to avoid any obstruction in the procurement
of aircraft.
17. ACCURACY IN WEATHER FORECASTING
17.1 The Committee notes that the Ministry is mandated to make weather forecasting for the country
as a whole and region-wise. The Ministry informed the Committee that the weather forecasting capacities

16
have been enhanced after the implementation of improved forecast suits of models on commissioning of
High Performance computing (HPC) systems. Assimilation of all global radiance data (including INSAT
3D data) has enhanced the weather forecasting capacities for the production of forecast products at
22km. grid globally and 9kms./3kms. grid over India/regional/mega city domains.
Range of Forecasts     Improvement
Short Range Monsoon Forecasts 50-60% to 70-95%
(upto 3 days in advance) (monsoon season)
District level medium range rainfall (i) 60-70% to 75-85%
(upto 5-7 days in advance) (monsoon season)
(ii) 70-75% to 85%
(non monsoon season)
17.2 The Ministry informed the Committee that medium range forecast (3-7 days in advance) compared
well with USA, but slightly lower with respect to Europe. The Ministry also informed that the development
of advanced technology for assimilation of new observations in high resolution numerical weather
prediction models (from 2 to 30 GB per day) was made possible through High Performance Computing
Systems (HPC).
17.3 Track and landfall forecasts of tropical cyclones have improved by about 18%. The Ministry stated
that ESSO-IMD currently operates 5 Doppler Weather Radars (DWR) at Chennai, Machilipatnam,
Visakhapatnam, Kolkata, Sriharikotta on the east coast along with a network of Automatic Weather
stations (AWS) and automatic Rain Guages (ARG) for continuous weather surveillance over the Bay of
Bengal. The Origin, development/movement of severe weather phenomena (thunder storms, heavy rainfall
from lows/depressions over the land) are regularly monitored through DWRs and with other observing
systems.
17.4 The Ministry stated that a complete system on location specific information on Air Quality forecast
has been developed. This provides not only the current information on the Air quality over different
regions of the city, but also the Air quality forecast for next 24 hours in advance. After successful
implementation in Delhi and Pune, it is now being done for Ahmedabad and Mumbai. For this, the
Ministry requires ` 24 crore but only ` 10 crore are available and additional funds required are ` 14
crore.
17.5 The Committee enquired the Ministry about the studies/prediction made on the flash floods in J&K
in 2014. In response, the Ministry replied that all necessary rainfall forecasts were made 3-5 days in
advance for the J&K region and provided to the concerned State Government authorities to take possible
precautionary measures and response action. Based on the anticipated rainfall in the upper catchments
of the Kashmir valley provided by the ESSO-IMD, the hydrological response leading to the floods are
assessed/managed by the Central Water Commission and the State Governments.
17.6 The Committee suggested the Ministry to release the forecasts necessary for the paddy cultivators
in the month of September because paddy cultivation takes a long period of 120 days. To this, the
Ministry replied in affirmative to release the forecast in the month of September. The Committee also

17
observed that the climate changes and climatic variability are on the rise as seen in the unseasonal rains
in April in 2015 and asked the Ministry about the contributions made to study the climatic variability in
agriculture, disaster management etc. The Committee also asked for an action plan to grope with the
problems of climate change and its effects.
17.7 The Committee notes the improvement in the accuracy of weather predictions including the
predictions of the recent flash floods in J&K. The Committee feels that the accuracy in prediction
of weather depends upon the augmentation in High Computing Systems. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the accuracy be improved further to bring it at par with other nations. The
Committee further recommends that allocation of adequate funds to improve the infrastructure
needed to enhance the accuracy of weather predictions including augmentation of High Computing
Systems be ensured.
17.8 The Committee recommends to the Ministry to come out with an action plan on how the
Ministry is dealing with changing climatic variability in various fields such as agriculture, disaster
management etc. The Committee further recommends that the additional funds required i.e.
````` 14 crore should be made available to the Ministry for installing the system for the improvement
of air quality forecasts in Ahmedabad and Mumbai.
18. MODERNISATION OF INDIAN METEOROLGOICAL DEPARTMENT
18.1 The program on 'Modernization of Observation & Forecast of Indian Metrological Department
(IMD) is to be implemented in a phased manner. After the implementation of the Phase-I programme of
the modernisation of IMD that included commissioning of the state - of - the art observing systems, the
second phase of the programme is to be implemented by the Ministry and this phase will enhance the
existing system with optimal augmentation of observing systems. It will enhance the coverage and
density of observations for the entire country with a centrally connected digital observational data
acquisition, processing and visualization systems.
18.2 The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the status of Modernisation Phase - II of IMD.
The Ministry replied that Phase - II has not been taken up so far in the XIIth Plan due to paucity of
funds. Notwithstanding the above, the Ministry has undertaken commissioning of Polarimetric Doppler
Weather Radars (DWRs) during the XII Plan to commission the DWRs at prioritised 8 to 10 locations
for improving the 24x7 surveillance of severe weather phenomena within the XII Plan period as per the
highly demanding requirements from various user/stakeholder agencies.
18.3 The Ministry further informed that the observing system networks have been commissioned during
the last 3 years through augmentation with 1188 Automatic Rain Guages (ARGs) and 554 Automatic
Weather Stations (AWSs) all across the country. 13 number of Doppler Weather Radars (DWRs) have
been set up at 13 cities including at Delhi airport.
18.4 The Committee is of the opinion that the Modernisation of Indian Meteorological Department
is of utmost importance and should be taken up earnestly. The Committee, however, expresses
serious concern on the fact that the modernisation of IMD - Phase II has not been taken up due
to non-availability of funds. The Committee feels that in view of dependability of farmers on the
rains for agriculture and the unpredictable weather changes because of climatic variability and

18
increasing magnitude of natural disasters in the country, the modernisation of IMD is imperative
for correct prediction. The Committee, therefore, makes strong recommendation that the Ministry
should make all efforts to initiate Phase II of Modernisation of IMD and merely because of the
funds crunch, the programme should not suffer.
19. AGRO - METEOROLOGICAL SERVICES
19.1 The Ministry informed the Committee that advance information on weather forecast is being
prepared and disseminated to the farmers through Agro-Meteorological Services for assisting them in
crop cultivation. District level agro advisories are prepared for 608 districts using five day forecasts and
disseminated to the farming community. The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the increase
in the outreach of agromet services to reach the level of providing information to 10 million farmers from
around 3.5 millon farmers at present. The Ministry replied that the outreach has been increased to 8
million farmers through SMS service and the SMSs are sent from the farmer's portal/call centre of
Ministry of Agriculture.
19.2 The Committee further enquired about taking agromet services to the district level. The Ministry
informed that in a pilot mode, the agro-met services under the umbrella of Gramin Krishi Musam Sewa,
has been extended to selected districts.
19.3 The Ministry also informed that due to the absence of appropriate village level weather observing
networks at sub-district scale, improvement in forecasts has not been satisfactory so far. The Ministry
assured that continuous efforts will be made to improve the estimates of weather based forecast systems
for agricultural services at sub-district level.
19.4 The Ministry informed that several rounds of discussions between the ESSO-IMD and the Indian
Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) has taken place to work out appropriate means of joint
implementation of establishing District Agro Meteorological Units at Krishi Vigyan Kendras in a gradual
manner subject to availability of funds during 2015-16 and 2016-17.
19.5 The Committee observes that weather forecasts are being disseminated to the farmers
through SMSs/Mobile technology and the outreach of agromet services to 8 million farmers and
to selected districts. The Committee notes that the improvement in forecasts has not been
satisfactory at sub district scale which needs to be improved by installing weather observing
networks. The Committee, therefore, recommends to improve the forecast at the sub district
level and also to increase the outreach from the district level to the block level. The Committee
further recommends to increase the number of farmers to 10 million receiving the agro met
services from the Ministry and in this regard, the Ministry should continue its coordination
efforts and discussions with other related agencies/institutions and the setting up of District Agro
Meteorological Units should be taken up to enhance the dissemination of agro-advisories to
farmers.
20. AIRBORNE PLATFORMS FOR IN-SITU OBSERV ATIONS - OCEAN RESEARCH VESSELS
(APOORV)
20.1 The Ministry informed that the APOORV programme is a re-defined sub-head of earlier Airbore
Platform and Ocean Research Vessels and all associated activities of the respective sub-heads. The

19
programme is basically an infrastructure development programme to support both ocean and atmoshpheric
research and services, which mainly envisages (a) operation and maintenance of fleet of ocean research
vessels (Sagar Nidhi, Sagar Manjusha, Coastal Resarch vessels) to support ocean survey and research
including preparation of detailed project report for acquisition of new vessels, (b) Acquisition of airbome
platform to help in collecting a wealth of atmospheric, aerosol and cloud microphysics data. The Ministry
intimated the Committee that the onboard facilities of coastal research vessels are crucial for monitoring
of coastal pollutant levels, conservation and management of coastal resources including coral reefs,
Coastal Area development and Management, bathymetric survey and surveys for Island Desalination.
20.2 The Ministry informed that the two existing coastal research vessels viz. Sagar Purvi and Sagar
Paschimi is to be replaced. Sagar Paschimi got damaged during the Hudhud cyclone and Sagar Purvi,
acquired in 1996, has almost completed 20 years which is the life span of any coastal research vessel
with its high degree of wear and tear. The acquisition for these two vessels are expected to be completed
by August 2017 and October 2017 respectively. The Ministry intimated that total funds required for the
acquisition of two vessels is ` 36 crore but the fund available is ` 1 crore which is abysmally low and
the additional funds required are ` 35 crore.
20.3 The Committee takes serious note that the amount required by the Ministry to acquire two
ocean vessels needed to replace Sagar Purvi and Sagar Paschimi is ````` 36 crore and the funds made
available are only ````` 1 crore. The Committee fails to understand how the grant of only ````` 1 crore
serve the critical purpose and, therefore, strongly recommends to ensure the availability of
adequate funds for acquiring the vessels which has great utility in oceanic research.
21. RESEARCH, EDUCATION AND TRAINING OUTREACH
21.1 Trained and specialised manpower in the field of earth system sciences is of tremendous importance
and, therefore, institutional mechanism for continuous development of such manpower for ongoing
programmes and future endeavours is greatly required. Recognizing the importance, the Ministry has set
up Centre for Advanced Training (CAT) with world class teaching courses and good hostel facilities to
serve for the region. The other main activities would be setting up an Institute for Operational Oceanography
for training and capacity building in operational oceanography. This institute is to be established as an
International Centre and was approved in December, 2012 as part of ESSO-INCOIS at Hyderabad.
21.2 The Ministry informed the Committee that capacity building in operational oceanography for personnel
from India and other Indian Ocean Rim countries and the related infrastructure are the major objectives
of this scheme. Although short-term training programs are being regularly imparted using the ESSO-
INCOIS facilities; construction of faculty buildings, labs, hostel and creation of posts is being done in
parallel. The e-classrooms have been made operational in March 2015 and the centre is expected to be
fully operational by March 2017.
21.3 The programme focuses on integration of multi-institutional and multi disciplinary scientific expertise
on research activities fostering bilateral, regional and global partnership in relevant fields of earth sciences.
To continue with the research activities, the Ministry informed that India has participated in the Belmont
Forum and G8 Research Councils Initiative on Multilateral Funding International Opportunities fund.

20
21.4 The details of the Budget Allocation and Utilization of the programme Research Education, Training
and outreach are as follow:-
(` in Crore)
Head 2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
Budget Estimates ` 70.00 ` 105.00 ` 75.00
Revised Estimates ` 82.00 ` 70.83 ---
Actual Expenditure ` 76.88 --- ---
21.5 The Committee enquired from the Ministry the reasons for the reduction in the budgetary allocation
for the programme in 2015-16 to ` 75.00 crore from B.E. allocation of ` 105.00 crore in 2014-15. The
Ministry stated the reduction is due to the overall reduction in B.E. outlay for Ministry by 10% as
compared to last financial year. The Ministry also stated that due to the paucity of funds, priority will
be given to the Ministry's own programmes while not compromising on all extramural activities including
international cooperation. The Ministry intimated that additional funds will be required for the meeting
of fund requirement of various activities under this programme.
21.6 The Committee notes the importance of trained manpower and coordination in research
activities including international cooperation. The Committee observes that the setting up of
Institute for Operational Oceanography is still not complete and requires more time. The Committee
further notes that the paucity of funds is becoming the major obstacle in ensuring the extramural
activities and fulfilling the objectives of the programme. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that additional funds needed for the programme should be sought by the Ministry to ensure
continuation of research and extra mural activities. The Committee further recommends that
the Institute for Operational Oceanography should be set up in the scheduled time frame.
22. ENVIRONMENT MONITORING AND RESEARCH
22.1 The Committee enquired from the Ministry about any coordination mechanism between Ministry of
Earth Sciences and Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change to forecast effect of pollution
and environmental degradation on weather and vice-versa. The Ministry stated that the Central Pollution
Control Board (CPCB) of the Ministry of Environment & Forests and Climate Change monitors various
pollutants in major towns and cities in the country in association with State Pollution Control Boards.
On the other hand, Ministry of Earth sciences had embarked upon providing air quality forecasts of
selected pollutants at selected locations of Delhi (24 hours in advance) based on measurement network
established in close vicinity of the various venues of Commonwealth Games events that was organised
by India in 2010.
22.2 A common understanding has been arrived between the Ministry of Earth Sciences and Central
pollution Control Board (CPCB) and Delhi Pollution Control Committee in reporting the concentrations
of various pollutants over the Delhi region involving the combined observation sites for formally reporting
for the whole of Delhi geographical region for the public domain consumption.

21
22.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry is having a coordination mechanism with the Central
Pollution Control Board to measure the concentrations of various pollutants over the Delhi
region. The Committee, however, feels that coordination between the Ministry of Environment,
Forests & Climate Change and the Ministry of Earth Sciences needs to be improved further so
as to monitor changes related to climate and the efficient coordination mechanism will speed up
the studies/activities related to combating the environmental degradation and effects of pollution.
22.4 The Committee recommends that special efforts should be made to disseminate information
and knowledge of the schemes of the Ministry in far flung districts and particularly in the states
of North East.

22
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE POWERS FOR THE EARTH COMMISSION
The Committee feels that without the devolution of financial and administrative power to
the Earth Commission, the functioning of the Ministry seriously gets hampered. The Committee
reiterates the recommendation made in its 243rd Report that immediate measures should be
taken to devolve financial and administrative power to the Earth Commission for its effective
functioning. (Para 4.3)
FINANCIAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF MINISTRY - AN ANALYSIS OF TREND OF UTILISATION
The Committee observes that in the last three years, B.E. allocation has been reduced at
the R.E. level. The Committee takes strong exception to such reduction which causes unnecessary
delay in the completion of programmes/projects. The Committee, therefore, recommends to
avoid curtailment of funds at R.E. stage which has been a regular trend in all the years and which
severely hampers the programmes/projects. (Para 5.2)
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015-16
The Committee observes that there has been a drastic reduction in the budgetary allocation
in the financial year 2015-16 to the tune of ````` 79.30 crore which is a serious blockade in taking
up new activities/initiatives by the Ministry for which additional finds of ````` 371 crore are required.
The Committee recommends that efforts be made by the Ministry by prudently utilizing the
given allocated budget and by planning and targeting the missions and programmes in an efficient
manner. (Para 6.2)
RATIONALIZATION OF THE SCHEMES
The Committee expresses its unhappiness that for most of the programmes there has been
a reduction in the budgetary allocation including the programme of High Performance Computing
which is an important programme of the ministry. The Committee feels that reduction in the
number of programmes the budgetary reduction in allocation of programmes after clubbing them
together will not ensure rationalisation of expenditure as the funds required for the programme
will not be sufficient enough to meet the expenses of the programmes. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that along with clubbing of programmes, adequate funds should also be allocated to
ensure efficient functioning. (Para 7.4)
POLAR SCIENCES AND CRYOSPHERE
The Committee is of the view that the programme is one of the most important programmes
of the Ministry and the activities pursued in the Antarctica, Arctic and Himalayan region is of
extreme use for better understanding of Indian Climate and other societal benefits. The Committee
also observes that the programme is of strategic importance and in order to make our country's
presence in Arctic and Antarctica felt, this programme is of utmost importance. The research
undertaken in polar regions will help understand the fragile Himalayan region. The Committee
recommends that the programme should be undertaken diligently and in a well-planned manner.
(Para 8.7)
22

23
POLAR RESEARCH VESSEL
The Committee observes that the progress of the research activities on the polar regions
depends upon the infrastructure that includes Polar Research Vessel. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the vessel be acquired expeditiously. The Committee notes that the amount for
the vessel had been approved but more funds to the tune of ````` 175 crore are required to acquire
the vessel. The Committee, therefore, also recommends that adequate funds be made available
to the Ministry for acquisition of the vessel. (Para 9.3)
SEISOMOLGICAL AND GEOSCIENCE (SAGE) PROGRAMME
The Committee takes note of the activities undertaken in the preparatory phase which is
relevant for collecting seismological data and for continuing the seismological research activities
in the main phase. The Committee recommends that the main phase of the programme be
carried on taking inputs from preparatory phase and to complete the deep drilling of the bore
holes essential for understanding the regular occurrence of the earthquakes in the region.
(Para 10.7)
The Committee takes serious note of the fact that additional ````` 48 crore is required and only
meagre amount of ````` 4 crore are available to the Ministry for such an important programme
which is critical in nature seeing the regular occurrence of earthquakes in the region. The
Committee recommends that ensuring funds to the programme should be a high priority as the
research on earthquakes will serve two purposes of monitoring critical parameters in the "near
field" of earthquakes and providing India a unique opportunity to take global leadership role in
this important scientific issue. (Para 10.8)
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR SEISMOLOGY
The Committee notes that the Ministry created a National Centre for Seismology as an
attached office of the Ministry of Earth Sciences. The Committee also takes note of the fact that
the separation of manpower, infrastructure etc. from IMD to NCS and creation of present posts
still needs to be done. The Committee, therefore, recommends for the early creation of manpower,
posts, infrastructure etc. necessary to start the functioning of National Centre for Seismology.
(Para 11.2)
MICROZONATION OF CITIES
The Committee takes note of the importance of microzonation of cities on account of
vulnerability of India's land to severe earthquakes and recommends to Government to take such
purposive measures in consultation with State Governments and stakeholders as would mitigate
the consequences of a potential earthquake in the vulnerable areas. The Committee also
recommends that microzonation of cities particularly those falling in seismic zone V , IV and III
should be taken up expeditiously and necessary geophysical, geological and other information/
data should be acquired from Geological Survey of India so that delay in microzonation of cities
is avoided. (Para 12.2)

24
OCEAN SERVICES, TECHNOLOGY OBSERV ATIONS, RESOURCES MODELLING AND SCIENCE
(O-STORMS)
The Committee takes strong exception to the overall reduction of the budgetary allocation
to the Ministry that resulted in the reduction in the budgetary allocation to the O-STORMS
programme which is a significant programme of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should make all efforts to seek additional funds for this
programme at the R.E. stage without which the activities under this programme will suffer
setback and unnecessary delays. (Para 13.4)
POLYMETALLIC NODULES AND GAS HYDRATES
The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry for the development of technology
for extraction of polymetallic nodules and gas-hydrates and the explorations significant for
economic and strategic purposes. The Committee recommends to undergo further exploration,
especially the exploration of Polymetallic Sulphides after getting approval from the International
Seabed Authority and more needs to be done by the Ministry in the field of gas-hydrates
exploration. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to take this programme with full vigour and
with all serious efforts so that it plays important role in bridging the gap in energy availability.
(Para 14.4)
The Committee recommends that additional funds as required for the development of the
manned submersible be made available to the Ministry. (Para 14.6)
HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING (HPC)
The Committee recommends enhancement of budgetary allocation to High Performance
Computing programme so that strategic and essential activities requiring High Performance
Computing are not adversely impacted. The Committee therefore, recommends increase in the
budgetary allocation to the programme at the R.E. stage. (Para 15.8)
ATOMOSPHERE & CLIMATE RESEARCH - MODELLING OBSERVING SYSTEMS & SERVICES
(ACROSS)
The Committee observes that the integrated budgetary allocation for the programme ACROSS
had been reduced to the tune of ````` 87.00 crore which is a matter of serious concern and which
will greatly hamper the planned activities of the programme. The Committee takes note that
additional funds are needed to meet the requirements of important programmes including
Himalayan Meteorology Programme. The Committee, therefore, recommends that requisite funds
be made available to the Ministry so that the programmes of national interest are not mired in
unnecessary delays. (Para 16.5)
The Committee notes that the funds available to the Ministry to procure a research aircraft
for all airborne atmospheric research is very meagre. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the additional requirement of ````` 59 crore be met to avoid any obstruction in the procurement
of aircraft. (Para 16.7)

25
ACCURACY IN WEATHER FORECASTING
The Committee notes the improvement in the accuracy of weather predictions including the
predictions of the recent flash floods in J&K. The Committee feels that the accuracy in prediction
of weather depends upon the augmentation in High Computing Systems. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the accuracy be improved further to bring it at par with other nations. The
Committee further recommends that allocation of adequate funds to improve the infrastructure
needed to enhance the accuracy of weather predictions including augmentation of High Computing
Systems be ensured. (Para 17.7)
The Committee recommends to the Ministry to come out with an action plan on how the
Ministry is dealing with changing climatic variability in various fields such as agriculture, disaster
management etc. The Committee further recommends that the additional funds required i.e.
````` 14 crore should be made available to the Ministry for installing the system for the improvement
of air quality forecasts in Ahmedabad and Mumbai. (Para 17.8)
MODERNISATION OF INDIAN METEOROLGOICAL DEPARTMENT
The Committee is of the opinion that the Modernisation of Indian Meteorological Department
is of utmost importance and should be taken up earnestly. The Committee, however, expresses
serious concern on the fact that the modernisation of IMD - Phase II has not been taken up due
to non-availability of funds. The Committee feels that in view of dependability of farmers on the
rains for agriculture and the unpredictable weather changes because of climatic variability and
increasing magnitude of natural disasters in the country, the modernisation of IMD is imperative
for correct prediction. The Committee, therefore, makes strong recommendation that the Ministry
should make all efforts to initiate Phase II of Modernisation of IMD and merely because of the
funds crunch, the programme should not suffer. (Para 18.4)
AGRO - METEOROLOGICAL SERVICES
The Committee observes that weather forecasts are being disseminated to the farmers
through SMSs/Mobile technology and the outreach of agromet services to 8 million farmers and
to selected districts. The Committee notes that the improvement in forecasts has not been
satisfactory at sub district scale which needs to be improved by installing weather observing
networks. The Committee, therefore, recommends to improve the forecast at the sub district
level and also to increase the outreach from the district level to the block level. The Committee
further recommends to increase the number of farmers to 10 million receiving the agro met
services from the Ministry and in this regard, the Ministry should continue its coordination
efforts and discussions with other related agencies/institutions and the setting up of District Agro
Meteorological Units should be taken up to enhance the dissemination of agro-advisories to
farmers. (Para 19.5)
AIRBORNE PLATFORMS FOR IN-SITU OBSERVATIONS - OCEAN RESEARCH VESSELS
(APOORV)
The Committee takes serious note that the amount required by the Ministry to acquire two
ocean vessels needed to replace Sagar Purvi and Sagar Paschimi is ````` 36 crore and the funds made

26
available are only ````` 1 crore. The Committee fails to understand how the grant of only ````` 1 crore
serve the critical purpose and, therefore, strongly recommends to ensure the availability of
adequate funds for acquiring the vessels which has great utility in oceanic research.
(Para 20.3)
RESEARCH, EDUCATION AND TRAINING OUTREACH
The Committee notes the importance of trained manpower and coordination in research
activities including international cooperation. The Committee observes that the setting up of
Institute for Operational Oceanography is still not complete and requires more time. The Committee
further notes that the paucity of funds is becoming the major obstacle in ensuring the extramural
activities and fulfilling the objectives of the programme. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that additional funds needed for the programme should be sought by the Ministry to ensure
continuation of research and extra mural activities. The Committee further recommends that
the Institute for Operational Oceanography should be set up in the scheduled time frame.
(Para 21.6)
ENVIRONMENT MONITORING AND RESEARCH
The Committee notes that the Ministry is having a coordination mechanism with the Central
Pollution Control Board to measure the concentrations of various pollutants over the Delhi
region. The Committee, however, feels that coordination between the Ministry of Environment,
Forests & Climate Change and the Ministry of Earth Sciences needs to be improved further so
as to monitor changes related to climate and the efficient coordination mechanism will speed up
the studies/activities related to combating the environmental degradation and effects of pollution.
(Para 22.3)
The Committee recommends that special efforts should be made to disseminate information
and knowledge of the schemes of the Ministry in far flung districts and particularly in the states
of North East. (Para 22.4)

27
MINUTES

X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 9th April, 2015 in Room No.139, First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
6. Shri Bhupinder Singh
7. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
8. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Dr. K. Gopal
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Nana Patole
14. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
15. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
16. Shri Vikram Usendi
17. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
29

30
*   * *
2. *    * *
3. *    * *
4. *    * *
5. *    * *
6. *    * *
7. *    * *
8. *    * *
9. *    * *
10. *    * *
1 1 . *    * *
12. *    * *
13. *    * *
14. *    * *
15. *    * *
16. *    * *
17. *    * *
18. *    * *
19. *    * *
20. *    * *
21. *    * *
22. *    * *
23. *    * *
24. *    * *
25. The following representatives of Ministry of Earth Sciences then appeared before the Committee:-
1. Dr. Shailesh Nayak, Secretary
2. Smt. Anuradha Mitra, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
3. Shri Anand S. Khati, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. L.S. Rathore, Director General, India Metrology Department
***Relate to other Matters.

31
5. Dr. Swati Basu, Scientific Advisory
6. Dr. S. Rajan, Director, NCAOR, Goa
7. Dr. S.S.C Shenoi, Director, INCOIS, Hyderabad
8. Dr. M.A. Atmanand, Director, NIOT, Chennai & PD-ICMAM
9. Dr. M. Rajeevan, Director, IITM, Pune
10. Dr. M. Sudhakar, Director, CMLRE, Kochi
11. Dr. Raj Gopal, Director, NCMRWF, Noida
12. Dr. M. Samsuddin, Director, NCESS, Thiruvananthapuram
13. Dr. K.J. Ramesh, Advisor
14. Dr. B.K. Bansal, Advisor
15. Shri R.K. Sharma, Advisor
16. Dr. K. Somasunder, Advisor
17. Shri Neeraj Kulhari, Assistant Controller of Accounts
26. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences and his team of officers and
informed that the Committee was scheduled to discuss the Demands for 2015-16 of the Ministry of Earth
Sciences. He asked the Secretary to brief the Committee about the budgetary allocations made in 2015-
16 and how the reduction in allocation would affect the schemes/programmes of the Ministry. He further
asked the Secretary to brief the Committee about the progress made in programmes of Polymetallic
nodules, Gas Hydrates Exploration, water desalination plants and setting up of National Centre for
Seismology.
27. Thereafter, the Secretary made a power-point presentation on various aspects of the Demands for
Grants 2015-16, the achievements of the Ministry during 2014-15 and key thrust areas during 2015-16.
The Secretary also brought out that the reduction in budget at RE stage upsets their expenditure plans.
As a result of that, sometimes they are not able to completely spend their RE allocation since the
remaining money is not sufficient to buy or complete the purchases. On enquiry by the Chairman, it was
informed that their budget for 2014-15 had been reduced by `79 crores. The Committee was further
informed that the Ministry needed nearly `1600 crores during 2015-16 i.e. `400 crores more than what
was allocated.
28. The Chairman enquired whether the information on weather is provided to the farmers through SMS
and whether the State Governments are involved in disseminating the information. It was informed that
the Ministry provided the basic information and the dissemination was done by the State Agricultural
Units and some private agencies like IIFCO and Reuters. As regards hailstorms, the Committee was
informed that the information on hailstorms was provided to states of Maharashtra, J&K and North West
and Central India about 3-4 days in advance. The Committee also desired to know about the research
work done on occurrence of tornado. It was informed that they had started this research and will need

32
some time to understand and provide the forecast. They were placing some radars and other equipment
and trying to model tornadoes.
29. The Secretary then informed that they made special forecasts for pilgrims during fairs and festivals.
In response to a query regarding the accuracy of these forecasts, the Secretary informed that their
forecasts had improved substantially and the accuracy was nearly 80-85 percent. The Chairman pointed
out that their forecast for Hudhud and Phailin was extremely accurate.
30. The Committee then raised various issues such as time of the forecast for monsoon; Arctic
response to the climatic variability; results from the Antarctica Mission etc. The representatives of the
Ministry also replied to some of the queries raised by the Members. The Chairman asked the Ministry
to send a note containing concrete proposals on the support needed by them.
31. The witnesses then withdrew.
32. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
33. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.

33
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 6th May, 2015 in Committee Room 'A',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Shri Bhupinder Singh
5. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapshinh Chauhan
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Dr. K. Gopal
9. Shri Daddan Mishra
10. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
11. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that the
meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 258th, 259th and 260th reports on Demands
for Grants (2015-16) pertaining to the Departments of Science & Technology and Biotechnology and
Ministry of Earth Sciences respectively.
3. The Committee, thereafter considered the draft 258th, 259th and 260th Reports and adopted the
same with slight modifications.
4. The Committee also decided to present/lay the 258th, 259th and 260th Reports to both the Houses
of Parliament on the 7th May, 2015. The Committee authorised the Chairman and, in his absence, Shri
Bhupinder Singh and Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Daddan
Mishra and, in his absence, Shrimati Vasanthi M. to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
5. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10.30 
A.M.
33