PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
 
TWO HUNDRED NINTH REPORT 
 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY) 
(DEMAND NO. 84) 
 
 (PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 23RD APRIL, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 23RD APRIL, 2010) 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2010/VAISAKHA, 1932 (SAKA) 
Web site: http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-Mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
C O N T E N T S 
         PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (i) – (ii)  
2.     PREFACE                                                                                                                   (iii) 
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                               1-18                    
4. SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS  
5. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE          
 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,  
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2010) 
---------- 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy  –– Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
 ** 2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
3. Shri Anil H. Lad 
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
5. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi  
6. Shri Saman Pathak 
7. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
8. Dr. Ejaz Ali 
9. Shri Jabir Husain 
10. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
 LOK SABHA 
11. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg 
12. Shri Udayanraje Bhonsale 
13. Shri Ninong Ering  
14. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
15. Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
16. Shrimati Kaisar Jahan 
17. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
18. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
19. Shri C. R. Patil 
20. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle 
21. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
22. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
23. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
 # #24. Vacant 
25. Dr. Rajan Sushant 
26. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
27. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
28. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava 
29. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
 30. Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
          #31. Shri K.C. Singh Baba 
           SECRETARIAT 
 Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
 Shri  Alok Chatterjee, Director 
 Shri  V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri  Girija Shankar, Assistant Director 
                                                 
 Nominated w.e.f. 14th October, 2009 
**  Nominated w.e.f. 31st December, 2009 
     #  Nominated w.e.f.  11th January, 2010 
  # #  Shri Yashwant Sinha ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from the           
Committee w.e.f. 1st February, 2010 
 
 
 

Preface 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-relate d Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
& Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present 
the Report on its behalf, present this Two H undred ninth report of the Committee. This 
Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of the Department of 
Science & Technology (Ministry of Science and Technology) (Demand No. 84). 
2.   In the meeting of the Committee held on the 30 th March, 2010, the Secretary and other 
Officers of the Department of Science & Technology gave an overview of the various 
activities of the Department a nd the Members sought clarificati ons on various aspects of the 
performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants. 
3.   The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the 
clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the 
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Science & 
Technology. 
4.    The Committee considered and adopte d the Report at its meeting held on the 16
th 
April, 2010. 
NEW DELHI;
                     DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY 
April 16, 2010                                                        Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on  
        Science & Technology, Environment & Forests. 
REPORT 
Science and Technology is regarded as one  of the most powerful instruments of 
growth and development, especially in the emerging scenario of competitive economy like 
India. In the wake of the new demands of  the growing economy, Science and Technology 
system in the country is embarking on scienc e projects which have relevance to national 
needs and which will also be relevant fo r the future. The Department of Science & 
Technology plays a pivotal role in promotion of science & technology in the country and also 
catering to the country’s present and future needs in science.  
2. The Department of Science & Technology which was established in May, 1971 with 
the primary objective of promoting new areas of  Science and Technology, plays the role of a 
nodal department for organizing,  coordinating and promoting S& T activities in the country.  
The mandate given to the department includes, among others: 
 Formulation of policy statements and guidelines on Science and Technology 
(S&T); 
 Promotion of new areas of scientific research; 
 Co-ordination of inter-departmental S&T efforts; 
 Support basic and applied research in universities and other institutions; 
 International S&T Co-operation; 
 Support high quality research in au tonomous bodies where specialization 
ranges from advanced medical research materials to astronomy; 
 Catalyzing S&T interaction in societ al programmes and entrepreneurship 
development;  
 Science popularization, communication and S&T Management Information 
System; 
 Promotion of Commercialization of home grown technology; 
 Support to technology development program mes, technology information and 
assessment; and 
 Providing services in the areas of: 

(i) Surveying & Mapping (SOI and NATMO) 
(ii) Technology Developmen t and Application (TDB) 
3. ORGANISATIONAL  SETUP  
3.1 Department of Science and Technology is th e nodal Department of the Ministry of 
Science and Technology.  The Or ganisational Structure of the Department has evolved over 
the year to respond quickly to  the issues relating to the promotion and development of 
Science & Technology in the c ountry.  Broadly, the functions of the Department has been 
divided into Autonomous Institutes, Scie ntific Groups, Technology Development Board, 
Scientific Services besides the Administration and Integrated Finance divisions. There are 18 
Autonomous Institutes and 5 Science/Engi neering Academies/Associations, which are 
working in diverse areas for the promotion of Science and Technology. The Scientific 
Groups inter-alia consists of the Science & Engineering Research Council(SERC), National 
Council for Science & Technology Communica tion(NSCTC), National Resources Data 
Management System(NRDMS), Internatio nal Division, National Entrepreneurship 
Board(NEB), National Science and Tech nology Management Information System  
(NSTMIS). The Scientific Services has two subordinate offices, vi z., National Atlas and 
Thematic Mapping Organisation (NATMO) and Survey of India (SOI) under its 
administrative control. 
4. MECHANISM TO MONITOR AND REVIEW THE ONGOING SCHEMES 
4.1 The Department informed the Committee that it has a robust mechanism to monitor 
and review its ongoing schemes and programmes. Each of the programmes are reviewed and 
evaluated by subject expert committees on a continuous basis. The reviews and monitoring 
done by above committees are taken into account , before formulation and finalization of 
budgetary support. 
5.  ELEVENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN 
5.1 The   Department informed the Committee that  the total approved outlay for Xth Five 
Year Plan was Rs.3400.00 crores, against which actual expenditure incurred was Rs.3998.10 
crore.  The approved outlay fo r the Eleventh Five Year Pl an is Rs.11,028.00 crores against 
which actual expenditure incurred during 2007-08 and 2008-09 was         Rs. 1266.89 crores 
and Rs.1517.12 crores respectively. The provision proposed  in the               BE 2009-10 
under Plan is Rs.1775.00 crores, besides a provis ion of Rs.358.00 crores has been proposed 
under Non-Plan. Provision proposed in the BE 2010-11 under Plan is Rs.2025.00 crores, 
besides a provision of Rs.344.00 cror es under Non-Plan. The Department also informed that 
it was successful in achieving the projected target s of the Xth five year plan and in addition 
to the strengthening of the ongoing flagship programmes, some new in itiatives have been 
planned for the XIth Plan Peri od, recognizing the cha nging context of scie ntific enterprise 
and to meet present national needs, based on th e experience gained and looking at the future. 
The New major initiatives of the XIth Plan Period are described below: 
i) Formation of Science and En gineering Research Board:  A Science and 
Engineering Research Board has been set up to perform the functions & tasks of 
funding research and partner the DST in the development as well as promotional 
roles and will start functioning from April, 2010.  The formation of SERB 
represents a landmark. 
ii) Launch of Innovation in Science Pursui t for Inspired Research (INSPIRE) 
and Scholarships for Science in Higher Education (SHE) :            A major 
programme for attraction of talent from va rious sections of the society to opt for 
science as a career in research has been launched in December, 2008.  
iii) Promotion of University Research and Scientific Excellence (PURSE) : The 
Department, under infrastructure streng thening programmes, has mounted an 

initiative viz. the PURSE to provide incen tive grant system for universities based 
on the evidence of scientific publications during the period 1996-2006.  
iv) Launch of Cognition Science Init iative and Innovation Clusters:   DST has 
launched a Cognition Science Initiative a nd has selected tw o major nationally 
coordinated programmes on language learning and neural network. An Innovation 
Cluster is also being established under Public-Private Partnership.   
v) Security Technology Initiative:  A nationally coordinated initiative on S&T 
inputs to Security Technology has been co mmissioned with Indian Institute of 
Science as the implementing agency. 
vi) Water Technology Initiative: The Water technology in itiative of DST has 
focuses on various systems and solutions available for providing safe drinking 
water for domestic applications.  
vii) Establishment of Indian Beam line in  the Synchrotron in KEK, Japan:    A 
major step has been taken to establish an Indian beam line under Nano Mission, 
for materials science research in the S ynchrotron at Japan taking advantage of 
International S&T cooperation. This is a unique arrangement for promotion of 
basic research in materials science in the country. 
viii) Joining International Consortia on Facility for Anti-proton and Ion Research 
(FAIR): India has enrolled as a member of  an international consortium for 
establishment of FAIR and will be developing technologies and building 
instruments to global standards as a part of the consortium. 
ix) Establishment of New Institutes  and Centers under Nano mission: Institute 
for Nano Science and Technology is being established in Mohali as a part of 
Knowledge City and Centers are also  being established in Bangalore and Kolkata 
as a part of Nano mission. 
x) Establishment of Science Bridges and Support of Next Generation Telecom 
NetWork: DST has mounted science bridges with universities and research 
groups in UK and lead institutions in Indi a on reciprocity and partnership basis in 
collaboration with Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council 
(EPSRC), United Kingdom (UK). A total of  4 projects have been funded under 
Science Bridge and the next generation network has been selected for special 
funding. 
xi) Research Project support under stra tegic partnerships under European 
Union(EU)-India, Indo-UK, Indo-Australia, Indo-Israel, Indo-Canada 
programmes: Numerous budget intensive projects under bila teral and               
multilateral cooperation have been select ed after parallel peer review and 
supported under reciprocity and partners hip basis. The coordinated call for 
research on computer materials scien ce with European Union has been highly 
successful and new international partnerships are being set up. 
5.2 The Committee appreciates th e fact that the Department  has been successful in 
utilizing more amount during Xth Five Year  Plan i.e. Rs 3998.10 crores which is over 
and above the total outlay of Rs. 3400.00 crores. Acco rdingly, a sum of             Rs. 
588.00 crores more have been utilized in vario us schemes over the in itial total outlay 
provided during the Xth Five Year Plan. The Committee also appreciates the fact that 
some new initiatives have been planned for the XIth Plan Period in addition to the 
strengthening of the ongoing flagship pr ogrammes. The Committee has, however, 
observed that against the approved outlay of Rs.11,028.00 crores, the actual 
expenditure incurred by the Department on ye ar to year basis during the XIth Five 
Year Plan has been intimated as Rs 1266. 89 crores for the year 2007-08 and Rs.1517.12 
crores during 2008-09 of the Plan period, which seems to be on the lower side on annual 

basis, if the average annual expenditure in connection with the full utilization of the 
budget amount of Rs. 11,028.00 crores is concerned which comes to approximately Rs 
2000.00 crores per annum.  
5.3 The Committee has further noted that the provision proposed under B.E. for the 
year 2009-10 under plan expenditure is Rs 1775.00 crores, which is significantly higher 
than the actual expenditure made by the Department during 2007-08 and 2008-09. 
Again the Committee has noted that the pr ovision proposed under B.E. 2010-11 is Rs 
2025.00 crores under Plan expenditure which is Rs250.00 crores more than the 
provision proposed for the year 2009-10 under Plan expenditure. The Committee 
understands that this is a healthy trend as regards the allocation of funds for various 
schemes of the Department under B.E. The Committee also noted that the non-plan 
expenditure for the year 2009-10 was Rs 358. 00 crores and the same has been reduced 
to Rs.344.00  crores  at B.E. stage for the year 2010-11 i.e. a reduction of about Rs.14.00 
crores under the non-plan head. Given the aforesaid trend of expenditure and the 
allocation of amount by the Planning Commi ssion at B.E.stage as analysed in detail 
above, the Committee also hopes that the Department will make all out efforts to 
maintain its trend of achievements of ta rgets set in the XIth plan as well. The 
Committee hopes that the new initiatives like INSPIRE & PURSE would be able to 
attract the younger generations towards sc ience and the country would  forge new 
partnerships with the countries who are the global leaders in  science to attain the 
objective of transforming India into a technologically advanced hub. 
6.  BUDGETARY  ALLOCATION 
6.1 The Budgetary Estimates of the Departme nt of Science & Technology for the year 
2010-2011 are placed at Rs.2369.00 crores (Pla n Rs.2025.00 crores and Non-Plan Rs.344.00 
crores) as compared to last year’s B.E. and R.E. of Rs.2133.00 cr ores and Rs.2040.50 crores 
respectively.  
6.2 The Committee was informed of the follo wing major programmes of the Department 
and the comparative Plan allocations for the programmes in B.E. 2009-2010, the proposed 
and B.E. allocation for the year 2010-2011:  
 
S.No.  Schemes / Programmes 
B.E. 
(Plan) 
2009-10 
 
Proposed 
(Plan) 
2010-11  
B.E 
Allocated(Plan)
2010-11 
1 Research & Development 
Support 535.00 610.00 570.00 
2 
Technology 
Development 
Programmes 
50.00 157.00 100.00 
3 
S&T Programmes for 
Socio-Economic 
Development 
108.00 113.00 111.00 
4 International Cooperation 
 50.00 50.00 50.00 
5 State Science & 
Technology Programmes 15.00 30.00 22.00 
6 
Modernization of 
Mapping organizations 
(SOI & NATMO) 
16.00 20.00 16.00 

 
7 Autonomous Institutions 
& Professional Bodies 536.00 610.00 570.00 
8 
Technology for Bamboo 
Products (Mission Mode 
Project) 
40.00 25.00 25.00 
9 Synergy Projects (O/o Pr. 
Scientific Adviser) 20.00 24.00 20.00 
10 5.00 5.00 2.00 
11. 
Information Technology 
National Training 
Programmes for 
Scientists/ Technologist 
working with Govt. of 
India  
5.00 5.00 5.00 
12 Drugs & Pharmaceuticals 
Research  96.00 75.00 50.00 
13 
National Mission for          
Nano-Science &                 
Nano-Technology 
130.00 140.00 100.00 
14 
Scholarships for Science 
in Higher Education 
(Oversight Committee 
recommendation) 
40.00 47.00 40.00 
15 Water Technology 
Initiative 15.00 80.00 60.00 
16 INSPIRE 60.00 245.00 240.00 
17 Innovation Clusters 7.00 11.00 7.00 
18 
Security Technology 
Initiative 7.00 10.00 7.00 
19 
Mega Facilities for Basic 
Research 40.00 43.00 30.00 
 Grand Total 1775.00 2300.00 2025.00 
 
6.3 The Committee was also informed that the projected Plan demand made by the 
Department for B.E for 2010-2011 was Rs.2300.00 cror es and the funds allocated against the 
above projected Plan demand are Rs.2025.00 cror es. Though the Department of Science and 
Technology has received an in crease of Rs.250.00 crores ov er the budget of the year 2009-
2010 B.E.(Plan) i.e. Rs.1775.00 crores, the Departme nt has stated that this increase is too 
limited to meet the investments into  the new  and major  initiatives  of the  Department.  The  
Department  provided the following justification for additional funds sought by the 
Department during the year 2010-2011:- 
 DST is currently implementing a flagship programme namely, Innovation in 
Science Pursuit for Inspired Research (INSPIRE). This programme of the 
Department has just taken off and additional commitments of the scheme during 
the year 2010-2011 as per approved eleventh plan outlay are Rs.240.00 crores. 
 Prime Minister’s Council has assigned two National Missions under National 
Action Plan for Climate Change, where there are ne w commitments of                 
Rs.25.00 crores in the Annual Plan   2010-2011. 

 The Department has also mounted a majo r initiative on Solar Energy Research 
with an outlay of Rs.25.00 crores for this year. 
 The Supreme Court has also ordered the De partment to find technical solutions to 
water problems. In pursuance to such order the Department has mounted a 
Technology Mission on Winning, Augm entation and Renovation (WAR) for 
water with a budget outlay of Rs.145.00 crores for two years. The Department has 
made a provision of Rs.60.00 crores fo r the Supreme Court directed water 
technology programmes. 
 Science and Engineering Research Bo ard (SERB), an autonomous body for 
supporting basic research passed by an Ac t of Parliament is scheduled to 
commence from April, 2010 and additional investments for SERB are essential. 
6.4  The Committee has noted that under B.E. (Plan) expenditure for 2009-10 
initially Rs1775.00 crores was allocated for th e Department combining all schemes. 
Again during 2010-11 the Department had proposed for a Plan allocation of                  
Rs 2300.00 crores for entire Department out of which Rs 2025.00 crores was actually 
allocated under B.E. Plan for 2010-11. The Co mmittee has, therefore, observed that 
although the Department has received an increased amount of Rs.250.00 crores in the 
B.E. Plan outlay for the year 2010-2011 as  compared to 2009-2010,  there has been a 
substantial reduction of Rs. 275.00  crores in the B.E.(Plan) a llocation  as compared to 
the Proposed (Plan) allocation for th e year 2010-11. The Committee although agrees 
with the opinion of the Department that th is increase of Rs 250.00 crores is too limited 
to meet the investments made by the Department into new and ongoing major 
initiatives of the department viz. Rese arch & Development Support including solar 
energy research, Technology Development Programmes, Autonomous Institutions & 
Professional Bodies, Drugs & Pharmaceuticals  Research, INSPIRE, Mega facilities for 
basic Research etc. which are of prime impo rtance, it is however of the opinion that 
correspondingly a reduction of Rs 275.00 crores in the B.E. Plan allocation for 2010-11 
against the proposed demand for 2010-11 may affect the major programmes of the 
Department as detailed above.  The Committe e is of the opinion that curtailment of 
funds to the tune of Rs275.00 crores will hamp er the setting up of basic infrastructure 
for these crucial projects and will be detrimental to the growth of science and 
technology in the country in the long r un. The Committee theref ore recommends that 
the department may take up the issue of grea ter allotment of funds  strongly with the 
Planning Commission at the Revised Estimate stage.  
6.5 When enquired about the reduction in th e total outlay from Rs.2133.00 crores at the 
B.E. stage to Rs.2040.50 crores in R.E. stage in the year 2009-2010, the Department stated 
that though its overall expenditure wa s above the required bench mark at the             R.E. 
stage, but the pace of expenditure in few sc hemes was not found suitably desirable by the 
Ministry of Finance, hence there was a decrease in total out lay at the R.E. stage. However, 
the Department has stated that by February, 2010, it has been able to utilize 85% of the 
allocated budget for the year 2009-10 and the remaining 15% will be utilized by March, 
2010. 
6.6 The Committee expresses serious concern at the slow pace of expenditure in 
some schemes by the Department which lead to a reduction in allocation at the R.E. 
stage by the Ministry of Finance during the last financial year. The Committee is of the 
opinion that a higher proposed allocation ca n only be justified if the Department is 
more prompt and efficient in utilising th e already allocated funds under various 
schemes. The Committee therefore recommends th at the Department should do proper 
internal planning so that maximum expendi ture on its schemes could be  incurred 
before sending the proposals for Revised Esti mate stage. In this way the Ministry of 

Finance will not resort to cuts in expenditure at the R.E. stage in future as they have  
done in the present case. 
7.  NON-SUBMISSION OF THE ANNUAL REPORT FOR  
THE YEAR 2009-2010 
7.1 The Committee expressed its  strong dissatisfaction at the undue delay in the late 
submission of the Report for th e year 2009-2010 and the fact th at much of the data which 
have been provided, relate to the year 2008-20 09 or even an earlier period i.e. 2007-2008. 
Due to this, the Committee was unable to j udge the progress made by the Department and 
effectively evaluate the Budgetary allocati ons for the year 2009-2010. The Committee has, 
however, noted that the other Ministries/ Departments under its jurisdiction have been able to 
submit their Annual Reports for the year 2009-2010 to the Committee for its perusal.  
7.2 In resonse to the above, the Department expr essed regret at the delay in submission of 
the report for the year 2009-2010 and stated that  the draft Report has already been finalized 
and the final report would be submitted soon.  
7.3 The Committee takes note of  this serious lapse on the part of the Department 
which has lead to the non-submission of th e Annual Report of the Department for the 
year 2009-10 as a result of which the Committee fails to get a Comprehensive picture of 
the performance of various schemes under th e Department during the Plan period of 
2009-10. The Committee fails to understand while other Departments under the 
Ministry of Science & Technology, viz. DS IR & DBT have already submitted their 
annual reports in time, why DST has failed to  submit their Annual Report within the 
stipulated time frame.  The Committee, therefore, stri ctly recommends that the 
Department may draw up a comprehensive time schedule for the various stages 
involved in the preparation of the Annual Repo rt and strictly adhere to the targets set 
in the schedule so that the Annual Reports are printed and submitted to the Committee 
well within the time limit.  The Department may also examine and analyse the approach 
followed by the other Departments of the Ministry of Science & Technology, which 
have submitted their reports in time and ad opt an effective method for the preparation 
of its Annual Reports for the next Plan period of 2010-11. 
MAJOR PROGRAMMES OF THE DEPARTMENT  
8. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT 
8.1 The Department of Science and Technology, as  a part of its S&T promotional activity 
has been supporting Research & Developmen t programmes under Science and Engineering 
Research Council (SERC).  The objectives of the SERC are:- 
(i) To promote research in newly emerging and frontline areas of Science and 
Engineering including multidisciplinary fields; 
(ii) To selectively promote general research capability in relevant areas of Science 
and Engineering taking into account existi ng research capabilities of the host 
institution; and  
(iii) To encourage young scientists to take up ch allenging research and   development 
activities. 
8.2 The Committee was informed that under the 'Research and Development Support’, 
the B.E. allocation was increased fr om Rs.537.00 crores for the year                2009-2010 to 
Rs.572.00 crores at B.E. for the year 2010-2011. E xplaining the reasons fo r the increase the 
Department stated that it is committed to th e pursuit and promotion of science & technology 
with vigor in the 11
th Five year plan. SERC, which is the single largest basic research 
funding body in the country across  disciplines and ac ross institutions, ha s intensified the 
R&D promotional activities through innovative programmes su ch as ‘Intensification of 
Research in High Priority Ar eas’ (IRHPA), Fund for Improvement  of S&T Infrastructure in 
Universities and Higher Educational Institutions  (FIST), Fast Track Young Scientist’s R&D 

programme and Prestigious Fellowship awar ds viz. J.C. Bose, Ramanujan, Ramanna 
Fellowships, etc. 
8.3  The Department further st ated that the enhanced allo cation of Rs. 572.00 crores in 
B.E. 2010-2011 compared to the allocation of Rs. 537.00 crores in 2009-2010 is primarily to 
undertake major R&D activities under the Scie nce & Engineering Rese arch Board (SERB) 
and to accommodate expanding research in infrastructural developmental activities such as 
special regional packages (North Eastern Region, Jammu & Kashmir and Bihar) under the 
FIST programme. This moderate  allocation would suffice to meet the increasing importance 
of indigenous Research & Development. The Committee was also informed that the SERB, 
which has been created recently after efforts by the Department spanning over 26 years, will 
take over the entire funding role of the Department besides the policy making and 
promotional roles of the Department from April, 2010.  
8.4 The Committee is of the opinion that the core responsibility of the Department is 
to promote basic and applied research in ne wly emerging and frontier areas of science 
and build up necessary infrastructure for the purpose. The Committee appreciates the 
initiative of the Department in  expanding research in infrastructural developmental 
activities in Universities and Higher Educat ional Institutions in states which lack 
necessary scientific infrastructure,  thro ugh special regional packages in the North 
Eastern Region, the states of  Jammu & Kashmir and Bihar.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Planning Commission should adequately fund such special 
initiatives of the Department for encouragi ng the research and development activities, 
so that the same can be pursued with vigour.  
8.5 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department which have been 
directed towards the creation of the Scienc e & Engineering Research Board (SERB) 
which will be engaged in the role of en tire funding of various research projects 
undertaken by the Department. The Commit tee feels that this is a major step 
undertaken by the Department to finance various  projects in a focused and well–
coordinated manner.  
8.6 PUBLICATIONS/ JOURNAL S OF THE DEPARTMENT 
In reply to a query regarding the publicati on of more than 1500 journals/publications 
by the SERC and the mechanism adopted by th e Department for such publications, the 
Committee was informed that the Department supports individual scientists and not the 
institutions. A proposal is submitted by the concer ned scientist, which is then scrutinized by 
five reviewers who are specialists in the area.  After atleast three of the reviewers submit a 
report in favour of the proposal, a presentation is made before a Committee, after which the 
journal is selected for publica tion. In reply to a nother query, regarding the quality of the 
publications, the Department informed that an  international group grad es the publications 
throughout the world depending upon a systema tic method of giving numbers called the 
Impact Factor(IF).  
8.7 The Committee was also informed that in the past the universi ties and the research 
laboratories used to contribute equally i.e. 50% each, towards the publication of research 
journals/publications. However of late, only 15 % contribution comes from the Universities, 
while 50% comes from the Research Laboratorie s and rest from other sources. Therefore the 
contribution of the Universities have gone dow n. The Department is therefore trying to 
increase the contribution through incentive mech anisms like giving grants to the Universities 
which publish journals/publications. 
8.8   The Committee expresses serious concern  about the fact that the contribution 
of the Universities as regards publication of  research papers/journals have decreased 
over the years from an initial 50% to current figure of 15%, despite the fact that there 
has been incentive grant system for Universit ies, based on the evidence of scientific 

publications during the period from 1996-2006 under PURSE programme and also 
despite the fact that there has been an ove rall increase in funds allocation towards 
science and technology which essentially is  not a favourable indication so far as 
performance of  Science & Technology in the country is concerned. The Committee 
therefore recommends that the Department sh ould evolve a more effective incentive 
mechanism to encourage the Universities to augment their contribution in terms of  
publications of quality research papers/journals.  
8.9 The Committee also feels that the Impa ct Factor of published journals and 
research papers in the country is low as co mpared to other advanced countries who are 
global leaders in the field of science & t echnology. The Committee is of the opinion that 
the Impact Factor is correlated with the quality  of the research papers/journals  i.e. the 
degree of originality involved and also ho w it reflects about basic research on a 
particular issue. Since the basic research is  persistently neglected in the country, the 
Impact Factor of the Indian journals a nd research papers in science is globally 
languishing behind. Therefore, the Committ ee feels that more emphasis on basic 
research needs to be made so that internat ional quotation from Indian journals could 
be increased in future. Apart from this, the Committee is of the firm opinion that unless 
Indian pioneering research publications/papers get world-wide online publicity, the 
Impact Factor will always remain poor. The Committee, therefore, suggests that 
adequate steps may be taken to give wid er international publicity to Indian science 
journals/ research papers in future.  
9. TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME 
9.1 The programme is aimed at developing i ndigenous technology through joint projects 
with industry and socio-economic  Ministries.  It also in cludes activitie s relating to 
development of natural Resour ces, Data Management System, Patent Facilitating Cells, 
Instrument Development Programme, Joint Technology Projects, Inter-Sectoral S&T 
Advisory Council (IS-STAC), Disaster Ma nagement Cell, National Spatial Data 
Infrastructure (NSD), Fly Ash Unit (FAU), National Good Laboratory Practices, Compliance 
Monitoring Authority, National Mission on Clim ate Change and Solar Energy Research 
Initiative.  
9.2 When enquired about the doubling of allocation under the Technology Development 
Programme of the Department from Rs.50.00 crores at R.E. stage 2009-2010 to Rs.100.00 
crores in 2010-2011, the Department explaine d budgetary allocation  includes two new 
components in addition to the existing activitie s viz. Solar Energy Research Initiative (SERI) 
and National Mission on Climate Change. Thes e two new activities have a budget allocation 
of Rs.25.00 crores each adding cumulati vely                    Rs.50.00 crores for 2010-2011 
under this programme. 
 9.3 The Committee feels that the Tec hnology Development Programme is an 
initiative in the right directio n as it aims at developing the need based indigenous 
technologies through joint participation.  The Committee feels that the programme 
combines the competent technical inputs from  the industry sector and the inputs from 
the socio-economic ministries , besides decreasing the invest ment cost of individual 
partners.  The Committee appreciates that th e Solar Energy Research Initiative (SERI) 
to encourage the use of Solar Energy specia lly for the rural areas and the National 
Mission on Climate Change which addresses th e pressing issue of change in climatic 
conditions have been accorded priority  under the programme. The Committee feels 
that the  Department should initiate more such programmes in the fields relevant to the 
socio-economic benefits of the common man. 

10. SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PROGRAMMES FOR                  
SOCIO-ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
10.1 The Committee was informed that th e Science and Technology Programmes for 
Socio-economic Development plays a vital role  in the development strategy of various 
sections of the society, which provides opport unities to motivate scientists, engineers and 
field level workers to take- up time bound developmental projects  with inputs of Science & 
Technology for the benefit of disadvantaged se ctions of the society.  The programmes are 
being implemented through S&T institutions , universities and S&T based voluntary 
organizations under various schemes. On being enquired about the mechanism to implement 
these programmes, the Department stated that an  effort is being made to link the concerned 
Ministries such as the Ministry of Rural De velopment to ensure effective utilization of 
resources and delivery of the programme. 
10.2 The Department also informed that the programme which has been continuing since 
the Sixth Five Year Plan and is being implemented with the active and intensive involvement 
of four divisions of the Department of Sc ience & Technology                               viz. (i) 
National Council for Science & Technol ogy Communication (NCSTC),              (ii) Science 
for Equity Empowerment and Development (SEED) , (iii) National Science & Technology 
Entrepreneurship Development Board (NSTED B) and, (iv) State Science and Technology 
Programme.  The allocation for this progra mme has always shown an upward trend and 
increase since its inception and the retention of the allocation this time is only temporary.  
The significant achievements made under the programmes during the last financial year are: 
 Council for Science & Technology for Rura l India (CSTRI) has been constituted 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, DST to set up centres which will act as an 
intermediate to solve the identified scient ifically solvable problems of rural area.  
Two centres of CSTRI have been set up at IIT, Madras and North Eastern Institute of 
Science and Technology (NEIST), Jorhat (Assam) and the operational cost of the 
centres are borne by DST;  
 Long term support to strengthen S&T based voluntary groups as centres of excellence 
in rural areas has been provided to two organizations; 
 Two Women Technology Parks have been se t up for technological empowerment & 
capacity building for women; 
 Technology Interventions for Elderly (TIE) have been started to promote research, 
development and adaptation of technology for improving quality of life for benefit of 
elderly population in the country; 
 S&T Interventions involving Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas (JNVs) have been 
implemented involving active participation of  the students and teachers of selected 
Jawahar Navodaya Vidyalayas (JNV) in village development using S&T based 
solutions;  
 Technology Intervention for Mountain Eco-systems (TIME) programme for 
alternative livelihoods in mountain areas including North-East region; 
 Coordinated programmes at different geographical locations: 
(i) Dissemination of state of the art technologies in sericulture for SC/ST 
communities. 
(ii) Development of Scheduled Caste co mmunity through resource management, 
technology transfer and em powerment has been implemented in the States of 
Kerala, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. 
(iii)Bio-Integrated Organic Farm Mana gement (BIOFARM) to benefit small & 
marginal farmers. 

(iv) Co-ordinated Programme Non-Edible Oils (AICRP-NEO) for gainful utilization 
of Non-Edible Oils (NEO) bearing plants under diverse field conditions. 
 Network NGOs and research institutions to provide technological solutions to 
location specific problems have been set up. 
 50 women scientists were provided fellows hip under Women Scientists – B (WOS – 
B) scheme. 
10.3 The Committee was informed that the allocation for the Sc ience and Technology 
Programmes for Socio-economic Development has been retained at almost the same level 
with Rs. 112.00 crores at R.E. 2009-2010 and Rs. 111.00 crores for B.E. 2010-2011. 
10.4 The Committee enquired as regards th e programmes taken up by the Department 
towards empowering the Tribal and Scheduled  Caste Youth under the SEED programme. 
The Department informed that under the SEED Programme, the focus is towards the capacity 
building for entrepreneurship of the Tribal and Scheduled  Caste Youth. Depending upon the 
density of people and the local resources av ailable in a specific area a comprehensive 
technology solution is provided under the programme to add value to the raw material 
resource. Besides providing technology, in so me cases even the capital to build the 
entrepreneurship base is also provided. Mon itoring of the programmes are also done after 
every three years to see whether the programmes have become                   self-sustainable. 
10.5 The Committee feels that in a country su ch as ours, where a large section of the 
population live in abject poverty, technologica l achievements made in the laboratories 
would be meaningless until such achiev ements addresses the cause of the 
underprivileged masses and helps in alleviating their poverty.  In this direction the pro-
active steps taken by the Department is vital for the socio-economic development of the 
country, specially the SEED programme, which caters to the needs of the Tribals and 
the Scheduled Castes population. The Commit tee fails to understand as to why the  
allocation for this programme has been decr eased this year despite the previous trend 
of increase in allocation sin ce inception of the programme and hopes that in future  
sincere efforts should be made to ensure that the programme is allotted enhanced funds 
and the same are utilized properly. The Committee recommends that all out efforts 
should also be made to popularize such programmes and involve all the stakeholders 
such as rural masses, voluntary groups and besides technical organisations for giving 
specialized inputs. The Committe e also appreciates the effo rt of the Department in 
involving the concerned Ministries such as the Ministry of Rural Development and feels 
that such effective coordination will ensure  sharing of resources between the Ministries 
besides ensuring an effective delivery of the programme. 
11. INTERNATIONAL  COOPERATION  
11.1 The Committee was informed that the pr ogramme includes the science & technology 
cooperation with the United States of Ameri ca, France and other developed and developing 
countries to undertake collaborative  projects in the identified th rust areas in the frontiers of 
S&T, related areas of science for basic research  and to explore other possible areas for future 
cooperation and to support the Centre for S& T of the non-aligned and other developing 
countries and the International Council of Scientific Unions and affiliated 
Unions/Committees through annua l contributions. The Depart ment also informed that  
International S&T cooperation has stepped up considerably with a four fold increases in the 
number of activities delivered during 2008-2009 in  comparison to pervious years. Giving the 
specific details of some initiatives, the Departme nt stated that a programme has been started 
with the United Kingdom for focusing on the Solar              Phot o-Voltaics technology and 
establishing the next generation network, while  a programme for development of material 
sciences have been started with the European Union.   

11.2 The Committee noted that the allocati on (including both the Plan and Non-Plan 
Components) under Internationa l co-operation has almost remained constant with Rs.58.50 
crores in R.E.; Rs.58.35 crores in B.E. in the year 2009-2010 and Rs.58.70 crores in B.E. 
2010-2011. The Committee also observed that the Plan Component remained static at Rs 
50.00 crores for B.E. & R.E. 2009-2010 and B.E. 2010-2011. The Department stated that 
though during the financial year 2009-2010 seve ral new initiatives/agreements were 
concluded, resulting in enhanced and expa nded engagements on the International S&T 
Cooperation front which needed a higher level of  budgetary support, however due to lack of 
full budgetary support, a number of activities had to be postponed to the next financial year 
when a higher level of budgetary provision was expected.  
11.3 The Committee notes with s erious concern that the budgetary allocation for the 
financial years 2009-2010 and 2010-2011 have al most remained constant, despite the 
fact that International S&T cooperation h ave registered an im pressive four fold 
increase in the number of activities de livered during 2008-2009 in comparison to 
pervious years. The Committee also expresses serious concern at the fact that due to 
lack of budgetary support during the ye ar 2009-2010 several new international S&T 
initiatives/agreements which were concluded,  but the activities under the agreements 
could not be materialized due to lack of full budgetary support and had to be postponed 
to the next financial year i.e 2010-2011 and th is year too the allocation has not been 
increased. 
11.4 The Committee is of the opin ion that retracting from an international agreement 
or postponing it, after it has been conclude d sends a wrong signal to the international 
scientific community about the seriousne ss and commitment of our country towards 
such agreements. Further, International Collaboration in S&T results in developing 
stronger relations both at bilateral and mult i-lateral levels which are inevitable to 
maintain pace of progress and growth of S&T,  besides ensuring sharing of expertise, 
cost and optimal utilization of resources. Keep ing this in view, th e Committee feels that 
full budgetary support should be provided by  the Ministry of Finance and Planning 
Commission atleast for those activities for which international agreements have been 
concluded, so that during the next financial year these activities get materialized and 
may not languish due to lack of funds. Th e Committee therefore r ecommends that the 
Department should strongly sponsor their st and with the Ministry of Finance to get 
adequate funds to translate those activities into reality.  
12. DRUGS AND PHARMACEUTI CAL RESEARCH PROGRAMME 
12.1 The Committee was informed that the Department while recognizing the profound 
influence of R&D on the prospects and opportuni ties for the growth of the Indian Drug 
Industry, initiated the scheme on Drugs a nd Pharmaceuticals Research in 1994-95 for 
promoting Industry-Institutional Collaboration in  R&D in drugs and pharmaceuticals sector. 
The programme aims at enhancing capabilitie s of institutions and the Indian Drugs & 
Pharmaceuticals Industry towards development of new drugs in all systems of Medicine.  
The specific objectives of this scheme are: 
     To synergise the strengths of publicly funded R&D inst itutions and Indian 
Pharmaceutical Industry in developing drugs in areas of national relevance. 
     To create an enabli ng, infrastructure, mechanisms a nd linkages to facilitate new 
drug development. 
     To stimulate skill development of human resources in  R&D for drugs and 
pharmaceuticals. 
12.2 The Committee noted that the allocation made to 'Drugs and Pharmaceutical 
Research' has been reduced from Rs.96.00 crores in B.E. to Rs.78.00 crores in R.E. in the 
year 2009-2010 and then again drastically reduced to Rs.50.00 crores in B.E. 2010-2011. The 

Department explained that while undertaking mid- term review of Plan activities of DST for 
11th Five Year Plan by Planning Commission and after considering several new schemes and 
programmes relating to Drugs & Pharmaceuti cal Research implemented by the various 
Departments/agencies such as Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Department of AYUSH, 
Department of Health, and CSIR, it was consid ered that Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Research 
Programme could be transferred to any one of these Departments interested to implement this 
programme from 2012-2013 onwards. In view of several such programmes existing in many 
other Central Government                Departments/agencies with liberal funding in the form of 
grants-in-aid and loans to pharma industries, number of project propos als received for this 
programme has been reduced. Th erefore, the proposed budget for Drugs & Pharmaceuticals 
Research Programme will not hamper the progress of this sector. 
12.3      The Committee notes with serious concern that a crucial programme such as 
the ‘Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research’ pr ogramme which was started in  1994-95 is 
still in search of a promoting Department/ Ministry. The Committee fails to understand 
as to why the programme is being shifted from Department of the Science & 
Technology to Departments of Biotechnology (DBT), or AYUSH, Minist ry of Health or 
CSIR. The Committee expresses its serious concern  at the fact that even after so many 
years of being in existence, no focused approach has been adopted towards the 
programme. Instead of shifting from one De partment to another, the Committee is of 
the firm opinion that to achieve better resul ts, better coordination should be evolved 
between the Ministries/Departments participating in the programme.  
12.4 The Committee is of the view that in  a country where poverty is rampant and 
substantial part of population suffers from cr itical diseases, continued support to drug 
research programmes is the social respons ibility of the government for providing 
affordable drugs/medicines to the poor mass es and this responsibility cannot be diluted 
or absolved at any stage through reduced allocations. Hence instead of decreasing 
allocation for the programme, a focussed a pproach should be adopted within the  
Department of Science  & Technology to ensu re that the programme is able to deliver 
its intended results. The Committee, the refore, recommends that drug research 
programmes should be focussed on the neglected diseases which are afflicting the large 
populace of our country with renewed vigour.  
12.5 The Committee in its 162
nd report on Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research 
Prgramme including the herbal  medicines have comprehens ively examined the various 
aspects of this programme and have given cogent recommendations. The Committee 
while reiterating its recommendations would like to stress upon the urgent need to forge 
effective partnerships between the various research institutions and the pharmaceutical 
companies engaged in the crucial field of  drugs and pharmaceutical research and 
development, keeping in view the profo und influence of R&D on the prospects and 
opportunities for the growth of the Indian  Drug Industry and promotion of Industry-
Institutional Collaboration of R&D in drugs and pharmaceuticals sector is the need of 
the hour.  
13. HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT 
 The Committee was informed that the Depa rtment has been consistently engaged in 
the development of human resource in the fi eld of science and technology through various 
programmes. The major programmes are as follows; 
i)  Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research (INSPIRE);  
ii)  Scholarships for Science in  Higher Education (SHE); and 
iii) Promotion of University Research  and Scientific Excellence (PURSE). 

13.1  Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research (INSPIRE) and 
Scholarships for Science in Higher Education (SHE) 
‘Innovations in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research’ (INSPIRE) aims towards  
attracting and fostering talent in scientific research.  The scheme draws benefits from the 
previous experience in the education sector an d aims to expand the scale of the programme. 
The ‘
Scholarship for Higher Education’ (SHE) targets at institution of 10,000 fellowships 
of Rs. 80,000/- per year for bright students in science streams during their B.Sc/M.Sc 
courses. The scheme aims at an annual accreti on of 10,000 ‘best in class’ future researchers 
per year, which should enable India to become a Global player in R&D.  
13.2 The Committee was informed that a  major programme for at traction of talent to 
study science and pursue a care er in research wi th a budget outlay of Rs.1980.00 crores for 
the XI plan period has been launched on 13th December 2008. The programme is expected to 
link the Science & Technology Mi nistry with about 1.5 mill ion young people in the age 
group of 10-32 years and involve s mentorship, scholarship suppor t and exciting interactions 
with global leaders in science. 
13.3 The Committee observes that INSPIRE Programme  has shown a three fold rise in 
allocation, from Rs. 60.0 crores  and Rs. 78.50 crores in 2 009-2010 at B.E and R.E stages 
respectively, it has been in creased to Rs. 240.0 crores in B.E 2010-2011. The Department 
stated that the INSPIRE scheme, which offers  science as a career  option by providing 
necessary opportunities for youth, has two sub-schemes: 
i) Scheme for Early Attracting of Talents for Science (SEATS):  It has two components 
namely ‘Inspire Award’ to seed and experience the joy of innovation, targeting every year 2 
lakh school children in the age gr oup of 10 to 15 years and ‘IN SPIRE Internship’, targeting 
more than 50,000 per year, aimed to motivating talented youth to take -up research as a 
personal undertaking by rubbing shoulders wi th global icons of sc ience including Nobel 
Prize Winners. In reply to a query of the Committee, as to whether the Nobel Laureates are 
being taken to the rural areas; the Department clarified that the children from all the schools 
of the country meet the Nobel Laureates at Allahabad. 
ii) Assured Opportunity for Research Careers (AORC):  It has also two components 
namely ‘INSPIRE Fellowship’, which aims at enhancement of research fellowships for 
doctoral studies and the ‘INSPIRE Faculty Scheme ’ for a period of five years after PhD in 
sciences. About 1000 young people in each category would be considered under this 
program. 
13.4 The Department explained that all INSPI RE components, except the ‘Inspire Faculty 
Scheme’, have been initiated and will r each the targeted level by 2010-2011. The higher 
allocation for INSPIRE is due to the ‘Inspire F aculty scheme’ which is a major scheme will 
be initiated in 2010-2011. In this scheme each  Post Doctoral Fellow will draw a salary 
equivalent to an Assistant Professor of IIT with a research grant, which involves a substantial 
expenditure. 
13.5   The Committee also noted that the Alloca tion to 'Scholarships for Science in Higher 
Education' was decreased from Rs.40.00 crores in  B.E. to Rs.26.50 crores in R.E. in the year 
2009-2010 and desired to know the r easons for decreasing the fund . Explaining the reasons, 
the Department stated that the selection of SHE Scholars involves a massive national level 
exercise with participation of State Educational Boards spread across the country. Due to this 
massive exercise in 2009-2010, the Department  could award only about 2500 scholarships 
and hence the reduced allocation. The Scheme will reach a full target  number of 10,000 in 
the near future. 
13.6 The Committee is aware that the country  has winessed an  overall decline in 
general  interest towards science subjects wh ich has resulted in a sharp decrease in the 
students who are opting for science as a ca reer and therefore the invaluable creation of 

the much-needed scientific and technical manpower base has suffered over the years. In 
this background the INSPIRE and SHE sche mes which aims towards inculcating an 
interest towards science amongst the school ch ildren at an early age of 10 to 15 years is 
highly commendable.  The Committee feels that through such schemes the brightest 
students of the country can be nurtured an d retained for research in science streams 
and would eventually enable India to embark on ambitious course of  scientific wealth 
creation.  
13.7 The Committee also appreciates that th e Department will nurture the scheme in 
colleges and post-graduate level too throug h its various fellowships and monetary 
incentives programmes, specially the ‘Ins pire Faculty scheme’ wherein each Post 
Doctoral Fellow will draw a salary equivalent to an Assistant Prof essor of IIT with a 
research grant. The Committee hopes that the scheme, which has been given substantial 
budgetary support, will be initiated as per schedule and the country will be able to reap 
the benefits of the scheme at the earliest. The Committee also appreciates the innovative 
scheme ‘INSPIRE Internship’, which aims  to motivate talented youth to take-up 
research through personal interactions with global icons of science including Nobel 
Prize Winners and recommends that such schemes should be encouraged through 
proper budgetary support. 
13.8 Promotion of University Research  and Scientific Excellence (PURSE) 
  The Department informed the Committee that under infrastruc ture strengthening 
programmes in Universities, it has started an in itiative to provide incentive grant system for 
universities based on the evidence of scientific publications during the period      1996-2006. 
The programme provides research  incentive grant at levels of  Rs.10 crores, Rs.3 crores and 
Rs.2 crores per year to 14 universities base d on objective criteria namely, number of 
publications and H indices, which a global index that attempts to measure both the scientific 
productivity and the apparent scientific impact of a scientist.  
13.9 In reply to a query as regards the lack of funding of  Universi ties in the Northern 
region of the country, under the PURSE progr amme, the Committee was informed that the 
grants are made to the Universities based on the output of publications and Universities 
which have more output, get the grants. 
13.10 The Committee is of the opinion that th e scientific departme nts in the various 
universities across the country suffer from a severe funds crunch and are not able to 
develop their infrastructure which is a serious drawback faced by the students who are 
pursuing a science course. In this direction, schemes such as PURSE have taken a right 
initiative by focusing on the infrastruc ture development of the Universities. The 
Committee recommends that more universities should be provided with grants and that 
such schemes should be extended to the Universities specially in the rural and 
backward areas of the country. The Department  should also explore the possibility of 
expanding the scope of the PURSE funding to st ates, especially the states which have so 
far been left out in the Northern region, through pro-active schemes. 
14. MEGA FACILITIES FOR BASIC RESEARCH  
The Committee was informed that the Basic research in the country has been 
depending upon mega and capital in tensive facilities created by other countries and this 
practice has led to asymmetries in credit sharing.  Further, Indian expertise to build advanced 
scientific instruments and devices does not get fostered outside the strategic areas of research 
where technology denial forces prevents build ing of capacities. The Department along with 
Department of Atomic Energy(DAE) has identifi ed areas where an effective partnership of 
the two departments can bring about an eff ective capacity building in the university and 
academic sector for building mega facili ties for basic resear ch. A Memorandum of 
Understanding has been signed between the Department and DAE. 

14.1 In reply to a query as regards the decrease in allocation to 'Mega facilities for Basic 
Research' from Rs.40.00 crores in B.E. to Rs.20.00 crores in R.E. in the year   2009-2010 and 
also a mere allocation of Rs.30.00 crores made this year, the Department replied that the 
main cause of non-utilisation of the  allocated amount is that one  of the major projects to be 
undertaken under this Scheme viz.  the "Facility for Antiproton and Ion Research (FAIR)" at 
Darmstadt in Germany, for which India is one of the founding countries and has agreed to 
contribute Rs. 36 million Euros towards its c onstruction, for which the schedule has got 
delayed at the international level itself and, hence, expenditure as regards the Indian 
component could not be made as expected ea rlier and therefore the Department could not 
utilize the allocation under "Mega Facilities for Basic Research". 
14.2 The Department also informed that dur ing 2009-2010, the following activities were 
undertaken under this Scheme – 
 participation in the ALICE (A Large I on Collider Experiment) experiment at 
LHC, CERN, Geneva; 
 participation in the CMS (Compact Muon Solenoid) experiment at LHC, CERN, 
Geneva; 
 participation in the LHC Grid Computing activities at CERN, Geneva. 
During 2009-2010  Rs. 20.00 crores were utilized fo r these activities. It  is expected that 
some of the projects undertak en/to be undertaken in the above schemes would advance 
further or mature for funding during 2010-2011 and, hence, the allocation has been kept at 
Rs. 30.00 crore. 
14.3 The Committee enquired as to why the Ba sic research in the country has been 
depending upon mega and capital in tensive facilities created by other countries and how this 
practice has led to asymmetries in credit sharing.  The Department explained that in the past, 
the resource deployment was meager under the mega-facilities available in the country and 
the scientists had to use the facilities and the t echnologies of the advanced countries and 
those countries used to take cr edit of any invention/innovation in science by Indian scientists 
instead of by our own science intelligentsia. To address this problem the Department has now 
started co-investing and co-generating values an d thereby ensuring that the patent/credits are 
also being equally shared between  the partnering countries and I ndia. This principle is being 
followed as regards the recent agreements of India with the European Union and the United 
States of America. 
14.4 The Committee appreciates the principle of reciprocity and parity adopted by 
the Department as regards the use of mega-faci lities in basic research by our scientists. 
The initiative of the Department will boost th e confidence of our scientists and also lead 
to the acknowledgement of our scientific expertise at an international level. The country 
will also be able to share the credit and the patents on any scientific discovery that 
results from international collaboration.  Although the Committee appreciates the 
partnership between the Department and th e Department of Atomic Energy(DAE) and 
feels that such efforts can develop the much needed capacity building in the university 
and academic sector for building mega facili ties for basic research, it also recommends 
that apart from DAE the partnerships with  other scientific de partments like DBT, 
Earth Sciences, Space and DSIR may also be fostered as the basic research in the 
country is perennially being neglected. The Committee feels that such positive activities 
on the part of the Department needs to be encouraged, and needs to be supported 
through proper budgetary support. 
15. The Committee is of the view that th e Department of Science & Technology 
through its various research and developm ent programmes is striving to uplift the 
standard of living in the country.  Keep ing in view the excellent work that the 

Department has undertaken, the kind of competence it has exhibited and the kind of 
core and critical programmes it has envisage d for the future, the Committee strongly 
recommends that the Department of Scie nce & Technology should be properly and 
adequately funded and any kind of reduction in  outlay at R.E. stage should be strictly 
avoided. 
MINUTES 
________________________________________________________________________ 
XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING  
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, 30 th March, 2010 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT  
1.  Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
4. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
5. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
6. Shri Jabir Husain 
7. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
LOK SABHA  
8.  Shri Ninong Ering  
9.   Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
10.  Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
11. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
12.  Shri C.R. Patil 
13.  Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
14.  Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
15.  Shri Francisco Sardinha 
16.  Dr. Rajan Sushant 
17.  Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
SECRETARIAT  
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director 
Shri V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
Representatives of ***
  
*** *** *** 
2. *** *** *** 
 The officials then withdrew.  
 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at  12.40 p.m. and re-assembled at 02.30 p.m. to 
hear the views of the Secretary, Department of Science & Technology.  
Representatives of Department of Science & Technology
 
1. Dr. T. Ramasami, Secretary 
2. Dr. Inder Jit Singh, Joint Secretary (Admn. & Parl.) 
3. Ms. Sheila Sangwan, JS&FA 
4. Shri Dinesh Sharma, Secret ary, Technology Development Board 

5. Dr. Laxman Prasad, Head (N STMIS) & Mission Director 
6. Dr. B. Hari Gopal, Head (SERC) 
7. Dr. Vinita Sharma, Head (SEED) & GLP 
8. Dr. A.K. Sood, Head (In ternational Cooperation) 
9. Dr. V. Raghupathy, Head (IS-STAC) 
10. Dr. G.J. Samathanam, Head (TDT) & PFC 
11. Dr. K.K. Dwivedi, Head (NSCTC) 
12. Dr. Praveer Asthana, Head (AI) & Mission Director (Nano Mission) 
13. Dr. Vimal Kumar, Head (Fly Ash Unit) 
14. Dr. Akhilesh Gupta, Head (Climate Change) 
15. Shri Neeraj Sharma, Scientist 'G' 
16. Shri Ghan Shyam Goel, Addl. Director-General, PIB 
17. Shri M.R. Kulkarni, Scientist 'E', SAC-PM 
18. Shri Sanjay Pandey, Controller of Accounts 
19. Smt. L. Indumathy, Director (Finance) 
4. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, De partment of Science & Technology and his 
team of officials and requested him to make a brief presentation on the Demands for Grants 
(2010-11) of the Department. He also desired to know the budgetary aspects and the aspects 
concerning major programmes and policies of the Department includ ing programmes where 
the targets could not be achieved by the Depart ment or the performance of the Department 
was not satisfactory. He requested the Secretar y to highlight the specific requirements for 
increase under any head of the budget. Thereaft er, the Secretary made a visual presentation 
highlighting the major activities planned for the year 2010-11 and achievements made by the 
Department during the year 2009-10.  The Secr etary also mentioned about the budgetary 
allocations made under different heads for th e year 2010-11 and the functioning of the 
Department. The Members then sought clarific ations on the points that  emerged out of the 
presentation of the Secretary.  The Secretary replied to them. 
 The officials then withdrew.  
 A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.20 p.m.  
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING  
The Committee met at 03.00 p.m. on Friday, 16
th April, 2010 in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT  
1.  Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
4. Shri Saman Pathak 
5. Shri Jabir Husain 
6. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
LOK SABHA  
7. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg 
8. Shri Ninong Ering  
9.   Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
10.  Shri C.R. Patil 
11.  Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
12.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
13.  Shri Pradeep Tamta 

14.  Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
SECRETARIAT  
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director 
Shri V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairman informed the Committee that though seven reports (204
th 
to 210 th Reports) on Demands for Grants  (2010-2011) pertaining to the 
Ministries/Departments under the purview of  the Committee have been circulated, the 
Committee would however consider  the draft ***, ***, ***, ***, *** and 209 th Reports on 
Demands for Grants (2010-2011)  pertaining to the ***; *** ; ***; ***; *** and Science & 
Technology respectively and dr aft *** Report pertaining to the *** would be considered 
later on as he could no t go through that Report  due to his some other engagements. The 
Committee then took-up for consideration its draft ***, ***, ***, ***, *** and 209th Reports. 
The Committee discussed the Reports one by one and adopted all the six Reports (***  to 
209th) without any amendment. 
3. The Committee, thereafter decided to present its *** to *** Reports on 22nd April and 
*** to 209 th Reports on 23 rd April, 2010 to both the Houses of the Parliament. The 
Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Jabir Husain to present the *** to 
*** reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Francisc o Sardinha and in his absence Dr. Mirza 
Mehboob Beg to lay the copies of the re ports on the table of Lok Sabha on 22 nd April, 2010. 
The Committee also authorized its Chairman a nd in his absence Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
to present the *** to 209th reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Pradeep Tamta and in his absence 
Dr. Charan Das Mahant to lay the copies of  the reports on the table of Lok Sabha on 23 rd 
April, 2010.  
3. Thereafter, the Committee decided to undert ake study visit to Bangalore, Chennai and 
Tirupati in the second week of J une, 2010 to acquaint itself   with    the   functioni ng    of    
certain       institutes/bodies/centers, etc.,   fal ling    within   the admi nistrative control of the 
Ministries/Departments under the purview of  the Committee. The Committee directed the 
Secretariat to take necessary action accordingly. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 p.m.  
 *** Relates to other matters. 