Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
REPORT NO.
316
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th August, )7 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th August, )7 2018
THREE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH REPORT
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 (Saka)
Air Pollution in Delhi and National Capital Region


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

63
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED SIXTEENTH REPORT
Air Pollution in Delhi and National Capital Region
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th August, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th August, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2018/Shravana, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(iv)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (v)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (vi )-(vii)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-36
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE .............................................................. 37-46
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 47-61

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
 ( Constituted on 1st September , 2017)
1. Shri Anand Sharma  —    Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
6. Shri C. P. Narayanan
7. Shri Parimal Nathwani
8. Shri Sharad Pawar
9. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri P. P . Chauhan
16. Kumari Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
21. Shri Daddan Mishra
22. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
23. Shri Chirag Paswan
24. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
25. Shri Nana Patole
26. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
27. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
28. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
29. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
30. Shri Nagendra Singh
31. Shri Vikram Usendi
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
 ( As on 2nd July , 2018)
1. Shri Anand Sharma     —   Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Sharad Pawar
7. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
#8. Shri Anil Baluni
#9. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
@@10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri P. P . Chauhan
16. Kumari Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
21. Shri Daddan Mishra
22. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
23. Shri Chirag Paswan
24. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
(iii)
# Nominated w.e.f. 2 nd June, 2018.
@@ Shri C. P . Narayanan ceased to be a member of the Committee on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f.  1st July, 2018.

*30. Dr. Raghu Sharma
@31. Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
* Nominated w.e.f. 14th March, 2018.
@ Nominated w.e.f. 27 th April, 2018.
(iv)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf,
present this Three Hundred and Sixteenth Report on “Air Pollution in Delhi and National Capital Region”.
2. In its meetings held on the subject on 8 th December, 2017, 9th January and 3rd July, 2018, the Committee
considered the subject and heard the views of the representatives of Union Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change, India Meteorological Department, Government of NCT of Delhi, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh,
Rajasthan, Punjab, National Green Tribunal, Punjab Agricultural University, Confederation of Indian Industry
and Centre for Science and Environment on the subject.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the representatives of the concerned Ministries/Departments,
Government of NCT of Delhi and the concerned State Governments, National Green Tribunal, Civil Society
and experts for placing before the Committee the required material and replying to the clarifications sought
by the Members on the subject.
4. In its meeting held on 2 nd August, 2018, the Committee considered the draft report and adopted the
same.
(ANAND SHARMA)
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
2 August, 2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Shravana 11, 1940 (Saka)  Science & Technology, Environment & Forests,
Rajya Sabha
(v)

ACRONYMS
AQI : Air Quality Index
C&D : Construction and Demolition
CAAQMs : Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations
CAP : Comprehensive Action Plan
CNG : Natural Gas/Compressed Natural Gas
COPD : Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease
CPCB : Central Pollution Control Board
CRB : Crop Residue Burning
CWG : Common Wealth Games
DMRC : Delhi Metro Rail Corporation
DPCC : Delhi Pollution Control Committee
ECC : Environment Compensation Charges
EPCA : Environment Pollution Control Authority
GRAP : Graded Response Action Plan
HARSAC : Haryana Space Applications Centre
HLTF : High Level Task Force
HSPCB : Haryana State Pollution Control Board
ICMR : Indian Council of Medical Research
IIRS : Indian Institute of Remote Sensing
IITM : Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology
IMD : Indian Meteorological Department
ITMS : Intelligent Traffic Management System
LPG : Liquid Petroleum Gas
MoES : Ministry of Earth Sciences
NAAQS : National Ambient Air Quality Standards
NAMP : National Air Quality Monitoring Programme
NCAP : National Clean Air Programme
(vi)

NCDC : National Centre for Disease Control
NCMRWF : National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting
NCR : National Capital Region
NGT : National Green Tribunal
NHAI : National Highways Authority of India
OBD : On-board Diagnostic System
P AU : Punjab Agriculture University
PCC : Pollution Control Committee
PEDA : Punjab Energy Development Agency
PPCB : Punjab Pollution Control Board
PRSC : Punjab Remote Sensing Centre
PUC : Pollution Under Control
PUCC : Pollution Under Control Certificate
PWD : Public Works Department
RSGL : Rajasthan State Gas Ltd.
SAFAR : System of Air Quality and Weather Forecasting and Research
SOP : Standard Operating Procedure
SPCBs : State Pollution Control Boards
STC : Special Technical Cell
UIT : Urban Improvement Trust
VMS : Variable Message Signboards
(vii)

1
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Clean air is the most important element of a healthy life.  However, day-by-day our environment is
getting polluted because of the mixing of particulates, biological molecules and other harmful materials.
Increasing air pollution is one of the most important environmental issues engaging the attention of one and
all.  The desire of people living in Delhi and its surrounding National Capital Region (NCR) areas to breathe
clean and fresh air has become a distant dream due to increase in the various components of pollutant
activities.  The situation of air pollution peaks with the onset of winters every year especially in the months
of November, December and January when the levels of air pollution reach much beyond the specified
norms which results in hazardous pollution related issues for the population of Delhi and NCR.  The increasing
air pollution in Delhi and NCR which encompasses areas in the neighbouring States of Haryana, Uttar
Pradesh and Rajasthan and its adverse impact on environment as well as human and animal health drew the
attention of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment
& Forests.
1.2 In its endeavour to analyse the whole gamut of air pollution in Delhi and NCR, the Committee took up
the subject “Air Pollution in Delhi and National Capital Region” for detailed examination.  The Committee,
accordingly, held meetings on the subject on 8
th December, 2017,  9 th January, 2018 and 3rd July, 2018 and
heard views of the Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India;
Chief Secretaries, Government of NCT of Delhi, Haryana and Rajasthan, Director-General, India Meteorological
Department; representatives of State Governments of Uttar Pradesh and Punjab; Dean, Punjab Agricultural
University, Deputy Director General, Confederation of Indian Industry, Registrar General, National Green
Tribunal and Director General, Centre for Science and Environment. The Committee discussed the subject
threadbare and the various steps taken/being taken by the concerned agencies/Departments/Ministries/State
Governments were also brought to the notice of the Committee.
1.3 NCR is a unique example of inter-State regional development planning for a region, spanning National
Capital Territory of Delhi and 22 districts in the States of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan, with the
National Capital as its core.  The NCR includes the neighbouring cities of Meerut, Ghaziabad, Gautam Budh
Nagar, Bulandshahar, Baghpat, Hapur, Muzzaffarnagar, Faridabad, Gurugram, Mahendergarh, Bhiwani, Mewat,
Rohtak, Sonepat, Rewari, Jhajjar, Panipat, Palwal, Jind, Karnal, Alwar and Bharatpur. The Committee notes
that meteorology is a complicated issue for Delhi due to the following factors:-
 Delhi is situated in the midst of alluvial plains of Northern India at one hand and desert on the
other.
 Wind speed, wind direction, humidity, temperature and pressure significantly influence levels
of air pollution.
 Calm conditions, temperature inversion, lowering of mixing height, intrusion of dust particles
from nearby areas adversely impact dispersion of pollutants and exacerbates levels of pollution.
1.4 Government of India has laid down National Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for twelve
pollutants namely, Particulate Matter 10(PM 10), PM 2.5, Carbon Monoxide (CO), Sulphur Dioxide (SQ 2),
Nitrogen Dioxide (NO 2), Ammonia (NH 3), ground level Ozone (O 3), Lead, Arsenic, Nickel, Benzene and
Benzo (a) Pyrene to control air pollution under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.  Also, the National

2
Air Quality Index (AQI) has been launched during 2015 which is a web-based system designed to provide
simplified form of air quality data on real time basis.
1.5 Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs)/Pollution Control
Committee (PCCs) are monitoring air quality across the country under National Air Quality Monitoring
Programme (NAMP) through a network comprising 691 operating manual monitoring stations located in
303 cities/towns in 29 States and 6 Union Territories and 54 Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring
Stations (CAAQMs) in 33 cities in 12 States across the country.  Three air pollutants viz. and PM of size less
than or equal to 10 micron (PM 10) are being monitored at all the locations. Other parameters like PM 2.5
(Particulate Matter having an aerodynamic diameter less than or equal to 2.5 pm), Carbon monoxide (CO),
Ammonia (NH
3), Lead (Pb), Ozone (O 3), Benzene (C 6 H6), Benzo (a) pyrene {B(a)P}, Arsenic (AS) and
Nickel (Ni) are being monitored  at select locations in the network under NAMP.
1.6 The Committee was informed that the NAAQ standard (Annual Average) in respect of SO 2, NO2,
PM10  and PM2.5 was 50, 40, 60 and 40 respectively.  There are six AQI categories, namely Good, Satisfactory,
Moderately Polluted, Poor, Very Poor and Severe.  The National Air Quality Index notified by the Government
which classifies air quality of a day and air quality descriptor is as under:-
AQI PM 10 PM2.5 NO2 O3 CO SO 2 NH3 Pb
Category 24-hr 24-hr 24-hr 8-hr 8-hr 24-hr 24-hr 24-hr
(Range) (mg/m3)
Good(0-50) 0-50 0-30 0-40 0-50 0-1.0 0-40 0-200 0-0.5
Satisfactory 51-100 31-60 41-80 51-100 1.1-2.0 41-80 201-400 0.5-1.0
(51-100)
Moderately 101-250 61-90 81-180 101-168 2.1-10 81-380 401-800 1.1-2.0
Polluted
(101-200)
Poor 251-350 91-120 181-280 169-208 10-17 381-800 801-1200 2.1-3.0
(201-300)
Very poor 351-430 121-250 281-400 209-748* 17-34 801-1600 1200-1800 3.1-3.5
(301-400)
Severe 430+ 250+ 400+ 748+* 34+ 1600+ 1800+ 3.5+
(401-500)
*One hourly monitoring (for mathematical calculations only).
The Air Quality descriptor along with likely impact on health  is as under:-
AQI Associated Health Impacts
Good Minimal impact
(0-50)
Satisfactory Minor breathing discomfort to  sensitive people
(51-100)

3
Moderately Polluted May cause breathing discomfort to people with lung disease such as asthma and
(101-200) discomfort to people with heart disease, children and older adults
Poor May cause breathing discomfort to people on prolonged exposure and discomfort
(201-300) to people with heart disease
Very Poor May cause respiratory illness to the people on prolonged exposure.  Effect may
(301-400) be more pronounced in people with lung and heart diseases
Severe May cause respiratory impact ev en on healthy people and serious health impacts
(401-500) on people with lung/heart diseases.  The health impacts may be experienced even
during light physical activity.
1.7 During the course of its deliberations of the subject, the Committee was informed that to effectively
address the problem of air pollution in Delhi by indentifying major air pollution sources, their contribution to
ambient air pollution level and develop an air pollution control plan, the Government of NCT of Delhi and
Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) got a ‘Comprehensive study on Air Pollution and Green House
Gases in Delhi’ by IIT, Kanpur in 2014-15.  As per their report, which was submitted in January, 2016, the
contribution of various sources of air pollution towards PM
10 and PM2.5 in summers and winters is as under:-
           Source Average for six monitoring locations
  % contribution (PM 10)       % contribution (PM 2.5)
Winter Summer W inter Summer
V ehicles 19.7 6.4 25.1 8.5
Secondary particulates 24.6 10.15 29.9 14.9
Bio-mass burning 16.7 6.8 25.8 12.2
Industries 0.65 1.05 0.8 1.2
Coal and Fly Ash 12.1 37.2 4.8 25.95
Construction material 3.1 4.1 1.5 3.0
Soil and road dust 14.4 26.5 4.3 27.1
Solid Waste burning 8.75 7.75 7.75 7.2
The major findings of the study are as under:-
(i) The contribution of vehicles to ambient PM 2.5 concentration during winter and summer are
25% and 9% respectively.  The major source contribution during winters is from Secondary
particles (30%), bio-mass burning (26%) and vehicles (25%).  In summers, the major sources
are soil and road dust (28%), Coal and Fly ash (26%), Secondary particles (15%), bio-mass
burning (12%) and Vehicles (9%).
(ii) On the basis of Emission Inventory, the top four contributors to PM
2.5   emission are road dust,
vehicle, domestic fuel burning and industrial point sources;

4
(iii) As per the emission inventory out of the total PM 2.5  emission load from vehicle sector 46% is
being contributed by trucks, 33% by 2 wheelers and 10% by cars (Diesel cars contributes
78% while petrol cars contribute 22%), 5% by buses, 4% by light commercial vehicles and
2% by 3 wheelers.
2. MEASURES TAKEN FOR MITIGATING AIR POLLUTION
2.1 In reply to the Committee’s query regarding the action taken by the Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change during the last three years to bring down the level of PM
2.5 and PM10, the Ministry has
stated that the following steps have been initiated:-
(i) Stringent BS–IV vehicle norms have been implemented from 1 stApril, 2017 throughout the
country.  Leapfrogging to BS-VI fuel standards from 1 st April, 2018 has been done in
Delhi.  BS–VI vehicle norms are proposed to be implemented from April, 2020 across the
country.
(ii) Standards for SO 2 and NOx have been revised this year for 5 Industrial sectors and for all
types of industrial boilers using solid and liquid fuels.
(iii) National Clean Air Programme (NCAP) is being launched by the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change for controlling air pollution.
(iv) 31 point action plan for prevention, control or abatement of air pollution and improvement of
ambient air quality in non-attainment cities and towns has been issued to concerned State
Pollution Control Boards.  Further, to sensitise stakeholders such as local urban bodies, transport
departments, industries, pollution control boards, etc. and facilitate preparation of action plans,
six regional workshops at Bhubaneshwar, Bhopal, Chandigarh, Guwahati, Mumbai and
Visakhapatnam have been organised.
(v) Directions issued to Director (Agriculture) for 06 regions regarding agriculture stubble burning
in NCR States and Punjab.
(vi) Direction has been issued to Chairman, Haryana State Pollution Control Board to effectively
control the air pollution due to operation of Hot Mix Plants.
2.2 In addition to the above, the Committee was informed by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change that the Ministry has notified a Graded Response Action Plan (GRAP) on 12
th January 2017
for Delhi and NCR, which comprises measures such as prohibition on entry of trucks into Delhi; ban on
construction activities, introduction of odd and even scheme for private vehicles, shutting of schools,
closure of brick kilns, hot mix plants and stone crushers; shutting down of Badarpur Thermal Power Plant,
ban on diesel generator sets, garbage burning in landfills and plying of visibly polluting vehicles etc.  Actions
along with responsible agencies have been identified in accordance with the air pollution levels represented
as Air Quality Index.  The nature, scope and rigor of measures to be taken is linked to levels of pollution viz.
severe plus or emergency, severe, very poor, moderate to poor and moderate, after due consideration by
authorities concerned.  The actions are to be implemented in the entire NCR and a Task Force has been
constituted, which reviews air quality status on regular basis.
2.3 The Committee was also informed that the following directions have been issued to the concerned
State Pollution Control Boards/Pollution Control Committee:-

5
(i) display air quality data, publish details of helpline numbers, direct agencies to set up control
rooms and connect with Central Control Room;
(ii) S tate power plants to comply with new emission limits by December, 2019;
(iii) red category industries operating in NCR to install Online Continuous Emission Monitoring
System by 30 th June, 2018;
(iv) District Magistrates and District Collectors of NCR districts to close down brick kilns which
are operating without consent to operate, not having proper stack monitoring facility, not
converted to zig-zag technology from fixed chimney bull trench kilns by 30
th June, 2018;
(v) Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Rajasthan State Pollution Control Boards to ensure vigorous
implementation of GRAP and constituting special field teams;
(vi) Chief Secretaries, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan, Haryana prohibiting use of petcoke and furnace
oil in industry, process and operations;
(vii) Municipal Commissioners, Delhi Municipal Corporations for taking effective actions to control
air pollution from waste burning, construction dust, mechanized sweeping, etc.;
(viii) Chairman, National Highway Authority of India to effectively control dust at construction sites
through water sprinkling;
(ix) Commissioner, Traffic Police for effective traffic management at busy intersections;
(x) Commissioners (26 regions) regarding control of air pollution in NCR;
(xi) Superintendent of Police (23 regions) regarding effective movement of traffic at busy
intersections; comprising 42 points action plan for prevention, control or abatement of air
pollution and improvement of ambient air quality in Delhi and NCR.
2.4 Responding to the query of the Committee about the new initiatives being taken by the Government of
NCT of Delhi, the following was submitted:-
(a) Massive Plantation Drive:-
During the period, 2013-15, 20.22% of Green covers have been recorded which 0.14% higher than
the earlier report is.  During the period, 2015-17, 20.59% of Green covers have been recorded which
0.37% higher than the earlier report is.  During the current year 2018-19 also, it is proposed to plant
about 32.18 lakh saplings which includes plantation of trees, Shrubs and free distribution by Forest
Department and other Departments. This is expected to sustain the momentum of the gree ning
efforts of the Government of Delhi and also the pollution absorbing potential of the city.
(b) Green Budget Implementation:-
The Government of Delhi has passed a Green Budget where in provisions has been made for providing
incentives/subsidy to the following:
(i) Switch over of industries to Piped Natural Gas from existing polluting fuels.
(ii) Replace of coal based Tandoors to Gas based Tandoors.
(iii) Switch over from D.G. Sets to clean fuel based electricity generator sets.

6
(c) Notification issued on Approved Fuel:-
The Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) has issued approved fuel notification on 29.6.2018.
As per the notification only approved fuels are permitted to be used which as follows:
1. Petrol (BS VI with 10 ppm Sulphur) as per the Notification of Government of India as amended
from time to time.
2. Diesel (BS VI with 10ppm Sulphur) as per the Notification of Government of India as amended
from time to time.
3. Liquid Petroleum Gas (LPG).
4. Natural Gas/Compressed Natural Gas (CNG).
5. Aviation turbine fuel.
6. (a) Firewood for crematoriums and for other religious purposes.
(b) Wood Charcoal for Tandoors and Grills of Hotels/Restaurant/Banquet/Halls/Eating Houses
having emission channelization/control system.
(c) Wood Charcoal for use in clothes ironing.
7. Biogas
8. Refuse Derived Fuel (only for Waste-to-Energy Plants)
9. Any other clean fuel notified by the Government of NCT of Delhi/Government of India
subsequent to this notification.
2.5 Besides, Coal with low Sulphur (less than 0.4%) permitted for use in Thermal Power Plant only.  All
other fuels will be deemed “unapproved” and so disallowed for use in NCT of Delhi. Existing Industries/
Units shall covert/Switch over from their existing fuels  to the above mentioned Approved Fuels within 90
days from the date of issue of this Notification.
2.6 The Committee takes note of the new initiatives being taken by the Government of NCT of
Delhi. The Committee appreciates the initiatives brought to the notice of the Committee and hopes
that the intended benefits would be realised and these initiatives further will pave way to mitigate
the air pollution problem in Delhi and NCR to a greater extent.
2.7 The Committee also desired to know the details of the action taken by the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change with regard to implementation of GRAP throughout the year to which the
Ministry informed the following:-
(a) A Graded Response Action Plan was notified by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change on January 12, 2017 wherein actions along with responsible agencies have been identified
in accordance with the air pollution levels. Specifically the measures pertaining to “Moderate
to Poor” have been implemented in Delhi and NCR, such as, prohibition on garbage burning,
periodic mechanised road sweeping and water sprinkling, no tolerance to visibly polluting
vehicles, strict enforcement of PUC norms, dust control rules, deployment of traffic police at
vulnerable areas, watering fly ash ponds alternate day.

7
(b) 26 meetings of the Task Force of Graded Response Action Plan have been convened. Regular
meetings were conducted during high pollution days.  There has been regular reviewing/tracking
air quality data, forecast (MET, AQI), polluting activities etc.
(c) Clean Air for Delhi Campaign was organized during February 10 – 23, 2018 66 sub-divisions
of Delhi covering all 11 districts for source identification of polluting activities and creating
mass awareness.  Teams comprising officials from Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change, CPCB and Delhi Government inspected areas with focus on construction activities,
road dust, open burning, vehicular pollution and traffic congestion.  On spot actions such as
challan, water sprinkling, dousing of fire, covering Construction and Demolition (C&D) wastes
and transport vehicle, sweeping etc., was taken in 5952 cases.  In case of violations, challans
were issued to 3160 defaulters amounting to a total of `9 crore with maximum for construction
and demolition activity (2300).
(d) Previously, in view of winter season, 40 CPCB teams were deployed to various parts of Delhi
for providing ground feedback on air polluting sources and implementation status of Graded
Response Action Plan.  Field visits commenced on 1
st September, 2017.  On the spot reporting
of polluting sources with location details was done to DPCC.  Directions were issued to
concerned agencies and weekly summarised reports were sent to DPCC, with copies to EPCA
and LG Office, Delhi.  Traffic congestion, dumping of construction and solid wastes, waste
burning, road dust re-suspension were identified as major concerns.
(e) Meetings on air quality management of hotspot areas in Delhi with implementing agencies
were held on November 17, 2017, December 05, 2017 and January 11, 2018.  Teams visit
hotspots periodically, information on localised sources are sent to DPCC to facilitate area-
specific plans. A daily reporting format was given to various implementing agencies like Municipal
Corporations (East, South and North DMCs), State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs), National
Highways Authority of India (NHAI), Public Works Department (PWD), Delhi Metro Rail
Corporation (DMRC) etc. for daily action of air pollution controlling activities which included
water sprinkling on daily basis, mechanical sweeping, challans and regular monitoring of open
burning, road dust and C&D activities.
2.8 The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, while giving the details of the Comprehensive
Action Plan (CAP),s submitted that Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the matter of M.C. Mehta vs. Union
of India, issued order dated December 13, 2017, wherein time bound Comprehensive Action Plan for Air
Pollution Control in Delhi NCR was finalised. It was brought to the knowledge of the Committee that the
CAP addresses issues pertaining vehicular emission and fuel quality, power plants and industries, waste-to-
energy plants, incinerators, generator sets, open, road dust, construction dust, etc.  It was further informed
that a total 55 agencies which include Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gases, Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways, Ministry of Urban Development, Delhi Police, Delhi and NCR – Chief Secretaries, Environment
Departments, Transport Departments, Urban bodies, Industrial Departments, etc. have been directed under
Sections 3 and 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 on January 25, 2018, March 06, 2018 and June
22, 2018 to ensure strict implementation of Comprehensive Action Plan for air pollution control in Delhi and
NCR.
2.9 The Committee also desired to know from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
as to what had been the impact of implementation of GRAP in mitigating the air pollution in Delhi and NCR.

8
The Ministry responding to the query of the Committee submitted that severe category was reduced to 200
days from 245 days in the year 2017 as compared to the year 2016.  Total number of good, satisfactory and
moderate days is 75 in 2018 (till June) against 56 in the year 2017 (till June) and total number of poor, very
poor and severe days is 116 in 2018 (till June) against 125 in 2017 (till June).
2.10 During its interaction with the representatives of Centre for Science and Environment on the 3
rd July,
2018, the Committee was informed that the implementation of GRAP in Delhi in the winter of 2017-18 has
shown 15-20% reduction in the severity of winter pollution according to Indian Institute of Tropical
Meteorology and IMD and if this is clubbed with implementation of the CAP notified in 2018, sustained
gains in pollution control can be achieved.
2.11 The Committee notes that while GRAP is an emergency plan to respond to the daily air
pollution levels, CAP is a comprehensive action plan that mandates short, medium and long term
action for each source of pollution for more systemic reforms in Delhi and NCR.  The Committee
further notes the action taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change to mitigate the air pollution and hopes that the GRAP and CAP will be implemented
in letter and spirit with the close co-ordination with the concerned State Governments of NCR.  The
Committee believes that the synergy between the concerned State Governments would definitely
help in getting rid of the problem of air pollution in Delhi and NCR.  The Committee is also of the
view that both the plans i.e. GRAP and CAP need to be implemented together given the air pollution
level in Delhi and NCR.  Further, a robust monitoring system should be evolved to ensure that the
National Ambient Air Quality Standards are met and the negative impact of air pollution on the
health of the residents of this Region is minimised.
3. AIR QUALITY MONITORING STATIONS
3.1 The Committee observes that given the magnitude of the problem of air pollution in Delhi and NCR,
a grid of air quality monitoring centres is imperative to chalk out our strategy based on the real time data
collected with the help of monitoring centres.  The Committee, accordingly, sought to know the existing
number of monitoring centres and the future plan of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change in the matter.  Responding to the concern of the Committee, the Ministry submitted that at present
Delhi and NCR have 89 air quality monitoring stations and the total strength of monitoring network will be
increased to 137 by December, 2018.
3.2 The Committee welcomes the plan of the Government of India for increasing the existing
monitoring network by adding 48 more of such stations by December, 2018.  The Committee hopes
that the target set by the Government will not only be achieved within the stipulated time but the
increased number of  monitoring stations would also help in further strategising the action plans to
combat the increasing air pollution in Delhi and NCR.
4. CROP RESIDUE BURNING
4.1 The Committee notes that one of the most debated and highlighted issues among the major contributors
in air pollution problem in Delhi and NCR is the burning of paddy straw every year during October and
November and wheat in April in the neighbouring States of Punjab, Haryana and western Uttar Pradesh.
The Committee observes that as per the IIT Kanpur report on “Comprehensive Study on Air Pollution and
Green House Gases in Delhi” carried out in 2015, the contribution of the biomass burning in winter is quite
high at 17% (for PM
10) and 26% (for PM2.5).  The Committee has been given to understand that the enhanced

9
concentration of PM in October-November is possibly due to the effect of post-monsoon crop residue
burning (CRB).  The biomass contribution in PM 10 in the month of November could be as high as 140
micrograms per cubic meter and about 120 micrograms per cubic metre for PM 2.5 (mean of contribution in
entire winter season: 97 micrograms per cubic metre and 86 micrograms per cubic metre respectively).  It
has also been brought to the notice of the Committee that Hybrid Single-Particle Lagrangian Integrated
Trajectory (HYSPLIT) Back trajectories analysis exercise shows that most of the time wind in Delhi is from
North West and sometimes from West.  Wind mass as it travels over Punjab, Haryana and parts of Rajasthan
States before entering in Delhi may pick up the pollutants on the way especially from large sources (e.g.
crop residue burning) and tall emitting sources. It was submitted that in all likelihood, the PM from biomass
burning is contributing to Delhi’s air quality from crop residue burning prevalent in Punjab and Haryana in
winter.
4.2 During its meetings held on the 8
th December, 2017 and 9th January, 2018 with the representatives of
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change; State Governments of Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and
Punjab, representatives of Government of NCT of Delhi and other experts, the Committee drew their attention
on the issue of impact of crop residue burning on the air pollution of Delhi/NCR and desired to know about
the steps taken thereon.
4.3 In response, the representatives of Government of Haryana informed the Committee that a Notification
under section 19 (5) of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 was issued prohibiting the
burning of leftover straw in whole State of Haryana.  As per the order of NGT, District Level Committees
have been formed under the Chairmanship of the Deputy Commissioners comprising of officers from
Department of Agriculture, Panchayat, Revenue, Police, Haryana Pollution Control Board, etc. for
implementation of orders of NGT in controlling the air pollution in NCR Districts. It was brought to the
notice of the Committee that the Haryana State Pollution Control Board (HSPCB) has engaged Haryana
Space Applications Centre (HARSAC) to monitor the stubble burning activities in the form of satellite imageries
for 10 major paddy growing districts i.e. Fatehabad, Sirsa, Sonipat, Karnal, Panipat, Kurukshetra, Kaithal,
Bhiwani, Jhajjar and Hisar and other remote evidences on the activities captured in the State for effective
monitoring and enforcement purposes, on daily basis.  It was also submitted that HARSAC has also been
requested to start SMS alerts regarding incidences of stubble burning cases to Deputy Commissioners,
Officers of Agriculture Department and Officers of Haryana State Pollution Control Board.  It was further
brought to the knowledge of the Committee that the HSPCB has announced a reward of `50,000/- to each
of 100 Gram Panchayats (Every year) in the major paddy producing districts, if they declare and pass a
resolution that they would not allow any crop residue burning in their village.  This reward will be paid by
HSPCB subject to the confirmation of zero burning in those villages as verified by the reports of the District
Level Committee and HARSAC remote sensing data.  The Committee was informed that this award has been
announced as a further step to encourage the farmers and to restrain them from burning the crop residue, as
recognition of an ‘Eco-Friendly Village’ and these villages will be further encouraged to take up other eco-
friendly activities too.  The Committee further learnt that the Regional Officers of HSPCB are submitting
daily reports on the activities in their jurisdiction on the number of incidences detected, the amount of
penalty imposed and collected and number of cases where FIRs lodged.  It was also submitted that during
the paddy season in the year 2016, a total number of 1797 cases of paddy straw burning were detected by
District level teams who collected `19.38 lakh as environmental compensation and during the wheat harvest
season in 2017, a total number of 1147 cases of wheat straw burning were detected by District level teams
who collected `10.61 lakh as environmental compensation, as per the directions of NGT and during the

10
paddy season in the year 2017, a total number of 1493 cases of paddy straw burning have been detected by
the District level team as on 12 th November, 2017 who collected `17,40,000/- (from 648 cases) as
Environmental Compensation as per the directions of NGT.
4.4 Sharing the steps taken by the Government of Punjab to address the issue of stubble burning, the
representatives of the Government of Punjab informed the Committee that the Government of Punjab,
Department of Science, Technology and Environment, in consultation with the Punjab Pollution Control
Board (PPCB), has banned the burning of agriculture residue in the State of Punjab in exercise of the powers
conferred under section 19 (5) of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 in 2013.  The
Committee was informed that the PPCB had issued an advisory during the last paddy harvesting season that
all the owners of combine harvesters desirous of undertaking paddy harvesting in the State of Punjab shall
attach Super Straw Management System (super SMS) with their combine harvesters as suggested and
recommended by the Punjab Agriculture University (PAU), Ludhiana, so as to ensure proper management of
paddy straw.  The Committee was also informed that all the Departments namely Department of Agriculture,
PPCB, District Administration, Department of Animal Husbandry, Department of Rural Development and
Panchayats, Department of Co-operation, Education Department and Punjab Agriculture University are creating
awareness among the farmers about ill effects of stubble burning.  It was submitted that the State Government
has issued administrative instructions to various Departments with a view to control the burning of crop
residue.  The Committee was further informed that Environmental Engineers of PPCB were directed to
work in close co-ordination with Deputy Commissioners and to take prompt action in case there was any
violation of straw burning ban orders.  Further, Punjab Remote Sensing Centre (PRSC), Ludhiana has been
engaged by PPCB to deliver real time information about the stubble burning incidents.  It was submitted that
the PRSC has developed monitoring mechanism along with SMS alert systems whereby SMS/email is sent
daily to the concerned Deputy Commissioners and other local functionaries of the Districts regarding fire
incidents in their areas.  It was also brought to the knowledge of the Committee that Punjab is the first State
in the country to start SMS alert system to track the stubble burning incidents.  The Committee noted that
the Deputy Commissioners have formed District Level Monitoring Committees to monitor the stubble burning
incidents.  The members of these committees are deputed on the same day or next day as per the location
mentioned in the SMS to visit the place of fire incident and impose penalty as environmental compensation
on the defaulting farmers.  These District/Sub Divisional Level Monitoring Committees had imposed penalty
as environmental compensation of ` 72,62,000/- in 2573 cases of stubble burning upto 18.11.2017 in different
parts of the State and an amount of ` 5,51,200/- has been collected. It was informed that the efforts of
Punjab Government have resulted in reduction of stubble burning cases during the year 2017 in comparison
to the year 2016.  It was submitted that upto 15
th of November 2016, 80878 cases of fire incidents were
reported whereas during the corresponding period in the year 2017, 43814 cases of fire incidents have been
reported, which are about 47% lesser as compared to the previous year.  It was further informed that the
Department of Agriculture has been providing subsidies to farmers/farmer groups/primary agriculture co-
operative societies (on the procurement/purchase of residue management equipment such as happy seeders,
zero till drill machines, for sowing wheat in paddy straw/stubbles without burning), Paddy straw chopper
shredder/Mulcher, Reversible Mould Board Plough, Rotavators, Balers and Rakes.  The Committee was also
informed that the Punjab Government has announced to honour the Panchayats which would ensure zero
burning in the whole villages of respective Panchayats.  Responding to the query of the Committee regarding
the scientific interventions being made by the Punjab Government in order to provide alternatives to farmers
on the issues of stubble burning, it was submitted that Punjab Agriculture University, Ludhiana is in the
process of finding solutions in terms of scientific interventions in order to provide alternatives to farmers.

11
Since the quantity of stubble in the State of Punjab is very high, it has been suggested that in-situ management
of stubble is the most effective method.  As per the advice given by the Punjab Agriculture University,
Ludhiana, a number of farmers have come forward for in-situ management of stubble to solve the problem
of stubble burning.  Further, the following scientific interventions/studies/solutions have also been suggested:
 Punjab Energy Development Agency (PEDA) is in the process of optimizing the technology
for use of paddy straw in bio-gas plants.
 Department of Industries and PEDA are taking steps to encourage   setting-up of industries for
production of ethanol from crop residue.
 PEDA is working on the proposal by Indian Oil Corporation Ltd. for establishing bio-mass to
bio-CNG projects.
 The State Government has signed a MoU with Chennai based company for converting paddy
straw into useful briquettes for use in thermal power stations outside the State.
 Punjab State Council for Science and Technology has optimised the technology for utilisation
of paddy straw as fuel in brick kilns.
 There is a proposal for setting up of a bio-refinery plant in the State in collaboration with
Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Limited at village Tarkhanwala in Bathinda District of Punjab.
 Department of Agriculture and Horticulture have continued their campaign for promoting and
maintaining level of diversification by the farmers as well as taken steps to persuade the farmers
to reduce dependence on paddy and switch over to other crops such as cotton, maize, sugar
cane, vegetables and fruits etc.
 Department of Animal Husbandry is making attempts to increase the area under fodder cultivation
in place of paddy. The experts are also encouraging farmers to put more reliance on income
from milk production, dairy and enhance the usage of paddy straw as part of daily cattle feed.
 PAU is encouraging farmers to sow those varieties of paddy, which mature in lesser time as
compared to the varieties of paddy being sown now.
4.5 In response to the concern of the Committee about incentivising farmers in order to reduce the
instances of stubble burning, it was informed that since the farmers who restrain from burning of paddy
straw will have to incur some expenditure on the in-situ management of the residue, it is necessary that they
be compensated for the cost incurred by them.  Hence, the Punjab Government has requested the Government
of India to compensate the farmers by providing additional bonus on paddy straw management expenditure.
In view of the fact that most of the small and marginal farmers cannot afford the additional cost required for
the paddy straw management without financial support, it is necessary to provide Residue Management
Expenses/Paddy Straw Management Expenditure in addition to the procurement subsidy for this type of
equipment.  It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that a Paddy Straw Management Expenditure
Compensatory Fund @ `100/- per quintal of paddy, has been sought from Government of India, amounting
to ` 6000.00 crore for three years which would be in addition to the Minimum Support Price of paddy and
the farmers who will not burn paddy straw will be given this bonus, if provided by Government of India.
4.6 Dean, Punjab Agriculture University in his presentation before the Committee on the subject informed
that the farmers have a 20-30 days time window for subsequent crop after harvesting rice and given the

12
huge volume of rice straw i.e. 20 million tonnes, it is very difficult for them to move out the rice straw from
their fields within available days time window, they resort to burn it in the fields itself.  He also informed that
other measures to deal with the paddy straw like taking it out of the fields is economically unviable.  Hence,
the best utilisation of rice straw is to consume within the fields.  He also apprised the Committee that long
term experiments have shown that incorporating rice straw for 6-7 years will increase the organic carbon in
soil from 0.3% to 0.8% making soil more fertile.  He submitted that the area under technologies handling rice
straw without burning has increased and around 40,000 hectares is under these technologies.  The Committee
was also informed that currently Punjab has 14,660 machines in operation against the actual requirement of
about 35,340 machines for which a capital of around `400 crore is required.
4.7 Apprising the Committee on the issue of stubble burning in the State of Uttar Pradesh, the representatives
of the Government of Uttar Pradesh submitted before the Committee that after NGT’s order dated 10
th
December, 2015, the Department of Agriculture, Government of Uttar Pradesh had issued instructions to all
Commissioners and District Magistrates to comply with its orders and start imposing fines on incidents of
stubble burning.  It was informed that awareness programmes are being conducted by the Agriculture
Department for not burning biomass/agriculture residue.  The Committee was informed that quantity of
agriculture residues in the State is approximately 156 Million Metric Tonnes and it is equivalent to approximately
175.50 Million Metric Tonnes regular coal and the Department of Environment of Uttar Pradesh Government
has issued a notification prohibiting stubble burning in the State. It was further brought to the notice of the
Committee that a total penalty of `14,25,900/- was imposed by the State Government on account of bio-
mass/ garbage burning in NCR from November, 2016 to December, 2017.  Also, Uttar Pradesh Pollution
Control Board has started imposing condition while granting air consent to industries including brick kilns,
for use of minimum 20% Bio-briquette as fuel.  The Committee was informed that 2 acre land has been
identified to establish bio energy plant/bio CNG and organic manure production unit and the use of combined
harvesting machine straw reaper has been made compulsory in the State by the Government of Uttar
Pradesh.  It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that a project sanction of `193.98 crore has
been submitted by the Department of Agriculture, Government of Uttar Pradesh to the Government of India
for distribution of agriculture equipment to farmers to discourage agriculture residue burning.  Also, a
project sanction of `24.89 crore has also been submitted by the Bio Energy Development Board of Uttar
Pradesh Government through National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development to the Government of
India for addressing the issue of air pollution.
4.8 The Committee notes that despite a series of measures taken by the Governments of Haryana,
Punjab and Uttar Pradesh, including the statutory ban on stubble burning in the years 2003, 2013
and 2015 respectively, the air pollution situation in Delhi and NCR has not improved much and, in
fact, it has been deteriorating further.  It is further worrisome to note that despite the statutory
ban imposed by these States on the crop residue burning, many such instances have been brought to
the notice of the Committee from these States.   Satellites images have also showed that paddy
burning in Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh had increased after Diwali during the year 2017
adding to the problem of air pollution in Delhi and NCR.  The Committee expresses its strong
reservations towards the failure of these State Governments in implementing the statutory ban on
stubble burning in letter and spirit.   Although the concerned State Governments have listed a
number of measures taken by them to tackle the issue, the Committee is of the view that the
required action has been taken by the State Governments rather late.   The Committee is of the
opinion that weak enforcement of the statutory ban by these State Governments coupled with laxity

13
towards the sensitivity and gravity of the matter has also adversely affected the ongoing efforts to
tackle the issue of air pollution in Delhi and NCR.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should also take the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare on board in the matter and impress upon the concerned State Governments of Haryana,
Punjab and Uttar Pradesh to ensure that the laid down guidelines and statutory provisions are
implemented in letter and spirit.
4.9 The Committee also firmly believes that the unscientific methods to deal with the crop stalk
and solid waste in the neighbouring States of Delhi namely, Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh
have aggravated the problem of the air pollution in Delhi and NCR.   The Committee, therefore,
recommends that more scientific approach should be adopted to address the issue of stubble burning
in these States.  The Committee also recommends that the State Governments should further
sensitise and educate the farmers of their respective States about the adverse impact of stubble
burning on the environment, ecology and bio-diversity of Delhi and NCR.  The Committee also
believes that for scientific disposal of the waste, segregation and identification of waste is equally
important and best suited approach needs to be evolved to yield the desired results in this direction.
4.10 The Committee notes that the State Governments of Punjab and Haryana run subsidy schemes
to promote disposal of the agricultural residues in a scientific manner instead of burning it.  However,
the subsidy schemes of these State Governments have not helped much to address the issue of
stubble burning.  The Committee is surprised to note that no scientific study has been undertaken
by any of the concerned State Governments or by the Central Government to ascertain the level of
damage that has been caused to the environment on account of stubble burning.  The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government
of India,  in consultation with the concerned State Governments of Haryana, Punjab and Uttar
Pradesh, should undertake a scientific study to assess the environmental impact of crop burning on
Delhi and NCR and the methodology to mitigate it in a time-bound manner.   The Committee notes
that Government of Punjab has also suggested some scientific solutions for converting paddy straw
into other useful items.   The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change should, in consultation with other concerned Ministries of Government of India,
explore as to how the paddy straw can be used to convert this challenge into a new possibility.
4.11 The Committee is constrained to note that in terms of the orders of NGT, the State Governments
of the Haryana, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh are penalising the farmers for burning crop residues.
However, the Committee is of the opinion that instead of being penalised, the farmers should be
provided with some practical solutions instead of crop burning.  It is of paramount importance that
technological and scientific solutions coupled with financial assistance should be made available to
the farmers to motivate them not to burn their crop residues. The Committee is of the considered
view that it would help minimise the problem of stubble burning in these States.
4.12 The Committee notes the measures being taken by the  respective State Governments to
curb the menace of crop residue  burning.  The Committee, however, is of the considered view  that
awareness needs to be created  amongst  the farmers highlighting the negative and adverse impact
of crop residue burning not only on environment, human health, ecology, etc., but on the fertility of
soil also.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate
Change  and the concerned State Governments should launch a massive awareness programme for

14
the above purpose. Educational messages in this regard should also be publicised on audio, TV and
print media so as to reach the maximum numbers of farmers in these States.  The concerned State
Governments should also  run awareness campaign in schools in order to educate children about  ill
effects of crop residue burning.
4.13 The Committee further notes that a High Level Task Force (HLTF) was constituted under the
Chairmanship of Principal Secretary to Prime Minister for the management of air pollution in Delhi and NCR
in November, 2017. A Sub-Committee of the High Level Task Force on prevention of stubble burning in
Punjab, Haryana and Western Uttar Pradesh was constituted. The Sub-Committee submitted its report on
18.12.2017. The Report of this Sub-Committee was accepted by HLTF and a new Central Sector Scheme
was announced in the Budget for ‘Promotion of Agricultural Mechanization for in-situ management of Crop
Residue in the States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and NCT of Delhi for the period from 2018-19 and
2019-20 with an outlay of `1151.80 crore.
4.14 The Committee welcomes this move of the Government and hopes that the suggestions made
by the Sub-Committee would be implemented at the earliest.  The Committee hopes that with the
allocation of `````1151.80 crore made for in-situ management of crop residue in the States of Punjab,
Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and NCT of Delhi would also address the financial needs of the concerned
State Governments in promoting the scientific disposal of agricultural residues.
4.15 The Committee has also been given to understand that the National Thermal Power Corporation
(NTPC) intends to procure farm stubble for burning in its thermal units, blending nearly 10 per cent in the
fuel mix.  NTPC will float a tender to buy farm stubble at ` 5,500 a tonne for its plants. This will help
farmers earn around ` 11,000 per acre from the sale of stubble/straw pellets.
4.16 The Committee welcomes the move of NTPC to procure farm stubble for its thermal units.
The Committee feels that this move would not only incentivize the farmers to not to burn the farm
stubble and get some monetary benefit out of it but would also help mitigate the problem of the air
pollution in Delhi and NCR to a large extent.
5. VEHICULAR EMISSION
5.1 Vehicular pollution is one of the major factors of air pollution in Delhi. The Government of NCT of
Delhi informed the Committee that vehicular pollution has been hugely contributing to high pollution level
and the dry conditions have also helped in the suspended material settling in the air. It was brought to the
notice of the Committee that the contribution of vehicles emission to the ambient PM
2.5 concentration during
winter and summer is 25% and 9% respectively. The Committee also notes that as per the emission inventory,
out of the total PM
2.5 emission load from vehicle sector, 46% of particulate emissions is attributed to trucks,
33% to two-wheelers and 10% to Cars (diesel cars contribute 78% while petrol cars contribute 22%), 5%
to buses, 4% to light commercial vehicles and 2% to three wheelers.
5.2 The Committee desired to know about the measures being taken by the Government of NCT of Delhi
for mitigating vehicular pollution. In response, the Committee was informed that action is being taken
against the vehicles for the violations/offenses relating to overloading, plying without Pollution Under Control
Certificate (PUCC) and visible smoke through the enforcement teams. It was brought to the notice of the
Committee that a total of 13121, 28573 and 49532 challans were done during the year 2017 for overloading,
without PUCC and visible smoke respectively.  It was further submitted that PUC centers in Delhi had been
upgraded to online mode on real-time basis. In the present system, emission values of the vehicles being

15
tested for pollution levels are simultaneously transferred to the server and readings are only displayed on
computer screen after the completion of the test, thereby reducing the human intervention.  Department of
Information Technology, Government of NCT of Delhi continuously monitors and improves this new software
“Paryavaran Mitra” to eliminate any manipulation in the checking of the vehicle for pollution.  The Committee
was given to understand that in compliance with the order of Supreme Court, the Environment Compensation
Charges (ECC) is levied on Delhi bound light and heavy duty commercial goods vehicles.  It was submitted
that all the public passenger transport vehicles like city buses, taxis, autos, etc. are mandated to ply on the
CNG/LPG in the NCT of Delhi.  Further, the light vehicles plying on the local permit are also on clean fuel
mode.  It was also informed that as per NGT order, ban on plying of more than fifteen years old petrol
vehicles and more than ten years old diesel vehicle is already in place.  It was further brought to the notice
of the Committee that the registration of electric vehicles in Delhi is being encouraged by giving subsidy by
the Government of NCT of Delhi.  Further, one time fixed subsidy is being given to battery operated
e-rickshaws registered in Delhi.  Sharing the plans of Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC), it was informed
that DMRC has planned to add 420 coaches in existing lines (line-1 to 6) and their extensions and 486 new
coaches in  upcoming lines (line-7 and 8) as part of Phase-III.  Apprising the Committee of the roadmap
prepared by the Government of NCT of Delhi to control the vehicular movement, it was informed that the
following efforts are continuously undertaken by Delhi Traffic Police:-
 Parking of vehicles in the non designated areas-  During the year 2016, a total of 6,76,301
motorists were prosecuted; whereas in the year 2017, a total of 10,88,734 motorists have been
prosecuted for improper/obstructive parking.  It is a continuous ongoing process to prosecute
such offenders by enforcement officers of Delhi Traffic Police and the same is rigorously
enforced.
 Decongest pathways- Encroachment removal drives are periodically undertaken in co-ordination
and association with land owning agencies as and when the requests are received from them to
decongest pathways.  Recently, the Hon’ble Lieutenant Governor, Delhi has constituted Task
Force teams for each traffic range in the NCT of Delhi.  Deputy Commissioners of Police/
Traffic Ranges have been made the convener of these Task Force teams with members from
Public Works Department, Municipal Corporations of Delhi, Delhi Development Authority
(Unified Traffic and Transportation Infrastructure (Planning and Engineering) Centre) and
Transport Department, GNCT of Delhi.  Congested traffic corridors have been identified by
the Task Force for improvement.  Out of 77 identified congested traffic corridors, 28 corridors
have been identified to be taken on priority.  In a meeting held by   Hon’ble L.G., Delhi on
06.06.2017, directions have been issued to local bodies for removal of encroachments on 28
corridors.  Further, as per the directions of Hon’ble L.G ., Delhi, joint drives have also been
launched by Delhi Traffic Police and MCDs w.e.f. 25.09.2017 for removal of obstructive
parking on the aforesaid corridors of Category ‘A’ identified by the Task Force teams.
 Intelligent Traffic Management System-  Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS)
project is being envisaged by Delhi Traffic Police to provide technology based traffic solutions
and enforcement so as to improve mobility, discipline and safety on the roads of Delhi.  The
major features of ITMS are as follows:-
 Optimized real-time traffic signal control.
 Surveillance camera to check junction behavior and violations.

16
 Variable Message Sign Board.
 Centralized Command and Control Centre.
5.3 The ITMS will be an intelligent system with a capability of Dynamic Control of Traffic Signals by
managing signal cycle times using Central Computer algorithm.  It will help in reducing overall delays by
optimizing the signal timings at the intersections.  The Dynamic Signal Control System will regulate the
traffic signal timings based on the real-time vehicle data (average speed in each direction, average volume,
occupancy level etc.,) collected by the field sensors using adaptive traffic technology based algorithm.
5.4 A comprehensive ITMS proposal worth `441 crore has been prepared and sent to the Government of
India.  The same is under consideration with Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India.
 Introduction of early alarm system for benefit of commuter to reduce traffic congestion
of major routes and route diversions- The traffic situation on roads of Delhi is quite dynamic
in terms of traffic volume, traffic density on various corridors and other major roads.  Major
break-down on signal free roads causes accumulation/congestion of traffic and results in long
queue and longer travel time. The Variable Message Signboards (VMS) will flash the traffic
situation and road condition to the motorists so that in case of accidents/blockage, they can
choose alternate options.  The Delhi Traffic Police has installed VMS with 3G connectivity at
50 important locations on the major travel corridors with a compatible Control Room at Traffic
Police Headquarters.  This project is aimed at facilitating the commuters including pedestrians
with centrally collated and analyzed messages for planning city journey.  The VMS boards are
displaying important traffic related information to the road users.  More such VMS shall be
installed.
  Returning of non-destined goods vehicles from Delhi borders- Non-destined goods vehicles
are regularly checked at border entry points of the NCT of Delhi and returned by field officers
of Traffic Unit.  Additional deployment of traffic staff has been made at the borders to return
non-destined goods vehicles.  During the year 2016, a total of 81,023 goods vehicles were
checked and more than 14,983 non-destined goods vehicles were turned back by traffic police.
Similarly, during the year 2017, a total of 2,60,607 goods vehicles have been checked and
57,502 non-destined goods vehicles have been returned from the borders.  It is an ongoing
process for which necessary action is undertaken by Delhi Traffic Police.
 Action against 15 years or more old de-registered diesel motor vehicles-   During regular
special drives started from 8.11.2016, a total of such 709 de-registered motor vehicles were
prosecuted/impounded upto 31.12.2016.  Similarly, in the year 2017, 188 such de-registered
motor vehicles have been prosecuted and impounded.  It is a continuous ongoing process to
prosecute such offenders by enforcement officers of Delhi Traffic Police and the same is
rigorously enforced.
TRANSPORT DEPARTMENT
5.5 In compliance with the order dated 16.12.2015 of Hon’ble Supreme Court, Environment Compensation
Charge (ECC) is levied on Delhi bound light and heavy duty commercial goods vehicles.  Notifications have
been issued as per Hon’ble Supreme Court directions.
5.6 The Government of Haryana submitted that the State Transport Department is monitoring the Pollution

17
Under Control Certification and also planning to make the PUC system through online.  The Transport
Department has banned the more than 10 years old diesel vehicles in Gurugram, Faridabad and Jhajjar
districts.  Further, Transport Department is diverting the non-destined vehicles from entering in Delhi territory.
Police Department established the 13 Nakas and the heavy vehicles have been prohibited from entering into
Delhi and NCR and they are diverted for which appropriate signage boards have also been installed in
different places.  The industry department was advised to provide the details of its proposal for infrastructure
and installation of CNG stations in NCR districts and the rest of the State along with the current status.
5.7 The representatives of Uttar Pradesh Government in their presentation before the Committee submitted
the following:-
 Online monitoring system for Pollution Under Control Certificate (PUC) Centres is being
established.
 The norms of BS-VI vehicles will be followed by 01-04-2020.
 Linking of Pollution Under Control Certificate (PUC) Centres with annual vehicle insurance is
under process.
 Full tax exemption on battery operated two wheelers.
 Operation of e-rickshaw and e-carts in NCR region.
 Increased coverage of Metro Line in the District Ghaziabad and Gautam Budhha Nagar.
 8480 polluting  vehicles Challaned between 01-04-2017 to 31-01-2018.
 546 vehicles Seized (more than 10/15 years old).
 Traffic App developed in Ghaziabad and Noida for alerts and alternate routes.
 Facebook and Twitter pages for traffic alerts and advisories.
 Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) based Public transport in Ghaziabad, Noida, Meerut and
Hapur.
5.8 The Government of Rajasthan submitted that the State Transport Department is taking necessary
steps to ensure pollution check of all categories of vehicles.  The Transport Department has launched a
scheme on 4th October, 2017 named “Rajasthan Motoryan Pradushan Janch Kendra Yojana” (online), 2017
under which networking of all 864 vehicles pollution check centres of the State is to be done in a phased
manner to connect 280 pollution check centres of Jaipur district through networking of software and only
online PUC certificates are being issued in Jaipur district.  The Transport Department has initiated networking
of 20 pollution check centres of Alwar and 13 of Bharatpur district of NCR sub-region of Rajasthan.
5.9 In order to encourage plying of non-polluting vehicles, battery operated vehicles are completely
exempted from payment of Motor Vehicle Taxes.  Also, CNG and LPG operated vehicles are provided 50%
exemption from payment of Special Road Tax.  It was further submitted that M/S Rajasthan State Gas Ltd.
(RSGL) has set up CNG filling station at Neemrana and Kukas for supply of cleaner fuel in NCR area.
RSGL will work out the future plans for setting up more such filling stations at NH-8 and in Rajasthan part
of NCR region.
5.10 Director General, Centre for Science and Environment apprising the Committee on the issue of
vehicular pollution submitted that it is critical that better ways to control pollution from vehicles on road are

18
needed.  It was informed that the current Pollution Under Control (PUC) system is extremely poor.  EPCA
has recommended several reforms including linking annual vehicle insurance with valid PUC certificates to
improve compliance; linking PUC centres with central servers; increasing surveillance; periodic audit of
PUC centres etc.  The Committee was further given to understand that on August 10, 2017 and February 5,
2018, the Supreme Court directed implementation of these reforms and directed the Government to assess
and consider integration on On-board Diagnostic System (OBD) with in-use emissions inspection programme
for BS-IV vehicles.
5.11 The Committee is of the considered opinion that given the health hazards due to the increasing
volume of PM
2.5 in the air of Delhi/NCR; it is imperative for the concerned State Governments as
well as the Central Government to understand the gravity of the situation and make all concerted
efforts to bring down the PM
2.5 level in the Region by making all possible efforts to control vehicular
pollution.
5.12 The Committee further notes that various directions have already been issued by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court of India, Hon’ble Delhi High Court, and National Green Tribunal with regard to vehicular emission and
the steps required to be taken immediately by the State Governments involved.  The Committee is surprised
to note that despite the orders/directions from the Courts/Tribunal, the desired progress has not
been achieved on this count.  The Committee urges upon the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change and the concerned State Governments to ensure strict compliance of the orders/
directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, Hon’ble Delhi High Court, and National Green Tribunal
for the purpose.
5.13 The Committee takes note of the decision of the Government of India to skip BS-V and
leapfrog directly from BS-IV to BS-VI for all vehicles in April, 2020 and to advance the proposed
use of BS-VI fuel from the year 2026 to 2020.  The Committee appreciates this decision and hopes
that all the modalities required for switching from BS-IV to BS-VI would be completed within the
stipulated timeframe set for the purpose.
5.14 The Committee feels that the problem of vehicular emission should be seen from the prism
of vehicular technology, fuel quality, stringent vehicular emissions norms, inspection and maintenance
of the vehicles and traffic management.   The Committee is of the opinion that these parameters
should be taken into consideration by all the concerned State Governments as well as Central
Government while drafting any strategy to mitigate the problem of air pollution.  The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should take
up this issue with the Concerned Union Ministries/Departments/Agencies in consultation with the
automobile industry so that an effective and long term solution can be found out to address the
problem.  The Committee also recommends that Government of India should consider the ITMS
proposal submitted by Delhi Police and made adequate funds available so that the system could be
introduced and contribute towards reducing vehicular air pollution by providing  technology based
traffic solutions.
5.15 The Committee further opines that the problem of air pollution is encompassing everything
which is related covertly or overtly to human beings and any leniency on the part of Government in
tackling the issue will have cascading effect on the health of its citizens.  The Committee feels that
worst situations demands stringent solutions. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, in consultation with Ministry of Road, Transport

19
and Highways along with the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, should chalk out
a mechanism for phasing out of the polluting vehicles at the earliest.
5.16 The Committee is happy to note that the construction of Eastern Peripheral Expressway has
been completed and the completion of Western Peripheral Expressway is likely to be completed by
30th September, 2018.  The Committee hopes that all the work related with the completion of Western
Peripheral Expressway will be completed within the given timeline. The Committee is of the considered
view that the completion of Western Peripheral Expressway and the already completed Eastern
Peripheral Expressway would play an important and crucial role in mitigating the problem of air
pollution in Delhi and National Capital Region.  The Committee also recommends that the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in consultation with the concerned State Governments
should undertake a massive plantation drive along both the sides of these Expressways so that they
can play their role in mitigation of vehicular emission.  Since the matter concerns to one and all,
the Committee also recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should
urge upon the Central PSUs to play a role too and contribute from their CSR funds for plantation
activities and the Ministry should play a role of a mentor for the purpose.
5.17 The Committee notes that with the expansion of Delhi Metro network, a large number of
people are commuting by Delhi Metro.  A large number of people are also using other modes of
public transport.  However, inspite of the increased availability of public transport, the dependence
on personal vehicles, particularly cars and two-wheelers, has not gone down and a substantial
population is still using personal vehicles for local commuting.  This not only adds to the congestion
on the roads but also contributes to the hazardous levels of air pollution.  The Committee is of the
view that the primary reasons for dependence on personal vehicles are inadequate public transport
facility and absence of last mile connectivity.  Also, the Delhi Metro network needs to be further
expanded so that a larger section can utilize this facility.  The issue of last mile connectivity also
needs to be addressed to ensure that people refrain from using personal vehicles and do not hesitate
to utilize the public transport to the maximum.  These measures would certainly help in reducing
the air pollution in Delhi.
6. ROAD DUST
6.1 The Committee notes that as per the Source Apportionment Study of PM
10 and PM2.5 carried out by
IIT Kanpur for Delhi during 2015 reveals contribution of soil and road dust towards PM 10 as 14.4% during
winters and 26.5% during summers.  Similarly, the contribution of soil and road dust towards ambient PM2.5
is 4.3% during winters and 27.1% during summers.
6.2 During its meeting held on 9 th January, 2018, the Committee enquired about the steps taken by the
concerned State Governments to mitigate the road dust.  Government of NCT of Delhi submitted that eight
mechanical road sweeping machines have already been procured by the three Municipal Corporations of
Delhi viz. North Delhi Municipal Corporation, East Delhi Municipal Corporation and New Delhi Municipal
Corporation for the purpose and the process of procuring 24 more mechanical road sweeping machines is
at different stages of procurement.  The Committee was also apprised about the water sprinkling activities
being carried out by these Corporations to combat dust pollution.
6.3 The Government of Haryana informed the Committee that four mechanical sweeping machines in
Gurugram and one mechanical sweeping machine in Sonipat have been deployed for regular sweeping of

20
roads.  Apart from this, regular sweeping is being carried out after sprinkling of water in other Municipal
Corporations where the mechanical sweeping machines are not available.
6.4 The Government of Uttar Pradesh in its reply submitted that water sprinkling is being done for
controlling dust emission through water tankers and fire tenders during Severe and Severe+ level of air
pollution.  The Committee was also informed that eighteen mechanised machines working in Ghaziabad,
Gautam Buddh Nagar and Meerut are functional.
6.5 The Government of Rajasthan sharing the details of the efforts made in the direction of controlling
pollution by dust submitted that water sprinklers have been installed at Ashok Circle, Nehru Garden and Moti
Doongri Park in Urban Improvement Trust Alwar to suppress dust.  It was further submitted that water
sprinkling on the roads is being carried out by the Municipal Corporation of Bharatpur and in the absence of
the mechanical sweepers, manual sweeping is being done.  The Committee was also apprised that one
mechanical sweeping machine is functional in Zone 3 of Municipal Council of Alwar.
6.6 The Committee notes that road dust is one of the major sources of air pollution in Delhi and
NCR.  Dust on roads, construction sites, etc. adds to the particulate pollution and a mitigation plan
for road dust is extremely essential for solving the problem of air pollution in Delhi and NCR.  The
Committee takes note of the action plan of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
regarding control of road dust/re-suspension of dust and other fugitive emissions. However, the
Committee is of the view that the action taken by the concerned State Governments of this Region
so far has not helped much in addressing the issue.  Further action on some of these points is yet to
be taken up with full vigour.  The Committee feels that though vacuum cleaning of the roads dust
may play an important role in addressing the issue of road dust as an immediate step but for the
long term solution to the problem, innovative solutions are required to be taken by the Government.
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
must impress upon all the concerned State Governments to aggressively take action on all the
action points for control of road dust/re-suspension of dust and other fugitive emissions.
6.7 The Committee also observes that in some parts of the NCR, roads are broken, poorly
maintained and partially paved surfaces which in turn have been resulting in adding to the problem
of road dust.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to take up the matter with the
concerned State Governments and the Central Government for paving of unpaved roads/streets in
the Region and ensure that the civic agencies of the Region involved pay due importance to the
maintenance of the roads/streets and complete the task in a fixed time frame.
6.8 The Committee also takes note of the number of mechanised road sweeping machines currently
being used to curb the road dust in Delhi/NCR and feels that the impact of using such machines in
visible only in selected  areas of Delhi.  Thus there is an urgent need to increase the number of
mechanised road sweeping machines.  The Committee is also of the considered view that adequate
funds be made available to the concerned Government agencies so that the plans to procure more
machines is fructified and the process of procurement is not stalled or delayed for want of funds.
6.9 The Committee also observes that the continuous digging of roads and other areas for various
municipal works in Delhi and NCR is highly irrational and exhibits a classic example of the concerned
Government agencies working in silos without having any co-ordination amongst them.  It is a well
known fact that one part or the other part in Delhi and NCR is under digging activities by a

21
Government agency and as soon as the work is completed some other agency starts digging work
related to them on the same site causing not only a great amount of inconvenience to the public at
large but also does burden the public exchequer .  This also adds to the air pollution in Delhi.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that all the concerned civic agencies should collectively draw
up plan of developmental activities for the next five years and undertake developmental works
simultaneously so that no repetitive digging of the roads etc. is undertaken and their contribution
to air pollution is minimised.
7. CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES
7.1 The Committee observes that pollution from construction activities is also one of the major contributors
to the air pollution in Delhi and NCR.  The Committee notes that as per the IIT Kanpur study, the percent
contribution of construction material to PM
10 during winters and summers is 3.1 and 4.1 respectively
whereas for PM2.5, it is 1.5 and 3.0 respectively. The Committee observes that construction activities include
land clearing, operation of diesel engines in generators, demolition, working with toxic materials, etc. have
been contributing to the air pollution.  The Committee finds that the ongoing construction activities in the
Region have been generating high levels of dust typically from cement, stone and tile cutting, wood, etc. and
they are being carried for long distances over a period of time.  The Committee notes that construction dust
is identified as PM
10 pollutant.
7.2 The Committee desired to know about the action taken by Government of NCT of Delhi and other
State Governments for controlling dust from construction activities.  Responding to the query, the Committee
was informed of the following action taken by the Civic Agencies/Construction Agencies of Government of
NCT of Delhi in this direction:-
7.2.1 North Delhi Municipal Corporation:-
(a) Private Sector:- Instruction in this regard have been issued to provide necessary protection
of appropriate height on all sides of the plot while sanctioning the building plan to ensure that
no construction material/dust arises outside the plot area during construction, failing which
the builder shall be liable to be prosecuted and shall also be liable to pay compensation as per
the direction of NGT. This exercise is also being supervised/monitored by EE’s of zones.
Apprising the Committee of the action taken from July 2015 to December, 2017on the violators,
the following figures were submitted before the Committee:-
 No. of Challan issued up to 31.12.2017 – 2265
 Total Penalty imposed – `5.39 crore
 No. of defaulters – 1620
 Total Amount Collected – `1.52 crore
 Amount to be realized – `3.85 crore
All concerned have also directed to carry demolition and construction materials properly covered
and follow all mandatory precautions to prevent air pollution. No construction material is
allowed to be stacked in open.  No person is allowed to be permitted to dump debris and other
construction material on metalled road or non specified area. It was further informed that
zonal building officers have been directed to intensify the site inspection and take action against

22
the defaulters and to submit report regarding inspections carried out, violations noticed, challans
issued, and penalty realised.
(b) Government Sector:- Instruction have been issued to incorporate Special Conditions in tenders
to comply directives of NGT and EIA Guidance Manual for contractor/agencies carrying out
works in North Delhi Municipal Corporation to reduce air pollution during construction activity.
(c) Stacking of construction materials :-  No construction material is allowed to be stacked in
open form.
(d) Carriage of construction Material :- All concerned have been directed to bring construction
material in covered forms.
7.2.1.1  It was further brought to the notice of the Committee that a 500 MT recycled plant of Construction
and Demolition waste was established in 2009 at Burari which was further upgraded to 2000 MT in July
2014 and is in operation wherein Construction and Demolition waste is converted into various useful/
recycled materials for which a circular has been issued for mandatory use of recycled materials from
Construction and Demolition waste plant for the works being carried out by North Delhi Municipal Corporation.
However, another Construction and Demolition waste recycling plant of 1000 MT capacity is being developed
at Rani Khera for which Concession Agreement has been executed and site has been handed over to the
concessionaire. Now concessionaire is required to install and make operational the Recycling plant within
six months from the date of handing over of site.
7.2.2 East Delhi Municipal Corporation
Strict enforcement in accordance with Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) is being taken and it is
being examined that these activities are frozen during October to February every year inclusive of ban on
entry of building material in Delhi and its transport inside.  It was also submitted that EDMC has one
construction and debris processing facility of 500 Tonne per day capacity.  The capacity will be enhanced
to 1000 Tonne per day by the December, 2018.
7.2.3 New Delhi Municipal Council
NDMC has a Special Technical Cell (STC) in Architecture Department which is monitoring the
ongoing construction sites for dust pollution.  Matter pertaining to construction activities in private property
and Government properties where building plans have been approved by NDMC is looked after by Architecture
Department of NDMC.  It is mentioned in the sanction letter that the owner will have to look after the dust
pollution from their sites as per the directions of National Green Tribunal and will also have to provide steel
barricading around the site to reduce dust pollution.  The field staffs of STC monitors the ongoing construction
sites for incidences of dust pollution.  It was further informed that since January, 2016 approximately, 3300
inspections have been done and offenders have been penalised.  Further, the scientific  disposal of C&D
waste by covering trucks carrying C&D waste for recycling has already being implemented in NDMC
besides strictly following the instructions issued by NGT and pollution control authorities.   The other
requirements for imposing heavy penalty on uncovered trucks carrying construction material shall be
implemented in future works by inserting appropriate clause after approval of Competent Authority.
7.2.4 PWD
Guidelines have been issued by CPWD in pursuance of orders passed by National Green Tribunal on
air pollution from construction and demolition activities are being followed as under:

23
 The contractor shall not store/dump construction material or debris on metalled road.
 The contractor shall get prior approval from Engineer-in-Charge for the area where the
construction material or debris can be stored beyond the metalled road.  This area shall not
cause any obstruction to the free flow of traffic/inconvenience to the pedestrians.  It should be
ensured by the contractor that no accidents occur on account of such permissible storage.
 The contractor shall take appropriate protection measures like raising wind breakers of
appropriate height on all sides of the plot/area using CGI sheets or plastic construction material
dust fly outside the plot area.
 The contractor shall ensure that all the trucks or vehicles of any kind which are used for
construction purposes/or are carrying construction material like cement, sand and other allied
material are fully covered.  The contractor shall take every necessary precautions that the
vehicles are properly cleaned and dust free to ensure that enroute their destination, the dust,
sand or any other  particles  are not released in air/contaminate air.
 The contractor shall provide mask to every worker working on the construction site and
involved in loading, unloading and carriage of construction material and construction debris to
prevent inhalation of dust particles.
 The contractor shall provide all medical help, investigation and treatment to the workers involved
in the construction of building and carrying of construction material and debris relatable to
dust emission.
 The contractor shall ensure that C&D waste is transported to the C&D waste site only and due
record shall be maintained by contractor.
 The contractor shall compulsory use of wet jet in grinding and stone cutting.
7.2.5 DDA
All necessary guidelines to prevent dust pollution at construction sites issued by DPCC/CPCB/NGT,
Hon’ble LG and Environment Department, Government of NCT of Delhi besides provision made in contract
agreement are being followed in letter and spirit.  Any violations are being penalized accordingly.  Sharing the
details of the guidelines being observed by DDA with the Committee, the following was submitted:-
 All the dust control measure based on directions of CPCB/DPCC and NGT are being followed
at construction sites.
 The material used at site is kept in moist and covered condition and wind breakers are installed
to check its construction dust.
 The construction debris/earth generated at site is regularly disposed off at earmarked dumping
yard with proper sprinkling of water regularly and habituated with plantation.
 Regular sprinkling of water is carried out at construction sites.
 Materials which are used in construction are kept covered during transportation.  Overloaded
vehicles are not allowed at construction sites.
 Stacked earth is levelled, sprinkled with water and plantation is carried out in earth dumping
yards.

24
 Regular inspections are carried out by DDA Officers/QAC to check air/dust pollution and
challans are being issued for non-compliance.
 Plants in parks are being washed with water at regular intervals.
7.2.6 Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC)
7.2.6.1  DMRC has conditions of contract on environment and Environment Management Manual which
contain DMRC requirement for dust suppression, waste management etc.  These requirements are also in
line with MoEF&CC, Government of India construction guidelines and international best practices.
Contractors are required to adhere to these guidelines.  In case of non-compliance, the contractors are
penalized as per the provisions laid out in these documents. Measures taken by DMRC to control dust
emission from construction sites are as follows:-
 Use of barricade boards
 Provision of wheel washing facility at exit gates of construction sites
 Frequent water sprinkling on site
 Vehicles carrying potentially dust-producing materials have properly fitting  side and tailboards
and material securely covered
 Use of dust collector system in batching plants
 Provision of covered area for storage of coarse and fine aggregates
 Provision of hard surface road and restricting speed of vehicles within construction sites
 Covering loose materials with tarpaulin or green net
7.2.6.2  DMRC takes the following measures for Construction debris:-
 Construction and Demolition (C&D) waste from DMRC is currently recycled at IL&FS C&D
waste recycling facility at Burari, New Delhi.  So far, 2.28 lakh tonne C&D waste has been
recycled.
 DMRC has also set-up and Commissioned C&D waste recycling facility of capacity 150 TPD
at Ranikhera, Delhi for recycling of C&D waste generated from Phase-IV construction works.
7.3 The Committee was also informed about the following steps being taken on the issue of dust and
construction debris:-
(i) Government has launched special drive to improve air quality by way of enforcing Dust Control
Measures by the construction project agencies/individuals.
(ii) Area SDMs, Tehsildars, Assistant Engineers of Public Works Department and Delhi Pollution
Control Committee are regularly inspecting projects for checking the compliance of dust control
and levy compensation for violations of dust control measures.
(iii) SDMs along with Tehsildars (Executive Magistrate), Department of Revenue, Government of
NCT of Delhi and Assistant Engineer of Public Works Department have been authorised to
take action against violators. Penalty is being imposed in accordance with the directions of
National Green Tribunal.

25
(iv) All local bodies and Delhi Development Authority have also been asked to apprise public in
general and owners and builders in particular who have got their building plans sanctioned for
following dust control measures.
7.4 It was also brought to the notice of the Committee by the Government of Haryana that teams are
constituted to prevent the incidences of garbage burning, violation of norms at construction sites.  Construction
activities were banned in NCR Region during emergent situation in the month of November, 2017.  Installation
of facility for recycling of construction and demolition materials is under progress by Directorate of Urban
Local Bodies, Haryana. Haryana State Pollution Control Board imposed a penalty of `1.448 crore as
environmental compensation on the construction projects in NCR for non-compliance of NGT’s order out
of which ` 1.43 crore was collected from the violators.  It was submitted that the construction projects are
covered under EIA Notification.  Before starting the construction, environmental clearance is required to be
taken by them from the States/Central Expert Appraisal Committee.  The conditions are being imposed by
the Authority to comply with the guidelines, so that there is no emission from the construction activities.
The compliance of the conditions is being monitored by the Haryana State Pollution Control Board and the
environmental compensation is being collected from the defaulter.
7.5 The Government of Uttar Pradesh in its submission on the issue of measures being taken to mitigate
dust pollution from the construction activities submitted the following:-
 Water sprinkling is being done for controlling dust emission through water tankers and fire
tenders during Severe and Severe + level of air pollution.
 From November, 2016 to December, 2017 about `6,00,60,000/- fine have been imposed on
defaulters construction and demolition units in NCR.
 Fine for not complying directions regarding water sprinkling, curtains, barriers and dust
suppression on builders in NCR is ` 75,50,000/-.
 Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board has started imposing condition while granting consent
to industries for complying with the Construction and Demolition Management Rules, 2016.
7.6 The Government of Rajasthan informing the Committee about the steps being taken on the issue
submitted that directions have been issued to contractors and private builders to cover material, construction
and demolition sites. Plantation of 4250 plants along road side under NCRPB project has been taken up by
PWD, Alwar.  It was informed that Urban Improvement Trust (UIT) Alwar has installed water sprinklers at
Ashok circle, Nehru garden, Moti doongri park to suppress dust.  Further, UIT Bhiwadi has taken interlocking
tiles work of `463.50 lakh.  Plantation in parks and road side work of `386.50 lakh has also been taken up.
Also, directions have been issued to contractors and private builders to cover material, construction and
demolition sites.  Regarding UIT Bharatpur, it was informed that provision of interlocking tiles during
construction of roads is made and direction to contractors for sprinkling of water on construction material
to control dust emission have also been issued.
7.7 The Committee notes that when the air pollution levels rose dangerously in November, 2017, the
Government of NCT of Delhi put in place a ban on the construction activities in the NCT of Delhi.  However,
the ban was lifted within a few days even though there was no considerable improvement in the air quality
of Delhi.    The Committee feels that construction activities provide daily earning to the poor and
weaker sections of the society.  Banning construction activities results in loss of livelihood to the

26
poor and the needy, especially labourers.  A World Bank report also stated that India’s labour losses
due to air pollution in the year 2013 stood at about $55.39 Billion or about 0.84% of its Gross
Domestic Product (GDP).  The said losses could be even more due to the air pollution situation
prevalent during the last few years.  The Committee recommends that instead of banning construction
activities, which deprive the poor of their daily earnings, efforts should be made for the stringent
enforcement of the construction guidelines and international best practices.
7.8 The Committee notes the steps initiated by the concerned State Governments to mitigate air
pollution due to construction activities in Delhi and NCR and hopes that these steps would be
scrupulously implemented to achieve the desired results.  The Committee also observes that noxious
vapours from paints, thinners, oils, cleaners, etc. are environmentally hazardous chemicals which
are widely used at the construction sites and have been contributing to raise the levels of air pollution
in the Region.    The Committee hopes that the concerned agencies would also take the required
steps to contain the air pollution contribution from these chemicals.
7.9 The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to sensitise the concerned State
Governments in the Region to strictly follow the guidelines/norms specified by CPCB in order to
prevent pollution caused by construction activities.  The measures taken by DMRC to control dust
emission and creative touch given to construction waste from construction sites are highly
commendable.  Instead of dumping the constructional waste here and there, the wastes are dumped
at pre-designated and approved sites by the Government.  The measures adopted by the DMRC by
following the C&D waste rules and the guidelines should be adopted and followed by other agencies
involved in construction activities.   Strict implementation of the C&D waste rules and guidelines
should also be enforced by the concerned law enforcement agencies of Delhi and NCR.  The Committee
strongly believes that good construction site practices can help to the great extent in controlling
and preventing air pollution in the Region.  The Committee also feels that Environment Risk
Assessments for all the construction activities and materials being used and likely to cause air
pollution must be made in consonance with the laid down norms/regulations.  The Committee
recommends that the construction industry should also be encouraged to use eco-friendly construction
methods, materials and technologies.
8. LANDFILL SITES
8.1 The Committee observes that there are three landfill sites namely Bhalswa landfill site, Ghazipur landfill
site and Okhla landfill site.  Bhalswa landfill site was commissioned in the year 1994, Ghazipur in 1984 and
Okhla in 1996.  The Committee was informed by the Government of NCT of Delhi that against the total
generation of 10400 tonnes per day (TPD) of municipal solid waste (MSW), only 5600 TPD of MSW is
processed in Delhi thus leaving a gap of 4800 TPD of MSW to be processed.  The Committee was further
informed that the Government had a proposal for capacity addition of 5400 TPD in the next two years.
8.2 The Committee is unhappy to note the existing capacity of the Government of NCT of Delhi
to treat the municipal solid waste scientifically is just about 54 per cent of the total requirement
leaving a gap of 46 per cent to be bridged.  This apathy of the civic bodies entrusted with the task of
management of municipal solid waste is totally unwarranted.  The Committee notes that there have
been frequent incidents of landfill fires in Delhi during the last few years which spew toxic gases
and have been adding to the rising pollution levels in Delhi.  The laissez-faire of the civic bodies of
Delhi also gets reflected in the fact that the height of Ghazipur landfill site has reached as high as

27
65 metres which is just 8 metres less than the height of the national monument Qutub Minar.
Similarly, the other two landfill sites in Delhi have also been declared exhausted but the untreated
waste is still being dumped there.  The Committee is of the considered opinion that unprocessed
municipal waste of 4800 TPD is a threat to the environment, ecology and flora and fauna of Delhi
and NCR and there is urgent need for augmenting the capacity to treat the municipal solid waste
scientifically to the desired level.  The Committee while taking note of the proposed capacity addition
plan of the Government of NCT of Delhi by setting up new waste-to-energy plants and enhancing
the processing capacity of the existing plants hopes that the timeline fixed to complete the proposed
action plan would be realised.
8.3 The Committee had visited CSIR-National Environmental Engineering Research
Institute (CSIR-NEERI), Nagpur in April, 2018. During its discussion with the representatives of
NEERI, the Committee was informed that the NEERI had, in May, 2016, offered their expertise to
deal with the issue of frequent fires on landfill sites in Delhi to the Government of NCT of Delhi but
they had not received any response to their communications.  The Committee is surprised to note
that despite the offer of NEERI to support Government of NCT of Delhi in the matter, no action has
been taken thereon.  The Committee also requested the Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of
Delhi to apprise the Committee of the action taken on the offer made by CSIR-NEERI, Nagpur.
However, a response in the matter is still awaited.  The Committee is of the view that considering
the gravity of the situation, the non-responsive attitude of the Government of NCT of Delhi is not
the least desirable.  The existing landfill sites in Delhi are adding to the pollution level in Delhi and
require immediate attention of the Government.
8.4 The Committee had also visited CSIR-Indian Institute Petroleum (IIP), Dehradun in June,
2018 and had been informed that the Institute had been successful in  developing a novel process by
which polyolefinic  waste plastics like polyethylene and polypropylene (e.g. carry bags, household
plastic utensils etc.) can be converted exclusively into any one of the products, viz,. gasoline or
diesel or aromatics along with simultaneous production of (LPG) like gases.
8.5 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate Change
must impress upon the Government of NCT of Delhi to take immediate necessary measures to fix
the problem relating  to the landfill sites of Delhi and, if required, take help of agencies like CSIR-
IIP and CSIR-NEERI in the matter.
9. FIRE CRACKERS
9.1 As has already been brought out in the report, since the last few years, the quality of air nosedives in
Delhi and NCR with the onset of winters, the situation further deteriorates every year after Diwali when the
quality of air goes from worse to worst.  The situation was such during the last few years that Delhi was
sheeted in a toxic smog that forced the closure of schools, power stations, construction sites, etc.  As a
result of this, in June 2017, the Supreme Court banned the sale of firecrackers in Delhi during the upcoming
Diwali festival in an effort to prevent the usual spike in toxic air pollution levels that follow the festival.
9.2 The Committee further observes that each year during Diwali, cheap firecrackers are burst,
often manufactured using toxic chemicals, turning Delhi in to a ‘Gas Chamber’.  The Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the year 2017 has directed to suspend and not renew the licences for possessing,
stocking and selling of fire crackers in Delhi.  The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the

28
Central Government and the Government of NCT of Delhi in this direction in the form of banning
the import of Chinese crackers and confiscating the available stocks.
9.3 The Committee, however, feels that much more needs to be done in this regard.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Government in consultation with the concerned
State Governments should chalk out a mechanism whereby the cracker manufacturers are allowed
to manufacture only low polluting crackers.  The Committee also recommends that the Central
Government should also consider issuing firm guidelines with regard to the chemicals to be used in
crackers by the manufacturers for minimising their adverse impact on the environment and human
health.
10. IMPORTANCE OF TREES IN REDUCING POLLUTION VIS-À-VIS FELLING OF TREES IN
DELHI
10.1 The Committee notes that according to the India State of the Forest Report 2017, the forest cover of
Delhi has increased by 0.3% compared to the assessments conducted in 2015.  However, the increase is
only in the open and scrub forest categories whereas both very dense and moderately dense forests have
recorded a decline.  The assessment by the Forest Survey of India emphasises that Delhi is losing its dense,
bio-diverse forests over the years even as plantations account for a minor improvement in the total forest
cover.  The reduction in very dense and moderately dense forests in Delhi is all the more worrying because
air pollution levels are extremely high in the capital and getting worse. The Committee understands that the
carbon sequestration and pollution combating capacity of open forests is much less than that of dense, good
quality forests.
10.2 The Committee observed that there was massive felling of trees in Mathura Road in New Delhi and
asked the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change about the reasons for the same. In response,
the Ministry informed the Committee about the following two proposals:—
I. Felling of 1713 trees for Redevelopment of Pragati Maidan Complex into Integrated Exhibition
cum Convention Center for ITPO.
10.3 An ambitious project of “Redevelopment of Pragati Maidan Complex into Integrated Exhibition Cum
Convention Center for ITPO” was implemented by the Government of India which required felling of
existing 1713 trees and saving another 825 trees inside the ITPO complex.  An area of 17.13 ha. was
identified by DDA at Yamuna Flood Plains (in between Yamuna Bank Metro Station and Railway Line adjacent
to CWG village Complex) for ten times compensatory plantation of about 17130 seedlings.  It was informed
to the Government that:—
(i) After obtaining approval of Hon’ble LG, permission for felling of 99 trees was given earlier
ITPO for creation of additional space for displaying and putting up of hangers for use as
exhibition space at Defense Pavilion, ITPO, New Delhi around December, 2016.
(ii) A proposal for integrated transit corridor development and street network/connectivity plan
for the corridor/influence zone was also under consideration with the objective of improving
peripheral roads and access through corridors. This would require felling of another 1000
trees approximately.
10.4 The approval of Hon’ble LG was obtained in terms of powers conferred by Section 29 of the Delhi
Preservation of Trees Act (DPTA), 1994, to exempt the affected area of 413439 sq. mtr. (41 ha. approx.)

29
area under Sub-section (3) of Section 9 of DPTA, 1994. The notification for felling of trees was issued on
16.5.2017 and ITPO has paid ` 9,76,41,000/- towards compensatory afforestation.
II. Felling of 1535 trees for construction of an Integrated Transit Corridor Development Plan
along Mathura Road, Bhairon Marg, M.G. Marg and connecting Mathura Road to M.G. Marg
via underground tunnel, Underpass, Clover Leaves, FOB, Loops, Ramps, Footpath, Road
work including Road Signage, Street Light Works, Ventilation of Tunnel, Drainage, Rainwater
Harvesting and allied works
10.5 It was inf ormed that ITPO Project Division, PWD, Government of NCT of Delhi submitted proposal
for felling of 1535 trees for the above project. In lieu  of 1535 trees proposed to be felled/transplanted,
15350 seedlings ( i.e. 10 times of proposed felling) had to be planted as compensatory plantation as per
DPTA, 1994 and nurtured for 5/7 years till their establishment.  An area of 13.5 ha. was allotted by DDA
against proposed felling of 1535 trees for 100% compensatory Afforestation of 15350 plants by User Agency
viz. PWD.  The balance 5.02 ha. from out of 22.15 ha. was allotted in May, 2017 in Yamuna Flood Plains (in
between Yamuna Bank Metro Station and Railway Line adjacent to CWG village Complex) after adjustment
of 17.13 ha. of land for plantation of 17130 trees against International Exhibition Cum Convention Centre at
Pragati Maidan.  An area of 8.48 ha. was allotted in October, 2017 at Yamuna Flood Plains between ITO
Barrage and Yamuna Bank Metro Station. The compensatory afforestation of 15350 trees would also increase
the overall green area of Delhi which would help in combating pollution.  Since the project undertaken was
aimed to decongest Mathura Road, Bhairon Marg and Ring Road of the traffic and reduce pollution level to
improve environment, approval of Hon’ble LG was obtained to exempt the affected area of 1,55,488 sq. mtrs.
(15.55 ha. approx.) under DPTA, 1994.  The notification for felling of trees was issued on 23.4.2018 and
PWD paid ` 8,74,95,000/– as security deposit towards compensatory afforestation.
10.6 The Committee was also informed about the felling of trees due to redevelopment of Government
housing colonies at Netaji Nagar, Nauroji Nagar and East Kidwai Nagar.  It was stated that permission has
been granted for felling 5600 trees by the Department of Forests and Wildlife, Government of NCT of Delhi
for redevelopment of these housing colonies and the actual number of trees felled as on 30
th June, 2018 was
3324.
10.7 The Committee is of the view that trees are the most important and essential part of our
environment. The rising population, industrialization, deforestation, and urbanization has caused
problems like climate change, global warming, rising pollution, loss of natural habitats for animals,
effects on the water cycle, effects on the carbon cycle and so many other diverse effects on the
environment. Cars, Trucks, Diesel engines, Railways, Motorcycles, and other vehicles all over the
world release millions of tonnes of carbon dioxide gas.  Trees contribute to the environment by
providing oxygen, improving air quality, climate amelioration, conserving water, preserving soil,
and supporting wildlife. During the process of photosynthesis, trees take in carbon dioxide and
produce the oxygen we breathe. Trees have a great role to play in reducing pollution. Not only do
they provide nourishment for the entire food chain as well as the earth itself, but they are a safe
and effective solution to some of our biggest environmental problems, improving both outdoor and
indoor environments.  Trees control climate by moderating the effects of the sun, rain and wind.
Trees also lower the air temperature and reduce the heat intensity of the greenhouse effect by
maintaining low levels of carbon dioxide.  Hence it is imperative to cut down on excessive carbon
dioxide emissions, go in for massive afforestation, increase the forest cover, etc.  Plantation, protection
and conservation of trees and forest is the only way of human survival on earth.

30
10.8 Maintenance of ecological balance and preservation of environment is essential for the very
survival of life on earth. At the same time, we need to raise standards of living of the people for
which the economy needs to grow rapidly and tourism needs to be promoted. The challenge before
us, therefore, is to strike the right balance between the two imperatives as a holistic national
enterprise.  While, on the one hand, Delhi is waging a war against air pollution, on the other, trees,
which play a very vital role in reducing one of our biggest environmental problems, are being
indiscriminately felled in the name of developmental projects.  This felling of trees has also adversely
affected the biodiversity of Delhi.  The Committee notes that the number of trees proposed to be
cut in the above proposals involving development plans in Delhi is too large. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the aforementioned development projects should be revisited and the
project proponents of these developmental projects should be requested to submit revised proposals
with minimal requirement of tree felling.  In view of the critical air pollution scenario in Delhi, all
possible efforts should be made for preserving the trees at these sites.  Further, the possibility of
translocating the maximum number of trees should also be explored. The Committee also
recommends that in future also, whenever any developmental/re-developmental project comes up,
efforts should be made for minimum felling of trees at the planning stage itself.
10.9 The Committee notes that recently eight metro pillars in Delhi were covered with evergreen
plants that remain green throughout the year, giving the pillars the look of vertical gardens.  Delhi
Metro has a wide network in Delhi and vertical gardens on metro pillars is a unique idea.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the concerned agencies should explore the possibility of
erecting such vertical gardens on metro pillars, flyovers and other strategic structures, which would
not only beautify these structures but also can be a good medium of increasing the green cover of
Delhi.  In light of the existing environmental crisis in Delhi, these vertical gardens could be one
step forward in helping the citizens of Delhi to breathe a little easy since these vertical gardens
serve the dual purpose of improving air quality by trapping dust and pollutants and absorbing heat
from the surroundings to provide a cooling effect.
11. AIR POLLUTION DURING SUMMERS
11.1 The Committee observes that the air quality of Delhi deteriorates with the onset of winters.  However,
in summers this year in June, Delhi slipped into a air quality position which normally comes in November
and the meteorological conditions were such that PM
10 levels had gone up very high.  This situation prevailed
for 4 to 5 days.  During a meeting of the Committee with the representatives of Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change held on the 14 th June 2018, while apprising the Committee of the air quality
position in Delhi, the Secretary of the Ministry informed that on account of the measures taken by them, the
air quality of Delhi had shown a lot of improvement till 10 th June, 2018. Suddenly, because of the south-
western winds, a lot of dust came from Rajasthan.  The meteorological conditions in Delhi are such that
PM
10 levels had gone up very high.  Even though there is a reasonable wind speed since 13th June afternoon,
the dust had not gone away from Delhi.  The air quality was not a creation of local pollutants.  However, the
Ministry was trying to control local pollutants further so that the impact of the dust was minimized.  He
further informed that they never expected that so much of dust will come from Rajasthan side, which had
got trapped over Delhi.
11.2 Depletion of forests is one of the main causes of air pollution in the country.  Delhi and its
surrounding areas are not so green now as they used to be earlier. There was a thick green belt

31
around Delhi but the same has gradually receded. This green belt acted as a wall to protect Delhi
from dust and pollution from neighbouring States. The Committee feels that the absence of green
belts permits such dust storms from neighbouring States to enter Delhi.  The Committee recommends
that a massive tree plantation exercise should be undertaken, in a time-bound manner, on the
borders of Delhi with Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh so that they not only absorb the pollution
causing particulate matter but also act as a natural barrier and shield the city from frequent dusty
winds from the neighbouring States.
11.3 During its study visit to Dehradun in May-June, 2018, the Committee had visited the Indian Institute
of Remote Sensing (IIRS) at Dehradun on the 2
nd June, 2018. During the discussions of the Committee with
the representatives of IIRS, while apprising the Committee about the Research and Development studies
carried out by IIRS, it was stated that Satellite remote sending data from India geo-stationary satellites such
as INSAT-3D is being used to monitor aerosol variability over Indo-gangetic region.  Algorithms are being
developed for Particulate Matter (PM
2.5) using remote sensing data sets.  The Committee was also informed
that PM2.5 has nearly doubled in the last 15 years, particularly over Indo-Gangetic Plain showing impacts of
urbanization and industrialization on particulate matter air quality. The Committee was also briefed about the
dust storm seen in satellite images of INSAT-3D over north India, causing worsening of air quality over
Delhi and surrounding regions on 29
th October, 2017 and the dust storm in May, 2018.
11.4 The Committee had also visited Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, Pune in April, 2018 and had
been informed that under the plan scheme “Metropolitan Advisories for Cities for Sports, Tourism (Metropolitan
Air Quality and Weather Services), Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES), Government of India, has introduced
a major national initiative, “System of Air Quality and Weather Forecasting and Research” known as “SAFAR”
for greater metropolitan cities of India to provide location specific information on air quality in near real time
and its forecast 1-3 days in advance for the first time in India. It has been combined with the early warning
system on weather parameters. The SAFAR system is developed by Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology,
Pune, alongwith ESSO partner institutions namely India Meteorological Department (IMD) and National
Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF).  The implementation of SAFAR is made possible
with an active collaboration with local municipal corporations and various local educational institutions and
Governmental agencies in that Metro city. The ultimate objective of the project is to increase awareness
among general public regarding the air quality in their city well in advance so that appropriate mitigation
measures and systematic action can be taken up for betterment of air quality and related health issues. It
engineers awareness drive by educating public, prompting self-mitigation and also to help develop mitigation
strategies for policy makers.
11.5 The Committee is of the view that IIRS, Dehradun has conducted Air Quality Studies and Air
Quality monitoring using Satellite data and ground instrumentations and has the infrastructural
set up to issue real time alerts on the worsening air quality due to various factors.  The Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should also coordinate
with the IIRS, Dehradun and SAFAR programme of Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, Pune
in the matter to get real time alerts on the worsening air quality in Delhi and NCR due to various
factors so that immediate damage control exercise could be undertaken and necessary corrective
measures could be initiated by all the concerned agencies.
12. IMPACT OF AIR POLLUTION ON HEALTH
12.1 In order to highlight the health hazards of air pollution, the Committee also sought information from

32
the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change about the negative impact of PM2.5 and PM10 on the
human as well as on animal health.  The Ministry in its reply submitted that air pollutants cause damage to
both flora and fauna.  PM
10 and PM2.5 have similar effects on both human and other animal.  The effects of
the two pollutants are as follows:—
(i) Respirable Suspended Particulate Matter (PM 10, size < 10μm) is a complex mixture of suspended
solid and liquid particle in semi equilibrium with surrounding gases. The major constituents of
PM
10 are organic and elemental carbon, metals/elements like silicon, magnesium, iron, ions like
sulphate, nitrates, ammonium etc. PM 10 can settle in the bronchi and lungs and cause health
problems like cardio-pulmonary problems, asthma, bronchitis, and pneumonia in older people.
(ii) Particulate Matter 2.5 (PM 2.5, size < 2.5 μm) are the airborne particles smaller than 2.5 µm
called fine particles. Composed mainly of carbonaceous materials (organic and elemental),
inorganic compounds (sulphate, nitrate, and ammonium), and trace metal compounds (iron,
aluminium, nickel, copper, zinc, and lead), pose the greatest problems. PM
2.5 tends to penetrate
into the gas exchange regions of the lung, and very small particles (< 100 nanometers) may
pass through the lungs to affect other organs.  The smallest particles, however, less than 100
nm (nanoparticles) can get into the bloodstream and affect the cardiovascular system.  It may
cause oxidative stress respiratory symptoms such as irritation of the airways, coughing, or
difficulty in breathing, decreased lung function, aggravated asthma, chronic bronchitis, irregular
heartbeat, cardio-pulmonary disorder, premature death in people with heart or lung disease.
12.2 The Committee also sought information from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare on the issue.
It was informed by the Ministry that there are two references of studies of Air Pollution and Human Health,
available on adult and younger population of Delhi details of which are as under:—
I. The e pidemiological study on Effect of Air Pollution on Human Health (Adults) in Delhi
(2008) conducted by CPCB with Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, Kolkata which showed
that:—
 The citizens of Delhi had 1.7 times more prevalence of respiratory symptoms compared
with rural controls, and the difference between these two groups with respect to
respiratory symptom was highly significant.
 The prevalence of current asthma and physician-diagnosed asthma among the participants
of Delhi were 7.6% and 3.6% respectively which were significantly higher than the
corresponding prevalences in control group which were 3.9% and 2.1% respectively.
 Decrease in overall lung function in Delhi compared with rural controls.  Their mean
FVC, FEV 1, FEF 25-75% and PEFR values were decreased by 9.4%, 13.3%, 10.4%
and 9.3% respectively.  All these changes were statistically significant.
II. The Study on Ambient Air Quality, Respiratory Symptoms and Lung Function of Delhi (2008)
on children in Delhi by CPCB and the Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute of Kolkata showed:—
 One or more respiratory symptoms in the past 3 months in nearly one-third of Delhi’s
children.  In contrast, 18.2% of rural children experienced respiratory symptoms.  The
difference in period prevalence (in 3 months) of respiratory symptoms between urban
(Delhi) and rural (Control) children was highly significant;

33
 Cough with phlegm (sputum production) or wet cough was present in 7% of Delhi’s
children.  In contrast, only 3.8% of children in control group had this symptom;
 Wheeze i.e. whistling sound during breathing was present in 4.8% of Delhi’s children in
past three months compared with 2.7% children with this symptom in control.  Thus,
Delhi’s children had 1.8 times more wheeze prevalence than the controls and the difference
was highly significant;
 Reduced lung function in children in the study group (Delhi) up to 43% as compared to
control group of 25.7%.
12.3 The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has further submitted that it appears from above references
that there is correlation of air pollution and increase in respiratory tract diseases. It was further informed by
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare that National Centre for Disease Control (NCDC) is collecting
Acute Respiratory Illnesses data from sentinel sites (four Hospitals namely AIIMS, Safdarjung Hospital,
LHMC group of Hospitals and Dr RML Hospital) daily since 10.11.2017 to till date.  NCDC had issued health
advisories to health departments of States and UT with severe Air Quality Index (Based on CPCB’s AQI
data).  It was further submitted that NCDC is working on comprehensive advisory and IEC on Air Pollution
and Health in joint collaboration with Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
12.4 Apprising the Committee about the health data of residents of Delhi and NCR, the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare submitted that the data collected from hospitals namely AIIMS, Safdarjung Hospital,
LHMC groups of hospitals and Dr. RML Hospital is inconclusive of the increase or decrease of respiratory
cases in respect to air pollution due to following limitations:
 Data is collected at present only from four Central Government hospitals (AIIMS, Safdarjung
Hospital, LHMC group of Hospitals and Dr RML Hospital).
 Data collected is only of cases of Acute Respiratory Illnesses  reporting of four Central Govt.
hospitals of Delhi.
 Data received is only from ‘Emergency Departments’ of the said hospitals. 
 The hospitals listed above have ‘ no fixed catchment area’.
 The information regarding ‘level of exposure to pollution and type of pollution’ is not available
at present with respect to admitted patients.
12.5 It was further brought to the notice of the Committee that NCDC is collecting, collating and analysing
the data from these four sentinel sites which was started soon after first meeting of Steering Committee on
Air Pollution’ i.e. since 10th Nov, 2017 to till date.  Sharing the information about the steps being undertaken
to combat ill effects of air pollution on health by various departments, the following was submitted:-
 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) constituted a Steering Committee on Air
Pollution and Health Related Issues, the report was submitted in August 2015, and the same is
at the website of MoHFW.
 Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF&CC) has an ‘Environment Health
Cell’ as well as Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) which looks after various aspects of
air pollution and its Quality index.

34
 ICMR, Delhi is conducting health assessment “ Effect of Outdoor Air Pollution on acute
respiratory symptoms in Delhi: A multisite study”. As communicated by the concerned official
at ICMR, the study is ongoing so report has not yet been shared with NCDC.
 Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change has a Task Force on National Action Plan
on Air Pollution and it was communicated to MoHFW that a Health Impact Assessment in 20
most polluted cities and a zone-based study is being undertaken by this task force. The report
is awaited.
 A high level task force on Air Pollution under the Chairmanship of Principal Secretary PMO
has drafted an action plan on Air Pollution with involvement of several Ministries. For this
report Ministry of Health was not part so it was suggested that Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare should be appropriately represented in the Task Force on Air Pollution, and for Health
Impact Monitoring of effects of air pollution sentinel surveillance may be expanded.
12.6 The Committee was informed about the available data on occurrence of Respiratory diseases, cases
and deaths due to Acute Respiratory Infection (ARI) in Delhi during the period 2013-2017, sex-wise and
year-wise, as per National Health Profile which is given in table below:-
Y ear Male Female T otal
Cases Deaths Cases Deaths Cases Deaths
(in lakh) (Nos.) (in lakhs) (Nos.) (in lakhs) (Nos.)
2013 2.22 112 1.69 63 3.9 175
2014 2.10 64 1.59 42 3.69 106
2015 1.87 82 1.43 51 3.30 133
2016 1.88 138 1.66 72 3.55 210
2017 1.40 217 1.21 140 2.61 357
Source: National Health profile
12.7 The Committee is extremely perturbed to note the replies of the Ministries of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change and Health and Family Welfare with respect to the alarming impact of
air pollution on the health of the residents of Delhi and NCR.  The Committee firmly believes that,
as accepted by the Ministries of Health and Family Welfare and Environment, Forest and Climate
Change, polluted air in Delhi and NCR is a significant risk factor for a number of pollution-related
diseases and health conditions including respiratory infections, heart disease, Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease (COPD), stroke, lung cancer, difficulty in breathing, wheezing,
coughing, asthma and worsening of existing respiratory and cardiac conditions resulting in increased
medication use, increased doctor or emergency room visits, more hospital admissions and premature
deaths.  Infants, children and asthmatic patients are the most vulnerable in such conditions.  The
Committee is also deeply concerned to note that during the period from 2013 to 2017, a total of 981
casualties have taken place due to Acute Respiratory Infection (ARI) in Delhi.  The Committee is
of the view that the adverse health effects of poor air quality in Delhi and NCR and its toll on
human life calls for immediate short and long term solutions to the problem. The Com mittee is

35
also surprised to note that Ministry of Health and Family Welfare was not taken on board in the
High Level Task Force on Air Pollution which is, in a way, indicative of the ignorance as well as
denial about the negative impact of air pollution on human health.  The Committee recommends
that considering the severe health hazards of air pollution, Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change should take immediate corrective and preventive strategic steps in consultation
with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to mitigate the air pollution.
12.8 Further, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should also aggressively start an awareness
campaign to educate the people about the adverse health effects of air pollution and the ways and
means to minimise its adverse impacts.
13. IMPACT ON INDIAN ECONOMY
13.1 The Committee is of the considered view  that adverse impact of air pollution is not limited to human
health, ecology, environment, bio-diversity, flora and fauna, etc. only but has also adversely impacted the
Indian economy including tourism, railways, civil aviation, etc.  Therefore, the negative impact of air pollution
on Indian economy needs to be brought out to have better understanding of the co-relation between air
pollution problem  and the economy.  The Committee notes that during the last winter season (December-
January), many trains coming to and from Delhi were either cancelled or delayed primarily due to low
visibility caused by smog/fog.  It is a matter of concern  to note that due to cancellation or delay of trains,
inconvenience was caused to the commuters, both domestic and foreign.  Similarly, civil aviation sector  of
the country was adversely affected when a large number of flights were delayed  or cancelled due to poor
visibility.  The Committee notes that this caused losses to the civil aviation sector, railways and also tourism.
13.2 The Committee expresses its concern that deteriorating air pollution has been responsible in the
naming of the national capital as one of the most polluted cities in the world.   Even the World Health
Organisation put Delhi amongst the 14 Indian cities that figured in a list of 20 most polluted cities in the
world in terms of PM
2.5 levels in the year 2016.   The Committee also notes that hazardous air quality in Delhi
and NCR after Diwali last year and at some other times too, made headlines globally.  Such reports have an
adverse impact on the plan of international tourists to visit India, particularly Delhi.   The Committee
expresses its deep concerns in the matter.  The Committee firmly believes that if corrective preventive
measures are not put in place by the Government, the situation will worsen which will also take a
toll on our foreign exchange earning capacity in so far as tourism sector is concerned.  As already
stated in the report, a World Bank report has stated that India’s labour losses due to air pollution
in the year 2013 stood at about $55.39 Billion or about 0.84% of its Gross Domestic Product (GDP).
The Committee observes that since the air pollution situation has only worsened during the last few
years, the said losses may have crossed 1% by now.
13.3 In view of the foregoing, the Committee feels that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change, Government of India should impress upon the Ministries of Railways and Civil
Aviation to join hands in sharing money in order to mitigate the problem of air pollution in Delhi
and NCR.
14. GENERAL OBSERV ATION
14.1 Pollution prevention is a major global concern because of its harmful effects on people’s
health and the overall environment.  Air Pollution has assumed gigantic proportions in our country
and Delhi, the capital of India, is not lagging behind.  Growing urbanization, rapid industrialisation

36
and increasing population etc. during the last few years have also adversely impacted the air pollution
scenario of Delhi and NCR.  In such a scenario, the measures taken by Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change for prevention and control of air pollution have so far not been
commensurate with the magnitude of the problem.  In view of the foregoing, the Committee
recommends that the Ministry, on its part, must prepare both short and long term plans, put forth
futuristic projections and ensure that all the measures planned are holistically implemented in
coordination with the concerned State Governments.  There are many scientific organisations of
Government of India such as CSIR-Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun; Indian Institute of
Remote Sensing; Dehradun; Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, Pune; CSIR-National
Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur which can help in contributing towards
finding solutions to many aspects associated with the air pollution problem of Delhi.  Improving air
quality in Delhi and NCR demands sustained and coordinated government action at all levels and
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should seek the cooperation of all concerned
agencies and stakeholders who can contribute towards addressing the problem of air pollution in
Delhi and NCR.

RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee takes note of the new initiatives being taken by the Government of NCT of
Delhi. The Committee appreciates the initiatives brought to the notice of the Committee and hopes
that the intended benefits would be realised and these initiatives further will pave way to mitigate
the air pollution problem in Delhi and NCR to a greater extent. (Para 2.6)
The Committee notes that while GRAP is an emergency plan to respond to the daily air
pollution levels, CAP is a comprehensive action plan that mandates short, medium and long term
action for each source of pollution for more systemic reforms in Delhi and NCR.  The Committee
further notes the action taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change to mitigate the air pollution and hopes that the GRAP and CAP will be implemented
in letter and spirit with close co-ordination with the concerned State Governments of NCR.  The
Committee believes that the synergy between the concerned State Governments would definitely
help in getting rid of the problem of air pollution in Delhi and NCR.  The Committee is also of the
view that both the plans i.e. GRAP and CAP need to be implemented together given the air pollution
level in Delhi and NCR.  Further, a robust monitoring system should be evolved to ensure that the
National Ambient Air Quality Standards are met and the negative impact of air pollution on the
health of the residents of this Region is minimised. (Para 2.11)
The Committee welcomes the plan of the Government of India for increasing the existing
monitoring network by adding 48 more of such stations by December, 2018.  The Committee hopes
that the target set by the Government will not only be achieved within the stipulated time but the
increased number of  monitoring stations would also help in further strategising the action plans to
combat the increasing air pollution in Delhi and NCR. (Para 3.2)
The Committee notes that despite a series of measures taken by the Governments of Haryana,
Punjab and Uttar Pradesh, including the statutory ban on stubble burning in the years 2003, 2013
and 2015 respectively, the air pollution situation in Delhi and NCR has not improved much and, in
fact, it has been deteriorating further.  It is further worrisome to note that despite the statutory
ban imposed by these States on the crop residue burning, many such instances have been brought to
the notice of the Committee from these States.   Satellites images have also showed that paddy
burning in Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh had increased after Diwali during the year 2017
adding to the problem of air pollution in Delhi and NCR.  The Committee expresses its strong
reservations towards the failure of these State Governments in implementing the statutory ban on
stubble burning in letter and spirit.   Although the concerned State Governments have listed a
number of measures taken by them to tackle the issue, the Committee is of the view that the
required action has been taken by the State Governments rather late.   The Committee is of the
opinion that weak enforcement of the statutory ban by these State Governments coupled with laxity
towards the sensitivity and gravity of the matter has also adversely affected the ongoing efforts to
tackle the issue of air pollution in Delhi and NCR.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should also take the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare on board in the matter and impress upon the concerned State Governments of Haryana,
Punjab and Uttar Pradesh to ensure that the laid down guidelines and statutory provisions are
implemented in letter and spirit. (Para 4.8)
37

38
The Committee also firmly believes that the unscientific methods to deal with the crop stalk
and solid waste in the neighbouring States of Delhi namely, Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh
have aggravated the problem of the air pollution in Delhi and NCR.   The Committee, therefore,
recommends that more scientific approach should be adopted to address the issue of stubble burning
in these States.  The Committee also recommends that the State Governments should further
sensitise and educate the farmers of their respective States about the adverse impact of stubble
burning on the environment, ecology and bio-diversity of Delhi and NCR.  The Committee also
believes that for scientific disposal of the waste, segregation and identification of waste is equally
important and best suited approach needs to be evolved to yield the desired results in this
direction. (Para 4.9)
The Committee not es that the State Governments of Punjab and Haryana run subsidy
schemes to promote disposal of the agricultural residues in a scientific manner instead of burning
it.  However, the subsidy schemes of these State Governments have not helped much to address
the issue of stubble burning.  The Committee is surprised to note that no scientific study has
been undertaken by any of the concerned State Governments or by the Central Government to
ascertain the level of damage that has been caused to the environment on account of stubble burning.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change, Government of India,  in consultation with the concerned State Governments of Haryana,
Punjab and Uttar Pradesh, should undertake a scientific study to assess the environmental impact
of crop burning on Delhi and NCR and the methodology to mitigate it in a time bound manner.   The
Committee notes that Government of Punjab has also suggested some scientific solutions for
converting paddy straw into other useful items.   The Committee recommends that the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change should, in consultation with other concerned Ministries
of Government of India, explore as to how the paddy straw can be used to convert this challenge
into a new possibility. (Para 4.10)
The Committee is constrained to note that in terms of the orders of NGT, the State Governments
of the Haryana, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh are penalising the farmers for burning crop residues.
However, the Committee is of the opinion that instead of being penalised, the farmers should be
provided with some practical solutions instead of crop burning.  It is of paramount importance that
technological and scientific solutions coupled with financial assistance should be made available to
the farmers to motivate them not to burn their crop residues.  The Committee is of the considered
view that it would help minimise the problem of stubble burning in these States. (Para 4.11)
The Committee notes the measures being taken by the  respective State Governments to
curb the menace of crop residue  burning.  The Committee, however, is of the considered view  that
awareness needs to be created  amongst  the farmers highlighting the negative and adverse impact
of crop residue burning not only on environment, human health, ecology, etc, but on the fertility of
soil also.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate
Change  and the concerned State Governments should launch a massive awareness programme for
the above purpose. Educational messages in this regard should also be publicised on audio, TV and
print media so as to reach the maximum numbers of farmers in these States.  The concerned State
Governments should also  run awareness campaign in schools in order to educate children about  ill
effects of crop residue burning. (Para 4.12)

39
The Committee welcomes this move of the Government and hopes that the suggestions made
by the Sub-Committee would be implemented at the earliest.  The Committee hopes that with the
allocation of `````1151.80 crore made for in-situ management of crop residue in the states of Punjab,
Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and NCT of Delhi would also address the financial needs of the concerned
State Governments in promoting the scientific disposal of agricultural residues. (Para 4.14)
The Committee welcomes the move of NTPC to procure farm stubble for its thermal units.
The Committee feels that this move would not only incentivize the farmers to not to burn the farm
stubble and get some monetary benefit out of it but would also help mitigate the problem of the air
pollution in Delhi and NCR to a large extent. (Para 4.16)
The Committee is of the considered opinion that given the health hazards due to the increasing
volume of PM
2.5 in the air of Delhi/NCR; it is imperative for the concerned State Governments as
well as the Central Government to understand the gravity of the situation and make all concerted
efforts to bring down the PM
2.5 level in the Region by making all possible efforts to control vehicular
pollution. (Para 5.11)
The Committee is surprised to note that despite the orders/directions from the Courts/Tribunal,
the desired progress has not been achieved on this count.  The Committee urges upon the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the concerned State Governments to ensure strict
compliance of the orders/directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, Hon’ble Delhi High Court,
and National Green Tribunal for the purpose. (Para 5.12)
The Committee takes note of the decision of the Government of India to skip BS-V and
leapfrog directly from BS-IV to BS-VI for all vehicles in April, 2020 and to advance the proposed
use of BS-VI fuel from the year 2026 to 2020.  The Committee appreciates this decision and hopes
that all the modalities required for switching from BS-IV to BS-VI would be completed within the
stipulated time-frame set for the purpose. (Para 5.13)
The Committee feels that the problem of vehicular emission should be seen from the prism
of vehicular technology, fuel quality, stringent vehicular emissions norms, inspection and maintenance
of the vehicles and traffic management.   The Committee is of the opinion that these parameters
should be taken into consideration by all the concerned State Governments as well as Central
Government while drafting any strategy to mitigate the problem of air pollution.  The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should take
up this issue with the Concerned Union Ministries/Departments/Agencies in consultation with the
automobile industry so that an effective and long term solution can be found out to address the
problem.  The Committee also recommends that Government of India should consider the ITMS
proposal submitted by Delhi Police and made adequate funds available so that the system could be
introduced and contribute towards reducing vehicular air pollution by providing technology based
traffic solutions. (Para 5.14)
The Committee further opines that the problem of air pollution is encompassing everything
which is related covertly or overtly to human beings and any leniency on the part of Government in
tackling the issue will have cascading effect on the health of its citizens.  The Committee feels that
worst situations demands stringent solutions. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, in consultation with Ministry of Road, Transport

40
and Highways along with the Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, should chalk out
a mechanism for phasing out of the polluting vehicles at the earliest. (Para 5.15)
The Committee is happy to note that the construction of Eastern Peripheral Expressway has
been completed and the completion of Western Peripheral Expressway is likely to be completed by
30
th September, 2018.  The Committee hopes that all the work related with the completion of Western
Peripheral Expressway will be completed within the given timeline. The Committee is of the considered
view that the completion of Western Peripheral Expressway and the already completed Eastern
Peripheral Expressway would play an important and crucial role in mitigating the problem of air
pollution in Delhi and National Capital Region.  The Committee also recommends that the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in consultation with the concerned State Governments
should undertake a massive plantation drive along both the sides of these Expressways so that they
can play their role in mitigation of vehicular emission.  Since the matter concerns to one and all,
the Committee also recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should
urge upon the Central PSUs to play a role too and contribute from their CSR funds for plantation
activities and the Ministry should play a role of a mentor for the purpose. (Para 5.16)
The Committee notes that with the expansion of Delhi Metro network, a large number of
people are commuting by Delhi Metro.  A large number of people are also using other modes of
public transport.  However, inspite of the increased availability of public transport, the dependence
on personal vehicles, particularly cars and two-wheelers, has not gone down and a substantial
population is still using personal vehicles for local commuting.  This not only adds to the congestion
on the roads but also contributes to the hazardous levels of air pollution.  The Committee is of the
view that the primary reasons for dependence on personal vehicles are inadequate public transport
facility and absence of last mile connectivity.  Also, the Delhi Metro network needs to be further
expanded so that a larger section can utilize this facility.  The issue of last mile connectivity also
needs to be addressed to ensure that people refrain from using personal vehicles and do not hesitate
to utilize the public transport to the maximum.  These measures would certainly help in reducing
the air pollution in Delhi. (Para 5.17)
The Committee notes that road dust is one of the major sources of air pollution in Delhi and
NCR.  Dust on roads, construction sites, etc. adds to the particulate pollution and a mitigation plan
for road dust is extremely essential for solving the problem of air pollution in Delhi and NCR.  The
Committee takes note of the action plan of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
regarding control of road dust/re-suspension of dust and other fugitive emissions.  However, the
Committee is of the view that the action taken by the concerned State Governments of this Region
so far has not helped much in addressing the issue.  Further action on some of these points is yet to
be taken up with full vigour.  The Committee feels that though vacuum cleaning of the roads dust
may play an important role in addressing the issue of road dust as an immediate step but for the
long term solution to the problem, innovative solutions are required to be taken by the Government.
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
must impress upon all the concerned State Governments to aggressively take action on all the
action points for control of road dust/re-suspension of dust and other fugitive emissions. (Para 6.6)
The Committee also observes that in some parts of the NCR, roads are broken, poorly
maintained and partially paved surfaces which in turn have been resulting in adding to the problem

41
of road dust.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to take up the matter with the
concerned State Governments and the Central Government for paving of unpaved roads/streets in
the Region and ensure that the civic agencies of the Region involved pay due importance to the
maintenance of the roads/streets and complete the task in a fixed time frame. (Para 6.7)
The Co mmittee also takes note of the number of mechanised road sweeping machines
currently being used to curb the road dust in Delhi/NCR and feels that the impact of using such
machines in visible only in selected  areas of Delhi.  Thus there is an urgent need to increase the
number of mechanised road sweeping machines.  The Committee is also of the considered view that
adequate funds be made available to the concerned Government agencies so that the plans to procure
more machines is fructified and the process of procurement is not stalled or delayed for want of
funds. (Para 6.8)
The Committee also observes that the continuous digging of roads and other areas for various
municipal works in Delhi and NCR is highly irrational and exhibits a classic example of the concerned
government agencies working in silos without having any co-ordination amongst them.  It is a well
known fact that one part or the other part in Delhi and NCR is under digging activities by a
government agency and as soon as the work is completed some other agency starts digging work
related to them on the same site causing not only a great amount of inconvenience to the public at
large but also does burden the public exchequer .  This also adds to the air pollution in Delhi.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that all the concerned civic agencies should collectively draw
up plan of developmental activities for the next five years and undertake developmental works
simultaneously so that no repetitive digging of the roads etc. is undertaken and their contribution
to air pollution is minimised. (Para 6.9)
The Committee feels that construction activities provide daily earning to the poor and weaker
sections of the society.  Banning construction activities results in loss of livelihood to the poor and
the needy, especially labourers.  A World Bank report also stated that India’s labour losses due to
air pollution in the year 2013 stood at about $55.39 Billion or about 0.84% of its Gross Domestic
Product (GDP).  The said losses could be even more due to the air pollution situation prevalent
during the last few years.  The Committee recommends that instead of banning construction
activities, which deprive the poor of their daily earnings, efforts should be made for the stringent
enforcement of the construction guidelines and international best practices. (Para 7.7)
The Committee notes the steps initiated by the concerned State Governments to mitigate air
pollution due to construction activities in Delhi and NCR and hopes that these steps would be
scrupulously implemented to achieve the desired results.  The Committee also observes that noxious
vapours from paints, thinners, oils, cleaners, etc. are environmentally hazardous chemicals which
are widely used at the construction sites and have been contributing to raise the levels of air pollution
in the Region.  The Committee hopes that the concerned agencies would also take the required
steps to contain the air pollution contribution from these chemicals. (Para 7.8)
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to sensitise the concerned State
Governments in the Region to strictly follow the guidelines/norms specified by CPCB in order to
prevent pollution caused by construction activities.  The measures taken by DMRC to control dust
emission and creative touch given to construction waste from construction sites are highly

42
commendable.  Instead of dumping the constructional waste here and there, the wastes are dumped
at pre-designated and approved sites by the Government.  The measures adopted by the DMRC by
following the C&D waste rules and the guidelines should be adopted and followed by other agencies
involved in construction activities. Strict implementation of the C&D waste rules and guidelines
should also be enforced by the concerned law enforcement agencies of Delhi and NCR.  The Committee
strongly believes that good construction site practices can help to the great extent in controlling
and preventing air pollution in the region.  The Committee also feels that Environment Risk
Assessments for all the construction activities and materials being used and likely to cause air
pollution must be made in consonance with the laid down norms/regulations.  The Committee
recommends that the construction industry should also be encouraged to use eco-friendly construction
methods, materials and technologies. (Para 7.9)
The Committee is unhappy to note the existing capacity of the Government of NCT of Delhi
to treat the municipal solid waste scientifically is just about 54 per cent of the total requirement
leaving a gap of 46 per cent to be bridged.  This apathy of the civic bodies entrusted with the task of
management of municipal solid waste is totally unwarranted.  The Committee notes that there have
been frequent incidents of landfill fires in Delhi during the last few years which spew toxic gases
and have been adding to the rising pollution levels in Delhi.  The laissez-faire of the civic bodies of
Delhi also gets reflected in the fact that the height of Ghazipur landfill site has reached as high as
65 metres which is just 8 metres less than the height of the national monument Qutub Minar.
Similarly, the other two landfill sites in Delhi have also been declared exhausted but the untreated
waste is still being dumped there.  The Committee is of the considered opinion that unprocessed
municipal waste of 4800 TPD is a threat to the environment, ecology and flora and fauna of Delhi
and NCR and there is urgent need for augmenting the capacity to treat the municipal solid waste
scientifically to the desired level.  The Committee while taking note of the proposed capacity addition
plan of the Government of NCT of Delhi by setting up new waste-to-energy plants and enhancing
the processing capacity of the existing plants hopes that the timeline fixed to complete the proposed
action plan would be realised. (Para 8.2)
The Committee had visited CSIR-National Environmental Engineering Research
Institute (CSIR-NEERI), Nagpur in April, 2018. During its discussion with the representatives of
NEERI, the Committee was informed that the NEERI had, in May, 2016, offered their expertise to
deal with the issue of frequent fires on landfill sites in Delhi to the Government of NCT of Delhi but
they had not received any response to their communications.  The Committee is surprised to note
that despite the offer of NEERI to support Government of NCT of Delhi in the matter, no action has
been taken thereon.  The Committee also requested the Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of
Delhi to apprise the Committee of the action taken on the offer made by CSIR-NEERI, Nagpur.
However, a response in the matter is still awaited.  The Committee is of the view that considering
the gravity of the situation, the non-responsive attitude of the Government of NCT of Delhi is not
the least desirable.  The existing landfill sites in Delhi are adding to the pollution level in Delhi and
require immediate attention of the Government. (Para 8.3)
The Committee had also visited CSIR-Indian Institute Petroleum (IIP), Dehradun in June,
2018 and had been informed that the Institute had been successful in  developing a novel process by
which polyolefinic  waste plastics like polyethylene and polypropylene ( e.g. carry bags, household

43
plastic utensils etc.) can be converted exclusively into any one of the products, viz., gasoline or
diesel or aromatics along with simultaneous production of (LPG) like gases. (Para 8.4)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate Change
must impress upon the Government of NCT of Delhi to take immediate necessary measures to fix
the problem relating  to the landfill sites of Delhi and if required, take help of agencies like CSIR-
IIP and CSIR-NEERI in the matter. (Para 8.5)
The Committee further observes that each year during Diwali, cheap firecrackers are burst,
often manufactured using toxic chemicals, turning Delhi in to a ‘Gas Chamber’. The Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the year 2017 has directed to suspend and not renew the licences for possessing,
stocking and selling of fire crackers in Delhi.  The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the
Central Government and the Government of NCT of Delhi in this direction in the form of banning
the import of Chinese crackers and confiscating the available stocks. (Para 9.2)
The Committee, however, feels that much more needs to be done in this regard.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Government in consultation with the concerned
State Governments should chalk out a mechanism whereby the cracker manufacturers are allowed
to manufacture only low polluting crackers.  The Committee also recommends that the Central
Government should also consider issuing firm guidelines with regard to the chemicals to be used in
crackers by the manufacturers for minimising their adverse impact on the environment and human
health. (Para 9.3)
The Committee is of the view that trees are the most important and essential part of our
environment. The rising population, industrialization, deforestation, and urbanization has caused
problems like climate change, global warming, rising pollution, loss of natural habitats for animals,
effects on the water cycle, effects on the carbon cycle and so many other diverse effects on the
environment. Cars, Trucks, Diesel engines, Railways, Motorcycles, and other vehicles all over the
world release millions of tonnes of carbon dioxide gas.  Trees contribute to the environment by
providing oxygen, improving air quality, climate amelioration, conserving water, preserving soil,
and supporting wildlife. During the process of photosynthesis, trees take in carbon dioxide and
produce the oxygen we breathe. Trees have a great role to play in reducing pollution. Not only do
they provide nourishment for the entire food chain as well as the earth itself, but they are a safe
and effective solution to some of our biggest environmental problems, improving both outdoor and
indoor environments.  Trees control climate by moderating the effects of the sun, rain and wind.
Trees also lower the air temperature and reduce the heat intensity of the greenhouse effect by
maintaining low levels of carbon dioxide.  Hence it is imperative to cut down on excessive carbon
dioxide emissions, go in for massive afforestation, increase the forest cover, etc.  Plantation, protection
and conservation of trees and forest is the only way of human survival on earth. (Para 10.7)
Maintenance of ecological balance and preservation of environment is essential for the very
survival of life on earth. At the same time, we need to raise standards of living of the people for
which the economy needs to grow rapidly and tourism needs to be promoted. The challenge before
us, therefore, is to strike the right balance between the two imperatives as a holistic national
enterprise.  While, on the one hand, Delhi is waging a war against air pollution, on the other, trees,
which play a very vital role in reducing one of our biggest environmental problems, are being

44
indiscriminately felled in the name of developmental projects.  This felling of trees has also adversely
affected the biodiversity of Delhi.  The Committee notes that the number of trees proposed to be
cut in the above proposals involving development plans in Delhi is too large. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the aforementioned development projects should be revisited and the
project proponents of these developmental projects should be requested to submit revised proposals
with minimal requirement of tree felling.  In view of the critical air pollution scenario in Delhi, all
possible efforts should be made for preserving the trees at these sites.  Further, the possibility of
translocating the maximum number of trees should also be explored. The Committee also
recommends that in future also, whenever any developmental/re-developmental project comes up,
efforts should be made for minimum felling of trees at the planning stage itself. (Para 10.8)
The Committee notes that recently eight metro pillars in Delhi were covered with evergreen
plants that remain green throughout the year, giving the pillars the look of vertical gardens.  Delhi
Metro has a wide network in Delhi and vertical gardens on metro pillars is a unique idea.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the concerned agencies should explore the possibility of
erecting such vertical gardens on metro pillars, flyovers and other strategic structures, which would
not only beautify these structures but also can be a good medium of increasing the green cover of
Delhi.  In light of the existing environmental crisis in Delhi, these vertical gardens could be one
step forward in helping the citizens of Delhi to breathe a little easy since these vertical gardens
serve the dual purpose of improving air quality by trapping dust and pollutants and absorbing heat
from the surroundings to provide a cooling effect. (Para 10.9)
Depletion of forests is one of the main causes of air pollution in the country.  Delhi and its
surrounding areas are not so green now as they used to be earlier. There was a thick green belt
around Delhi but the same has gradually receded. This green belt acted as a wall to protect Delhi
from dust and pollution from neighbouring States. The Committee feels that the absence of green
belts permits such dust storms from neighbouring States to enter Delhi.  The Committee recommends
that a massive tree plantation exercise should be undertaken, in a time-bound manner, on the
borders of Delhi with Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh so that they not only absorb the pollution
causing particulate matter but also act as a natural barrier and shield the city from frequent dusty
winds from the neighbouring States. (Para 11.2)
The Committee is of the view that IIRS, Dehradun has conducted Air Quality Studies and Air
Quality monitoring using Satellite data and ground instrumentations and has the infrastructural
set up to issue real time alerts on the worsening air quality due to various factors.  The Committee
recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should also coordinate
with the IIRS, Dehradun and SAFAR programme of Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, Pune
in the matter to get real time alerts on the worsening air quality in Delhi and NCR due to various
factors so that immediate damage control exercise could be undertaken and necessary corrective
measures could be initiated by all the concerned agencies. (Para 11.5)
The Committee is extremely perturbed to note the replies of the Ministries of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change and Health and Family Welfare with respect to the alarming impact of
air pollution on the health of the residents of Delhi and NCR.  The Committee firmly believes that,
as accepted by the Ministries of Health and Family Welfare and Environment, Forest and Climate
Change, polluted air in Delhi and NCR is a significant risk factor for a number of pollution-related

45
diseases and health conditions including respiratory infections, heart disease, Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease (COPD), stroke, lung cancer, difficulty in breathing, wheezing,
coughing, asthma and worsening of existing respiratory and cardiac conditions resulting in increased
medication use, increased doctor or emergency room visits, more hospital admissions and premature
deaths.  Infants, children and asthmatic patients are the most vulnerable in such conditions.  The
Committee is also deeply concerned to note that during the period from 2013 to 2017, a total of 981
casualties have taken place due to Acute Respiratory Infection (ARI) in Delhi.  The Committee is
of the view that the adverse health effects of poor air quality in Delhi and NCR and its toll on
human life calls for immediate short and long term solutions to the problem.  The Committee is
also surprised to note that Ministry of Health and Family Welfare was not taken on board in the
High Level Task Force on Air Pollution which is, in a way, indicative of the ignorance as well as
denial about the negative impact of air pollution on human health.  The Committee recommends
that considering the severe health hazards of air pollution, Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change should take immediate corrective and preventive strategic steps in consultation
with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to mitigate the air pollution. (Para 12.7)
Further, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should also aggressively start an awareness
campaign to educate the people about the adverse health effects of air pollution and the ways and
means to minimise its adverse impacts. (Para 12.8)
The Committee expresses its concern that deteriorating air pollution has been responsible in
the naming of the national capital as one of the most polluted cities in the world. Even the World
Health Organisation put Delhi amongst the 14 Indian cities that figured in a list of 20 most polluted
cities in the world in terms of PM
2.5 levels in the year 2016. The Committee also notes that hazardous
air quality in Delhi and NCR after Diwali last year and at some other times too, made headlines
globally.  Such reports have an adverse impact on the plan of international tourists to visit India,
particularly Delhi.  The Committee expresses its deep concerns in the matter.  The Committee
firmly believes that if corrective preventive measures are not put in place by the Government, the
situation will worsen which will also take a toll on our foreign exchange earning capacity in so far as
tourism sector is concerned.  As already stated in the report, a World Bank r eport has stated that
India’s labour losses due to air pollution in the year 2013 stood at about $55.39 Billion or about
0.84% of its Gross Domestic Product (GDP).  The Committee observes that since the air pollution
situation has only worsened during the last few years, the said losses may have crossed 1% by
now. (Para 13.2)
In view of the foregoing, the Committee feels that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change, Government of India should impress upon the Ministries of Railways and Civil
Aviation to join hands in sharing money in order to mitigate the problem of air pollution in Delhi
and NCR. (Para 13.3)
Pollution prevention is a major global concern because of its harmful effects on people’s
health and the overall environment.  Air Pollution has assumed gigantic proportions in our country
and Delhi, the capital of India, is not lagging behind.  Growing urbanisation, rapid industrialisation
and increasing population etc. during the last few years have also adversely impacted the air pollution
scenario of Delhi and NCR.  In such a scenario, the measures taken by Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change for prevention and control of air pollution have so far not been

46
commensurate with the magnitude of the problem. In view of the foregoing, the Committee
recommends that the Ministry, on its part, must prepare both short and long term plans, put forth
futuristic projections and ensure that all the measures planned are holistically implemented in
coordination with the concerned State Governments.  There are many scientific organisations of
Government of India such as CSIR-Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun; Indian Institute of
Remote Sensing; Dehradun; Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, Pune; CSIR-National
Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur which can help in contributing towards
finding solutions to many aspects associated with the air pollution problem of Delhi.  Improving air
quality in Delhi and NCR demands sustained and coordinated Government action at all levels and
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should seek the cooperation of all concerned
agencies and stakeholders who can contribute towards addressing the problem of air pollution in
Delhi and NCR. (Para 14.1)

MINUTES

49
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, the 8th December, 2017 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma    —    Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
LOK  SABHA
4. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
5. Shri Laxman Giluwa
6. Dr. K. Gopal
7. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
8. Shri Daddan Mishra
9. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
10. Shri Nana Patole
11. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
12. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
13. Shri Nagendra Singh
14. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Shri A. K. Mehta, Additional Secretary
2. Ms. Shruti Rai Bhardwaj, Joint Director
3. Dr. P. Gargawa, Additional Director, CPCB
4. Shri A. Sudhakar, Member Secretary, CPCB
5. Dr. K. J. Ramesh, Director-General, India Meteorological Department
Representatives of Government of Delhi
1. Shri Anshu Prakash, Chief Secretary
2. Shri Naresh Kumar, Chairman, NDMC
3. Shri Mohanjeet Singh, Pr. Secretary (Industries)
4. Dr. Ranbir Singh, Commissioner, East DMC
5. Shri Madhup Vyas, Commissioner, North DMC

50
***Relate to other matters.
6. Shrimati Varsha Joshi, Secretary (Transport)
7. Shri Keshav Chandra, Secretary (E&F)
8. Shri A. K. Singh, Chairman, DSSSB/Secretary (E&F) designate
9. Ms. Garima Bhatnagar, Joint Commissioner of Police (Traffic)
10. Shri Ishwar Singh, APCCF
11. Shri S. S. Gill, Special Secretary (UD)
12. Shri S. M. Ali, Special Secretary (E&F)
13. Dr. Anil Kumar, Director (E&F)
14. Shri B. L. Chawla, Senior Environment Engineer, DPCC
Experts on Stubble Burning
1. Shri Jaskarn Singh Mahal, Dean, Punjab Agricultural University
2. Ms. Seema Arora, Deputy Director General, Confederation of Indian Industry
3. Shri Kamal Sharma, Counsellor, Confederation of Indian Industry
2. At the outs et, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee along with the new
members nominated in the Committee for the year 2017-18 and informed them about the agenda of
the meeting. * * *    * * *            * * *.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change along with the Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi and flagged various issue
relating to the subject “Air Pollution in Delhi/NCR” and also sought to know their views thereon.
4. Additional Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, in the beginning, thanked
the Committee for the opportunity given. Thereafter, he made a power point presentation apprising the
Committee about the whole gamut of air pollution in the Delhi/NCR. It was submitted that National Capital
Region (NCR) is an inter-State planning and development region with NCT-Delhi as its core. It was brought
to the notice of the Committee that total 78 (locations) in Delhi NCR are being monitored which included 48
in Delhi, 6 in Haryana, 13 in Uttar Pradesh and 11 in Rajasthan. The Committee was informed that in
comparison to the year 2016, the pollution level in Delhi NCR has shown all overall improvement. Additional
Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change also briefed the Committee about the policy
framework put in place to address the issue of air pollution in the form of legislative framework as well as
policies interventions.
5. The Committee was informed that the two studies duly conducted by Central Pollution Control Board
in 2010 and IIT Kanpur in 2015 spelling out % contribution of PM
10 and PM 2.5. Apprising the Committee
about the action being undertaken by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to address
the issue of increasing air pollution in Delhi NCR, it was informed that CPCB has developed Graded Response
Action Plan (GRAP) in Delhi NCR. A Task Force has been constituted by CPCB for tracking/reviewing
situation and to advise Environment Pollution (Prevention and Control) Authority (EPCA). The Committee
was informed that BS-IV vehicle norms have been implemented from April, 2017 and BS- VI vehicle norms
are to be rolled out from 2020. For real-time surveillance, stringent industrial emission norms have been put
in place and for construction sector, guidelines on dust mitigation measures have been issued. It was
brought to the notice of the Committee that the Ministry has expanded and upgraded its network for monitoring

51
air pollution. The Additional Secretary, Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change also briefed the
Committee about the various regulatory actions taken by the CPCB to address the issue of air pollution.
Details regarding Air Quality Index were also shared with the Committee.
6. Dwelling upon the issue of stubble burning, the Committee was given to understand that out of total
production of paddy-straw of 47.79 million tonnes per year, 39.12 million tonne per year is reportedly burnt
in the fields itself which is 80% of the total paddy straw production. To address the issue, it was submitted
that two pronged strategy i.e. ploughing the residue back into the field and on farm management; and
extraction and usage for other purposes, are being worked upon by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change. The Committee was also briefed about the estimated cost of technological options available
to tackle the issue of stubble burning. Apart from the recommended Draft Action Plan for zero-burning of
crop residue, the strategic plan of implementation ranging from Block Level to National Level was also
shared with the Committee.
7. The experts on the stubble burning also shared their views on the issue. It was brought to the notice
of the Committee that Punjab produces about 20 million tonnes of rice straw out of which a meagre amount
is being utilised by the seven biomass-based power generation plants in Punjab. It was suggested that steps
needs to be taken to have uniformly scattered utilisation plants so as to consume the rice-straw. Technological
solutions such as use of Balers, Happy Seeder, mixing rice-straw in soil itself were brought to the notice of
the Committee along with the problems attached therewith.
8. Thereafter, Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi made his submission on the subject. It was
submitted that as per the study conducted by IIT Kanpur in 2015 the major sources of air pollution in Delhi
have been identified as vehicular pollution, road and soil dust, dust generated due to constructions and
demolition activities; burning of dry leaves/garbage etc.; trans-State movement of pollutants specially due to
burning of crop residue in the neighbouring States of Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh; and Industrial
sources/Thermal Power Stations. Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi submitted that ambient air
quality was very poor as per grading of Graded Response Action Plan till 7th November evening though
suddenly increase were observed in the evening of 7
th November which can be attributed to Wind movement
from Punjab and Haryana region as well as from Western U.P. region.
9. Briefing the Committee about the possible main reasons for high level of air pollution in Delhi NCR, it
was submitted that crop residue burning in neighbouring States of Punjab, Haryana and UP; non-favourable
meteorological conditions like calm wind, temperature inversion at lower height; vehicular pollution and dry
conditions helping re-suspension of particulate matter (PM) could be attributed as the main reasons. Apprising
the Committee about the effective steps taken by the Delhi Government, it was informed that Environment
Pollution (Prevention and Control) Authority (EPCA) in its meeting held on 17.10.2017 has decided that in
Delhi provisions of very poor and severe category of Graded Response Action Plan (GRAP) will be enforced
from 17th October, 2017 to 15th March, 2018 irrespective of Ambient Air Quality in NCT of Delhi. The
Committee was informed that a Committee has also been constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary,
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India for reviewing the air quality in
Delhi NCR during emergency situation. The Chief Secretary, Delhi Government also apprised the Committee
about the host of strategic steps being undertaken in the direction of burning of waste material/garbage in
open, dust control measure, prohibition on bursting of firecrackers, imposition of change on lights and
heavy duty commercial vehicles entering Delhi, greening of city, outreach programmes, etc. by the Government
of Delhi to address the issue of air pollution in Delhi NCR.

52
10. The Committee directed the Government of Delhi to send a detailed report on Air Ambience Fund and
its methodology to distribute it among the civic agencies of Delhi like MCDs, NDMC, Delhi Cantonment
Board to combat the menace of pollution. The Committee also directed to explain as to why the funds
remained unutilised.
11. The Committee directed that the details of the meetings of Task Force constituted under the aegis of
CPCB on the direction of NGT may be furnished at the earliest.
12. Vehicular problem was one of the few major factors in spoiling the quality of air. The Committee was
of the view that ongoing Highways/Roads/bridges/metro projects may be completed at the earliest so that
the level of pollution could be abated to some extent.
13. The representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of India
and Government of NCT of Delhi while presenting their views also responded to some of the queries raised
by the Chairman and Members of the Committee. They also promised to furnish written replies to some
other queries/points raised by the Chairman and the Members of the Committee, which could not be replied
during the meeting.
14. The witnesses then withdrew.
15. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
16. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 1.15 
P.M.

53
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 9 th January, 2018 in Room No. ‘G-074’, Ground
Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma    —    Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
6. Shri Sharad Pawar
7. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK  SABHA
8. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
9. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
10. Shri P. P . Chauhan
11. Dr. K. Gopal
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
14. Shri Nagendra Singh
15. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Shri C. K. Mishra, Secretary
2. Shri Arun Kumar Mehta, Additional Secretary
3. Shri S. P. Singh Parihar, Chairman, CPCB
4. Shri Ritesh Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Earth Sciences
1. Dr. K. J. Ramesh, DG , IMD, New Delhi
2. Prof. (Dr.) Gufran Beig, Scientist ‘G’, IITM, Pune
Representatives of Government of Delhi
1. Shri Anshu Prakash, Chief Secretary
2. Shri Naresh Kumar, Chairman, NDMC

54
3. Dr. Puneet Kumar Goel, Commissioner, South DMC
4. Shri Madup Vyas, Commissioner, North DMC
5. Shri Anil Kumar Singh, Secretary, (E&F)
6. Shri S. M. Ali, Special Secretary (E&F)
7. Shri K. K. Dahiya, Special Commissioner, Transport
8. Shri Ishwar Singh, APCCF
9. Dr. Anil Kumar, Director (Environment)
10. Dr. Dilraj Kaur, Additional Commissioner
11. Shri Dilip Ramnani, Director (DEMS)
Representatives of Government of Rajasthan
1. Shri Nihal Chand Goel, Chief Secretary
2. Shri R. K. Grover, Secretary, Environment
3. Shrimati Mugdha Sinha, Secretary, Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs
4. Shrimati Aparna Arora, Chairperson, Rajasthan State Pollution Control Board (RSPCB)
5. Shri K. C. A. Arun Prasad, Member Secretary, RSPCB
Representatives of Government of Haryana
1. Shri D. S. Dhesi, Chief Secretary
2. Shrimati Dheera Khandelwal, Additional Chief Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Kheterpal, Chairman, Pollution Control Board
Representatives of Government of Punjab
1. Dr. Roshan Sunkaria, Principal Secretary, Science Technology and Environment
Representatives of Government of Uttar Pradesh
1. Shrimati Renuka Kumar, Principal Secretary, Department of Forest and Environment
2. Shri Ashish Tiwari, Member Secretary, U.P. State Pollution Control Board
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the agenda of the
meeting. Thereafter, he welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
Chief Secretaries of the State Governments of Haryana, Delhi, Rajasthan and representatives of the State
Governments of Uttar Pradesh and Punjab and Director-General, IMD along with the other senior officers
to the meeting of the Committee.
3. Initiating the discussion on the subject “Air Pollution in Delhi/NCR”, the Chairman highlighted the
importance of clean air and observed that the problem of air pollution in Delhi/NCR region gets accentuated
with the onset of winter every year leaving the residents of Delhi and NCR gasping for fresh and clean air.
He further observed that the increasing air pollution is continuously damaging the lives of human beings
particularly the vulnerable once including old age people and infants. The Chairman, accordingly, sought to
know the views of the Ministry as well as the representatives of State Governments on the issues of policy
interventions made to mitigate the air pollution; level of coordination between the CPCB and the State
Pollution Control Boards; budgetary provisions made by the State Governments; compliance of the directives
of NGT and Supreme Court; steps taken to contain the problem of stubble burning in the States of Uttar
Pradesh, Punjab and Haryana. He also flagged various other relevant issues pertaining to the subject.

55
4. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, informed the Committee
that air quality in Delhi and surrounding areas as well as other cities had been a matter of concern. It was
submitted that in the last few months various steps bad been taken in this direction of mitigating the air
pollution. He apprised the Committee that there is now a coherent time of thinking between the Government
of India and all the State Governments in the matter. He informed the Committee that the year 2017 has been
better than the previous year and this year there has been an overall improvement in the air quality in the
NCR region. He further informed that the Central Government intended to increase the number of air quality
monitoring stations from 78 to about 150 across the NCR. Briefing the Committee about the apportionment
of factors causing air pollution in Delhi, he informed that IIT Kanpur had carried out a study in 2015
according to which it has been observed that in winters, 25% of air pollution is caused by vehicular emission,
30% by secondary particles, 26% by biomass burning and 8% by burning of solid waste while in summers,
15% of air pollution is caused by secondary particles, 12% by biomass burning, 26% by coal ash and fly
ash, and 27% by soils and dust.
5. Apprising the Committee about the preparedness of the Ministry to address the issue of air pollution,
the Secretary informed about the Graded Response Action Plan which had been duly approved by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court. He also informed the Committee that the Ministry has drafted a new air action plan.
The Committee was also informed about stopping certain activities such as brick-kilns, furnace oil, etc. by
the Ministry. Various other steps being taken by the Ministry to mitigate the air pollution in the Delhi/NCR
were also brought to the notice of the Committee. Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change also accepted that dust mitigation along with solid waste management in Delhi has been one of the
issues, the Government is concerned with. He hoped that completion of Eastern and Western Peripheral
Expressway by the end of March, 2018 would help reducing the air pollution to some extent. The Committee
was also informed that the Ministry is working on a major reform in the thermal power stations in the NCR.
The Chairman, CPCB also made a power point presentation briefing the Committee about the subject.
6. Thereafter, Chief Secretaries of the State Governments of Haryana, Delhi, Rajasthan and representatives
of the State Governments of Uttar Pradesh and Punjab and Director-General, IMD also briefed the Committee
about the various steps being taken to mitigate the problem of air pollution in Delhi/NCR by them. Action
taken on the directions of the NGT on the issue was also brought to the notice of the Committee by these
representatives.
7. Thereafter, the Chairman and Members of the Committee raised various issues/points/queries such as
efficacy of the Air Quality Monitoring Systems, monitoring mechanism, budgetary allocations, scientific
and technological solutions to address the problem, participation of the Municipalities, Zila Parishads and
Panchayats, linkage with scientific institutions, international collaboration with the other countries of the
world, efficacy of existing regulatory mechanism, etc. The Members also raised the issues relating to the
role of increasing population, urbanisation and industrialisation in increasing the air pollution levels and steps
required for solution to these problems, steps taken for conversion etc. of bio-products of sugarcane
industries in Uttar Pradesh, whether adequate number of Air Quality Monitoring Systems have been installed
in cities other than Delhi affected by the problem of air pollution etc. The Members also pointed out that
imposing fine on the farmers for stubble burning was not the right course. The Members also raised the
issue of checking industrial pollution and stressed the need for providing subsidy on Turbo Happy Seeder
machines and making the machines available to the farmers.
8. The Chairman then stated that the need of the hour was not only to find immediate measures but also

56
to find long-term solutions to the problem of air pollution. He also pointed out that severe dust storm over
Iraq and Middle East and its movement towards India, particularly the NCR region and the stubble burning
in the States of Punjab and Haryana were also the major factors for the rise in air pollution levels in Delhi in
November/December 2017. He further stated that at a time when the rate of growth of agriculture had
decreased and the paddy prices had crashed, solutions which do not further penalize the farmers of the
country, need to be looked into. He suggested that steps should be taken to encourage economic activity
rather than penalizing the farmers for burning the paddy waste. He also referred to the unveiling of Pratyush,
the fastest super-computer, which was located in Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), Pune
and was going to be dedicated to the weather and climate research and sought to know the coordination
between the India Meteorological Department (IMD) and IITM, Pune.
9. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the representatives of the
State Governments, while presenting their views also responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairman
and Members of the Committee. The Chairman also directed all the representatives to furnish the written
replies to some other queries/points/issues raised by the Chairman and the Members of the Committee,
which could not be replied during the meeting, within 10 days.
10. The witnesses then withdrew.
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
12. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 1:45 
P.M.

XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 3 rd July, 2018 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma    —    Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
5. Shri Sharad Pawar
6. Shri Anil Baluni
LOK  SABHA
7. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
8. Shri P. P . Chauhan
9. Kum. Sushmita Dev
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Shri Laxman Giluwa
12. Dr. K. Gopal
13. Shri Daddan Mishra
14. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
15. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
16. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
17. Shri Nagendra Singh
18. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
Representatives of Centre for Science and Environment
1. Ms. Sunita Narain, Director General
2. Ms. Anumita Roy Chowdhury, Executive Director
Representatives of National Creen Tribunal
1. Shri Mukesh Kumar Gupta, Registrar General
2. Shri S. S. Mishra, Deputy Registrar
57

58
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He drew
attention of the Members to a recent United Nation’s Report which stated that out of the 15 most polluted
cities in the word, 14 are in India. He informed the Members that the Committee was scheduled to hear the
representatives of Centre for Science and Environment and National Green Tribunal on the subject “Air
Pollution in Delhi/National Capital Region”. He also pointed out that NGT was doing important work and it
was a Statutory Body constituted through an Act of Parliament and Demands for Grants of NGT is being
scrutinised by the Committee. He further stated that there were a lot of critical environmental issues before
the country and proposed that the Committee should hear the views of the Chairman, NGT after the next
Chairman assumes office.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Centre for Science and Environment and
National Green Tribunal and brought out that the air quality of not only Delhi but the adjacent areas of the
NCR was also deteriorating. The air pollution in Delhi and NCR was not only continuously damaging the
lives of the citizens but also affecting the plants and the animals. He also highlighted the issue of felling a
large number of grown up trees on Mathura Road and various other Government colonies in Delhi which
had evoked a sharp reaction from the NGOs, civil society and local citizens. He also expressed the view that
such large scale felling of trees will further deteriorate the quality of air in Delhi which will lead to many
health problems. He asked the representatives of Centre for Science and Environment and National Green
Tribunal to apprise the Committee of the sources of air pollution and the short and long-term action plan and
policy interventions which were required to be taken to solve the problem of air pollution.
4. The representative of Centre for Science and Environment stated that air pollution is no longer restricted
to Delhi or NCR but had become a Pan-India problem. She informed that there was a direct relation between
weather and pollution and that during the recent smog, the pollution levels went up to the frightening level of
almost eleven times of the safe limit. Talking about the sources of pollution, she informed that vehicles,
specially trucks were the biggest source of pollution and diesel cars are a very big toxic source of pollution.
She also referred to the industrial sources of pollution and stated that although petcoke was banned in Delhi,
Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh, it was being used in rest of the country which was adding to the
pollution burden in the other cities of the country. She also pointed out that Delhi had set up a network of
extensive and robust air quality monitoring stations. However, such stations were yet to come up in Haryana,
Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan. She further stressed the need to have a robust and a very extensive network of
air quality monitoring stations. She also stressed upon the need to bring cleaner vehicles in advance of their
deadline i.e. 2020. She further stressed the need for running thermal power plants in Delhi region on gas
instead of coal and introducing a good public transport network to encourage people not to use cars for
commuting. She also highlighted that although the Government had come up with new standards for thermal
power plants in the year 2015, they were yet to be implemented.
5. The representative of National Green Tribunal pointed out that the sources of air pollution in Delhi are
rampant construction activities and transportation of construction material; absence of proper and scientific
disposal of municipal solid waste, vehicular pollution, dust on roads, industrial emissions etc. He informed
that NGT had taken the issue of air pollution from two perspectives, one is precautionary and the other is
polluters pay principle. He also referred to the problem of stubble burning and mentioned that the NGT had
in its judgement pointed out that there is absence of single action plan for handling the problem.
6. Thereafter, the Committee observed that earlier there was a green belt in the areas around Delhi.
However, the depletion of forest cover around Delhi was one of the main factors of air pollution in Delhi.

59
The Committee also pointed out the non-implementation of directives and decisions of the NGT in the
country. It was also brought out that often at the time of afforestation, trees of similar types as felled are not
planted. The Chairman also pointed out that when trees are felled, it takes a lot of time for the planted trees
to grow fully and the whole ecosystem gets affected. Members also raised some other queries relating to
vehicular pollution, pollution from cement and stone crushing industries, possibility of relocation of trees in
Delhi instead of felling them etc. The Committee also desired to know from the representatives of NGT as
to whether they were aware of any violation of the guidelines issued by them in the implementation of the
developmental projects in Delhi.
7. The representatives of Centre for Science and Environment and National Green Tribunal, while
presenting their views also responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the
Committee. The Chairman also directed them to furnish the written replies to some other queries/points/
issues raised by the Chairman and the Members of the Committee, which could not be replied during the
meeting, as well as the questionnaire to be forwarded by the Secretariat, at the earliest.
8. The witnesses then withdrew.
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
10. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 1:02 
P.M.

XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 2nd August, 2018 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma    —    Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
LOK  SABHA
5. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shri P. P . Chauhan
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Shri Laxman Giluwa
9. Shri Daddan Mishra
10. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
11. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
12. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
13. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
14. Shri Nagendra Singh
15. Dr. Raghu Sharma
16. Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them about the agenda of the
meeting. The Chairman also welcomed Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar, M.P., Lok Sabha on his nomination to the
Committee and expressed hope that the experience and expertise of Shri Jakhar would enrich Committee’s
insights.
3. The Committee then considered the draft 316
th Report on “Air Pollution in Delhi and National Capital
Region” and adopted the same with some modifications suggested by the members of the Committee. The
Committee also decided to present/lay the report to both Houses of Parliament on 7 th August, 2018. The
Committee also decided to nominate the Chairman and, in his absence, Shri Prasanna Acharya, M.P. (R.S.)
and in his absence, Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan, M.P. (R.S.) to present the report in Rajya Sabha and Shri
Vikram Usendi, M.P . (L.S.) and, in his absence, Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar, M.P. (L.S.) to lay the Report on
the Table of Lok Sabha.
60

61
4. The Chairman then congratulated the Committee Secretariat for its dedication and hard work in the
preparation of the draft 316 th Report as well as in organising the meetings and the study visits of the
Committee relating to the subject matter of the said Report alongwith other issues undertaken by the Committee.
The Chairman observed that the observations/recommendations of the Committee had been very clearly and
comprehensively brought out in the draft Report.
5. The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3:40 P.M.