PARLIAMENT OF INDIA. 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1996-97) 
FORTIETH REPORT 
ON 
"MID-TERM APPRAISAL" OF PROGRAMMES AND FUNCTIONING 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIO-TECHNOLOGY WITH SPECIAL 
EMPHASIS ON THE ROLE OF BIO-TECHNOLOGY IN 
AGRICULTURE AND ALLIED AREAS 
(Presented on 13th March , 1997) 
I 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
\larch. 1997/Pha lguna I~> 18 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
1. CoMPOSITION OF THE CoMMriTEE 
2. REPORT OF THE CoMMITTEE 
3. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMfiTEE 
PAGES 
(i) - {ii) 
1-5 
7-10 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITIEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1996-97) 
1. Shri V. Narayanasamy __ Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt 
4. Shri N. Giri Prasad 
5. Shri K.R. Jayadevappa 
6. Shri K. Karunakaran 
7. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
8. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty 
9. Shri Narendra Pradhan 
10. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar 
11. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
12. Shri G. Swaminathan 
13. Shri Prakanta Warisa 
*14. Vacant 
LOK SABHA 
15. Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma 
16. Shri Ranjib Biswal 
17. Shri A.B.A. Gani Khan Choudhury 
18. Prof. Jitendra Nath Das 
19. Shri Mohd. Ali Ashraaf Fatmi 
20. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi 
21. Shri K. C. Kondaiah 
22. Dr. Ramkrishan Kusmaria 
23. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
24. Shri Shivaji Mane 
25. Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta 
26. Shri Punnu Lal Mohle 
27. Shri Sharad Pawar 
28. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
29. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
30. Shri Kalpnath Rai 
31. Shri A. Raja 
32. Shrimati Vasundhara Raje 
33. Shri P.V. Rajendran 
34. Shri K.B. Raut 
35. Slui S. Ramachandra Reddy 
36. Shri Harivansh Sahai 
37. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
38. Shrimati Vijayaraje Scindia 
39. Kumari Selja 
4f). Capt. Satish Sharma 
' Prof. Saif-Ud-Din Soz was nominated w.e.f. 31st December, 1996 and ceased to be a member of the Committee on his 
appointmc:nt ;1s Ministc:r w.e.f. 20 February. 1997. 
I "' 

*41. 
42. 
43. 
44. 
**45. 
Shri Surender Singh 
Shri Soumya Ra~an Patnaik 
Sushri Uma Bharati 
Shri Srikanta Dutta Wadiyar 
Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shrl H. K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Comm ittee Officer 

REPORT 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the 
Committee, do hereby present on its behalf, this 40th Report of the Committee. This 
report deals with the programmes and functioning of the Department of Bio-technology 
with special emph asis on the role of Bio-technology in Agriculture and Allied areas on the 
basis of 'Mid- Term Appraisal' undertaken by the Committee. 
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on the 27th January, 1997, the Secretary and 
other officers of the Department of Bio-technology gave an overview of the various 
activities of the Department and the Committee sought clarifications on the various aspects 
of the functioning of the Department particularly about the activities relating to the fields 
of Crop Biotechnology , Biofertilizer, Biopesticides , Sericulture, Plant Tissue Culture, 
Acquaculture, Biosafet y, financial aspects, etc. 
3. The Committee wishes to express its appreciation to the officers of the Department 
of Biotechnology for their coo peration and making available the material requisitioned by 
the Committee on various aspects on programmes undertaken by the Department. 
4. The Committee conside red and adopted the draft report at its meeting held on the 
5th March, 1997. 
5. After the decipherment of the structure of DNA molecule by Watson and Crick in 
1953, major breakthroughs have taken place in the field of Mole cular Biology lead ing to a 
better understanding of origin of life and life processes. All the characteristics of the living 
organisms from single cell microbes and viruses to multicellul ar organisms e.g. pla nts , 
animals and hum an being are determined on the basis of information coded in the ir nucle ic 
acid, the basic genetic material which is mainly the template Deoxyn ibon ucleic Acid 
(DNA) assisted chiefly by anothe r nucleic acid e.g. Ribon ucleic Acid (RNA). It is now 
possible to isolate, splice and clone and even tra nsfer genes of interest from microbes, 
plants, animals and humans and get them expressed in any other organism or cell derived 
from them. Scientists have unfolded the secrets of genetic code, deciphered the mechanism 
of protein synthesis in living cells, identified and located spec ific genes and have learnt to 
establi sh the genetic reasons of many diseases like siekel cell anaemia, Beta Thalassemia or 
phenylketonuria etc . As a result, a large number of biotechnology industries have come 
up , specially in the pharmaceutical sector all over the world. It has been fully recognized 
that to have biotechnol ogy based industrial development , it would be esse ntial to bring 
together the disciplines of Medicine, Biology, Chemistry , Engineering and other areas. It 
was with a view to explo it the potential of biotechnology revolution and to derive 
econOinic benefits of the same in India , that the Department of Biotechnology was set- up 
in Februa ry, 1986. 
6. The Se<.:rctary. Department of Biotechnology in her presenta tion before the 
Committee. gave an overview of the thrust areas in wh~{ h the Department was engaged 
durin g the year 1996-97 particularly the applicat ion df Biotechnology in the field of 
agriculture and allied areas for the overall Socio-econom ic progress. The thrust of the 
Department had been in Research & Development in ident ified areas of modern biology 

and biotechnology; demonstration and technology transfer; human resource developoment; 
creation of infrastructural facilities; industrial biotechnology; support to autonomous 
research institutions; and international Collaborations. The Secretary informed the 
Committee that during the last ten years of its existence, a unique feature of the Department 
has been to involve the scientific community of the country through a number of technical 
task forces, advisory committees and as individual experts in identification, formulation, 
implementation and monitoring of various programmes and activities. The task forces in 16 
identified areas namely - crop biotechnology and plant molecular biology, plant tissue 
culture, basic research, medical biotechnology, medicinal and aromatic plants, microbial 
biotechnology, environment and biodiversity conservation, aquaculture and marine 
biotechnology, human genetics, food biotechnology, biological control of pests and diseases, 
biotechnology of silkworms and host plants, process engineering and bioinformatics have 
been the main strength of the scientific programmes. In addition, individual expert 
committees like steering committee on biofertilisers, immunological approaches to fertility 
control, neurosciences and immunodiagnostics development have also been guiding the 
programmes in these areas. Biotechnology based projects for SCIST and weaker sections 
have made significant impact on the target population. 
7. In order to realise the full potential of Biotechnology in the field of agriculture and 
allied areas, technology transfer and product generation have been supported in the areas 
relating to agriculture and allied fields covering: Crop Biotechnology and Plant Molecular 
Biology; Bio-fertilizers and Bio-control. Plantation Crops; Animal Biotechnology and 
Aquaculture; Seribiotechnology; Medicinal and Aromatic Plants and Food-Biotechnology. 
The Committee was informed that about 225 projects have been funded in these areas and 
55-60% funds were invested. The Department was working in dose collaboration with 
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (!CAR), Ministry of Agriculture. State Level 
Institutions, Agricultural Universities, NGOs and other R & D Academic institutions. Most 
of the projects were being implemented by the !CAR institutions. Joint monitoring 
mechanisms had been instituted. There was a DBT - !CAR Committee and small sub­
groups which met regularly for identification of joint programmes, their expeditious 
implementation and monitoring. It was stated that every effort was being made to avoid 
duplication. 
8. The Department, the Committee was informed , has tried to develop new plant 
varieties with novel traits by strengthening plant breeding programmes and initiating plant 
research and crop improvement packages at its 7 centres for plant molecular biology 
(CPMBs). Twenty R & D projects on four priority crops namely rice. wheat. chickpea and 
rape mustard have been launched by Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi; Madurai 
Kamraj University, Madurai; Tamil Nadu Agriculture University, Coimbatore; Bose 
Institute, Calcutta; Osmania University, Hyderabad; National Botanical Research Institute. 
Luck now and Delhi University, Delhi. Two multi-institutional projects: (i) the development 
of transgenic cotton varieties resistant to insect pests; and (ii) quality improvement in wheat 
have also been launched. The Secretary apprised the Committee of some salient 
achievements of these projects as under:-
A gene encoding for a protein of lysine and containing amino acid from Amaranthus 
has been cloned sequenced and transferred in to potato with the objective of 
improving the nutritional quality (JNU, New Delhi); 
Transgenic tobacco plants expressing Bt gene have been tested for insect susceptibility 
in. R2 and R3 generations. Also transgenic plants with CpTl gene in Ro population are 
under investigation; gene conferring insect resistance / tolerance have been transferred 

in to mustard chickpea and rice. Transgenic plants and the stable lines would be soon 
subjected to tests for insect resistance (National Botanical Research Institute , 
Lucknow and Bose Institute, Calcutta); 
Several somatic hybrids of Brassica using protoplast hybridization developed between 
B. Juncea and wild spp. for introgressing genes for CMS and disease resistance 
through cytogenetic manipulation. Hybrids were confirmed through molecular analysis. 
Plants resistant to Alternaria blight and white rust were selected among the progenies 
of somatic hybrids and backcrossed with B. Juncea and B. napus (Indian Agricultural 
Research Institute, New Delhi; Bose Institute, Calcutta); 
In mungbean, transformation has been successfully carried out through co-cultivation 
with Agrobacterium tumefaciens and putative transgenic plants raised in laboratory 
condition (Calcutta University); 
Blackgram has been successfully transformed with npt II (neomycin phostransferase II) 
marker gene (MKU, Madurai); and 
In cotton, a method for production of multiples standardized. The chemic al synthe sis 
of Cry lA (c) designed for high level expression and transformation work initiated. 
9. The Mission Mode project on "Technology Development and Demonstration of 
Biofertilizers - Blue Green Algae (including Azolla) and Rhizobium " and thirty R & D 
projects have been supported ; large scale production technologies have been developed and 
standardised for indoor and outdoor production of BGA. Alternate carrier materials like 
rice/wheat/maize straw/sugarcane waste/corn dust and rice husk have been successfully 
introduced. Polyalkene bioreactors have been used for scaling up of genetically pure 
cultures. Large scale production technologies have been developed and standardised for 
indoor and outdoor production of BGA. The improved new technologies include live algal 
cultures in polybags called "Flexibioreactors ". The carriers like pulverized straws of wheat , 
rice , maize and dried powder of sugarcane leaves, Mont Morillonite Clay were found to be 
potential carrier. Several algal biofertilizer parks have been established in the States of 
Mahaiashtra and Tamil Nadu. 
9.1 The Committee recommends that in order to ensure production and distribution of 
adequate quantities of quality based Bio-fertilizers efforts should be made to open atleast one 
centre during the year 1996-97 in each of the States/Union Territories . The Department 
should ensure the availability of mother culture of micro-organisms from research centres/ 
universities sponsoring for large scale commercial production of biofertilizers through 
appropriate public/co-operative and non-governmental agencies. It should also launch a 
nation-wise awareness programme for dissemination of basic information on biofertilizers 
intelligible to common population. 
10. The Department established a Biocontrol Network Programme in 1989 initially with 
10 R & D projects. Presently, the programme is stated to be running with about 60 R & D 
projects at various institutes/universities throughout the country. The biocontrol agents and 
biopesticides include microbial pesticides (baculoviruses), parasitoids , predators , antagonistic 
fungi and bacteria for use under Integrated Pest Management System (IPM). 
The Committee was informed that the efficacy of biocontrol agents have been 
demonstrated in farmers ' field at multilocations covering an area of 11,700 ha. throughout 
the country. Mass production technologies have been developed for NPV of Heliothis 
armigera, NPV of Spodopter4 litura , GV of Chilo infuscatellus , Trichogramma, Chrysopa, 
Trichoderma viridae and other species , Gliocladium virens and Pseudomonas fluorescens and 

their efficacy have been demonstrated in the fields of cotton, chickpea, tobacco, sugarcane, 
groundnut, sunflower, blackgram, greengram, pigeonpea and other pulses, sesame and 
cauliflower and other vegetables. A baculovirus based technology at Kerala Forest Research 
Institute, Trissur for the management of teak defoliator, a serious pest of teak plantation in 
India and a protocol of cheap mass production of NPV is being standardized. 
10.1 The Committee is of the view that popularisation of Bio-pesticides Technology is an 
important component of Integrated Pest Management System. The Committee recommends 
that mass awareness programmes should be undertaken in all the States of the country 
including setting up of demonstration units. The feedback from the farmers, who are the 
ultimate users be analysed and improved in light of the feedback. In order to achieve the 
above objective more production units should be set-up in coordination with or by other 
concerned Ministries in different States with the help of willing entrepreneurs. The 
Department should also take initiatives to identify biological control of crops having significant 
export potential. 
11. The Committee was apprised of some of the drought resistant varieties of certain 
crops including Sorghum and Bajra. It was stated that the Department has also initiated 
research in plantation crops including Pepper, Tea and Coffee. A successful project on Oil­
Palm demonstration in the State of Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra has been 
completed. 
11.1 The Committee feels that keeping in view the requirements of different Agro-climatic 
regions of the country efforts should· be made to involve more and more States in various 
projects. The Committee recommends that in order to expedite research for technology 
transfer in the areas of drought resistant varieties and cover more areas for Palm-Oil 
cultivation. The Committee notes that although the DBT had generated several result oriented 
technologies much was left to monitor the transfer of results of various researches after field 
testing to the user Ministries/Departments particularly that of agriculture. The Committee 
feels that there is need for minimising the time gap between the results of research and its 
application. . 
12. The Committee took note of the position regarding patenting in Biotechnology in the 
country. The DBT started promoting patenting of inventions from the middle of 1994 and has 
already filed 17 patent applications. 7 patent applications are under process. The Committee 
is of the view that the research institutes need to be encouraged to protect their inventions 
before the same are published. Perhaps many projects lose their importance before they are 
commercially exploited. There is therefore need to choose the research projects with abundant 
caution keeping in view their viability and importance in the specialised fields. 
12.1 The Committee feels that DBT should make sufficient financial provisions and 
strengthen in-house expertise to provide both financial and technical assistance to DBT funded 
investigations for securing inventions made by them in India and abroad. In order to catalyse 
large scale dissemination and commercialization of technologies, the scale up and 
demonstration need to be undertaken with the active involvement of industries and 
enterpreneurs along with research institutions and DBT. Some professional interface 
organisations like the Biotech Consortium India Ltd., (BCIL) and National Reseach 
Development Corporation (NRDC) · could also be brought in to the forefront to assist the 
process. 
12.2 Although the DBT has generated technologies and processes which can be utilised by 
the industry, the response of the latter to commercially exploit them had not been 
encouraging. The Committee feels that this could be attributed to a variety of factors 
including the weak linkages between the industry and research institutions. The Committee 

recommends that the DBT should carry out join~ development work tegether with the industry 
and the user institutes so that a closer liaison is established on the utility of the projects. 
13. During the last 10 years of its existence , the Department of Biotechnology has not 
set up many of its own research institutions. Instead it has made use of the existing 
infrastructure in the country; the national laboratories , state level research institutions and 
the universities. This has resulted in strengthening the expertise and capability and in 
capacity building in the field of biotechnology. Keeping in view the number of research 
publications and the work being done in the advance areas of molecular biology in 20 to 25 
reputed research institutions in the country there is need for the personnel with tremendous 
amount of experience in diverse fields. Even while considering support in terms of 
consu mable , research requirement etc. based on identified research programmes, the 
question of availability of trained manpower would continue to be a serious concern. 
13.1 The Committee is of the view that the Department should make every effort to have 
a dialogue with the host institutions as well as other scientific agencies, UGC and State 
Government Departments to take over technically trained personnel and creat more positions 
for their regularisation and absorption . In training the manpower, the country has made 
considerable investment in advance areas of research, development and application and losing 
this manpower would entail huge national loss. The Department should be consious of the fact 
that more often a potential Scientist goes abroad as a student and subsequently spends all or 
most of his/her working life abroad which is the crux of the problem of brain-drain. 
NEw DELHI; 
A1arch 5th, 1997 
V. NARAYANASAMY 
Chairman , 
Committee on Science & Technology, 
Environment and Forests 

MINUTES 

XXII 
TWENTY -SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday the 5th March, 1997 in Room No. 62, 
First Floor, Parliament House , New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri .V. Narayanasamy ·- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri N. Giri Prasad 
3. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
4. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty 
5. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma 
7. Prof. Jitendra Nath Das 
8. Smt. Maneka Gandhi 
9. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
10. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta 
11. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
12. Shri N. K. Premchandran 
13. Shri A. Raja 
14. Smt. Vasundhara Raje 
15. Shri Harivansh Sahai 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Under Secretary 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up consideration of following draft reports:-
(i) 40th report on the "Mid-Term Appraisal" of programmes and functioning of the 
Department of Biotechnology with special emphasis on the role of biotechnology in 
agriculture and allied areas; 
(ii) • 
(iii) :) 
• 
* * 
After some discussion the Committee adopted all the aforesaid three Report s with 
minor changes. 
Gel a t e ~ to other matter~ . 
' 

3. The Committee decided to present these Reports to both the Houses of Parliamen t 
on Thursday, the 13th March, 1997. The Committee , therefore, authorised its Chairman and 
in his absence , Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty to present the Report s t o the Rajya Sabh a and 
Justice Guman Mal Lodha and in his absence, Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramani k to lay the 
Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 P.M . 