 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
(DEMAND NO. 89) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on _____ March, 2020) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on _____ March, 2020) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on ______________, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on _____________, 2013) 
 
REPORT NO. 
353 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY THIRD REPORT 
 
       Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Forty Third Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, 
Forests and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants (2021-22) of the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on1st December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1stDecember, 2021) 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

 
 Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY THIRD REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Forty Third Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, 
Forests and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants (2021-22) of the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1stDecember, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1stDecember, 2021) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
  PAGES 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………… (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………… (ii) 
  3. ACRONYMS ……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
4. REPORT …………………………………………………………………... 1-11 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been  
                       accepted by the Government………………………………... 
 
2-7 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee     
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
replies……………………………………………………….. 
 
8 
 Chapter III.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted  by the     
Committee…………………………………………………… 
 
9 
 Chapter IV.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
                      Replies of the Government are still awaited………………… 
 
10-11 
 5. MINUTES …………………………………………………………………. 12-13 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
                              
 

 _____  
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh – Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2.    Shri Anil Baluni 
3.    Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
4.    Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5.   Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
6.    Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
7.    Shri Parimal Nathwani 
8.    Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
9.    Shri Nabam Rebia   
10. # Vacant 
 
   LOK SABHA 
 
11.    Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
12.    Shri Pradan Baruah 
13.    Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
14.    Shri Jashvantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
15.    Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16.    Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
17.    Shri S. Jagathrakshakan 
18.    Shri Mohammed Azam Khan 
19.    Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
20.    Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
21.    Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
22.    Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
23. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
24. Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
25. Shri Francisco Sardinha  
26. Shri Anurag Sharma 
27. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
28. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
29. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
30. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
31. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
 
         SECRETARIAT 
 
         Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
         Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
         Shri Rakesh Anand, Additional Director 
         Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director 
         Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
         Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
         Shri Ankit Chansoria, Assistant Committee Officer 
____________________________________________________________________                      
#Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha ceased to be the member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation 
from the Committee w.e.f. 11th October, 2021    
(i)

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committe e on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been authorised 
by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Three Hundred Fifty Third 
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  recommendations/obser vations 
contained in the Three Hundred Forty T hird Report  of the Committee  on  Demands for 
Grants (20 21-2022) of the Department of  Scientific and Industrial Research , which was 
presented/laid in both the Houses of Parliament on 8th March, 2021.  
 
2.   There were 1 6 recommendations/observations in the Three Hundred Forty Third 
Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of the 
Committee were received from the Department on 6th September, 2020.   
3.   In the meeting held on 30th November, 2021, the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 (JAIRAM RAMESH) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
30th November, 2021    Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
Agrahayana 09, 1943(Saka)                                   and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change,  
Rajya Sabha 
 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

 
 
ACRONYMS  
 
A2K+ Access to Knowledge  
BE Budget Estimate 
CEL Central Electronics Limited 
COVID Corona Virus Disease 
CRTDH Common Research and Technology Development Hubs  
CSIR - HRDG Council of Scientific and Industrial Research   
Human Research Development Centre 
CSIR- NCL Council of Scientific and Industrial Research  
National Chemical Laboratory  
CSIR-NAL Council of Scientific and Industrial Research – National 
Aerospace Laboratories 
DRDO-DMRL Defence Research and Development Organisation  
Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory  
DSIR Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
FY Financial Year 
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
IRD Industrial Research and Development  
IRD Innovation Research and Development 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MSME Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
NRDC National Research and Development Corporation  
PACE Patent acquisition and Collaborative   
PPE Personal Protective Equipment 
PRISM Promoting Innovations in Individuals  
PSE Public Sector Enterprises 
R&D Research and Development 
RE Revised Estimates 
SFC   Standing Finance Committee  
SME Small and Medium Enterprises 
UDAN Ude Desh ka Aam Naagrik 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Committee deals with action taken by the Government 
on recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Forty Third Report of the 
Committee on „Demands for Grants (202 1-22) of the „Department of Scientific and Industrial 
Research‟ which was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 8th March, 
2021.  
2. Action Taken Notes (ATN) have been received from the Department of Scientific and Industrial 
Research‟ ( DSIR) in respect of the  recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred 
Forty Third Report. This has been categorized as follows:-  
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos. 2.3, 2.7, 2.14, 4.3, 5.2, 6.3, 6.4, 6.6, 6.8, 6.10 and 7.3  
 Total recommendations – 11. Accepted 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Department has accepted its 
recommendations/observations as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report. 
Chapter II:    Recommendations/Observations which the Commi ttee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: Nil 
Chapter III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: Nil 
Chapter IV:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited: 
Para:- 2.9,  2.11, 2.13, 2.16 and 3.3 
Total recommendations –  5. To be pursued further 
The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and detailed 
Action Taken Notes in respec t of recommendations/observations made in all chapters 
of the Report. 
3. The details of the ATR have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters. 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020-21 AND ALLOCATION  
FOR 2021-22 
Recommendation/observation 
1.1 The Committee observes that the Department has been able to utilise over 90 percent of funds 
alllocated during R.E. 2020 -21 upto 31.01.2021. The Committee is satisfied with util isation of funds 
and hopes that the Department would be able to ensure its full utilisation by the end of financial year.                             
                                                                          (Para 2.3of the 343rd Report) 
Action Taken 
1.2 Details about the financial performance of the Department duri ng 2020-21 with details of B.E., 
R.E. and utilization of funds up to 31.03.2021 across its various schemes  is given in Annexure 1.  
Department has fully utilized the funds allocated during R.E. 2020-2021 for the F.Y. 2020-21. 
Recommendation/observation 
1.3 The Committee urges the Department to ensure full utilisation of funds allocated at R.E. 2020 -
21, especially under research and development initiatives under IRD, develops a robust  mechanism to 
achieve 100% coverage of timely disbursement of fellowships and finance projects undertaken by the 
two Public Sector Enterprises under the Department.  The Committee also recommends the 
Department to raise internal budgetary resources and try  to offset the reduction in budgetary 
allocation.                                                                           (Para 2.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.4 The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR)  notes the concern of the 
Committee regarding full utilization of funds allocated at R.E. 2020 -21. DSIR Umbrella Scheme 
1 – Industrial Research and Development ( IRD) (which includes Common Research and 
Technology Development Hubs ( CRTDH), Patent Acquisition and Collaborative  Research & 
Technology Development   (PACE), Promoting Innovations in Individuals , Startups & MSMEs  
(PRISM) & Access to Knowledge  for Technology Development and Dissipation  (A2K+), have  
utilized 99.992% of the funds allocated in RE 2020 -21. DSIR Umbrella Scheme 2 –[National 
Research and Development Corporation ( NRDC) & Central Electronics Limited (CEL)] have utilized 
100 % of the funds allocated in RE 2020 -2021. For timely disbursal of fellowships, an end-to-end 
software, "NewFMS, has been developed by Council of Scientific and Industrial Research -National 
Chemical Laboratory ( CSIR-NCL) and implemented in the Council of Scientific and Industrial    
Research - Human Research Development Centre ( CSIR-HRDG) with effect from 01.04.2021. 
 Improvements in the software to address user feedback, security audit observations and opportunities 
for enhanced productivity are being carried out on a continuous basis." 
1.5 National Research Development Corporation ( NRDC) has undertaken 10 projects under 
Techno-commercial support and 6 projects u nder Priority Development Areas (PDAs) for further 
development of technologies.  Besides , the NRDC had also undertaken value -addition of 50 
technologies developed at various R&D institutes .  
 
 

3 
 
Recommendation/observation 
1.5 The Committee also recommends that the Department should indicate and quantify the physical 
targets that the Department aspires to achieve against each of these key initiatives with this additional 
budgetary allocation of Rs.355.00 crore.                                              (Para 2.14 ibid)       
Action Taken 
1.6 Details of the budgetary allocations demanded and announced fo r the year 2021 -22 by DSIR is 
given in Annexure -2.  Physical targets for Rs. 355 C rore additional allocation for FY 2021 -22 are as 
given below for various programmes :- 
DSIR Umbrella Scheme 1(IRD) and 2 (Assistance to Public Sector Enterprises ( PSEs)]: De tails are 
given in Annexure -3. This is as per the Standing Finance Committee (SFC) approved in August, 2021. 
Therefore, the demand for additional budget does not arise. 
 Common Research and Technology Development Hubs ( CRTDH): To support 12 ongoing 
CRTDHs and creation of 2 new CRTDHs as approved in the SFC memo for 2021-22. 
 A2K+: To support ongoing projects & studies and to support 8 new studies/4 Events, 2 Satellite 
Centers and 6 new Technology Development & Utilisation Programme for Women ( TDUPW) 
projects under A2K+ schemes as approved in the SFC memo for 2021-22. 
 PACE:  Support to 2 new Technology Development and Demonstration (TDD) projects of 
industries alone or industries & institutions jointly. 
 PRISM:  Support to  15 new Innovative Projects,  20 ongoi ng projects, continuing support to 10 
existing outreach centres, support to 2 new workshops, exhibition. 
      CSIR: Details are given in Annexure -4.   
DSIR UMBRELLA SCHEMES 
UMBRLLA SCHEME 1 – INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT 
Recommendation/observation 
1.7 The Committee acknowledges the achievements of the Department of Scientific and Industrial 
Research under these sub -schemes in supporting independent innovators, promoting collaborative 
research between Industry and Research & Development (R&D)  organisations, and supporting 
industrial R&D through creation of common research. The Committee hopes that the sub -schemes 
would be extended at the earliest. On its part, the Department should also look for extra budgetary 
resources to fund the shortfall in budg etary allocation under the scheme.      (Para 4.3 ibid)           
Action Taken 
1.8 Department is thankful to the Committee for acknowledging the achievements of DSIR 
sub-schemes of the Umbrella Scheme-1 Industrial Research and Development (IR&D).  
1.20 Department would like to inform that based on the appraisal and approval of „IR &D‟ 
Scheme and „Assistance to PSEs‟ Scheme, it had been decided to make the schemes co -
terminous with 15 th Finance Commission ending on 31.03.2026 vide DSIR Order No. DSIR/IRD 
Cont./2019-20 dated 4 th August, 2021 and DSIR Order No. PSE-11/2/2020-PSE-DSIR dated 5 th 
August, 2021. 
 
 
 

4 
 
UMBRLLA SCHEME 2 – ASSISTANCE TO PSEs (National Research Development 
Corporation – NRDC and Central Electronics Limited –CEL) 
Recommendation/observation 
1.9 The Committee appreciates the role of NRDC in acting as a bridge between lab research and 
its translation into products by MSMEs. The Committee recommends that more aggressive steps be 
taken by the Department towards integration of entrepreneurs, SMEs and other private entities with 
the objective of translating R&D results into marketable products.                                  (Para 5.2 ibid)                                                   
Action Taken 
1.10 In order to further promote the translation o f R&D into marketable products, the NRDC 
has taken -up a new activity for providing support to the technology from “Proof of Concept 
(POC) stage ” to pre -commercialization and then upto commercialization stage. Besides , the 
Corporation would also organize se ctor specific Industry Interaction meets where the MSME‟s 
would be informed regarding the various technologies available in their area of operation . 
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR) 
Recommendation/observation 
1.11 The Committee recommen ds that the Department should also explore raising extra budgetary 
resources to finance the establishment expenditure.                                           (Para 6.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.12 CSIR is trying to enhance its budgetary resource s through (i) Approaching Industries for 
seeking Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funding; (ii) Increasing its technology transfer 
and their commercialization   
Recommendation/observation 
1.13 The Committee is of the considered view that the avenues for translatio n of technology and 
commercialisation of research need  to be further augmented.  The Committee recommends that CSIR 
should take into account the requirements of the industries and work towards bridging the gap between 
what is required by the industry and w hat the institutes provide.  For this purpose, the Department 
should impress upon all the CSIR laboratories to enlist 10 goals/objectives that each of these 
laboratories propose to pursue in the medium to long term plan. The CSIR laboratories should furthe r 
indicate the goals/objectives that will be pursued during the year 2021 -22 along with the steps that the 
Department plans to undertake to achieve these goals during the year. On its part, Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research should also devel op a mechanism to periodically monitor the 
progress of the goals/objectives of each of these laboratories.                                         (Para 6.4 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.14 CSIR will follow the recommendations of the Committee for enhancing extra budgetary 
resources through appropriate steps to increase its technology translation and fulfilling the needs of the 
industries. In order to bridge the gap between CSIR and industries, a Committee was constituted  to:                
(i) Deliberate on all aspects related to “Ease of doing Science and Technology Business” in CSIR ; and 
(ii) Evolve facilitative models and enabling mechanisms to enhance “Ease of doing Science and 
Technology Business” in CSIR. The Committee deliberated upon intricacies of doing sc ience and 
technology business in CSIR keeping focus on: (a) CSIR Industry partnership, (b) Mechanisms by 
which Technology Readiness Levels can be improved faster, (c) Enhancing and enabling support 
system for pursuing S&T activities, and (d) Connecting with the stakeholders seamlessly. 
1.15 The major recommendations of the Committee in terms of connecting with different 
stakeholders are: (i) Synergizing with industry; (i i) Enabling and Robust Financial Systems;                      

5 
 
(iii) Strengthening & Promoting Entrepreneurship; (iv) Technical Innovation Centers (TICs) for Faster 
Product Development and Innovation Parks for Connecting with Industry ; and (v) Boosting Innovation 
& Technology Development and Commercialization.  Moving with aforesaid recommenda tions, the 
goals /objectives to pursue in the medium and long term as envisaged are as follows:  
(a). Understanding the R&D road map of prominent industries (big players as well as 
MSMEs) & mapping & aligning them to specific CSIR labs. 
(b). Tuning CSIR labs to seek and engage with industry at the incipient stage of an industry 
R&D project. 
(c). Evolve methodology for sharing of resources such as capital, Human Resources, assets, 
materials, etc. along with risk sharing. 
(d). Tuning organizational behavior and associated cultural changes (long term). 
(e). Enticing and educating Industry Captains/ Chief Executive Officer s (CEOs) to fund 
R&D in CSIR Labs. 
(f). Handholding industry (including Micro Small and Medium Enterprises). 
(g). The approach to building a p rofitable CSIR Technology Business for spin offs (long 
term). 
(h). Setting Up Pilot plants & facilities for scaling up in collaboration with Industries.  
(i). Co-locating Industry R&D labs in CSIR labs. 
(j). To improve efficiencies, utilization of funds co ming from non -governmental 
stakeholders such as industry, private charitable and scientific organizations and 
multi-lateral funding agencies shall be determined either by negotiated terms of 
agreements or, where not adequately specified in an agreement, by  the concerned 
laboratory Director for institute contracts or by Director General, CSIR for 
headquarters contracts without the requirement of following the General Financial 
Rules. 
Recommendation/observation 
1.16 The Committee notes the contribution of the  CSIR laboratories/institutes under the Department 
and extends its heartfelt appreciation to the scientists, researchers, etc. working in the Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research for their invaluable effort and contribution towards strengthenin g 
the nation’s fight against COVID-19 pandemic.                                                                (Para 6.6 ibid)                                                  
Action Taken 
1.17 Department thankfully acknowledges the appreciation expressed by the Standing 
Committee towards the CSIR/DSIR efforts in fight against COVID -19 pandemic. Further to what 
has been achieved, CSIR is doing sequencing of corona genome at large scale to know about 
mutations happening in the country; post -vaccination immun e surveillance to assess the 
generation of antibodies including neutralizing antibodies; development of mRNA Vaccine 
Platform for vaccines and therapeutics; other vaccines for coronavirus based on new 
technologies; development of air purification system to  be installed in buses, metro rail, railways, 
auditoriums, hospitals and public places; development of air sampler to assess the presence of 
viable Corona Virus in air at public places and hospitals, clinical trials of new drugs etc. Robotic 
line of Feluda  has been developed by Tatas based on CSIR technology which can do 4000 
tests/day. These technologies will help the country in a big way in its fight against Corona Virus. 
 

6 
 
Recommendation/observation 
1.18 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Depart ment should give thrust to its promotion 
and outreach activities and showcase the technologies/products developed by it on more platforms so 
as to reach out to possible industrial clients, public servants, public representatives, etc. This would 
also definitely lessen our dependency on imports of such products.                                   (Para 6.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.19 Department would like to inform the Committee that following web portals have been 
launched for promotion of its technologies/produ cts and its outreach activities: 
(a). Showcasing technologies of CSIR are made available in a user-friendly technology 
portal namely https://techindiacsir.anusandhan.net which is updated periodically; 
(b). Aarogya Path: A portal has been developed as the National He althcare Supply Chain 
Management System to address COVID -19 and any future national pandemic. A CSIR 
National Healthcare Supply Chain Portal https://www.aarogyapath.in, that aims to provide 
real-time availability of critical healthcare supplies has been launched; 
(c). Kisan Sabha App has been developed by CSIR-CRRI to connect farmers to the supply chain 
and freight transportation management system. This portal acts as a one -stop solution for 
farmers, transporters, and other entities engaged in the Agriculture industry. More than 
75,000 downloads have been reported; 
(d). CSIR has developed a virtual platform - PRABHASS (Pravasi Bharatiya Academic and 
Scientific Sampark) Portal to connect with the global Indian S&T diaspora for jointly 
addressing societal challenges/ pr oblems. PRABHASS 1.0 ( www.prabhass.gov.in), 
developed by CSIR was launched jointly by Prof. K. VijayRaghavan, Principal Scientific 
Advisor and Dr V.K. Saraswat, Member NITI Aayog. 
 National Research and Development Corporation (NRDC) 
1.20 In order to showcase available technologies to the Industrial clients, the Corporation 
participates in various exhibitions, carries out Industry Interaction meets, uses electronic media 
like Twitter, Facebook, etc. to make the MSM Es aware of various technologies available, 
regularly upload s the technology details on its website, publishes the details of the technologies 
in its in -house magazine „Awishkar and Invention Intelligence ‟. The Corporation also advertises 
about the technologies in National Dailies and writes e-mails to the targeted Industry.  
Central Electronics Limited ( CEL) 
1.21 CEL has been continuously involved in development and commercialization of 
technological products through modes of in -house development, collabora tion and know -how 
transfer from national laboratories. The company has been actively involved in manufacturing of 
ceramic radomes for seeker missile applications through know -how transfer from Defence 
Research and Development Organisation - Defence Metallu rgical Research Laboratory ( DRDO-
DMRL) and reached out to defen ce organisations for supply. Products such as Laser Fencing 
System (know-how from DRDO -LASTEC) is being promoted for perimeter security and Drishti 
Transmissometer (know -how from CSIR -NAL) is b eing promoted for airport runway 
transmission measurement.  The company is also working on the development of body armours ; 
and is communicating with stakeholders to gain insights on various end use applications during 
development phase. 
Recommendation/observation 
1.22 The Committee appreciates this novel initiative taken by the Department to cultivate Asafoetida 
(Hing) in the country. The Committee hopes that the initiative will benefit the Indian consumer.                                                                            
                                                                                                           (Para 6.10 ibid) 

7 
 
 
Action Taken 
1.23 Department is very thankful to the appreciation expressed by the Committee.  
EXPLORING OPPORTUNITIES FOR REVENUE GENERATION 
Recommendation/observation 
1.24 The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department for revenue generation and 
recommends that the Department should further explore avenues to augment revenue generation 
through technology transfer, consultancy services, patents, etc. The Committee recommends that the 
Department should actively reach out to the private sector and disseminate information about the 
technologies/products/services given by the Department. On its part the Department should also set 
targets for the same and actively monitor the progress.                                                     (Para 7.3 ibid)                           
Action Taken 
1.25 CSIR in order to augment its resources has created a Tech nology Management 
Directorate- Industry Interface which will interact with Industries for getting revenues through 
CSR (Corporate Social Responsibility) funds, simplifying its technology transfer guidelines, 
making some of its patents free etc. The constit uent laboratories are organizing meets in virtual 
mode, advertising the products through web portals and social media.  

8 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE  
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY  THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE  GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation/observation 
4.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should make arrangements for 
internal reallocation of budgetary resources so that the projects relating to conversion of waste to 
wealth and recycling of plastics are not adversely impacted.                                             (Para 2.9 ibid)                                                      
Action Taken 
4.2 Department will follow the directions of the Committee.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.3 The Committee desires to know about the details of action taken by the Department with 
regard to internal reallocation of budgetary resources pertaining to ‘conversion to waste to 
wealth’ and ‘recycling of plastics’ related projects. 
Recommendation/observation 
4.4 Given the importance of the intended objectives of the initiatives under the two umbrella 
schemes, the Committee expresses its concerns on the impact of the difference in B.E. demanded by the 
Department for Financial Y ear 2021-22 and B.E. allocated, on the outcomes and physical targets of 
the two umbrella schemes. However, since the B.E. 2021 -22 of Rs.5224.27 crore of the Department is 
22 percent more than R.E. 2020 -21, the Committee hopes that the Department will be ab le to regain 
the momentum lost due to Corona Virus Disease (COVID -19) pandemic in the implementation of its 
schemes and new initiatives.                                                                                            (Para 2.11 ibid) 
Action Taken  
4.5 Department will follow the directions of the Committee.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.6 The Committee notes the reply 
Recommendation/observation 
4.7 The Committee recognises the need of an additional allocation of atleast ₹355 crore to the 
Department, in addition to the allocation made in B.E. 2021 -22. The Committee underlines the 
importance of timely completion of the projects and, therefore, strongly recommends that the 
Department should explore internal budgetary reallocations to ensure ava ilability of funds for the 
projects. The Committee also recommends that, if required,  the Department should seek additional 
funds from the Ministry of Finance at the supplementary/R.E. stage so that the Department is able to 
sustain its key programmes; es pecially initiatives relating to research and development of new drugs, 
vaccines and medical equipments, Civil Aircraft -SARAS and increasing the number of fellowships.            
                                                                                    (Para 2.13 ibid)                                    
Action Taken 
4.8 As per recommendations of the Committee, Department will seek additional funds  from 
the Ministry of Finance at the supplementary/R.E. stage to sustain its key programmes   
 
 

11 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.9 The Committee reiterates its recommendation in para 2.13 and would like to be apprised 
about the progress made in this regard. 
Recommendation/observation 
4.10 The Committee is constrained to note that details of the activiti es planned to be undertaken by 
the Department with the increased allocation for creation of Capital assets was not available in the 
documents furnished by the Department, and the break -up of budgetary allocations for Revenue and 
Capital Expenditure, as well as funds allotted for Establishment Expenditure under various Budgetary 
Heads has not been made available.  The Committee recommends that the Department should 
invariably furnish the above information to the Committee to facilitate analysis of Demands for Grants.             
                                                                                                                      (Para 2.16 ibid) 
Action Taken 
4.11 Department will follow the directions of the Committee.   
   Required details are as given below: 
   DSIR Umbrella Scheme 1(IRD) & 2 (Assistance to PSEs): Details given in Annexure -3. 
   CSIR: Details given in Annexure -4. 
   NRDC-Total budget allocation under the Promotional Schemes is allocated for revenue     
   expenditure and no allocation has been done for Capital Expenditure  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.12 The Committee notes the reply 
DEVELOPMENT OF CIVILIAN AIRCRAFT-'SARAS' BY CSIR-NAL 
Recommendation/observation 
4.13 The Committee reiterates that SARAS is a crucial pr oject in promoting connectivity to small 
airports and underserved regions along with a variety of military uses. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends that the Department should look for internal budgetary reallocations to ensure 
availability of funds for the project and if need be, seek additional allocations at the R.E. stage, so that 
the Department is able to sustain the National Mission on Development and Certification of 19 - Seat 
Light Transport Aircraft –‘SARAS’ and ensure its timely completio n.                (Para 3.3 ibid)            
Action Taken 
4.14 As per directions of the Committee, Department will seek additional funds  from the 
Ministry of Finance at the supplementary/R.E. stage to sustain the SARAS project. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.15 The Committee reiterates its recommendation in para 3.3 and would like to be apprised 
about the progress made in this regard. 
 
 

12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________________________ 

13 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 30th November, 2021 in Room No. 63, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
              MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.   Shri Jairam Ramesh -- Chairman 
              RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3.  Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
4.  Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
5.  Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
6.  Shri Nabam Rebia 
             LOK SABHA 
7.  Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
8.  Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
9.  Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
10.  Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
11.  Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
12.  Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
13. Shri Anurag Sharma 
14.  Shri Ram Shiromani 
             SECRETARIAT 
             Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
             Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
             Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
             Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
             Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee.  The 
Committee decided to take up the consideration and adoption of the draft 348 th, 349th, 350th, 351st, 
352nd, 353 rd, 354 th, 355 th, 356 th and 357 th  reports of the Committee on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 316 th Report on 'Air Pollution 
in Delhi and National Capital Region'; the 324 th  Report on „Status o f Forests in India; the 325 th  
Report on „An Expanded Role for the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) in Cancer Treatment 
in India through An Enlarged Network of the Tata Memorial Centre (TMC)‟; and 351 st to 357 th 
Reports on the Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; 
Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial Research; Science & Technology; Space; Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, respectively.  The Committee, then, considered the 
draft 348th to 357th reports and adopted the same. 
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 1 st December, 2021.  The Committee also authorised the Chairman to decide the 
names of the Members for presentation/laying of the reports in both the Houses of Parliament.  
4. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10.25 a.m. 
 