PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(1995-96)

TWENTY SIXTH REPORT
ON

THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY FOR THE YEAR 1993-94

(Society related programmes of Department of Science & Technology, Science &

Technology policy and institutional mechanisms relating thereto, Technology Informa-

tion, Forecasting & Assessment Council (TIFAC), Technology Development Fund; and
Seismicity)

(Presented on May 24, 1995)

RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

May, 1995/Jyaistha 1917 (Saka)


9 एक ७9 ९७ '+

CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ......... ५०५०-०० ०० ० »०>_तञ-्तत लत ह न +
ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE REPORT

INTRODUCTION
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE

MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE ..

PAGES
(tii)
(iii)

(iv)
1—10
13—14
17—24


COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(1995-96)

1. Syed Sibtey Razi—Chairman
RAJYA SABHA

2. Dr. M. Aram

3. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi

4. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
5. Shri K. Rahman Khan
6. Prof. M.G.K. Menon

7. Shri Suresh Pachouri

8. Shri N. Giri Prasad

9. Shri Satchidananda

10. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
11. Dr. Ranbir Singh

12. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav

LOK SABHA

13. Shri E. Ahmed

14. Shri P.C. Chacko

15. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
16. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
17. Shri Sharad Dighe

18. Shrimati Saroj Dubey

19. Shri Oscar Fernandes

Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
Shri P. Kumarasamy
Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
Shri Harpal Panwar

Shri Balraj Pasi

Shri Bhim Singh Patel
Shri Chandresh Patel

Shri Vijay Naval Patil
Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
Shri Rama Chandra Rath
Shri M.G. Reddy

Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh

RESSRSSRBSRREBRES


(iv)

36. Shri Harchand Singh

37. Shri Ram Prasad Singh

38. Shri K.G. Shivappa

39, Shri Bapusaheb Thite

40. Kumari Sushila Tiriya

41. Kumari Frida Topno

42. Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer


ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE REPORT

BJGVJ — Bharat Jan Gyan Vigyan Jatha

CCST — Cabinet Committee on Science and Technology
CDRI — Central Drug Research Institute

CIMAP — Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants
CLRI — Central Leather Research Institute

CSIR — Council of Scientific and Industrial Research

DRDO — Defence Research and Development Organisation
DST — Department of Science and Technology

EDCs — Entrepreneurship Development Cells

EDPs — Entrepreneurship Development Programmes

GATT — General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade

GIS — Geographic Information System

ICAR — Indian Council of Agricultural Research

ICICI — Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India
IDA — International Development Agency

IDBI — Industrial Development Bank of India

IFCI — Industrial Finance Corporations of India

IMD — India Meteorological Department

IPR — Intellectual Property Rights

MPLAD — Members of Parliament Local Area Development Scheme
NAL — National Aerospace Laboratory

NATMO — _ National Atlas & Thematic Mapping Organisation
NBRI — National Botanical Research Institute

NCL — National Chemical Laboratory

NRDMS — Natural Resources Data Management Systems
NSTEDB — _ National Science & Technology Entrepreneurship Development Board
SOI — Survey of India

STEDS — S&T Entrepreneurship Development Schemes

STEPs — Science & Technology Entrepreneurs’ Parks

TIFAC — Technology Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council.


INTRODUCTION

I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Twenty Sixth Report of the
Committee. This Report examines the Annual Report (1993-94) of the Department of
Science and Technology with particular reference to society related programmes, science and
technology policy and institutional mechanisms relating thereto, Technology Information
Forecasting and Assessment Council, Technology Development Fund and seismicity.

2. The Committee held in all three meetings on January 23, 24 and May 23, 1995. In
the meeting held on January 23, 1995, the Secretary, Department of Science and Technology
gave a brief presentation about the activities of the Department, particularly in the
aforementioned areas which were selected by the Committee for examination. The Members
also made certain queries with regard to the programmes supported by the Department of
Science and Technology in the above areas. In the meeting held on January 24, 1995 further
discussion took place on the Annual Report of the Department of Science and Technology.
The Secretary and the representatives of the Department of Science and Technology
furnished answers to the questions raised by the Members on the previous day.

3. The Committee thanks the officials of Science and Technology for giving the
Committee the relevant papers/background note which facilitated the Committee to
undertake an indepth examination of the Annual Report (1993-94) of the Department of
Science and Technology.

4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on May 23,
1995.

New Delhi; SYED SIBTEY RAZI
May 23, 1995. Chairman,
Committee on Science and Technology,

Environment and Forests.


REPORT

The Department of Science and Technology (DST) has nodal responsibilities for overall
science and technology policy;.other science departments deal with these aspects with
specific reference to the areas which: fall within their mandate. DST is also engaged in
promoting new areas of science and technology, in coordinating multi-institutional, inter-
disciplinary programmes, in support for a large number of aided institutions, in overseeing
major national survey and science programmes conducted by IMD, SOI and NATMO, in
promoting relevant science and society programmes and running TIFAC. In examining the
Annual Report which covers all these aspects, the Committee decided to particularly assess
the society-related programmes of DST, its work on science and technology policy and
institutional mechanisms concerning it, working of the Technology Information Forecasting
and Assessment Council (TIFAC), Technology Development Fund and seismicity.
Society related programmes

2. The society related activities of the Department cover: Science and Society
Programme; Integrated Waste Management Project; Science and Technology Communica-
tion; Entrepreneurship Development; and Natural Resources Data Management System
(NRDMS). The Secretary of the Department gave details of these society related
programmes. He informed the Committee that the society related programmes of DST are,
in fact, catalytic in nature (since DST is not equipped nor has the resources to run large
operational programmes to cover all of society); they are taken up when they involve
important S&T elements. The.projects that are taken up by DST are locale-specific; and
some of the programmes of the Department have become quite successful. In this context,
the Secretary, DST referred to the encouraging response from the Ministry of Rural
Development and the Department of Animal Husbandry. The Ministry of Rural Develop-
ment has decided to support 25 institutions based on the model developed by DST in the
area relating to carcass utilisation and utilisation of its byproducts. The Department of
Animal Husbandry has also accepted the model of DST and had decided to set up 25 units
during the year 1993-94 in the same field.

3. The Committee was informed that the Science and Society Programme of the
Department aims at demonstrating the application of science and technology in improving
the quality of life of the common man, creating productive jobs and generating income. The
Department implements the S&T based developmental projects by networking voluntary
organisations, S&T institutions, resource persons, Ministries and Departments, local par-
ticipatory groups and financial institutions. Projects under the Science and Society Prog-
ramme are formulated keeping in view the needs of the community. Efforts are made to
optimally utilise the local resources, knowledge and skills, along with technical support from
identified’ S&T institutions. The ultimate goal is to develop local S&T talent and managerial
capability.

4. The Secretary informed the Committee about the sericulture programme of DST. In
this programme DST has emphasised the training of women. So far 21 projects have been
implemented in 13 States and 1 Union Territory; and ten thousand women ‘have been
trained all along the various stages, from mulberry plantation to weaving. These sericulture
projects are in the non-traditional States which do not normally have activities in this area.
The Committee was given an account of the various innovative technologies which were
introduced to carry out sericulture in the non-traditional States. For example, hormone


treatment of silk worm has been tried to increase silk yield. The Regional Research
Laboratory, Jammu is working on this programme. The other techniques used are:
introduction of evaporative cooling chamber for increasing the shelf life of plucked mulberry
leaves; inter-cropping of mulberry plants with horticultural and other crops; introduction of
shrub varieties of mulberry considered suitable for a particular type of soil; and development
of silk filature. This is to illustrate that there is an element of technology innovation in this
programme. The representative of the Department stated that scientists from various
concerned institutions wére associated with these projects such as the Karnataka State
Sericulture Development Institute, Bangalore and the Central Sericulture Research and
Training Institute, Mysore. Some of the scientists are also associated with the Central Silk
Board.

4.1 The Committee expresses its satisfaction that DST is making efforts to take
sericulture to States where it is not traditionally practised and women have been provided the
latest S&T inputs and training in mulberry cultivation, silk worm rearing and cocoon
production as well as in reeling and weaving at village level. The Committee would like to
recommend that the knowledge based on innovative technologies, generated to carry out
sericulture in the non-traditional States may also be shared with the traditional States as these
techniques could help them in improving their yields.

5. The Committee was told that the Plant Based Health System Programme of DST
aims at upgrading the folk practices and local health traditions through data collection,
validation, cultivation of medicinal plants and training in preservation, processing and quality
control. As regards assessment of the programme, the Committee was informed that DST
organises meetings with the programme implementing groups. Experts drawn from the
Central Drug Research Institute, (CDRI), National Botanical Research Institute, Lucknow
(NBRI), Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow (CIMAP) and
medical practitioners, both from Ayurvedic and Allopathic streams are involved in the
process of assessment.

5.1 The Committee considers the Plant Based Health Systems are of great importance to
the country because doctors ‘and modern medicines are not available to vast number of our
population and at least some home remedy can be made available to the population which is
based on locally available plants. More than this, there is great scientific validity in this
approach which underpins various indigenous systems of medicine. The Committee, however,
feels that this programme should be a national one. After all ICMR is the nodal science
agency in this area. There are majof councils on indigenous systems of medicine under the
Ministry of Health. CSIR through CDRI, CIMAP and various regional laboratories has major
on-going scientific work in this area. The Department of Biotechnology is also engaged on
aspects falling under their mandate. What is needed are not scattered. sub-critical and
marginal efforts but a well coordinated and adequately funded national programme.

6. Though the Committee was given an idea about the low cost agricultural equipment
that have been developed for the use of marginal farmers, the Committee feels that the
Department would do well to examine this within the overall context of developing
technologies needed by the small and marginal farmers and agricultural labourers in
coordination with ICAR and CSIR. The Committee would like the possibilities explored for
development of efficient techniques which can be used by small farmers for crushing of
sugarcane.


6.1 The Committee is happy that a bination of coir and polymers can reduce cost of
ploughs and suggests that there are other fibres, which are available in plenty, which may be
tried to make low cost equipment for farmers. The Committee noted in this regard the efforts
made by the Regional Research Laboratory, Bhopal which is working on sisal fibre and has
programmes on composites based on sisal fibre, as well as research on natural fibres both in
terms of categorisation of fibres and use of the products.

7. The Programmes under ‘Special Component Plan for Scheduled Castes and Tribal
sub-plan’ have been initiated recently during the Eighth Plan. The Committee wanted to
know whether there was any linkage between DST and the State Governments with regard
to the programmes for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, and whether proper
follow up was being undertaken by the concerned extension agencies of the target
population covered under these programmes. The Committee was informed that DST
involves State level agencies and also State S&T Councils for implementing these
programmes. Some of the voluntary organisations in the States have been able to effectively
involve the respective extension agencies for follow up of target population.

8. As regards popularisation of science, the Committee was informed about the role
being played by the National Council for Science and Technology Communication. The
Secretary particularly referred to the use of electronic media and print media for the
popularisation of science. In this regard he mentioned about the T.V. serial ‘Kyon Aur
Kaise’. He drew the attention of the Committee to a science page in newspapers. The page
is designed by DST and given to newspapers. Fourteen Hindi and eight English newspapers
have so far agreed to print science page. The Secretary also mentioned about the National
Children’s Science Congress which was held last year with good success and was organised
this year also. One difference between the National Children’s Science Congress organised
last year and that of this year was that last year there were individual projects, but this year
groups of children had come up with projects. The children who do well at the district and
State level come to the Centre and approximately 300 projects have thus been chosen.

8.1 As regards communication techniques to popularise science and indigenous technology
in the country, and to developing scientific temper among masses the Committee appreciates
the work done by the Department through Bharat Jan Gyan Vigyan Jatha (BJGVJ) and
through electronic media and print media. The Committee also appreciates the initiative taken
by the Department in organising the National Children’s Science Congress. The Committee,
however, feels that DST should have a constant focus on reaching out to rural people and to
the more disadvantages sections of society. Whilst the Committee is aware that the
Department cannot on its own cover all the States, it can play a catalytic role in popularising
science and technology and creating scientific temper by mobilising all available and capable
State level institutions. S&T interventions need to be made in areas which can bring about a
major change in the earning capacity of the people, create new opportunities for them and
develop their abilities. Awareness concerning these possibilities should be propagated.

9. The Committee was informed that the National Science and Technology Entrep-
reneurship Development Board (NSTEDB) set up in 1982, has been promoting entrep-
reneurship amongst persons equipped with scientific and technical qualifications which will
lead to employment generation based on innovative methods, techniques and equipment,
and using locally available resources. Entrepreneurship awareness camps are organised for
students of pre-final and final year science and technology streams. Entrepreneurship
Development Programmes (EDPs) are organised in different parts of the country by expert
institutions to create a new generation of entrepreneurs who would use innovative S&T
approaches to generate new opportunities for production and employment. Faculty Develop-
ment Programmes (FDPs) for Entrepreneurship Development are also sponsored, for
training teachers to undertake entrepreneurship development activities in the academic


institutions on a continuing basis. Entrepreneurship Development Cells (EDCs) have been
established in engineering colleges. S&T Entrepreneurship Development Scheme (STEDS)
aims at identifying and documenting location specific entrepreneurial opportunities, primarily
for effective utilisation of local resources, in backward districts, and training S&T persons in
relevant enterprises. STEDS are operational in 13 backward districts. On a specific question
whether any review of the scheme had been made by the Department, the Committee was
informed that an Expert Advisory Committee reviews and monitors the progress made under
this scheme on a regular basis. Review and monitoring is carried out jointly with the
concerned State Government. Employment generation based on Science and Technology
envisages creation of sustainable jobs involving S&T interventions, by organising scientifi-
cally designed skill development training programmes. DST has supported the setting up of
S&T Entrepreneurs Parks (STEPs) 10 provide the missing link between university research
and industry which can also be training grounds for young S&T entrepreneurs. STEPs are
promoted jointly by DST, Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI), Industrial Finance
Corporation of India (IFCI), Industrial Credit and Investment Corporation of India (ICICI),
State Governments, Commercial Banks and industries. 12 STEPs have been established so
far in different parts of the country.* As regards the future programme for setting up more
STEPs in the country, the Committee was informed that the financial institutions have
decided to watch the performance of the existing STEPs before considering any new request
for funding. DST is ready to consider any bankable project for establishment of STEPs
provided the State Government, host institutions and other agencies show interest in the
project and can mobilise financial support for such ventures.

9.1 The Committee appreciates the concept of STEPs which is to bring together qualified
S&T personnel and needed finances so that they can make use of available local resources
most effectively and generate employment; and to provide entrepreneurship development to
enable them. It recommends that wide publicity be given to the concept so as to enlist the
support of State Governments and financial institutions in setting up STEPs particularly in
States where STEPs do not exist at present. The Department may also think of using a part of
the Technology Fund, (which was based originally on an R&D Cess and allocated to IDBI)
and which will soon be operated under the auspices of DST. For this the concept of venture
capital should be enlarged to include ventures by young entrepreneurs under the STEP
schemes.

9.2 The Committee is of the view that the entrepreneurship development programme is
an important programme. What is particularly needed in the country today is entrepreneur-
ship particularly among the younger group who can set up highly productive small and
medium enterprises. If the country has to develop, those with S&T and engineering
capabilities should be able to stand on their own feet rather than look only for Government
service. This programme has been in existence for over a decade, and needs to be given
higher priority than it has been. The Committee, therefore, recommends that DST should
vigorously implement the entrepreneurship awareness and development programmes.

9.3 The Committee also recommends that employment generation programmes and
entrepreneurship development schemes should be linked with the Natural Resources Data
Management System (NRDMS) which is concerned with the resource database. In order to
add value to the locally available resources a link needs to be established between the
resources available and their utilisation through entrepreneurship using S&T interventions.

“For details, see Annexure I.


10. According to the Secretary, DST, Natural Resources Data Management System
(NRDMS) integrates various types of information through a Geographical Information
System (GIS) package. In total 11 States have been covered under NRDMS. These States
are Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Manipur, Mizoram, Orissa,
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. The Department has decided to cover all the
districts in Karnataka in a phased manner under NRDMS, and this experiment is going to be
fully documented. According to the representative of the Department, what is stored in the
database not only relates to natural resources but also the different parameters relating to
demography, socio-economic data of the district, agro-economy, infrastructure facilities
available, the administrative boundaries, etc. These databases have been made use of for
various applications relating to natural resources management, and also for other infrastruc-
tural development. The Committee was informed that R&D studies have been undertaken in
other States like Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh, Sikkim, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
Goa and Kerala to develop scientific methodologies for tackling area specific problems.
User-interaction workshops and training programmes are organised under NRDMS to create
awareness and train potential users on the utility of the NRDMS database in resource
management. A manual for decentralised planning is also being prepared.

10.1 The Committee notes the fact that after the Constitution (Seventy Third)
Amendment Act and the Constitution (Seventy Fourth) Amendment Act, the importance of
micro-level planning, local area planning, village planning, block planning, and district
planning has acquired new dimensions. Under NRDMS there are at present 22 GIS Centres
operating to provide geographic information. The Committee would like the Department to
continue and enlarge the process of integrating data from various sources like remote sensing
and other local sources, in order to prepare a comprehensive database which should give an
idea about natural resources, human resource, geographical area characteristics, etc. Such an
integrated database would greatly facilitate micro-level planning. This integrated data can also
prove very useful to Members of Parliament to take up projects under the Members of
Parliament Local Area Development Scheme (MPLAD). If a systematic and scientific database
is made available, Members of Parliament can indicate their priorities within a properly
structured framework.

10.2 The Committee recommends that the Department may also think of setting up more
GIS Centres to cover all the States in the country. The Committee further recommends that
orientation workshops be organised to involve Panchayat leaders, State Legislators and
Members of Parliament in the actual utilisation of scientific data in micro-planning and local
area development.

11. Under the society-related programmes, DST has a programme on Integrated Waste
Management. This programme aims at development and demonstration of indigenous
technology upto pilot stage for converting municipal waste into fuel pellets. The Committee
was informed that DST has set up a Garbage Processing Plant at Deonar (Bombay) where
municipal trucks dump garbage regularly. The DST plant came into operation in February
1993 and has a capacity of producing fuel pellets at the rate of 1.5 tonnes/hour in each of
the two streams. Some private firms also reported to have shown interest in this technology.

11.1 The Committee is aware of the fact that the Integrated Waste Management Project
is an effort to bring technology to bear on this important problem of urban areas. The
Committee feels, however, that the efforts of DST can at best relate to technology
demonstration. What is involved in urban waste disposal is a large management and economic
problem. Waste has to be collected and brought to disposal centres. It has to be sorted into
various categories of which that which can be made into fuel pellets is only one part.
Pellitisation is a known process and what is called for is adoptation to locale-specific material
characteristics. The Ministry of Urban Development and State Governments/Local Municipal


Authorities are the ones most involved in the issues. There is therefore need for an integrated
effort in the direction of waste management. There are several organisations/agencies in the
country concerned with the technology in these areas. It is important for DST to combine its
efforts with them and get into coupling arrangement with them for beneficial results. A single-
handed effort by DST alone is unlikely to solve this important emerging problem. The
Committee does not see any such coordinated approach so far in this programme. The
Committee notes this programme is an on-going one for the last five years.

11.2 The Committee was told that the Integrated Waste Management Project was taken
to the Empowered Committee of Secretaries and it had reviewed the Project. The
Empowered Committee had agreed that the Plant could now be handed over to an
entrepreneur. A Committee has also been set up to decide about the terms and conditions of
transfer, and also to whom the Plant would be transferred. It is currently working on these
aspects and no decision has yet been taken.

11.3 The Committee is of the view that in ali these efforts to treat wastes and process
urban garbage, DST should very closely involve the Ministry of Urban Development in its
efforts, because finally it is that Ministry which has assigned responsibility in this area.

12. The Committee was informed that DST organises workshops ‘periodically to
publicise the facilities made available by it to voluntary organisations, and also to sensitise
them to undertake society-related programmes*. In order to mobilise voluntary organisations
to understand the concept of S&T application for rural development, periodic sensitisation
workshops are organised at various locations in different States in which local voluntary
organisations, Government Departments, local technical institutions, etc. participate.

12.1 The Committee is of the view that whilst a number of projects are run by DST
under the Science and Society Programme, at present only a few organisations/institutions
receive long term programme based support from DST. The Department should provide not
only wide publicity to its society-related programmes and enlist support of voluntary groups
and organisations in States but also provide them with core and programme support as
appropriate. DST should also focus its programmes better, such as in the area of
entrepreneurship development, S & T communication (including awareness, creation of
scientific temper and science popularisation) targetted programmes aimed at weaker sections/
handicapped/SC & ST populations/women/rural employment, etc. rather than embark on
ad-hoc individual projects.

Science and Technology Policy and the Institutional Mechanisms relating thereto

13. The Committee was told that the Scientific Policy Resolution of 1958 and the
Technology Policy Statement of 1983 are the main policy instruments which govern the
science and technology scene in the country. The Government declared a New Economic
Policy and New Industrial Policy in 1991; it has made major adjustments in its trade and
economic policies. The Department embarked on an exercise in 1992 for drafting a new
Technology Policy. The first draft of a possible policy statement was prepared taking into
account the recent developments. The draft was widely circulated and discussed at various
fora and the Department had received more than 1,000 inputs which are now to be

*For details, see Annexure II.



correlated and incorporated into the new policy statement. The Secretary, DST informed the
Committee that the Cabinet Committee on Science and Technology (CCST) has been
constituted. There also exists the Empowered Committee of Secretaries. The Science
Advisory Council has not yet been constituted.

13.1 With regard to science and technology policy, the Committee is of the view that
overall the Scientific Policy Resolution of 1958 and Technology Policy Statement of 1983 are
valid even today in terms of their stress on the importance and role of S & T in our national
life and the need to have national self-reliance. DST has the responsibility (in association with
other science departments/agencies) to clearly formulate what the New Technology Policy
should be, taking note of the changes brought about by the New Industrial and Economic
Policies.

13.2 The Committee took note of the exercise initiated by DST in 1992 for drafting a new
Technology Policy. The Committee expresses deep concern that even after the elapse of almost
4 years'since the New Economic and Industrial Policies were formulated and announced there
is no corresponding New Technology Policy to provide guidance in this area. This does not
appear to be an area to which priority has been attached. There is clearly a need to have a
harmonised approach te economic, industrial and technology policies. The Committee would
urge the Department to have this looked into on an urgent basis.

13.3 As regards institutional mechanisms for science and technology policy, the
Committee noted that CCST has been constituted and there also exists the Empowered
Committee of Secretaries. With regard to a pointed query from the Committee whether (and
how often) CCST has met and whether it has taken any pulicy decision in the area of S&T, a
reply is still awaited from the Department. The Science Advisory Council has not yet been
constituted. Such advisory mechanisms have existed on a continuing basis since mid-fifties
from the days of Jawaharlal Nehru; but no such body has functioned since 1989. In the
absence of any such body one cannot expect inputs for a CCST to consider and reach
decisions on. Experience clearly shows that a bureaucratic approach to science and technology
hampers its progress and is to be avoided.

Technology Information Forecasting and Assessment Council

14. A decision to set up a Technology Information, Forecasting and Assessment Council
(TIFAC) was taken in 1987. It was set up in 1988 as a registered society under DST. The
Secretary informed the Committee that the TIFAC Council has been reconstituted, and it
has now a new Chairman. The composition of TIFAC has also undergone a change. There
are 13 industrialists. 12 eminent scientists drawn from various fields including scademia, and
representatives of 3 financial institutions—ICICI, IDBI and IFCI on the reconstituted
TIFAC Council, TIFAC has conducted Technology Forecasting (TF)/Technology Assess-
ment (TA) and Techno Market Surveys (TMS); and more than 100 reports have been
brought out by way of information generation. According to the Secretary, these reports are
now being accessed in increasing measure, and the earning from the sale of these reports is
increasing. Currently these reports are fetching about Rs. 1.5 lakh per month.

14.1 The total outlay on TIFAC since it was set up has been Rs. 22.5 crores till. 1994-95.
The Committee would like to know on what activities such a large amount has been spent and
the returns from it.

14.2 TIFAC has a small Secretariat. It has established formal links with several
institutions like the National Aerospace Laboratory (NAL), National Chemical Laboratory
(NCL), Central Leather Research Institute (CLRI)—all of CSIR, Research Centre Immarat,
Hyderabad, of DRDO Centre for Liquid Crystal Research, Bangalore supported by Bharat
Electronics Ltd. and DST. TIFAC has also’signed Memoranda of Understanding (MOU)
with CII and with the Department of Electronics. As a major followup of the various


Technology Assessment and Technology Forecasting studies already conducted by TIFAC,
the TIFAC Council has selected a few areas for long term assessment and forecasting.
Accordingly, Task Forces have been constituted to look ahead in a 20 year time frame, to
delineate desirable directions for development and to identify specific technologies of
importance. One of the Task Forces deals with Future Technology Forecast for India for
2020; this has 11 panels which deal with engineering industries, electronics and communica-
tion, materials and their processing, agriculture, strategic industries, services, health care,
life sciences and bio-technology, infrastructure, chemical process industries and driving
forces and impediments. The Secretary told the Committee that Technology Forecast is a
very difficult area. Follow up of the forecast is still more complex and difficult. It would be
difficult for the Department to work on these aspects without the support of the major
industries. The Committee was told that TIFAC assists DST in working closely with 21
socio-economic Ministries and their S&T Advisory Committees for pursuing key technology
areas and targeted end uses. The Secretary also made a mention of the programme relating
to Home Grown Technologies (HGT), because in the wake of liberalisation a lot of concern
has been expressed about the growth of indigenous technology. In this area, there are at
present 9 projects. The HGT programme is overviewed by a high level group chaired by
DG, CSIR; and it is also reviewed by the TIFAC Council. As regards support to HGT by
DST, the Committee was informed that part financial support is provided to industry/
institution for upscaling the indigenous technologies for commercialisation. The support is
provided on a returnable basis. Sufficient time is allowed for upgradation of technology.
Appropriate monitoring mechanism has also been instituted for each project. An agreement/
MOU is also signed among the agencies involved. TIFAC facilitates the bringing together of
R&D institutions, entrepreneurs and industries for exchange of technological knowledge and
expertise. As regards transfer of technology from R&D laboratories to the industry, the
Chairman of TIFAC informed the Committee that the matter was discussed with industrial-
ists and R&D laboratories, and it was agreed that the industrialists would take a lead in
taking forward some of the technologies from the laboratories. According to the arrange-
ment the industrialists should take up some technologies which they feel have potential, and
would fund 50 per cent of the cost on commercialising it. The Government or TIFAC would
fund the remaining 50 per cent. Answering a specific question on the Task Force on
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR), the Committee was informed that TIFAC had brought
out a Practical Guide for Patent’ Protection which was well received by institutions and
industries. In addition, Chairman, TIFAC had convened a meeting to sensitize scientists on
the issues relating to patent protection. The Task Force on IPR constituted by TIFAC is
functioning under the chairmanship of the Director, National Chemical Laboratory, Pune.
The Chairman of this Task Force has brought out a paper titled ‘Indian S&T in the wake of
GATT: The concerns, challenges and opportunities.’ This paper has been presented to elicit
the views of experts. After analysing the inputs received, the Task Force would come out
with specific suggestions.

14.3 The Committee notes that the TIFAC Council has been reconstituted; it has got a
new Chairman and industries and financial institutions are also represented on it. The
Committee, however, would like to state that the Department of Science and Technology
should study the corresponding systems which exist in other countries like the Office of
Technology Assessment in the United States and the Technology Foresight Programme which
exists in the United Kingdom and also the MITI mechanism in Japan. Each of these has
specific end objectives defined by their mandate and their programmes are directed to these.
TIFAC must guard against carrying out ad-hoc activities. It is also not meant, in terms of the
original decision to set it up, to perform project functions. It is meant to set up a system
which enables information relating to technology, whether within the country or from outside;
to be accessed and provide assessments concerning these, as also engaged in technology


forecasting which would enable the nation to capitalise on its strengths, correct weakness and
not be caught unawares. Though TIFAC has existed for seven years, there is no indication of
any thought out strategies in these respects. This should be its first priority.

Technology Development Fund

15. At present the Cess collected as per the Research and Development Cess Act, 1986
is credited to the Consolidated Fund of India, and the Central Government, on appropria-
tion by Parliament, makes payment to IDBI for being utilised for the purpose of Venture
Capital Fund. In its Sixth Report this Committee had desired that the Government may
examine the feasibility of implementing the suggestion of allowing DST to have access to
these funds. In his budget speech, while presenting the budget for 1994-95, the Finance
Minister proposed to credit 5 per cent cess on payment of royalty for imported technologies,
which is presently collected under the Research and Development Cess Act, 1986, into a
new Fund for Technology Development and Application. This Fund will be places at the
disposal of the Department of Science and Technology to help the development of
indigenous technologies and to take them to the stage of commercial application. During the
inauguration of the Indian Science Congress at Calcutta in January, 1995, the Prime Minister
had announced the creation of the Fund.

15.1 The Committee was informed that the Department can operate this Fund only
when the R&D Cess Act, 1986 is amended. The Department has taken all necessary steps to
bring Bills, both for amendment of R&D Cess Act and for the operation of the Fund by
DST, before the Parliament.

15.2 The Committee is happy that the Prime Minister has announced in January, 1995
the creation of the Fund for Technology Development and Application, following the proposal
made by the Finance Minister in February, 1994 in his speech presenting the 1994-95 Budget.
The Committee suggests that the necessary Bills for amending the R&D Cess Act, 1986 and
allowing DST to operate the Fund be enacted at the earliest possible.

15.3 The Committee hopes that Department of Science and Technology would have all
institutional mechanisms to operate the Fund for Technology Development and Application
ready by the time these enactments are made so that no further time is lost. These
mechanisms would have to look into market aspects (domestic and export), IPR aspects,
ensure strong coordination between industry and R&D institutions and be supported by inputs
from TIFAC which would have to gear itself for this purpose. This fund should look into the
possibility of integrating indigenous technology with outputs as appropriate from abroad so as
to give India world leadership in some areas.

15.4 Secretary, DST informed the Committee that the area of indigenous technology will
receive a boost with the advent of the Technology Development Fund. The Committee would,
however, like the Department to prepare a comprehensive paper on the overall support that is
required to be given for the promotion of science and technology, namely, the percentage of
GNP which should be allocated to this sector and the exterit to which industry should
contribute now and increase its effort over time, the manner in which priority setting should
be carried out, etc. This kind of an exercise is the responsibility of DST because it has been
assigned nodal responsibilities which it should exercise in close consultation / coordination
with all other relevant organisations / institutions. The Committee would like to see such a
paper prepared by DST at an early date.

Seismicity

16. The Committee was informed that the National Seismological Network consists at
present of 37 observatories in different parts of the country. India Meteorological
Department (IMD) is taking steps to upgrade the existing network by replacing the old


analog type instruments with new modem digital equipment. Addition of new observatories
is also under consideration. Secretary, DST told the Committee that during the last one year
the Department has tried its best to improve the network both by way of allocating
resources from within its own budget as well as by seeking World Bank support. For
example, the Department sanctioned a project of Rs. 3.5 crores very quickly for the
Maharashtra area, as well as for other specific projects and studies. The World Bank assisted
project for seismological instrumentation and related geographical studies in the peninsular
shield area is likely to be launched during 1994-95. The World Bank has indicated that the
International Development Agency (IDA) would provide credit of US $ 7.5 millions for
procuring the required equipment and associated facilities. An International Advisory
Committee has been constituted to oversee the activities. As regards the reaction of
Government to the recommendations of the Committee constituted by Government for
restructuring the seismological set-up for more effective seismic monitoring, research and
development and earthquake mitigation measures, this Committee was told that the
recommendation of that Committee, relating to the restructuring of seismological set-up, are
under active implementation. The existing seismic stations are being upgraded; new stations
are being installed; and in addition, clusters and strong motion arrays are being deployed.
The time-frame for upgrading the existing statiorls in the peninsular shield area is about
three years. Some new locations have been identified, and the sites will be surveyed for
suitability of the characteristics of the sensors to be deployed.

16.1 The Committee expresses its satisfaction that the Department is expanding its field
network relating to seismic monitoring with the addition of new stations and upgradation of
existing areas. But it would like the Department to use modern data analysis techniques to
extract more pertinent information from the existing analog records. The Committee is of the
view that substantial information exists in the available records than is made use of. This calls
for the application of powerful new techniques relating to signal extraction.

16.2 The Committee hopes that the Department would keep under constant review its
strategies for identifying aeas which are seismically active and ensure that appropriate zoning
and earthquake mitigation measures are implemented. The clearly highly active seismic zones
of the Himalayan belt and north-east require special attention; and the Department should
prepare special programme for these areas. This should not be downgraded in priority
because of the peninsular shield problems.

SYED SIBTEY RAZI

Chairman,

New Delhi; Committee on Science and Technology,
May 23, 1995 Environment and Forests.


ANNEXURE


ANNEXURE-I

State-wise details of STEPs

State No. of STEPs Location

Tamil Nadu 1 Regional Engineering College,
Tiruchirapalli

Uttar Pradesh 2 University of Roorkee
Hercourt Butler Technological
Institute, Kanpur

Punjab 1 Guru Nanak Engineering college,
Ludhiana

Karnataka 2 SJ College of Engineering, Mysore.
Karnataka Regional Engineering College, Surathkal.

Bihar 1 Birla. Institute of Technology,

. Mesra (Ranchi).

M.P. 1 Maulana Azad College of Technology, Bhopal.
West Bengal 1 Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
EP. 1 Himachal Pradesh University, Shimla.
Maharashtra z Jawaharlal Nehru Entrepreneurs

Chemical Park, Bombay.

University of Poona, Pune.

Tora. 12



ANNEXURE-II

Statewise details of the organisations being provided long term programme based support

@
(ii)

ii)

Madhya Pradesh
Uttar Pradesh

Kerala

Tamil Nadu

Karnataka
Andhra Pradesh

Maharashtra
Bihar
Gujarat

Rajasthan
Delhi

—Madhya Pradesh Vigyan Sabha, Bhopal

Eklavya Foundation, Bhopal
Himalayan Environmental Studies and Conservation Organ-
isation, Chamoli

Integrated Rural Technology Centre, Palghat
Centre of S&T Application for Rural Development, Trichur
Peermade Development Society, Peermade

Gandhigram Trust, Gandhigram
Murugappa Chettiar Research Centre, Madras

Karnataka Rajya Viana Parishat, Bangalore

Peoples’ Research Organisation for Grass Root Environment
Scientific Service, Secunderabad.

Centre for Application of S&T for Rural Development, Pune
Vigyan Ashram, Pabal

Centre of Science for Villages, Wardha

Society for Rural Industrialisation, Ranchi

Sardar Patel Renewable Energy Research Centre, Vallabh
Vidyanagar

Social Work & Research Centre, Tilonia

Centre for Technology & Development
Development Alternatives


MINUTES



MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS

XXV
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING

The Committee met from 10.50 a.m. to 1.05 p.m. and again from 2.15 p.m. to 4.20
p-m. on Monday, the 23rd January, 1995 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi — Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

Dr. M. Aram

Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi

Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
Shri K. Rahman Khan
Prof. M.G.K. Menon
Shri Suresh Pachouri
Shri N. Giri Prasad

. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
. Dr. Ranbir Singh

Seeravayn

बट

LOK SABHA

11. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
12. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
13. Shri Sharad Dighe

14. Shri Oscar Fernandes

15. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
16. Shri Harpal Panwar

17. Shri Balraj Pasi

18. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
_19. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
20. Shri Harchand Singh

21. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
22. Shri K.G. Shivappa-

23. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

24. Kumari Sushila Tiriya

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary

Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter


Representatives of the Department of Ocean Development and some of the Scientific
Organisations/Laboratories

Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary

Shri J.V.R. Prasada Rao, Joint Secretary

Shri S.W. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor

Dr. S.A.H. Abidi, Director

Shri Bhimsen Rao, Director

Shri H.P. Rajan, Director

Shri B.N. Krishnamurthy, Director

Shri S.K. Das, Director

Shri B.R. Subramanian, Principal Scientific Officer

Dr. V.S. Rao Chintala, Principal Scientific Officer

Prof. B.L. Deekshatulu, Director, National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad

Dr. M.D. Zingde, Scientist In-charge, Regional Centre of NIO, Bombay

Shri P.K. Sen, Senior Manager (R&D), Engineers India Ltd., Gurgaon

Dr. V.P. Kamboj, Director, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow

Dr. D.K. Biswas, Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi

Prof. M. Ravindran, Executive Director, National Institute of Ocean Technology, IT

Campus, Madras

Dr. S.C. Das, Scientist, Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubaneshwar

Prof. P. Ramachandra Rao, Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur

Dr. B.M. Reddy, Scientist Emeritus, National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi

Dr. G.K. Patnaik, Scientist, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow

Dr. S. Nayak, Scientist, SAC, Ahmedabad

Dr. Chari R., Scientist, NRSA, Hyderabad

Smt. Suchitra Goswami, Deputy Secretary

Shri Prabh Das, Deputy Secretary

Shri B.K. Mukhopadhyay, Under Secretary

Representatives of the Departmént of Science and Technology

Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary 5
Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam, SA to PM & Secretary DRO
Shri Y.S. Rajan, Advisor

Dr. U. Trivedi, Advisor

Dr. A.P. Kulshreshtha, Advisor

Dr. A. Chakrabarty, Advisor

Shri S. Ghose, Joint Secretary

Shri S.B. Krishnan, JS & FA

Dr. R.K. Midha, Joint Advisor

Shri V. Rao Aiyagari, Joint Advisor

Dr. Laxman Prasad, Joint Advisor

Dr. (Mrs.) Kamla Kumar, Joint Advisor
Dr. N. Sen Roy, DG, IMD


Dr. V.P. Kamble, Additional DG, IMD
Dr. S.K. Mishra, Director, NCMRWF
Dr. Harsh Gupta, Director, NGRI

Dr. J.J. Bhagat, Consultant

2. In the forenoon session, the Committee took up consideration of the Annual Report
(1993-94) of the Department of Ocean Development with reference to the following
topics:—

(i) Marine Satellite Information Service (MARSIS);

(ii) Pollution Monitoring Programme—Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction Sys-

tem (COMAPS); and

(iii) National Programme for Identification of Marine Bioactive Substances for use as

Drugs.

The Secretary of the Department gave an overview of the programmes and initiatives
being pursued by the Department in these areas and the Members sought clarifications from
him on various points arising therefrom.

3. In the afternoon session, the Committee took up consideration of the following
subjects on the basis of the Annual Report (1993-94) of the Department of Science and
Technology:—

(i) Society related programmes of Department of Science & Technology;

(ii) Science & Technology policy and Institutional mechanism relating thereto;

(iii) Technology Information, Forecasting & Assessment Council (TIFAC);

(iv) Technology Development Fund; and

(v) Seismicity.

The Secretary of the Department, assisted by other officials, briefly explained for the
benefit of the Members the activities of the Department in these areas and the Members
sought clarifications from him.

4. The discussion on the Annual Reports (1993-94) of the Departments of Ocean
Development and Science and Technology remained inconclusive.

5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.

6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.20 p.m. to meet again at 10.15 a.m. on Tuesday,
the 24th January, 1995.


XXVI
के TWENTY SIXTH MEETING

The Committee met from 10.15 a.m. to 1.26 p.m. on Tuesday, the 24th January, 1995

in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT

1.

Syed Sibtey Razi —— Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

9० :3 9 (७ # (०

Dr. M. Aram

. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
. Shri K. Rahman Khan

Prof. M.G.K. Menon

. Shri Suresh Pachouri

Shri N. Giri Prasad

. Dr. Ranbir Singh

LOK SABHA

10.

. Shri E. Ahamed

Shri Jitendra Nath Das

. Shri Oscar Fernandes

. Shri P. Kumarasamy

. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
. Shri Balraj Pasi

. Shri Vijay Naval Patil

. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma

. Shri Harchand Singh

. Shri Ram Prasad Singh |

. Shri K.G. Shivappa

. Shri Bapusaheb Thite

SECRETARIAT

Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri

Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary

N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary

Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter

Representatives of the Department of Ocean Development and some of the Scientific
Organisations/Laboratories

DE;

Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri
Shri

P. Rama Rao, Secretary

J.V.R. Prasad Rao, Joint Secretary

5.9. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Bhimsen Rao, Director

H.P. Rajan, Director

B.N. Krishnamurthy, Director


Shri S.K. Das, Director

Shri B.R. Subramanian, Principal Scientific Officer

Dr. V.S. Rao Chintala, Principal Scientific Officer

Smt. Suchitra Goswami, Deputy Secretary

Shri Prabh Das, Deputy Secretary

Dr. M.D. Zingde, Scientist In-charge, Regional Centre of NIO, Bombay.

Dr. V.P. Kamboj, Director, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow.

Prof. M. Ravindran, Executive Director, National Institute of Ocean Technology, IIT
Campus, Madras.

Prof. P. Ramachandra Rao, Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur.
Dr. E. Desa, Director, National Institute of Oceanography, Dona Paula, Goa.

Dr. B.M. Reddy, Scientist Emeritus, National Physical Laboratory, New Delhi.

Dr. G.K. Patnaik, Scientist, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow.

Dr. Chari R., Scientist, NRSA, Hyderabad.

Dr. S. Nayak, Scientist, SAC, Ahmedabad.

Representatives of the Department of Science and Technology

Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary

Shri Y.S. Rajan, Advisor

Dr. U. Trivedi, Advisor

Dr. A.P. Kulshreshtha, Advisor

Dr. A.K. Chakrabarty, Advisor

Shri S. Ghose, Joint Secretary

Dr. N.K. Sehgal, Joint Advisor

Dr. R.K. Midha, Joint Advisor

Shri V. Rao Aiyagari, Joint Advisor
Dr. Laxman Prasad, Joint Advisor

Dr. (Mrs.) Kamla Kumar, Joint Advisor
Dr. N. Sen Roy, DG, IMD

Dr. V.P. Kamble, Additional DG, IMD
Dr. P.K.B. Menon, Director हु

Dr. Harsh K. Gupta, Director, NGRI, Hyderabad

2. The Committee took up further consideration of the following subjects_on the basis of
the Annual Reports (1993-94) of the Departments of Ocean Development and Science and
Technology, respectively:—

(1) Marine Satellite Information Service (MARSIS);

(2) Pollution Monitoring Programme—Coastal Department
Ocean Monitoring of Ocean
and Prediction System (COMAPS); Development

(3) National Programme for Identification of Marine
Bioactive Substances for use as Drugs.

(4) Society related programmes of the
Department of Science and Technology
(5) Science & Technology policy and Institutional Department of
mechanism relating thereto; Science and
Technology


(6) Technology Information, Forecasting & Department of
Assessment Council (TIFAC); Science and
Technology

(7) Technology Development Fund; &

(8) Seismicity.

The Secretary, Departments of Ocean Development and Science and Technology
assisted by other officials, supplemented some of the points earlier made before the
Committee on these subjects in its meeting(s) held on January 23, 1995 and replied to the
clarifications sought by the members.

3. The discussion on the Annual Reports (1993-94) of the Departments of Ocean
Development and Science and Technology was concluded.

4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The committee then adjourned at 1.26 p.m.


XI
ELEVENTH MEETING

The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 23rd May, 1995 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.

PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi —— Chairman

RAJYA SABHA

. Dr. M. Aram

. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
Prof. M.G.K. Menon
Shri Suresh Pachouri

. Shri Satchidananda

Dr. Ranbir Singh

79 एमी ७

LOK SABHA

8. Shri P.C. Chacko

9. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
10. Shri Sharad Dighe

11. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
12. Shri Harchand Singh

13. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
14. Kumari Frida Topno

SECRETARIAT

Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer

2. The Committee took up for consideration its draft Twenty-sixth Report on the
Annual Report (1993-94) of the Department of Science & Technology with reference to the
society-related programmes being pursued by the Department, Science & Technology Policy
and institutional mechanisms relating thereto, Technology Information Forecasting and
Assessment Council (TIFAC), Technology Development Fund and Seismicity and after some
discussion, adopted the same with minor amendments.

3. The Committee decided to present this Report to beth the Houses of Parliament on
the 24th May, 1995. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri
Satchidananda to present this Report to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Sharad Dighe and in his
absence Shri Shankarrao D. Kale to lay the Report on the Table of Lok Sabha.

23


4. The Committee decided to undertake on the spot study visits in a phased manner to
different; Institutes/laboratories/bodies/centres, etc. within the administrative control of the
Ministries/Departments coming within the purview of the Committee to acquaint itself with
their working and authorised its Chairman to constitute group(s) comprising 10 members
each for its visit(s). The Committee also authorised its Chairman to obtain necessary
permission of the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for these study visits.

The Committee then adjourned at 10.35 a.m.