153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-THIRD REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS
 CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED FORTY-SIXTH  REPORT OF THE
 DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
 ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON THE
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-2006)OF THE
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 20TH MARCH, 2006)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 20TH MARCH, 2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2006/ PHALGUNA, 1927 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
1.     COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                         
 2.    INTRODUCTION
 3.    REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                      
4.    MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS                                                                                                                                    
                                                       
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2006)
----------
           
Shri P.G. Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Dr.Prabha Thakur
Shri Dilip Singh Judev
Shri Nand Kishore Yadav
Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
Smt. Kum Kum Rai
Shri Birabhadra Singh
    #
8.               Vacant
    *9.                Vacant
   §10.  Vacant
  LOK  SABHA
Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad            

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
Shri Pankaj Choudhary
Shri Mohan S. Delkar  
Shri Francis Fanthome 
Shri Anantrao Gudhe
Shri Babubhai K. Katara
Shri A. Venkatesh Naik           
Shri Brahmananda Panda
Smt. Neeta Pateriya
Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil        
Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
Shri Rakesh Singh
Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                              
Dr. Ramlakhan Singh   
Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar                     
Shri D. Venugopal
Shri Sita Ram Yadav
31.Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
                                                            (ii)
           
            SECRETARIAT
            Shri N.C.Joshi, Additional Secretary
            Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
            Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
            Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
 Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One
 Hundred Fifty-third Report on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the recommendations
 contained in One Hundred Forty-sixth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of
 Environment And Forests.
2.         The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment And Forests on the
 recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
 Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Ministry of
 Environment and Forests which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25
th April, 2005.
3.         There are Forty-five recommandations contained in the One Hundred Forty-sixth Report of the Committee.  Action
 Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Ministry on 19th December, 2005 and
 subsequent information was received on 2nd February, 2006.
4.         In the meeting held on the 17th March, 2006 the Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report and adopted
 the same.
NEW DELHI ;
March 17, 2006
       P.G.NARAYANAN 
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
 on Science & Technology, Environment &     Forests.
 
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the
 recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
 Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of
 Environment and Forests, presented to both Houses of Parliament on 25
th April, 2005. There were forty-five
 recommendations contained in the report.  Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received
 from the Ministry on 1
st September, 2005. The Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report in its meeting held on
 18th November, 2005 and decided to seek clarification/additional information on certain points contained in paras 18, 20,

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 23, 52, 55, 59, 63, 70.1, 98 and 101. The Ministry’s clarification/additional information on the points raised by the
 Committee was received on ­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­19th December, 2005.
            The Committee’s recommendations, Action Taken thereon by the Ministry of Environment and Forests, points raised
 by the Committee (wherever necessary), clarifications by the Ministry and comments of the Committee thereon are set out
 in the succeeding paragraphs: -
OUTLAY FOR NORTH-EAST & SIKKIM
Recommendation
            The Committee recommends that as there has been greater emphasis on North-East region, the Ministry should make
 a lump sum budgetary support under one head equal to 10% of Plan funds for the North-Eastern Sector including Sikkim
 and not under separate heads as has been made in this financial year.(Para 5.2)
Action Taken by the Ministry
Ministry of Environment & Forests has been earmarking 10 percent of Gross Budgetary Support (GBS) for development of
 North East Region under Major Head 2552.  A provision of Rs. 123.50 crores out of total outlay of Rs. 1234.91 has been
 made under this Head during the current financial year.  Inadvertently, an amount of Rs. 35 crores, for the scheme
 Gregarious flowering of muli bamboos (melocanna baccifera) has been shown separately under Major Head 2552. It is
 clarified that this scheme has been drawn to meet emergent situation in North East Region. To ensure smooth passage of
 occurrence of gregarious flowering of muli bamboos in the north eastern states, without resulting into social, economic and
 ecological problems, is one of the major objectives of this scheme. It is also to ensure appropriate utilization of raw material
 that will be available on account of gregarious flowering by supplying to industrial concerns. Therefore, this programme is
 exclusively committed for North East Region and the allocation of Rs. 123.50 crores has been shown only under one Major
 Head 2552.
It will be ensured in the future that a lump sum provision for projects / schemes for North East Region and Sikkim will be
 shown only at one place under Major Head 2552. 
Comments
             The Committee notes the reply.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR 2005-2006
Recommendation
            The Committee is of the view that expenditure should be evenly spread over all the four quarters of the financial
 year.  The Committee is of the considered opinion that any variation in the expenditure is mainly due to inherent lacunae in
 the budgetary mechanism of the Ministry, which requires urgent attention and a well-planned action plan to ensure full
 utilization of allocated budget in a uniform manner spreading over all the four quarters of the financial year. The
 Committee, therefore, suggests that the Ministry may examine the existing procedure and see whether it can be further
 streamlined to make the expenditure uniform in all quarters.                                 (Para 10)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The system of monitoring of expenditure exists in this Ministry. Secretary (E&F) regularly chairs a Senior Officer meeting
 every fortnight to review the expenditure of the Ministry nearing even in all the quarters as the Ministry could spend only
 Rs. 1003.1 crores (approx.) in the last year. The quarter-wise expenditure is:
1
st Quarter         2nd Quarter              3rd Quarter                 4th Quarter
  19.1%                30.07%                   21.98%                      28.85%
The major constraints in the utilization of the plan outlay are:
Before releasing the first installment to the implementing agencies, the utilization certificate for the previous year is
 mandatory.
Annual Plan of the operations is received in the first quarter, cause slow progress. Inadequate schemes for North East States.
Inadequate provision of State’s share as per norms for CSS (Centrally Sponsored Schemes).
Comments
The Committee is not at all convinced with the Ministry’s reply and reiterates its recommendation that the entire procedure
 needs to  be reviewed and streamlined so as to  maintain to the extent possible, uniform pace of expenditure throughout the
 entire year.
            The Committee also urges upon the Ministry to make effective coordinative efforts in the direction of motivating
 states and other implementing agencies for utilizing their funds in a time-bound manner and timely furnishing of utilization
 certificates to the Ministry.
POLLUTON FROM COAL BASED METHANE AND CLEAN COAL TECHNOLOGIES
Recommendation
            The Committee is of  the opinion that although the coal constitutes a major source catering to the country's energy
 needs,  possibly with  proper technologies and new initiatives for better management, it is possible to reduce the hazards of
 coal production which is being otherwise caused due to extraction of this mineral without proper  planning. Through
 scientific mining practices followed by land reclamation, beneficiation for ash reduction at source, improvement in

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 combustion methods, use of efficient electrostatic precipitators, bag filters for trapping of fly ash emission and effective
 management of ash including its utilization for bricks, cement and such other purpose, many of the problems can be
 prevented and controlled.                                        (Para 13)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The recommendations made in this para are essentially in the nature of observations only, however, it may be clarified that
 while appraising projects relating to mining and thermal power projects, the issues mentioned in this para such as land
 reclamation in case of mining projects and use of beneficiated coal, use of high efficiency electrostatic precipitators (ESPs),
 ash utilization etc. in case of thermal power plants are duly considered and stipulated as conditions while according
 environmental clearance to these projects. 
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation 
            The Committee feels that Central Pollution Control Board should lay down the environmental guidelines for coal
 mining activities prescribing the use of beneficiated coal with lower ash content in power plants and lay down specific
 norms for emission and effluents from coal combustion system.                                                           (Para 14)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) develops industry-specific standards for effluent and emissions. These
 standards are based on techno-economic feasibility and prevailing process technologies in India and abroad, cleaner
 production options, waste minimization/reuse/recycle/practices, pollution control technologies, retrofitment of
 upgraded/advanced process and pollution control technologies, economics of scale etc. The proposed standards are
 discussed in Peer & Core Committee of CPCB, which includes members from industries, Industrial Associations, experts in
 the field and representatives of concerned Ministries & SPCBs. The standards recommended by Peer & Core Committee are
 again reviewed by an Expert Committee in the Ministry of Environment & Forests and subsequently notified under the
 Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
The Environmental Standards  for the Pollution Prevention and Control for coal mines developed by CPCB had already been
 notified under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. Notifications on use of beneficiated/ blended coal with lower ash
 content in power plants and norms for emission and effluent for power plants have also been promulgated by Govt. of India
 under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. The Code of Practice for the Pollution Prevention and Control for coal mines
 has also been evolved by CPCB.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply and is of the view that though different measures exist to control the coal mining
 activities, the Ministry should ensure their proper implementation. 
Recommendation 
            The Committee feels that maximum land degradation in coal mining is caused by open-cast mining. Since the
 productivity is higher in open cast sector, this pace of growth cannot be sustained for long since the stripping ratios will
 increase the mining operations which may consequently run into land access and other environmental problems.
(Para 15)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The mining methodology i.e. opencast or underground has its own environmental impacts.  The choice of mining
 methodology depends on the geological formations and other mining considerations like conservation of reserves etc. 
 Based on the proposal submitted to this ministry, the project is appraised from environmental angle and necessary safeguard
 measures are stipulated as conditions to be complied with by the proponent during implementation of the project which
 inter-alia include rehabilitation of mines out areas, stability of over burden dumps and their reclamation, protection for
 subsidence, inundation of mine etc.  Mine plan approval by the competent authority is an essential requirement for granting
 environmental clearance for ensuring sustainability of the mine by restricting selective mining. 
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation 
            The mining operations like drilling, blasting, movement of the heavy earth moving machinery on haul roads,
 collection, transportation and handling of coal, screening, sizing and segregation units are the major sources of such
 emissions.  Underground mine fire is also a major source of air pollution in some of the coalfields.
(Para 16)
Action Taken by the Ministry
To control fugitive emissions of particulate matter in coal mines, the Emission Standards for Coal Mines have already been
 notified. State Pollution Control Boards are the implementing Authority for these standards. The level of methane, which is
 an inflammable gas, is periodically checked in underground coalmines for safety reasons. The level of SO2 and NOx
 emission levels have already been notified. Underground mine fire problem is complex in nature and coal companies are

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 already working on it with external assistance.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
            The proper management of methane emission should be one of the important factors which should be handled by the
 miners and mining authorities to reduce its emission into the atmosphere.                                                                       
          (Para 18)
Action Taken by the Ministry
Methane emissions cause safety hazards; therefore, the level of methane is periodically checked and the Director General,
 Mines & Safety (DGMS) has programmes for its control to prevent hazards.
Point raised by the Committee
The Committee would like to know about the details of the programmes to control and manage methane emission. What role
 does the Ministry of Environment and Forests   have in this? How it is ensured that the programmes/norms in this respect
 are strictly adhered to?
Clarification by the Ministry
The Ministry of Environment and Forests through its representative in Clean Development Mechanism  (CDM) Executive
 Board of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC) has played an active role in approving
 the Methodology on Coal Based Methane and Coal Mine Methane in December, 2005.  Ministry of Coal & Mines as well
 as coal companies and Consultants are being advised of the new methodology for development of relevant CDM projects
 for approval.  Similarly, for methane emanating from Municipal wastes, local authorities have taken up waste and energy
 projects/waste management projects recovering methane by taking advantage of CDM.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
            Waste water from coal preparation plant and mine water are other sources of water pollution which requires
 immediate control.                                                     (Para 19)
Action Taken by the Ministry
Standards for effluent discharge from coal mines have already been notified under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. The
 coal mines adopt appropriate water pollution control technology and install effluent treatment plants to ensure that the
 effluent discharge are within the stipulated standards.
Coalmines generally adopt the following water pollution control measures:
Maximum utilization of mine discharge
Appropriate water treatment system
Reuse of the waste water from the workshop in the workshop itself
Sewage treatment for the domestic waste
Garland drains to be provided around the toe of the OB dumps and coal stock yards to arrest the storm run-off from these
 areas.
The storm run-off from the OB dumps, coal stockyard etc. are to be settled in a suitable settling pond. The over flow of this
 settling pond may be discharged into the natural flowing stream. De-coaled pits may be utilized as settling pond.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation 
            The main sources of noise pollution, are blasting, movement of heavy earth moving machine and drilling and coal
 handling plants and the effective monitoring of all these issues are necessary for reducing noise pollution.                        
                      (Para 20)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The Standards for maximum permissible noise level have already been notified under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.
 Code of practice for noise pollution control has also been evolved by CPCB. The coal mines adopt various noise pollution
 control techniques to ensure that noise level is within the stipulated standards.
Point raised by the Committee
The Committee would like to know the details of measures and techniques, being adopted by coal mines to keep the noise
 level within the stipulated standards.
Clarification by the Ministry
The main sources of noise pollution in  coal  mining activity can be attributed to blasting, drilling, movement of heavy earth
 moving machinery  and movement of trucks for transportation of mined coal. For controlling noise from various sources,
 the abatement measures initiated include the following :
Vide GSR No. 742(E) dated 25
th September, 2000, Ministry has issued standards for coal mine.  In clause IV of the

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 Notification, noise level standards to be achieved by coal mines has been detailed and is as under :
 
6.00 AM-10.00 PM                   10.00 PM – 6.00 A.M
                        Noise level  Leq 75 dB(A)         Leq 70 dB(A)
(Monitoring frequency for noise level shall be once in fortnight)
While according environmental clearance under the provisions of Environment Impact Assessment Notification, 1994 and
 its subsequent amendments, a number of conditions are stipulated both specific to the project and general for mining/coal
 projects, which the coal companies are required to comply with.  Environmental conditions include the measures for
 minimizing noise pollution from coal mining operations such as drilling and blasting, movement of heavy earth moving
 machinery, collection, transportation and handling of coal etc.  The stipulated conditions include adequate measures to be
 taken for control of noise pollution below 85 dB(A) in the work environment;
The heavy earth moving machines are required to be provided with sound proof cabins and the engine exhaust with suitable
 mufflers; 
The quantity of explosives is minimized and milli second delay detonation technique is adopted;
Creation of green belt/plantation all around the noise generating sources for attenuation  of noise levels;
Restriction of speed limit of the vehicles to be observed in sensitive areas and regulation of vehicular movement.
 
Comments
While noting the reply, the Committee feels that these norms/standards  need to be scrupulously followed by coalmines and
 strictly   enforced by the Ministry.
Recommendation 
            The mines areas, which are backfilled, should be rehabilitated for development of vegetation.  In the quarried areas
 water reservoir is developed for water harvesting.  The big voids created by open-pit mining can cause land degradation
 which, the Committee feels, could be gainfully utilized to serve water reservoirs which will provide moisture for vegetation
 in the surrounding areas and the water could be used for domestic supply after necessary treatment.                                  
                                                                      (Para 21)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The recommendations made in this para regarding back filling and rehabilitation of mines out areas, development of water
 reservoir in the quarried areas for rain water harvesting and as a source for moisture for the vegetation and use of this water
 for domestic supply after necessary treatment are duly considered while appraising the mining projects.  Some of these
 issues are addressed in the form of post mine land use and mine closure plan.  These also form part of the environment
 management plan and are stipulated as conditions of environmental clearance on case to case basis. 
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation 
            It is understood that major coal projects are required to obtain Environmental Clearance from the Government. 
 Mitigative/control measures are identified to reduce the adverse impacts on environment.  It helps to integrate
 environmental considerations into mining and related operations right from the planning stage.  For this purpose, the project
 proponent needs to prepare an Environmental Impact Assessment Report and an Environmental Management Plan.
                                                                               (Para 22)
Action Taken by the Ministry
Preparation of Environmental Impact Assessment report and Environment Management Plan is a pre-requisite for submitting
 proposal for environmental clearance under the EIA Notification, 1994.  It also includes mining projects including Coal
 mines with a lease area of more than 5 ha.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation 
            The Committee is of the opinion that for abatement of the pollution problems associated with the coal mines, the
 Central Pollution Control Board needs to develop National Environmental Standards and Code of practice for coal mines
 which should be given due consideration by the Ministry of Environment & Forests and given a legal framework.           
                                                                                                          (Para 23)
Action Taken by the Ministry
Standards for coal mines have been notified vide G.S.R. 742(E) dated 25
th September, 2000 in the Gazette of India.  Central
 Pollution Control Board has also formulated code of practice for Environmental Pollution (Prevention) Control of coal
 mines. 
Point raised by the Committee
The Committee would like to know whether any initiative has been taken towards giving legal framework to the Code of

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 Practice for noise pollution control. If not, the reasons therefor.
Clarification by the Ministry
Noise has been defined as unwanted sound and human ear is most sensitive in the range of 2000 to 5000 Hz. Usually the
 sound level measurements are made at ground level. Realizing the increasing trend in noise pollution due to various
 activities, legal framework has been put in place by notifying general and source specific standards by this Ministry from
 time to time.
The ambient air quality standards in respect of noise were notified for various zones, under Environment (Protection) Act,
 1986, and are as following.
 
Area    code Category of area Limits in dB (A) Leq
 
Daytime
6 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Nighttime
9 P.M. and 6 A.M.
(A) Industrial area 75 70
(B) Commercial area 65 55
(C) Residential area 55 45
(D) Silence Zone 50 40
 
In addition to the above, source specific standards have been notified for various type of vehicles, air coolers, refrigerators,
 diesel generator sets and firecrackers etc. from time to time.
The use of loud speakers has also been regulated by restricting its use during night hours between 10 P.M. and 6 A.M. with
 powers given to the State Governments to relax this time from 12 midnight to 6 A.M. for 15 days in a calendar year.
Specific norms also have been notified for coal mining activities for controlling noise pollution from drilling, blasting and
 movement of heavy earth moving machineries.
For controlling noise from various sources, the abatement measures suggested include the following:
i)          Creation of green belt/plantation all around the noise generating sources for attenuation of noise levels;
ii)         Restriction of speed limit of the vehicles to be observed in sensitive areas and 
      regulation of vehicular movement.
iii)         Acoustic enclosures for diesel generator sets.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
            The Committee is of the opinion that supply of high ash laden coal to power plants not only poses environmental
 problems but also causes poor plant performance and high cost for ash disposal.  The Committee, therefore, strongly
 recommends that Ministry of Environment and Forests should evolve a mechanism for suggesting measures for improving
 the quality of coal supplied to the power plants.
Particularly power plants located beyond 1000 kms. From Pit head: and
Power plants located in critically polluted areas, Urban sectors and in ecologically sensitive zones.
(Para  24)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The Ministry of Environment and Forests issued a notification on conservation of topsoil and utilization of ash generated by
 coal/ lignite Thermal Power Plants in September, 1999.  The notification inter alia stipulates 100% utilization of ash
 generated by coal/ lignite based Thermal Power Plants in 9/15 years.  During the year 1999-2000 the ash generation was
 about 90 million tonnes and utilization was 13 million tonnes which is about 14.6% of the ash generated.  In the year 2004-
05 the ash generation has gone up to 111.5 million tonnes and utilization was around 41.9 million tonnes which is about
 37% of the total ash generated.  The ash generation has increased considerably because of its use in cement, road
 embankments, bricks etc.  The action plan has been drawn up in such a way that by the year 2014, 100% of the ash
 generated, is likely to be utilized. 
            For Mitigating and reducing the environmental impacts due to operation of coal based thermal power plants, the
 Ministry of Environment and Forests has already issued a notification in September, 1997 on use of beneficiated coal based
 Thermal Power Plants.  The notification stipulates that on and from the 1
st day of June 2001, the following coal based
 thermal power plants shall use beneficiated coal with an ash content not exceeding thirty-four per cent:-
any thermal power plant located beyond one thousand kilometers from the pit-head and
any thermal power plant located in urban area or sensitive area or critically polluted area irrespective of their distance from
 pit-head except any pit-head power plant.
The concerned agencies like Ministry of Coal, Power and Central Electricity Authority are well aware of the requirements of
 the provisions of this notification. Further measures are being initiated to deal with the constraints in the implementation of

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 the notification.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation 
            The Committee during its study visit to Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubneswar, held a meeting on 31
st January,
 2005 with the management of the laboratory and the scientists thereof.  During the course of the meeting, interalia the
 Committee was informed that a certain section of the research of the laboratory is being directed towards biological
 desulphurization of coal for reducing the sulfur dioxide and nitrous oxide emissions i.e. SO2 and NOX into the atmosphere
 during extract of coal from mines and their subsequent burning.  The Committee was also informed that certain research
 paper has also been released by RRL scientists in the area of bio desulphurization of coal.
(Para 25)
Recommendation 
            The Committee has been given to understand by Regional Research Laboratory that most widely studied
 microorganism for removal of pyritic sulfur from coal is Thiobacillus ferrooxidans, a Gram-negative, acidophilic,
 mesophilic, chemoautotrophic, rod-shaped bacterium.  The Committee feels that greater researches in this direction by RRL
 could lead to cost effective microbial processes that can be implemented in pilot plant commercially considering some
 factors like capacity of reactor for treatment of coal. The Committee has been further given to understand that certain
 radiation techniques have been reported to be effective for removal of sulfur from coal.  The gamma radiolytic pretreatment
 by ionizing gamma rays from Cobalt-60 removes organic sulfur from coal leaving the hydrocarbon matrix of coal
 unaffected.
(Para 26)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The research activities in the field of bio-desulfurisation of coal for reducing the sulfur dioxide and nitrous oxide emission
 i.e. SO2 and Nox into the atmosphere during extraction of coal from mines and their subsequent burning have already been
 undertaken by various R&D Organisations in the country.  Recently, RRL, Bhubneswar has completed a study on biological
 elimination of organic sulfur from high sulfur Assam coal containing 1.21% of organic sulfur and 0.92% of pyritic sulfur
 using a native fungal strain belonging to Aspergillus Species. Further details of the study are being ascertained.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply and appreciates the research activities being undertaken by RRL. The Ministry should
 with all earnestness examine the findings of the RRL research for de-sulferisation of coal in future in close collaboration
 with the Ministry of Coal.
OPTIMAL HYDRO-CARBON ENERGY MANAGEMENT THROUGH CLEAN DEVELOPMENT
 MECHANISM(CDM)
Recommendation
            This Committee would, like to invite the attention of the Ministry of Environment and Forests in conjunction with
 the oil sector that investment in low emissions technologies is the demanding need of the hour and the problem should be
 addressed in such a fashion that long term national emissions reduction should be made one of the priority areas.(Para 27)
Action Taken by the Ministry
National Auto Fuel Policy has been adopted with a view to introduce a road map for emission reduction from automobiles.
 In pursuance with this policy emission standards at manufacturing stage have been notified with required fuel
 specifications. Euro-II norms have been introduced through out the country from 1
st April 2005. Similarly, Euro-III norms
 have also been introduced in 11 major cities from 1st April 2005. The Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MOP&NG)
 has proposed an investment of Rs. 35,000 crores for upgradation of oil refineries to meet the fuel specifications. Out of this,
 the expenditure incurred so far is about Rs.10, 000 crores and remaining amount is expected to be spent by 2010. The other
 steps initiated for reduction of  emission include: -
Adoption of cleaner technologies in various industrial sectors.
Notification of Source Specific Emission Standards.
Identification of pollution sources for preparation of city specific action plan to improve the air quality.
Regular monitoring for environmental compliance.         
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the measures adopted for reduction of emission will yield a positive
 results.
Recommendation
            In order to give an effective implementation of the above proposal of the Committee, the following model may be
 considered by the Ministry of Environment & Forests:
The solubility of additional carbon dioxide in the ocean surface water decreases with rising concentrations. Thus, the relative
 oceanic uptake of carbon dioxide is reduced at higher concentrations.

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
The land vegetations may serve as an additional medium term sink for anthropogenic carbon emissions.
The radio-active greenhouse forcing grows only logarithmically with increasing carbon dioxide and Green House Gases
 (GHG) emissions.
(Para 28)
Action Taken by the Ministry
Scientific Input contained in the Recommendations would be kept in mind as the need arises.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
            The environment friendly performance objectives and mechanisms for tracking progress in achieving the prime
 objective of the aforesaid model for the growth of the oil industry on the one hand and socio-economic sustainability on the
 other, the implementation of socio-environmental policies involving oil companies and the Ministry of Environmental &
 Forest requires combination of technological advances and innovative approaches.(Para 29)
Action Taken by the Ministry
            World over governments and industries are working together to innovate and promote environment friendly
 technologies. In India, significant effort is being made in this direction alongwith promotion of bio-fuels like bio-diesel
 from Jatropha curcas; optimal utilisation of fuels through development of higher efficiency equipment such as motors and
 vehicles. Further, the Petroleum Conservation Research Association (PCRA) is very active in promoting the message of
 energy efficiency to general public and all stakeholders. MoEF is also working with various national bodies such as PCRA,
 the oil companies, various state level research and government agencies and other non-governmental organizations for
 promotion of environment friendly technologies.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
            The Committee is of the opinion that for addressing the key issues pertaining to the transition of a carbon based
 economy to a hydrogen economy, the Ministry of Environment and Forests need to promote the following:
Promote more rapid dissemination and use of efficient, existing commercial technology in strategic and environmentally
 sensitive of the country.
Encourage the development and use of innovative, currently non-commercial technologies.
Enhance the ability of all oil sector companies to achieve and utilize advanced and efficient technologies, and
Improve scientific understanding by addressing well-known uncertainties, in the adoption and implementation of efficient
 technologies.
(Para 30)
Action Taken by the Ministry
Hydrogen technology is a futuristic technology and will take many years to become commercially viable. A high-powered
 hydrogen technology Board has been set up in the country to look into all aspects of development, dissemination and
 deployment of this technology in various sectors. As of now, transport sector looks prominent to make use of this emerging
 technology. India has also joined international efforts in a partnership to reap the benefits of the hydrogen economy
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
 
BOTANICAL SURVEY OF INDIA : METHODS OF CONDUCTING SURVEY AND STRUCTURE OF SURVEY
 REPORT
Recommendation
            The Committee is happy to note that Global Positioning System (GPS) is also being used for recording the
 coordinates of the collection site and mapping the distribution in the area.(Para 31)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The Committee’s observation has been noted.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
            The Committee is also given to understand that person undertaking survey is at least M.Sc. in Botany with good
 knowledge of herbarium methodology and taxonomy and also has a very sound physique and normal sight, and should be
 ready to trek in remote, inaccessible areas.(Para 32)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The observations embodied in the paragraph have been noted.
Comments

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
            BSI has further intimated that survey reports normally contain a general information about the area surveyed
 including a small vegetational account, significant features of flora of the region supplemented with photographs and total
 number of samples collected during the survey.(Para 33)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The observation has been duly noted.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
            The Committee while appreciating the process adopted by the Botanical Survey of India for framing survey
 methodology including norms for designing survey report would like to suggest that the Ministry should examine and
 review the guidelines in view of their experiences and problems faced.
(Para 34)
Action Taken by the Ministry
            The observation has been noted. The work performance of Botanical Survey of India is monitored by the Programme
 Advisory Committee (PAC) which has several eminent Scientists on its membership and is chaired by Prof. H.Y.
 Mohanram. The guidelines would be further reviewed.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply and is of the view that performance of its ongoing activities at BSI should be
 evaluated at regular intervals and those activities which fail to pay dividend should be closely reviewed and may be wind
 up, if necessary.
FOREST CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT AND REGENERATION
Recommendation
            The Committee expresses its apprehension about the success of the Integrated Forests Protection Scheme (IFPS)
 after its transfer to the State Governments.  It is of the view that if money is routed through the State Governments, it may
 not reach to the field level and might be dissipated in other scheme of the State Governments.  Since forest and wildlife are
 not really a priority area with most State Governments and accorded very low priority, other schemes of the State
 Governments like Education, Health etc. may get a major chunk of the State allocation, leaving behind a meager amount for
 the IFPS.  The chances of utilizing the allocation for the basic activities of the IFPS, i.e. mobility (roads and vehicles),
 communication (wireless and computers), combat and self defence (arms) and amenities to the frontline staff are very less.
                                                         (Para 39)
Recommendation
            Moreover, IFPS is of significant importance not only for the maintenance of existing forest cover and natural
 regeneration but also achieving the National goal of achieving forest and tree cover to 25% by 200 and 33% by 2012.  But
 the transfer of the scheme to the States may not help in achieving the stipulated 33% target as some States always complain
 about the hindrance of development activities due to thick forest cover in their States.  In all likelihood, such State may
 refrain from utilizing allocation on the IFPS and money can be utilized for some other purpose.  The Committee, therefore,
 recommends that IFPS should not be transferred to the State and continues to be administered as a Centrally-Sponsored
 Scheme.                                                 (Para 40)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The matter was taken up with the Planning Commission by the Ministry for retention of the scheme as Centrally Sponsored
 Scheme.  The Planning Commission vide its communication dated 1
st July, 2005 has agreed for retaining the scheme as a
 Centrally Sponsored Scheme.  
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply and hopes that continuation of IFPS as a Centrally-Sponsored Scheme will help the
 Ministry to give priority to the forest conservation and development and achieving its stipulated objectives.
RESEARCH
Recommendation
            The Committee recommends that to accelerate the pace of research and to provide expertise in different fields of
 forestry research, the Ministry should impart forestry education and develop forestry curricula at various levels.  It should
 also strengthen the infrastructure and technical capabilities of the universities providing forestry education with necessary
 grants.  The Ministry should also organize seminars and workshops, besides conducting special courses on various forestry
 themes for the academic advancement of the foresters and those interested in the field of forestry.            (Para 43)
Action Taken by the Ministry
Ministry of Environment & Forests has already initiated several steps to accelerate the pace of research and to provide
 expertise in the different fields of forestry.  Forestry education is being imparted through various agencies of the Ministry

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 like Indian Council of Forestry Research & Education (ICFRE), Dehradun, Indian Institute of Forest Management(IIFM),
 Bhopal, Indian Plywood Industries Research and Training Institute (IPIRTI), Bangalore, Indira Gandhi National Forest
 Academy (IGNFA), Dehradun and Directorate of Forest Education (DFE), Dehradun.  Syllabus has been constantly revised
 at the appropriate time in order to equip foresters to face the emerging challenges in the field of forestry.  ICFRE is also
 providing a token amount to the universities for providing forestry education.  For IFS Officers theme based compulsory
 training courses are regularly organized in various institutions of repute.  There is a provision in the year 2005-06 to
 organise seminars/workshops for IFS officers on various emerging issues.  Skill upgradation training for frontline staff has
 also been taken up.  The training of frontline staff is being organised at State Forestry Training Institutions under the direct
 supervision of DFE, Dehradun.  Every effort has been made by the Ministry to ensure compliance of the views expressed by
 the Parliamentary Standing Committee.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the steps initiated by the Ministry for augmenting the
 pace of research will help it to build a skilled human resource base and to provide expertise in different fields of forestry. 
 Moreover, the Ministry should also participate and showcase its research activities at National & International level
 exposition, exhibitions, fairs etc., besides conducting special courses on various forestry themes. 
WILDLIFE CONSERVATION
Recommendation
            The Committee expresses its serious concern over the sudden disappearance of the Tigers from Sariska Tiger
 Reserve.  The Committee feels that the negligence of Forest staff coupled with the large scale poaching has cost the country
 dear.  Conditions in most of the national parks are more or less same, posing a clear danger to protected animal species. 
 Poaching is not a new phenomenon but the poachers are now more advanced with latest weapons and very powerful
 communication network, making the lackadaisically managed tiger reserves easy picking.  In contrast, forest guards are
 usually equipped with a wooden stick and most of the times without any means of communication.  Taking note of this
 alarming situation, the Committee is of considered opinion that a Special Task Force at the central or state level with the
 involvement of Para-military forces must be constituted to combat the menace of poaching of wild-life.
(Para 49)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The Ministry of Environment & Forests is in the process of setting up a National Wildlife Crime Control Bureau.   The
 creation of the Wildlife crime Control Bureau has been approved by the National Board for Wildlife chaired by the Prime
 Minister. 
The objectives of the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau are as below:-
To act as a multi agency unit with full time officer from Forest and Wildlife Departments and various para military forces
 (Police, DRI, CBI, IB, ITBP, BSF, Customs).
To develop a National level Policy for containing the trade, enforcement and capacity building of the State Forest
 Departments to carry out enforcement and investigation in a professional manner.
To implement the resolutions and decisions taken under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of
 Flora and Fauna (CITES), to which India is party since 1996.
To co-operate with the Interpol Wildlife Crime Working Group, the World Customs Organization, the CITES Tiger
 Enforcement Task Force and various other Law Enforcement Task Force and various other Law Enforcement Agencies
 inside the country.
To gather and analyze intelligence related to organized wildlife crime activities and to disseminate the same to State and
 Regional Enforcement Agencies for swift action to apprehend the criminals.
To undertake joint operations with counterpart agencies in other countries.
To maintain a data bank related to wildlife crimes.
To monitor the trade and advise the Government of India on changes required in policy and legislation from time to time.
To develop infrastructure and capacity for scientific and professional investigation into wildlife crimes and assist State
 Governments to ensure better success of cases related to wildlife crimes.
(b)        Under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Project Tiger, there is a provision for providing funding support to States
 for deployment of para military forces to combat poaching.  The States are provided funding support based on proposals
 received from them.  During the current financial year the protection measures were reviewed at the highest level in the
 Ministry and as many as 11 tiger reserves were provided central Assistance in June 2005 to the tune of Rs. 75.74 lakhs for
 special protection during the monsoon season.  The States have been requested for evolving a staff development plan so that
 trained frontline staff in the right age group is available for field protection.  Top most priority is given to proposals
 received from States for wireless network, deployment of local people in patrolling, procurement of arms and ammunition. 
 While the situation in Sariska is unfortunate, there are no indications to conclude that the situation is similar in all Protected
 Areas.
Comments

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
            The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the constitution of National Wildlife Crime Control Bureau may help
 the country to preserve and protect the tigers.
            The Committee, however, expresses its concern that National Parks in most of the tiger reserves have failed to
 protect their inmates.  Therefore, management of Forest Parks needs to be improved and tightened so that they can perform
 their task more effectively to protect our National Heritage. 
Recommendation
            Moreover, the Ministry should also involve the villagers living in and around National parks/Tiger reserves to
 prevent the poaching as they are aware of the tentative movement of the poachers but because of poachers' threats or any
 other compulsion, they refrain from coming out openly to help the forest Department to catch the poachers.  The Committee
 strongly recommends that all vacant positions should be filled immediately and at no time any tiger reserve in the country
 should be left with the junior officers.
(Para 50)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The Centrally Sponsored Schemes of ‘Project Tiger’ and ‘Development of National Parks and Sanctuaries’ are umbrella
 schemes, where Central assistance is provided to States for carrying out  site specific eco-development works in the
 peripheral villages to elicit the cooperation and support of local people towards conservation.  Further, funding support is
 provided to States towards wages for deployment of local people in protecting national parks/sanctuaries/tiger reserves. 
 The States have been requested to take measures for filling up the vacant posts.
Comments
The Committee is of the view that unless Ministry steps up its anti-poaching drive, the dwindling numbers of tigers in the
 country may not be stopped.  Therefore, a more effective strategy for tackling poaching and smuggling may be evolved
 which may include equipping forest officials with modern weapons, communication system and making available adequate
 funds for protecting the endangered cat.
The Committee also suggests the Ministry to rope forest communities in its conservation efforts.
Recommendation
            The Committee feels that Project Elephant is a major project of the Ministry but getting less importance. The tusk is
 as precious as tiger skin and not immune from Poachers.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that Elephants should also
 be protected from the poaching and effective strategy should be evolved for their preservation.  In view of decline in Tiger
 population in Sariska, the Committee suggests the Ministry to undertake an evaluation of Elephant population and take
 corrective measures accordingly.                                                                                                                    (Para 52)
Action Taken by the Ministry
Expressions of interest for evaluation of the Project Elephant have been called for from scientific institutions. The response
 has been received only from Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE), Dehradun and Asian Elephant
 Research & Conservation Centre (AERCC), Bangalore. The date for receipt of applications has been extended to 15
th
 August 2005.
Point raised by the Committee
The Committee would like to know the progress made by the Ministry till date in pursuance of its recommendation to
 undertake evaluation of elephant population.  The details of the corrective measures being taken /proposed to be taken to
 save the elephant may be also be furnished. 
Clarification by the Ministry
The elephant census is being carried out periodically and the evaluation has also been carried out during the financial year
 2004-05.
The corrective measures being taken/proposed to be taken to save the elephant are as follows:
Avoiding man-animal conflict by Erecting barriers (trenches, electric fencing etc.) to stop straying of wild animals into
 agricultural fields, villages and other sensitive areas
Providing technical and financial assistance to the State under Centrally Sponsored Scheme of “Project Elephant” for
 infrastructure Developments, capacity building, communication etc for effective protection of wild elephants.
Undertaking habitat-development works within elephant reserves and corridors.
Establishing and protecting elephant corridors.
Creating awareness among the people to live in harmony with wild animals.
Undertaking eco-development works in villages situated on the fringe of forests for reducing their dependence on forests for
 firewood, fodder and grazing of cattle.
Paying ex-gratia relief to the affected people for loss of human life, crop and houses.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply and is surprised to know that any result-giving anti-poaching strategy is missing from
 the list of corrective measures. Establishing elephant corridors are not sufficient enough to protect the elephants from
 poaching. Committee’s recommendation was more categorical about preservation of elephants from poaching. The

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 Committee, therefore, feels that the Ministry should include an effective anti-poaching strategy, among other measures, in
 its action plan to save the elephant population.
Recommendation
            The Committee recommends that sufficient allocation must be provided to various States for habitat management
 mitigation of human-elephant conflict, payment of ex-gratia relief for loss of human life and crops caused by wild
 elephants, strengthening of anti-poaching measures, capacity building of the field staff, registration of domesticated
 elephant using microchips etc.                                                                                  (Para 53)
 
Action Taken by the Ministry
The Ministry provides financial and technical assistance under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes “Development of National
 Parks and Sanctuaries”, “Project Tiger” and “Project Elephant”  for  habitat management, payment of ex gratia for loss of
 human life and crops caused by wild elephants, strengthening of anti poaching measures, capacity building of the field staff
 etc. Regular consultations take place between officers of the affected States, Ministry and other experts for finding ways
 and means for mitigating human elephant conflict. Project Elephant provides technical and financial assistance for
 microchipping of domestic elephants throughout the country.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
            The Committee recommends that endangered species need to be preserved while the population of other animals
 should be sustainably managed.  The Ministry should generate data and information on maintaining a sustainable population
 of each animal for their scientific management.  Research initiative in the field of sustainable use of wildlife products are
 needed.  The Ministry should cover not only wildlife research and training but also the socio-economic aspects of wildlife
 conservation.                                 (Para 54)
Action Taken by the Ministry
A database exists in the Ministry on the population of the major species of the country, as per the census reports submitted
 by the States from time to time. Management Plans have been approved for the Protected Areas of the country and the
 defaulting States have been directed to complete the exercise expeditiously. The Ministry also provided grants in aid for
 research in wildlife and related subjects. The Research and Training Division of the Ministry organizes trainings for officers
 in wildlife management every year. In addition the Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun conducts diploma and certificate
 courses in wildlife management for all ranks of Forest Department functionaries.
Comments
The Committee states that the database should be evaluated and updated from time-to-time so that the country can have a
 perfect picture of the population of the major species of the country.
Recommendation
            While the Committee is concerned about the protection of wildlife in the Protected Areas, it feels that wildlife should
 also be protected outside the Protected Areas and sufficient allocation should be made for the purpose.                 
                     (Para 55)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The Ministry had submitted a new scheme for Protection of Wildlife outside Protected Areas since a major portion of the
 wildlife of the country inhabit areas outside the notified Protected Areas. However, the scheme was not approved by the
 Planning Commission. An amount of Rs 60.00 crores was also earmarked for the scheme in the X Plan. The scheme has
 now been approved in principle for implementation during X Plan.
Point raised by the Committee
Since the scheme for Protection of Wildlife outside Protected Areas has been approved, the steps proposed to be taken by
 the Ministry to protect the wildlife should be indicated. What is the allocation of funds for this during the current year as
 well as Tenth Plan and whether this is sufficient?
Clarification by the Ministry
The Scheme for Protection of Wildlife Outside Protected Areas has been sent to Planning Commission for in-principle
 approval. The Scheme has been proposed for an amount of Rs. 22.75 crores for the remaining Tenth Plan Period. The SFC
 for the Scheme will be held soon after receipt of communication from the Planning Commission. The amount proposed, if
 approved, by Planning Commission will be sufficient for implementing the scheme in the remaining period of Tenth Five
 Year Plan.
The major components of the proposed scheme are –
Habitat improvement including regeneration, water conservation, salt licks, check dams, fire protection,
 education/interpretation including signages, etc.
Wildlife conservation in areas outside notified Protected Areas, but forming important animal habitats and corridors.

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
Mitigate man-animal conflicts through adequate and expeditious payment of compensation for loss of life and damage to
 property.
Prevention of poaching and control of illegal trade in wild life, its derivatives and parts outside Protected Areas.
Association of communities and education/awareness programme.
Periodic monitoring and evaluation studies including establishment of database.
Comments
            The Committee finds contradiction in the Ministry’s replies.  Earlier, the Ministry informed the Ministry informed
 the Committee that the scheme for protection of Wild Life Outside Protected Areas has been approved, in principle, for
 implementation during the plan.  In its subsequent reply it has informed the Committee that the scheme has been sent to
 Planning Commission for in-principle approval.  The actual position needs to the clarified.
 
NATIONAL AFFORESTATION AND ECO-DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
Recommendation
            The Committee is of the opinion that the destruction and depletion of forests will not only lead to loss of our
 vegetation but will also result in widespread deterioration of environment with fatal consequences to the very existence of
 all forms of life.  Therefore, the Ministry should evolve mechanisms for ecological restoration of degraded forest areas and
 adjoining lands through systematic planning and implementation, in a cost effective manner.  The Ministry should also
 restore fuel wood, fodder, timber and other forest produce on the degraded forest and adjoining lands in order to meet the
 demands for these items and local population including tribals should be allowed to share its products without
 compromising the preservation of our national forests.  In addition, the Ministry should also create general awareness and
 help foster a people's movement for promoting afforestation and eco-development with the assistance of voluntary agencies,
 non-governmental organizations, Panchayati Raj Institutions and others and promote participatory and sustainable
 management of degraded forest areas and adjoining lands.
(Para 59)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The Ministry is implementing the National Afforestation Programme (NAP) Scheme with an objective of regeneration and
 eco-development of degraded forest and adjoining areas and augment the availability of fuelwood, fodder, grasses, and non-
timber forest products with people’s participation. The scheme is based on the principle of “care and share” under Joint
 Forest Management (JFM). The local communities are not only involved in planning and implementation of NAP Scheme,
 but are also entitled to receive share of produce from the regenerated forest as per the JFM resolution of the respective State
 Government.
2.         People’s participation is key to NAP. An amount of up to 1% of the plantation cost is earmarked for awareness
 raising. Ministry has also provided assistance for organization of Vriksha Mela in the rural weekly markets.
3.         Further, the Ministry is also implementing the scheme - Grants-in-Aid for Greening India, from 2005-06.  Under the
 restructured scheme, assistance is to be given for awareness generation and production of quality planting material through
 State Forest Departments in collaborative arrangement with different organizations including tree growers Co-operatives,
 Panchayats etc. Assistance is also given for tree planting to various organizations, including Panchayati Raj Institutions,
 Registered Societies, Non-profit organization, Co-operatives, Charitable Trusts, Voluntary Agencies, Registered
 Educational Institutions etc.
Point raised by the Committee
In the third part of its Action Taken, the Ministry has informed that Assistance for tree plantation etc. is given to various
 organizations, Registered Societies, Educational Institutions, etc.
The Ministry may provide the details of these organizations, institutions etc. alongwith the details of funds granted to them
 during the current year. What is the mechanism to ensure that funds are being properly spent on this programme? 
Clarification by the Ministry
The details of organizations and the details of funds granted to them during the current year is mentioned below.
As regards the mechanism to ensure proper utilization of funds, proposals of those organizations whom funds are granted are
 pre-appraised by State Forest Department and are prioritized and screened by a Committee constituted at state level headed
 by PCCFs of respective State. These are further scrutinized by the Screening Committee of the Ministry of Environment
 and Forests. Further the subsequent instalments are released only after the receipt of utilization certificate and field
 inspection report from concerned PCCF of the State. 
 
 REST OF INDIA                     
Sl.No. Name of the NGO State Instalment
Amt released
(Rs.)  
1 Jan Seva Samiti, Agra Uttar Pradesh Bal.of 3rd 76137  
2 Gramin Vikas Samiti, Agra Uttar Pradesh 3rd 125000  

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
3
Kishan Vrikshoropan Samiti,
 Agra Uttar Pradesh 3rd 125000  
4
Kalawati U M Vidyalaya,
 Rampur Uttar Pradesh 2nd 243870  
5 Green Jan Chetna, Ferozabad Uttar Pradesh 2nd 301267  
6 Bani Mandir Yubak Sangha Orissa 2nd 313820  
7 Krishak Shikha Seva Samiti, Eta Uttar Pradesh 2nd 313820  
8 Mari Amman Services Tamil Nadu 3rd 32153  
9 Manav Pragati, Churu Rajas than 2nd 313820  
 
10 ORDER, Khurda Orissa 2nd 250000
11 GITA, Bhubaneshwar Orissa 3rd 125000
12
Zila Khadi Gramudyog Sansthan Parisad,
 Dhonora Uttar Pradesh 2nd 103934
13 NRDC, Bhubaneswar Orissa 3rd 125000
14 Sahayogi Gramdyog Vikas Samiti, Almora Uttaranchal 2nd 322460
15 Arogya Dham Adarsh Samiti,Ramgarh Uttaranchal 2nd 313820
16 Basti Area Dev. Council, Balasore Orissa 3rd 125000
17
Ganpati Pragatisheel Kalyan
 Samiti,Mainpuri Uttar Pradesh 2nd 313820
18
Adinath Jan Kalyan Sikha Samiti,
 Mainpuri Uttar Pradesh 2nd 313820
19 Utkal Jyoti Yubak Sangha, Laxmipur Orissa 2nd 313820
20
Paschim Banga Manav Kalyan Sangha,
 Kolkata West Bengal 3rd 125000
21 Satpura Vigyan Sabha, Bhopal Madhya Pradesh 2nd 303820
22 Anmol Gramudyog Sansthan, Luknow Uttar Pradesh Bal. of 1st 100783
23 ISWAR, Dhenkanal Orissa 2nd 243870
24 AHIMSA, Dhenkanal Orissa 2ND 313820
25 Beliachandi Aastha, South 24 Pragana West Bengal 2ND 313820
26 Agradoot Society, Almora Uttaranchal 3RD 125000
27 Swaraj Bharti, Dhenkanal Orissa 2ND 313820
28 Centre For Weaker Section, Balasore Orissa 2ND 125000
29 Kumaon Adventure, Almora Uttaranchal 3RD 125000
30 UPKAR, Berhampur Orissa 2ND 313820
31 BIRDA Dhenkanal Orissa 2ND 307544
32 Veer Balajee Vikash Samiti Uttar Pradesh 2ND 313820
33 SIVA, Dhenkanal Orissa 2ND 313820
34 Yuba Shakti, Sundargarh Orissa 1ST 396000
35 WWF Himachal Pradesh, Simla Himachal Pradesh 2ND 313820
36 Sanskar Yubak Sangha, Boudh Orissa 1ST 550000
37 Maa Mangla Pratisthan, Jajpur Orissa 1ST 550000
38 Balapeer Manav Sansthan, Nagaur Rajas than 1ST 550000
39 Bal Avam Mahila Uttan Samiti, Jaipur Rajas than 1ST 550000
40 Amitoz Sansthan Charitable Rajas than 1ST 550000
41
Mahila Evam Paryavaran Vikas,
 Mozamabad Rajas than 1ST 550000
42 Shree Parshwanath Bal Mandir, Indore Madhya Pradesh 1ST 396000
43 Sanklap , Dhenkanal Orissa 1ST 550000
44 Basirhat Women Dev. Society., West Bengal 1ST 550000
45 Darmapada Jubak Sangha, Deogarh Orissa 1ST 550000
46 LIFE Academy of Vocational Orissa 1ST 550000
 
                     
NORTH EASTERN STATES
Sl.No. Name of the NGO State
Instalment
Amt. Released(Rs.)
1 ASHRAY Tripura 2ND 133870

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
2
Gharmura Samaj Unnayan Club
 Hailakhandi Assam 2ND 313820
3 Manav Sakti jagaran, Nalbari Assam 2ND 243870
4 Lopanglu MPCS, Mokakchung Nagaland 3rd 169470
4 Sanghsinha MPCS, Bomdila Arunachal Pradesh 2ND 313820
5 Hills Areas Deve, Churachandpur Manipur 2ND 313820
6 Women Welfare Society, Boleng Arunachal Pradesh 2ND 313820
7 Zhumoha MPCS, Kohima Nagaland 3rd 144778
8 AFORD Ukhrul Manipur 2ND 313820
9 Yamuk & Kashi Welfare Society, Ittangar Arunachal Pradesh 2ND 313820
10
Hill Tribal Farmers Welfare Society,
 Sagalee Arunachal Pradesh 2ND 313820
11
Tribal Area Development Society,
 Naharlagun Arunachal Pradesh 2ND 313820
12 Mankhola MPCS, Kohima Nagaland 2ND 313820
13 Yaripok Development Agency,Yaripok Manipur 2ND 313820
14 Phazang Integrated Dev.Asso,Ukhrul Manipur 2ND 313820
15 Mishillimi MPCS, Pughoboto Nagaland 2ND 313820
16
Everest Society and Welfare
 Ass.Naharlagun Arunachal Pradesh 2ND 305010
17 Three Sisters Welfare Society, Dimapur Nagaland 2ND 313820
18 Good Samaritan Wefare Society, Dimapur Nagaland 2ND 313820
19 Deb Village Forest Management, Sagalee Arunachal Pradesh 2ND 313820
20 Social Welfare Youth Association Sikkim 2ND 313820
21 Joram Mahila MPCS , Joram Village Arunachal Pradesh 2ND 313820
22 Tribal Welfare Society, Ittanagar Arunachal Pradesh 3RD 100000
23 Gramin Vikas Kendra, Ittanagar Arunachal Pradesh 3RD 100000
24 Arunachal Techno Consultancy, Sagalee Arunachal Pradesh 2ND 313820
25
Sano Batao Development Agency,
 Senapati Manipur 2ND 313820
26 Rural Women Upliftment Ass. Assam 2ND 313820
27
Sara MPCS Ltd., Tenyephe Village
 Dimapur Nagaland 2ND 313820
28 Vierhe MPCS, Phezha Village Nagaland 2ND 313820
29 Deed Valley MPCS, Lower Sabansiri Arunachal Pradesh 2ND 313820
30 Tawang Youth Welfare Society, Tawang Arunachal Pradesh 1ST 550000
31 Integrated Rural Dev.& Edu.Org. Thoubal Manipur 1ST 550000
32 Bomi Romko Multipurpose So., East Siang Arunachal Pradesh 1ST 550000
33 Tribal Development Foundation, Ittanagar Arunachal Pradesh 3RD 100000
34
Society's Abbatial Network (SANGA)
 Churachandpur Manipur 1ST 550000
 
35 Tang Village MPCS, Naharlagun Arunachal Pradesh 1ST 550000
36 Lipir Forest Management Comm. Arunachal Pradesh 1ST 550000
37 Rural Area Reconstruction Organisation Manipur 2ND 313820
38 Socio-Economic Integrated Dev. Manipur 1ST 550000
39
Farmer's Co-operative Society Ltd,
 Nirjuli. Arunachal Pradesh 1ST 550000
40 Association for Rural Dev. Manipur 1ST 550000
     
N.B.     All first installments are yet to be released.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply and suggests the Ministry to give due regard to the involvement of people for the
 protection and management of degraded forests.  In this regard, Joint Forest Management Programme should be actively
 pursued.
Recommendation
            The Committee is also of the view that the Ministry should formulate an effective strategy to consider all activities,

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 current and potential, that can influence forests and related social, economic, and environmental outcomes.  More focused
 interventions are required that address issues relating to opportunity, empowerment, and livelihood security of the poor
 people who depend on forests in different ways.  A broader livelihood approach, covering productive capacity, institutional
 and legal structures, market access and tenure must be adopted that puts forests into the broader context of rural
 development.  The focus should be on improving governance (especially correcting major distortions in incentives and
 markets that are reducing the value of the forest resources), and the development of efficient markets and encouraging
 competitive private sectors participating in the sector.  More focused interventions are required for maintaining natural
 forests for eco system protection and sustaining the global and local forest values.
(Para 60)
Action Taken by the Ministry
Forest Policy and Planning in India is a concurrent responsibility of the central government and state governments. Policy
 and Planning are linked to prescriptions contained in basic national legislation, including forestry legislations. In turn,
 policy shapes legislations in as much as legislations provide the structure and grounds for implementation of policies,
 strategies and priorities. Further, forestry is directly linked to overall land use. Hence forest policy and legislations flow
 from, and constitute a part of the national land use and legislative framework for natural resource management. The
 National Forest Policy, 1988 embodies the principles of sustainable forest management and treats forests primarily as
 environmental and social resources.    Recognizing the role of forests in rural livelihoods and in securing environmental
 security for future generations, the Government of India have formulated the National Forestry Action Plan (NFAP) which
 is a comprehensive work plan for the next twenty years to achieve the goal of sustainable development of forests and also to
 increase the forest/tree cover in the country to 33 percent of the land area as mandated in the National Forest Policy, 1988. 
 The National Forest Policy, 1988 contains essential elements to achieve sustainability of all types of forests, which are
 mainly (i) Increase in the extent of forest and tree cover; (ii) Maintenance, conservation and enhancement of bio-diversity;
 (iii) Maintenance and enhancement of ecosystem functions and vitality; (iv) Conservation and maintenance of soil and
 water resources; (v) Maintenance and enhancement of forest resource productivity; (vi) Optimization of forest resource
 utilization; (vii) Maintenance and enhancement of social cultural and spiritual benefits. The Government of India have
 adopted several schemes under National Forestry Programmes  to achieve Sustainable Forest Management and the national
 goal of one third of land area under forest/tree cover, and also simultaneously forging  linkages with livelihood and poverty
 alleviation issues of forest dependent communities.
2.         The sustainable management of forests and trees can make a meaningful contribution towards achieving livelihood
 opportunities to the people living in and around forests.  In particular : (i) the management, harvesting, processing and
 marketing of wood and non wood forest products can provide opportunities for employment and income generation (ii) The
 adoption of agro forestry practices can increase food production and food security in conjunction with provision of  wood
 products for sale or consumption, provide a source of household energy, and improve soil composition (iii) watershed
 management practices can provide multiple goods and services especially enhanced and sustained water production that is
 important to health and sanitation.
3.         MoEF has prepared comprehensive National Forestry Action Plan (NFAP) for 20 years to achieve sustainable
 development of forests and to increase forest and tree cover upto 33% of geographical area with a cost of Rs.133902 Crore.
 The forest and wild life sector is getting around 30%  financial resources of the required need including the budget at the
 national level and funding from external sources. It is a major constraint in achieving sustainability and thus providing
 required level of livelihood opportunities and incentives to the rural people dependent on forests. If adequate investment is
 made, forest and wild life sector is capable of providing livlihood opportunities to the poorest of the poor who live in and
 around forests.           
4.         As regards attracting investment from private sector, the MoEF is working on developing a multi-stakeholder
 partnership (MSP) for afforestation of degraded forest lands. MSP involves local community, State Forest Department  and
 private industry as partners.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION/TRAINING/EXTENSION PROGRAMME
Recommendation
            The Committee recommends that the Ministry should have taken the initiative for Strengthening Environment
 Education in the formal educational curriculum and for this purpose, it should vigorously interact with the University
 Grants Commission (UGC), the National Council for Educational Research and Training (NCERT), the Ministry of Human
 Resource Development, All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE) and the State Education Department to ensure
 integration of environmental concept into the curriculum. Moreover, talented persons should be encouraged with
 remunerative schemes and attractive pay scales to do research on environment related issues.                  (Para 63)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The Ministry of Environment & Forests (MOEF) has taken various initiatives for strengthening Environment Education in

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 the formal educational curriculum. Though Formal Education is the mandate of the Ministry of Human Resource
 Development (MHRD), MOEF has been interacting since early 1990s with the MHRD, NCERT, State Departments of
 Education etc. to ensure that environmental components are adequately covered at the school level.
In 1999, MOEF commissioned Bharati Vidyapeeth Institute of Environment Education & Research (BVIEER) to conduct a
 nation wide survey to assess the extent of infusion of environmental concepts in the school curriculum and the effectiveness
 of its delivery in the classroom. Simultaneously, a National Consultation on EE was also organized in January 2000. The
 participants at this Consultation, which included officers from MHRD, MOEF, NCERT, State Government Departments of
 Education, SCERTs, etc. and representatives from NGOs besides educationists, were of the view that instead of teaching
 Environment as a separate subject, a separate space/forum should be created within the School System for integrating the
 various environmental concepts infused/introduced in other subjects. The Study revealed that the extent of infusion of
 environmental concepts into the school curriculum varied from State to State- while it was reasonably satisfactory in some
 States, it was very poor in some other states. It was also observed that appropriate training of teachers was necessary to
 ensure effective transaction of the environmental concepts in the class room. The study also recommended strengthening the
 infusion approach. Based on these recommendations, MOEF launched a pilot project on “Environment Education in School
 System” under the World Bank assisted Environmental Management Capacity Building Project with the basic objective of
 strengthening environmental education in the formal school system. The EESS project was implemented in 15 States in
 collaboration with the State Education Departments and the respective SCERTs for greening of the middle school level
 textbooks and their introduction in 100 schools in each state on experimental basis. The introduction of greened books in
 the project schools was preceded by the training of teachers in these schools.
The EESS project also stresses on hands-on activities. A hands-on Environmental learning program Global Learning and
 Observations to Benefit the Environment (GLOBE) was therefore, launched as a component of the EESS project.  India
 joined this program in August 2000 and has so far trained about 1800 GLOBE teachers from about 1700 schools in the
 country. Teachers of the 100 pilot schools were trained in various protocols for conducting the experiments in four broad
 environmental parameters-Hydrology, Soil, Land Cover and Atmospheric temperature / rainfall.  GLOBE provides a unique
 opportunity to its students to carry out various measurements so that they can learn about scientific protocols and perform
 environmental learning activities, which have already been introduced as theory in the greened textbooks developed for
 EESS project.  
The Ministry had also been interacting with the UGC to ensure coverage of environmental components at the college level
 education. A course module has been worked out through UGC for teaching EE as a separate paper at entry level in all
 streams of undergraduate education.
The MOEF has also launched an initiative to integrate environmental concepts and issues in the Management Education
 Syllabi of various professional Management courses in consultation with AICTE in 2002.  The courses content has been
 examined. Workshops have also been conducted to sensitize the faculty of more than 250 management colleges towards
 environmental issues. A Curriculum Development Workshop was also conducted to develop new curriculum and also to
 develop a resource base for teaching material.  An inventory of the courses offered in India and abroad has been prepared
 along with an inventory of resource material.
Besides the above initiatives, the Working Group constituted by the MOEF in April 2004 for the preparation of a
 Comprehensive plan for Environment Education in school; with members drawn from MHRD, NCERT, MOEF, a few State
 Education Departments and representative of organizations (namely CEE, CPREEC and IES) working in the field of
 Environment Education; has recommended that the MOEF shall take following action in the light of the Hon’ble Supreme
 Court’s directive to all the State Government to compulsorily teach environmental concepts in schools as per the model
 syllabus prepared by NCERT:
MOEF will collaborate with NCERT to facilitate the preparation of the textbooks by developing training modules for the
 textbook writers;
MOEF shall help the state governments in training teachers, master trainers/ resource persons by providing financial and
 technical assistance;
MOEF will play an important role in hands-on activities suggested by NCERT in the model syllabus.
Under the research funding program, guidelines are being framed to pay good remunerations to talented persons working in
 institutes, which do not receive core grant, to do research on environmental issues.
Point raised by the Committee
In the Action Taken Note, the Ministry may also mention the status of implementation of recommendations made by the
 Working Group. When did the Working Group submit its report?
Clarification by the Ministry
The Report of Working Group was submitted on 4
th October,2004 and was accepted by the Hon’ble Minister of
 Environment & Forests on 20.12.2004. The status of implementation of recommendations made under the report is as
 under:
 

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
The MoEF has already offered through its consultant organization, the Centre of Environment Education, Ahmedabad,
 technical and financial support to the State Governments for orientation of their textbook writers to facilitate preparation of
 the new textbooks. 
 
MoEF has also offered technical and financial assistance to State Governments for the preparation of training modules as
 well as imparting training to schools’ teachers, master trainers, and resource persons for teaching environment education.
 
The hands-on-activities have been started in 1700 schools under the GLOBE programme. The GLOBE programme is being
 further strengthened to cover more States under this programme.          
 
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
            The Committee also recommends that to promote an awareness among the students, the scientists, planners, policy
 makers, etc., and also for exchange of information and knowledge on different aspects of ocean science and technology, the
 Ministry should sponsor, organize and conduct seminars/workshops/symposia, etc.  These measures will help the Ministry
 in building up a skilled human resources base in environmental science, besides augmenting existing infrastructure
 facilities.
(Para 64)
Action Taken by the Ministry
Ministry is already providing funds for organizing Seminar/Conference/Workshop etc to provide a forum to professionals,
 scientists, environmentalists, and other groups of the society to share knowledge and experience on various themes related
 to environment and for creation of mass environmental awareness. Under this programme, financial assistance is being
 provided to universities, academic institutions/colleges, NGO’s, Govt. Departments on identified thrust areas related to
 environment or any other emerging area impinging on technology, innovation in regard to environment.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply and feels that efforts of the Ministry should be focused on educating people about
 environmental issues and making them conscious about their own roles in protecting nature and environment.
 
CONSERVATION PROGRAMME
Recommendation
            The Committee recommends that National Mangroves Afforestation Programme should be designed so that new
 research projects on the priority areas of mangroves and coral reef conservation for supplementing Management Action
 Plan of strategically identified mangrove areas is accorded importance.                                                   (Para 70.1)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The Government seek to sustain mangrove forests and Coral Reefs in the country by both regulatory and promotional
 measures. The Coastal Regulation Zone notification(1991) under the Environmental Protection Act(1986) recognizes the
 Mangrove and Coral reef areas as ecologically sensitive and categorizes them as CRZ-I(i) which implies that these areas are
 afforded protection of the highest order. Under the promotional measures the Government has identified 35 mangrove areas
 and 4 Coral Reefs areas on a country-wide basis for intensive conservation and management.
The Ministry of Environment and Forests, for the last several years has been funding research in multi-disciplinary aspects
 of Mangroves and Coral Reefs ecosystems protection, conservation and management at various universities, institutions of
 higher learning, national research institutes and non-governmental organizations. There has been an allocation of Rs. 24
 crores during the X Plan for Mangroves and Coral Reefs, of which a sum of Rs.6.50 crores has been provided for Research
 Projects. The Current year’s allocation for Research in Mangroves and Coral Reefs is Rs.5.30 crores. There is an increasing
 emphasis on close interface between Researchers and Managers in the field. The Primary objectives are to develop
 strategies, technologies and methodologies for better management of mangroves areas in the country.
Point raised by the Committee
The Ministry may provide the details of the various Universities, Institutions and NGOs which are supported with the fund
 to do research in the field of Mangrove and Coral Reef Conservation. To what extent, the primary objective of developing
 strategies, technologies and methodologies for better management of mangroves areas in the country has been achieved, as
 the scheme has been implemented for the past several years?
Clarification by the Ministry
The list of projects supported by the Ministry in the area of Mangroves & Coral Reefs during 2004-05 and 2005-06 is
 enclosed. As would be noted, 29 projects have been assisted in the field of Mangrove & Coral Reef biology, Survey &
 Inventorisation, and Development of Data bases.  
            A number of technologies & methodologies for better management of mangrove areas have been adopted in the

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 recent years. There is a problem of ‘saline blanks’ or hyper-saline areas in Pitchavaram & Muthupet Regions of Tamil Nadu
 and Godavari & Krishna Deltas of Andhra Pradesh. To cover these areas with mangrove species, trenching technique has
 been developed and used by the State Forest Departments with financial support from the Ministry.  In this technique,
 canals are formed so that the high saline soils get regular tidal inundation, excess salts are leached out and the area becomes
 suitable for regeneration of mangroves. A workable design namely ‘modified fish bone channel’ has been scientifically
 demonstrated at Muthupet, Tamil Nadu.  In this design, distribution canals are linked to avoid the blind end points.  The
 feeder canals are at 50 m distance and distribution canals are at 20 m distance. Using this technique, the hyper-saline areas
 have been successfully reclaimed.  Similarly, in the arduous terrain along the coasts of Gulf of Kutch in Gujarat, the raising
 of mangrove plantation has been difficult as the tidal amplitude washes away the planted seedlings.  The Gujarat Forest
 Department with financial support from the Ministry has developed and implemented a ‘raised-bed technique’ in which the
 seedlings are planted on raised beds in parallel rows during the low tide hours.  
List of projects supported by the Ministry of Environment and Forests during   2004 - 05 and 2005 – 06.
S.No. Title of the Project Name & Address of the PI Total Sanctioned
 Outlay
1. Investigation on lesser known aspects
 of mangrove biodiversity and ecology
 in the States of Goa, Karnataka and
 Andhra Pradesh, ICFRE (Dehra Dun)
Dr. K. Satyanarayana Rao, Institute Of
 Wood Science & Technology, 18
th Cross,
 Malleswaram P.O., Bangalore - 560 003
13,14,000/-
 
 
2. Studies on rare species in India for their
 effective conservation
Dr. K. Kathiresan, Centre of Advance Study
 in Marine Biology , Annamalai University,
 Parangipttai - 608 502
28,64,500/-
 
 
3. Inventorization and characterization of
 the microbial community in
 Bitarkanika Mangrove ecosystem of
 Orissa.
Dr. Nibha Gupta, Senior Scientist, Regional
 Plant Resource Centre  Bhubneswar – 751
 015
11,10,000/-
 
 
 
4. Studies on the reproductive biology or
 corals to assess coral regeneration and
 larval recruitment pattern
Dr. J.K. Patterson Edward, Director,
SDMRI, Tuticorin - 628 002
15,18,000/-
 
 
5. Genome analysis of corals for their
 systematic and conservation
Dr. Usha Goswami,
National Institute of Oceanography, Goa
13,53,000/-
 
 
6. Pollination biology and reproductive
 ecology of major Mangrove species of
 Gujarat
Ms. Seema Mali, GEER Foundation,
Gandhinagar,
Gujarat
14,20,000/-
 
 
7. Pollination biology of Ceriops tagal and
 Ceriops decandra (Rhizophoraceae)
Dr. A.J. Solomon Raju, Department of
 Environmental Sciences, Andhra
 University, Visakhapatnam
9,96,793/-
 
 
8. Population structure and reproduction in
 Bruguiera and Ceriops: Implication on
 conservation
Dr. K. Gurumurthi, Institute of Forest
 Genetics and Tree Breeding, Coimbatore
15,95,400/-
 
 
9. Seed biology of Indian Mangroves in
 relation to sustainable conservation and
 management
Dr. Subrata Maity, Department of Seed
 Science & Technology, Bidhan Chandra
 Krishi Viswavidyalaya, Mohanpur, Nadia,
 W.B.
13,13,600/-
 
 
10. Assessment of phyto-diversity and
 preparation of database of Mangroves
 of Sunderban Biosphere Reserve, W.B.
Dr. H. S. Debnath, Botanical Survey of India
 (BSI), Kolkata
16,35,800/-
 
 
11. Systematic evaluation of aquatic
 epiphytic microbial diversity of
 mangrove plants and a novel strategy
 for raising mangrove nursery
Dr. M. Sundararaman , Department of
 Microbiology, Bharathidasan university,
 Tiruchirapalli
9,99,810/-
 
 
12. Ecological assessment for development
 and biodiversity conservation of
 Bhavanapadu (Mangrove) Swamps of
 North Coastal, Andhra Pradesh
Prof. K. Kameswara Rao, Department of
 Environmental Science, Andhra University,
 Visakhapatnam
11,61,330/-
 
 

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
13. Assessment of marine microbial, floral
 and faunal diversity of the coral reef
 environs of the Little Andaman Islands
Prof. L. Kannan
Annamalai University,
Annamali Nagar – 608 002, Tamil Nadu
30,59,600/-
 
 
 
14. Taxonomy and biodiversity of soft
 Corals (Octocoallia: Alcyonacea) in
 India
Dr. K. Padmakumar, Department of Aquatic
 Biology and Fisheries, University of Kerala,
 Thiruvananthapuram
20,05,000/-
 
 
15. Molecular diversity and biogeography
 of fauna in the Western Ghats, India
Dr. R.Sukumar, Center for Ecological
 Sciences, IISc., Bangalore
11,08,500/-
 
 
16. Ecological studies to conserve and
 rehabilitate the mangrove vegetation in
 the coastal landscapes of Kerala
Dr. J.K. Sharma, Kerala Forest Research
 Institute, Peechi, Kerala
15,42,000/-
 
 
17. Effect of reduced fresh water flow
 through Brahmani-Baitarani river
 systems on mangrove population in
 Bhitarkanika Estuary
Dr. K. Sarveswara Rao, Principal
 Investigator, Regional Research Laboratory,
 Bhubaneswar - 751 013, Orissa 
20,69,000/-
 
 
18. Recruitment and growth study of coral
 reefs in the Gulf of Kachchh
Dr. C.N. Pandey, Director, GEER
 Foundation, Gandhinagar
10,26,000/-
 
 
19. Plant crab association in the mangrove
 ecosystem of Kerala
Dr. T.S. Nayar, Division of Conservation
 Biology, TBGRI, Thiruvananthapuram
21,20,600/-
20. Geo-microbial investigation and
 characterization of the microbial
 community in Manakudi Mangrove
 Ecosystem of Tamil Nadu (South West
 Coast of India)
Dr. S. Ravikumar, Division of Marine
 Microbiology and Medicine, Centre for
 Marine Science and Technology,
 Manonmaniam Sundaranar University,
 Rajakkamangalam
13,43,280/-
 
 
21. Studies on the mangroves of Krishna
 and Godavari Estuaries
Dr. P.Venu, Botanical Survey of India,
 Southern Circle, TNAU Campus, Lawley
 Road, Coimbatore - 641 003
20,83,400/-
 
 
22. Biodiversity of malacofauna in  
 mangroves of East Coast of India
Dr. A. Shanmugam, CAS in Marine
 Biology, Annamalai University,
 Parangipettai
16,85,900/-
23. Pollination biology of Ceriops tagal and
 Ceriops decandra (Rhizophoraceae) at
 Coringa Mangrove Forest, Andhra
 Pradesh
Dr. A.J. Solomon Raju,Department of
 Environmental Sciences, Andhra
 University, Visakhapatnam - 530 003
9,96,793/-
 
 
24. Diversity and distribution of corals and
 their associated fauna of Rani Jhansi
 Marine National Park, Andaman
Dr. R. Jeyabaskaran, Zoological Survey of
 India, A&N Regional Station, Port Blair-
744 102
15,05,000/-
 
 
 
25. Training programme on conservation of
 coastal and marine biodiversity for
 school teachers and students in coastal
 belt in Tamil Nadu
Dr. C. Lakshminarasimhan, A.V.V.M. Sri
 Pushpam College, Poondi
3,19,200/-
 
 
26. GIS based mapping and analysis of
 ecological variables of reefs around the
 little Andaman Island
Dr. Rajkumar R., ZSI, A & N Regional
 Station, Port Blair
21,91,600/-
 
 
27. Survey and inventorization of the by-
catch loss in selected coastal zones of
 West Bengal and its impact on
 biodiversity 
Prof. N.R. Chattopadhyay, Faculty of
 Fishery Sciences, West Bengal University
 of Animal and Fishery Science, Mohanpur -
 741 252, Nadia, West Bengal
15,73,800/-
 
 
28. Molecular diversity and biogeography
 of fauna in the Western Ghats, India
Dr. R. Sukumar, Centre for Ecological
 Sciences, Indian Institute of Science,
 Bangalore – 560 012
11,08,800/-
 

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
29. Professional and analytical support on
 conservation of coastal and marine
 biodiversity pursuant to the Convention
 on Biological Diversity and an in-depth
 study of the synergies and linkages of
 the subject with regard to other
 multilateral Environmental Agreements
 / Treaties
Dr. Sejal Worah, Mr. Rajesh Sehgal and Dr.
 Swayamprabha Das, World Wide Fund
 (WWF) for Nature-India, New Delhi
3,02,280/-
 
 
Total Amount Rs. 4,33,22,986/-
( Four Crore Thirty Three Lakh Twenty Two Thousand Nine Hundred Eighty Six only)
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply and suggests the Ministry to come forward with a comprehensive plan of action for
 preserving Mangroves and Coral Reefs.
CLEANING OF MAJOR RIVERS BY 2007 AND OTHERS BY 2012
Recommendation
            The Ministry has submitted that it is most unlikely to achieve the target of cleaning of major rivers by 2007 and it
 may extend the target to XI Plan.  On this submission of the Ministry, the Committee express its serious concern on the
 tardy pace of execution of river cleaning project and recommends that all causative factors for the slow progress of the
 project be identified and sorted out expeditiously and all out efforts be made to accelerate the momentum required to
 achieve the stipulated targets within their scheduled time limit and cost estimates.Para 78)
Action Taken by the Ministry
            National River Conservation Plan is presently being implemented in 32 rivers spread over 19 States and 158 towns. 
 Planning Commission has allocated Rs.1417 crores as 10
th Plan outlay for the works under this Plan against the requirement
 of Rs.3066 crores for completion of these works.  A demand has already been placed with the Planning Commission to
 increase this outlay during the Mid-Term Review, which is still underway.  Unless these funds are made available, the
 Ministry is not in a position to complete the approved works and achieve the target of cleaning of major rivers by  2007. 
 also the present approved works do not cover full pollution load in the major rivers like Ganga, Yamuna etc. for which an
 additional Rs.3064 crores is required.  All these requirements have been given to the Planning Commission and are
 necessary to meet the objective of cleaning of major rivers by 2007.
            In spite of the meagre resources for completing the approved works, additional sewage treatment capacity of 375 mld
 (million litres per day) was created during 2004-05 under NRCP and a further sewage treatment capacity of 564 mld is
 expected to be added during the current financial year.  It is, therefore, evident that the execution of river cleaning schemes
 is progressing satisfactorily commensurate with the funds available in the Outlay.
            Further, all the Systemic issues associated with the river cleaning projects have been identified and a detailed review
 of the works is being undertaken at the highest level in the Ministry by Secretary (E&F).  Monitoring of progress of works
 is being strengthened and  process has been initiated for appointment of independent Evaluators for the works being done
 under NRCD.  Meetings of the Steering Committee of National River Conservation Authority are also being held to review
 the progress of works with different States and to accelerate the momentum of works to achieve the stipulated targets
 commensurate with the outlay within the scheduled time limit and cost estimates.
Comments
            The Committee is not at all pleased with the present situation as it has now been informed that due to non-availability
 of sufficient funds, the project of cleaning of rivers cannot be completed  by 2007, the target fixed for this purpose and is
 likely to be extended to the XI Plan period. This means the cost of the project will increase. The Committee fails to
 understand as to why the issue of funds was not sorted out at the time of fixing the target. The Committee would like to
 have the comments of the Planning Commission and the Ministry in this regard, particularly the reasons/constraints for non-
completion of the Project as per the target.
NATIONAL LAKE CONSERVATION PLAN (NLCP)
Recommendation
            The Committee feels that lakes are critical in sustaining the environmental health of our country.  Acting as a huge
 reservoir, they not only provide water but also recharge and replenish the ground water and prevent floods.  Besides, their
 importance from the point of view of beauty, and aesthetics are well acclaimed.  But the Committee is not satisfied with the
 lackadaisical approach of the Ministry in undertaking the lake conservation schemes.  They are moving without any specific
 targets and objectives.  The Committee is anguished to note that even after repeated recommendations of the Committee,
 the Ministry has not come out with any specific targets to be achieved during a particular period.  The Committee expresses
 its serious concern and recommends that the Government should formulate short-term and long-term plans on lake
 conservation with specific targets and should proceed further in that direction as per those targets.
(Para 84)

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
Action Taken by the Ministry
The scheme of National Lake Conservation Plan(NLCP) was initiated in June, 2001 with the objective to restore and
 conserve polluted and degraded lakes of the country.  During the four year period since inception of NLCP, 20 projects for
 conservation of 35 lakes at an estimated cost of about Rs. 164 crore have been approved.  The activities covered under the
 programme include: Prevention of pollution from point sources by interception, diversion and treatment of pollution load
 entering the lake, insitu conservation measures like desilting, deweeding, bioremediation, biomanipulation, construction of
 wetland for nutrient development including lake beautification and public recreation facilities, public awareness and
 participation besides site specific activities.
The scheme of NLCP was conceptualized in 1994 and put up for approval of Government of India in Dec, 1997.  However,
 at that point of time, the Ministry was requested to seek external assistance for NLCP.  Since no funding agency evinced
 any interest, the scheme was later granted approval in June, 2001, after which its implementation  was initiated.  During the
 4 year period of implementation, the number of lakes taken up for conservation has gradually increased reaching 35 at
 present along with a progressive expenditure trend. With a view to prioritise the lakes for conservation under NLCP, the
 Ministry identified 62 lakes on the basis of a criteria.  The list of identified lakes have been communicated to all State
 Governments for amendments/ if any with justification.  Some of the States have indicated their prioritization of lakes.  A
 national prioritization list  shall be prepared after receipt of inputs from all the States.  The Ministry in the meantime has
 prepared short-term targets for the current financial year which include Physical completion of conservation works in 8
 lakes along with coverage of 3.66 Ha lake area through bioremediation resulting in improved dissolved oxygen content and
 reduction in organic matter with weed control.  Besides this, interception and diversion of sewage, realignment of drains,
 check dam, setting up of settling tanks, desilting & deweeding, catchment area treatment including afforestation along with
 public participation and public/private partnership are also proposed to be achieved in respect of a few lakes.
Comments
            The Committee is not satisfied with the action taken by the Ministry in conserving the lakes of the country.  It is
 constrained to say that a big project like NLCP, which could play a significant role in restoring the environmental health of
 the country, is suffering due to apathy and the lackadaisical attitude of the Central and State Governments.  Very little
 seems to have been done for cleaning of lakes and a lot of time has been consumed in preparing action plans or discussing
 cost factors.  The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the programme needs to be executed with all seriousness and
 commitment by the concerned parties.
 
POLLUTION GENERATED BY THE ACTIVITIES OF THE OSWAL CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS LTD.,
 ORISSA
Recommendation
            The Committee made an on-the-spot study visit on 3
rd February 2005 to have a first-hand assessment of the Pollution
 caused by M/s Oswal Chemicals & Fertilizers Ltd., Paradeep.  During it's study-visit, the Committee was apprised by the
 management of  M/s Oswal Chemicals & Fertilizers Lt., Paradeep that with such a huge operation where production of 6840
 TPD of di-ammonium phosphate was involved it wasn't possible to close the operations of the Plant as ordered by Orissa
 State Pollution Control Board (OSPCB). Now the Central pollution Control Board, New Delhi after examining all aspects
 related to Pollution, has referred the matter to OSPCB for their views, and the opinion of OSPCB are still awaited.  The
 Committee therefore, recommends that as the industry was asked to carry out process, safety and environmental audits of 
 the plant through a reputed firm, there for it should be given adequate opportunity to carry out these procedures and
 thereafter adopt suggestions made by the Environmental audit.  To enable the process, safety & environmental audits,
 Engineers India Limited, New Delhi requires the Plant to run in a steady state of operation so that the process by Engineers
 India Limited, New Delhi is completed and corrective measures suggested in right earnest.
                                                                                                                (Para 94)
Recommendation
            The Committee also notes that as huge production of fertilizer by the Plant is involved, mere closure of operations
 would send wrong signals to the business community besides diminishing the benefits to a larger section of population
 primarily the farmers.  However, every effort must be made to impress upon the Industry to comply environmental norms
 for a safe and smooth functioning of the Plant.                  (Para 95)
Recommendation
            The Committee also expresses its dismay that the issues has now been pending quite long and recommends that the
 same may be sorted out without further delay.
(Para 96)
Action Taken by the Ministry
In pursuance to various directions issued by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and the Orissa State Pollution
 Control Board (OSPCB) from time to time the project authorities have initiated the environmental, safety and process audit
 through Engineers India Limited (EIL). M/s Oswal Chemicals and Fertilizers limited had approached the Hon’ble Orissa

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 High Court regarding the import of raw material. The court in its judgments of 21st March, 2005 and 7th April, 2005 has
 directed that the rock phosphate and sulphur imported by the Company be unloaded and kept in go-down of the company
 where similar materials are stored and to prevent pollution, the company shall not be permitted import of further raw
 material and their use without prior approval of State and Central Pollution Control Board.
The OSPCB is continuously monitoring the activities and improvements in environmental management systems by the
 company.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
FOUNDATION FOR REVITALIZATION OF LOCAL HEALTH TRADITIONS (FRLHT)
Recommendation
            The Committee is of the view that 90% of the country's medicinal plants occur in forest habitats.  The most important
 strategy for conserving the medicinal plant gene pools is to establish a nation wide network of forest gene banks (average
 size 200-500 ha in tropical forest and 50-100 ha in high altitude forest) across the different forest types and altitudinal range
 in all bio-geographic regions of the country.  In view thereof, the Committee recommends that Ministry should urgently
 initiate programmes or in-situ conservation of genetic diversity.  The Committee also feels that conservation of genetic
 diversity and documenting the entire traditional medicinal plants should be undertaken in such a manner so as to plan for
 development of traditional medicinal plants.  Besides, the Ministry, in collaboration with CSIR, DST, DBT and Ministry of
 Rural Development, should support community owned enterprises based on medicinal plants.            (Para 98)
Action Taken by the Ministry
India has an estimated 8000 species of native medicinal plants.  These are distributed across all vegetation types and
 altitudinal ranges across all the bio-geographic regions of the country.  Conservation of these species can therefore only be
 done by protecting a large number of forest areas, comprising 15 to 20 forest sites in every State, across all the bio-
geographic regions.  The forestry sector undertakes in-situ conservation of the medicinal plants diversity of the country. In
 situ conservation serves the purpose of long-term survival and evolution of a species in  association with other plant, animal
 & microbial associates in the ecosystem.
Since MOEF is now administering the Biodiversity Act 2002, it has an additional mandate of supporting the conservation of
 traditional knowledge associated with the use of medicinal plants biodiversity.
            At present a number of organizations and departments, viz., ICMR, CIMAP, DBT, NBPGR, and Ministry of
 Commerce are also engaged in handling the subject of medicinal plants but each one has a specific mandate.  While it is
 research for the first three organizations, it is ex-situ conservation for NBPGR, and marketing for the Ministry of
 Commerce.  Similarly, research on cultivation of medicinal plants, especially pertaining  to standardization of agro-
technology & breeding techniques is managed by the Ministry of Agriculture.  The Indian Medicinal Plant Board was
 established vide Gazette Notification dated 24.11.2000, following the recommendations of the Planning Commission’s Task
 Force.  The basic role of Indian Medicinal Plant Board has been that of coordination and advisory, and limited to promoting
 cultivation (contract farming), extension activities and market research through project mode.  
            Considering   the extent and magnitude of work involved in in-situ and ex-situ conservation of medicinal plants, and
 the need for more than one agency having to be pro-active player and having been also recognized in the Planning
 Commission Task Force report, the Ministry of Environment and Forests would like to reaffirm the validity and relevance
 of its seminal role in conservation of medicinal plant.  The concerns arising out of CITES and CBD also provide an added
 dimension to it.
Point raised by the Committee
The Ministry has not made any comments on the Committee’s recommendation that the Ministry should support
 community-owned enterprises based on medicinal plants.
Clarification by the Ministry
The Ministry’s mandate in respect of medicinal plants covers conservation initiatives.  NBPGR (an ICAR Lab) also
 undertakes ex-situ conservation.  While research in medicinal plants is handled by ICAR, ICMR, CIMAP, DBT, DST; their
 cultivation is promoted by the Indian Medicinal Plant Board in the Ministry of AYUSH.   As for  the MOEF, its mandate
 extends to conservation of medicinal plants through both State-owned & Community-owned enterprises.  
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply and is happy to note the seminal role of the Ministry of Environment and Forests in
 conservation of medicinal plant.  However, multiplicity of agencies involved in the programme necessitates rigorous
 coordination and monitoring to ensure the success of activities pursued under the programme.  Therefore, the Ministry
 should chalk out a comprehensive plan, in coordination with other departments, to get the desired results.
TROPICAL BOTANIC GARDEN AND RESEARCH INSTITUTE (TBGRI), THIRUVANTHAPURAM
Recommendation
            TBGRI is the only organization in India, which maintains a 300 acre conservatory garden for the wild tropical plant
 genetic resources of India, besides a well integrated multidisciplinary R&D system dealing with conservation, management

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 and sustainable utilization of tropical plant resources.  The Institute has 121 acres of forest land with hills and hillocks,
 portions of evergreen, deciduous, marshy and riverine vegetation in addition to grass lands and rocky areas.  All of them to
 large extent provide different microclimatic conditions for different species.  The Institute also have a well-organized
 Arboretum, Palmetum, Bambusetum, Orchidarium, Medicinal plant garden and Field Gene Bank of wild plant collections to
 which new additions are being carried out from the topical areas of the country.  The Institute has about 20 major projects at
 operational stage on survey and inventory conservation and sustainable utilization of plant genetic resources in India. 
 TBGRI is accredited to UNCED and enjoys the membership of Botanic Gardens Conservation International.  The Institute
 is the coordination and National Database Center for All India Coordinated Research Project on Ethnobiology sponsored by
 the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India.  TBGRI also harbours a well-established herbarium of
 vascular plants and fungi and a group of well-trained taxonomists.                                                                                   (Para
 100)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The observations of the committee have been noted. TBGRI is an organization of the State Government of Kerala and it is
 funded for its day-to-day activities by the State Government. It also implements various projects through funding from other
 sources.
Comments
            The Committee notes a reply.
Recommendation
            Keeping in view the above facts, the Committee considers it as an institute of national importance and, therefore,
 recommends that the TBGRI should be elevated to a national institute under the administrative control of Ministry of
 Environment & Forests.
(Para 101)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The observations of the committee have been noted.  TBGRI is an organisation of the State Government of Kerala and it is
 funded for its day-to-day activities by the State Government.  It also implements various projects through funding from
 other sources.
             The TBGRI was provided funds on regular basis since the year 1997-98 and was also accorded the status of a
 National Centre of Excellence in 1997. However, due to certain complaints against the functioning of the centre, no funds
 could be released during the financial year 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 and subsequently, on the recommendations of an
 enquiry committee constituted by the Ministry, an ex-post-facto approval was given for expenditure of Rs.15.49 lakh
 incurred during 2000-01 and the institute was allowed to carry forward Rs.5.19 lakhs from the financial year 2000-01 to
 2001-2002. Recently, the instances of lack of financial and Accounts propriety have been brought to notice. Their resolution
 with the Institute is being pursued.
Point raised by the Committee
The Committee would like to know the status of resolution process being pursued with the TBGRI. What is the nature of
 financial irregularities brought to the notice of the Ministry?
Clarification by the Ministry
The Ministry has sought clarifications from the TBGRI on expenditure of funds released to it under the ‘Centre of
 Excellence’ Scheme subsequent to the submission of the Audit Report of M/s Verma & Verma on TBGRI. These mainly
 relate to unexplained creditors, amount lying in suspense account, large variations in the rates of depreciation, existence of a
 very large number of Savings Bank accounts and the absence of Bank  Reconciliation Statements. Besides, the accounts of
 the TBGRI have not been audited by the CAG as required under para 7.3. of the MoU signed between the TBGRI and the
 Ministry and the TBGRI has not maintained the records of Assets created out of grants provided by the Ministry.
.           Director, TBGRI has been requested vide the Ministry’s D.O. letter No. J-22018/6/97-CSC(BC)(Vol.IV) dated 6
th
 October, 2005 to submit clarifications and action taken report on each of the  issues highlighted in the said letter to enable
 the Ministry to take a decision on funding to TBGRI under the Centres of Excellence Scheme. This is being followed up
 closely to find an early resolution.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
           
            The Committee in paras 10 to 16 of its 143
rd Report pertaining to the Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the
 Department of Ocean Development (presented to the Parliament on 25th April, 2005) made recommendations on the Post-
Tsunami Assessment of Coral Health in Andaman Waters and Indian Ocean. The Department of Ocean Development, while
 furnishing its action taken note on the recommendations/observations of the Committee (on Post-Tsunami Assessment of
 Coral Health) mentioned that the activities relating to the assessment of the damages caused to the coral reefs in Andaman
 & Nicobar Islands including undertaking coral reef habitat restoration projects etc. fall within the purview of the Ministry of
 Environment & Forests. It further mentioned that the Department of Ocean Development is concerned only with the

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 mapping of coral reefs.
            In view of the above, the Ministry of Environment & Forests was then requested to furnish its comments on the
 recommendations/observations made by the Committee on Post-Tsunami Assessment of Coral Health in Andaman Waters
 and Indian Ocean.  Action Taken Notes on these recommendations of the Committee were received from the Ministry of
 Environment & Forests on 2
nd February, 2006. The Committee’s recommendations, the Action Taken on these
 recommendations by the Ministry of Environment & Forests and comments of the Committee thereon are set out in the
 succeeding paragraphs.
Recommendation.        
The Committee has been given to understand that massive influx of seawater borne by Tsunami on 26/12/04 severely
 affected several section of coral population in Andaman & Nicobar and in certain strategic areas of Indian Ocean.  The
 Committee has been further given to understand that four research vessels, namely, Sagar Poorvi, Sagar Paschimi, Sagar
 Sampada and Sagar Kanya of the Department of Ocean Development were commissioned in these waters to undertake,
 interalia, a detailed assessment of destruction inflicted by Tsunami on the coral health of these regions. 
            The Committee, however, finds that assessment with regard to the impact of Tsunami on coral reefs in Andaman &
 Nicobar Islands is somewhat contradictory. As per the Annual Report of the Department for 2004-05, coral reefs have been
 severely affected by Tsunami whereas Secretary of the Department in his presentation before the Committee on the 1
st
 April, 2005, maintained that by and large coral reefs were unaffected. The Committee, therefore, feels that a detailed
 physical verification of coral health is necessary to assess accurately the status of their health in post-Tsunami scenario. The
 Committee would like to have a factual note in this regard interalia giving the future contingency plan in case of such
 natural eventuality.                                     (Para 10)
 
Action Taken by the Ministry
            The Ministry had initiated a study on “Assessment of Damages to Coastal Ecosystems due to recent Tsunami” on 4
th
 January, 2005.  The Study included damages caused to mangroves, coral reefs, coastal forests, coastal and marine
 biodiversity, coastal water and fresh water pollution, geo-morphological changes based on satellite imagery.  The following
 scientific institutions were involved in the study viz.:
Annamalai University, Parangipettai
Botanical Survey of India, Kolkata
Zoological Survey of India, Kolkata
Forest Survey of India, Dehradun
Central Pollution Control Board, Delhi
Space Applications Centre (ISRO), Ahmedabad
Centre for Earth Science Studies, Thiruvanathapuram
Institute for Ocean Management, Anna University, Chennai
Suganthi Devadason Marine Research Institute (SDMRI), Tuticorin
Central Water Commisssion, New Delhi
It has been stated that the Reports from the institutions were received compiled by SAC in April, 2005. They have further
 stated that with regard to the damages to coral reefs, the above-mentioned Report indicates “Coral reefs have suffered two
 kinds of damages, the reefs were either completely eroded and/or sand, mud, detritus, deposited on it.  The giant Tsunami
 waves smashed and crushed the reefs, while the backwash deposited the debris.  The deposition of material kills the live
 coral colonies.  It has been estimated that the Andaman and Nicobar group of Islands lost reefs of about 23,000 ha. And
 17,000 ha. respectively.  About 6,740 ha. Of reef in the Andaman Islands and 6,140 ha. of reef in the Nicobar Islands is now
 covered by sand, mud or detritus.  The reefs of the Car Nicobar, Comorta, Nancowry, Trinkat, Katchall, Tilakchang and
 Little Nicobar have been totally lost.  The reefs of the Gulf of Mannar have been affected marginally.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply. However, there is no mention about the future contingency plan in case of such
 natural calamity.  The Committee would like to have details in this regard.
Recommendation
            The Committee apprehends that certain branching corals like Acropora Cytherea also known as stag horn corals
 which are common in Andaman waters might have been affected severely by the Tsunami onslaughts.
            The Committee is, however, of the opinion that unless comprehensive planning is made, neither proper and deep
 assessment of the health of coral in these areas could be made nor any critical measures could be designed to remedy the
 health of these corals in the affected areas.  The Committee, therefore, understands that in order to have a very successful
 picture of the entire assessment scenario, the following measures need to be considered by the Department before
 undertaking major audit of coral health in these areas:
Norms of audit through symbiotic studies of coral health will have to be
      mapped.

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
New insights into the role of cell suicide and apoptosis in bleaching of
            corals should also have to be developed.
A detailed mapping of coral stress tolerance is necessary to be assessed and
             mapped.
The behaviour of coral reef fish is needed to be assessed on a comparative
pilot-scale basis in coral areas which are severely affected by Tsunami and areas which are less affected or are not affected
 at all by the Tsunami onslaught.
Since reef bleaching and mortality are highly co-related, the study of coral  bleaching in detail is also necessary since this
 could be linked to                global climate change specially elevated sea water temperature and high solar irradiance.
                                                                                              (Para 11)
 
Action Taken by the Ministry
            Acropora cytherea is a fast growing corals and comes back to original level of colonization within a very short
 duration (10 years).  The Ministry notes that to remedy the health of the corals in Andaman &Nicobar Islands affected by
 the Tsunami, some important measures have been suggested by the Committee.  These can be undertaken by different
 organizations, as detailed below:
Symbiotic studies of coral reef health can be entrusted to National Institute of Oceanography, Goa (a CSIR Lab) they have
 the relevant facility to do so.
New insights into the role of cell suicide and apoptosis in coral bleaching can be developed with the help of experts, serving
 in the relevant Committees of Department of Biotechnology (DBT).  Centre for Cellualr and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad
 (a CSIR Lab) may take-up such studies.
Mapping of coral stress tolerance is to be studied by DBT, DST and relevant CSIR organizations.
Behaviour of coral reef fish is an important area of study to be taken up by fishery specialists in CMFRI, Zoological Survey
 of India.
Reef bleaching and mortality in relation to climate change is an important area where an integrated approach and
 coordinated efforts are required by various GOI Departments such as DOD, DST, DBT,DSIR and MOEF.
Comments
            The Committee recommends that its suggestions could be examined by the abovementioned organizations.
Recommendation
The Committee feels that successful restoration and management of coral health require a more realistic and historically
 informed understanding of the ecology of near-pristine condition of coral reefs that can only be obtained by a combination
 of retrospective analyses, modeling and intensive studies of eco-system structure and function of the very few isolated reefs
 that have escaped intensive exploitation by Tsunami onslaughts.  The Committee understands that studies based on an index
 known as DI, i.e., comparative Deterioration Index of community for corals will have to be undertaken for deriving a
 comparative picture of analysis of the health deterioration of different corals groups in these regions.  The DI values can
 show the likelihood of some of the corals getting rehabilitated early and some corals more at a later stage which is
 proportional to the destructive index of each coral community following the Tsunami onslaughts.  The training should be
 given to surveyors for fast yielding of elaborate data based upon deterioration index of these coral communities so that
 relatively accurate picture could be framed for the subsequent restoration.  Moreover, the DI approach can serve as an
 efficient tool for Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) Selection and Management. The Marine Protected Areas (MPA) is the
 primary form of protection in the marine coastal zone and could be used as a spearhead for marine conservation including
 the restoration of coral health.  The MPA could be directly linked with DI index and the coefficient of the DI picture can
 give details for restoration of the marine protected areas. Apart from this, identification of new Heat Shock Protein (HSP) of
 marine invertebrates is expected to enable rapid and accurate quantitative monitoring of short term and long-term
 fluctuations in marine eco-system.   The expression of specific stress proteins present in certain coral community can be
 identified as early warning system for future changes in coral communities following Tsunami disturbances and also the
 ability of reef eco-system to withstand global changes could also be assessed.                            (Para 12)
 
Action Taken by the Ministry
            At present various research organizations collect data on the coral reef ecosystem on various/different aspects.  The
 data collected to be placed in an Database which will give an overall picture about the status of coral health.  The
 deterioration index of coral community could be useful to managers of marine protected areas.
            With regard to identification of new Heat Shock Protein (HSP) of marine invertebrates, for using as early warning
 systems for future changes, DST&DBT may be requested to initiate action to identify suitable research programme and
 institutions to carry out such works, Integrating the results of HSP studies by these organizations, the early warning systems
 of future changes in marine communities, especially coral communities can be made available.
Comments

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
            The Committee notes the reply
Recommendation
The Committee also feels the turbidity and terrigenous mud which have been transported by the Tsunami to different coral
 reefs from other area should also be measured to understand the coefficient of DI (Deterioration Index).
            Apart from this, the comparative gene flow, migration of sea bio community from other areas and relative return of
 the elementary sea bio community to their original coral habitats following Tsunami can also give some ideas about
 comparative health of the coral resources.                                                                                                              (Para 13)
 
Action Taken by the Ministry
            The turbidity and movement of terrigenous  material transported during Tsunami will have a major effect on the
 coral reefs of Andaman Islands by burying and silting the live coral colonies.  Due to the location of Andaman and Nicobar
 Islands in the Bay of Bengal region these terrigenous material will be transported within a short time.  However, this is an
 interesting area of study to understand how new colonization is taking place where such devastation due to Tsunami has
 taken place.  The study will also reveal the regeneration of coral species-wise.  Such studies need continuous presence in the
 area and Indian researchers from various Universities/CSIR and other Laboratories may take them up with appropriate
 collaboration and logistic support from local Forest Departments.
            Turbidity and deposition of terrigenous materials including sedimentation caused during the period of Tsunami and
 afterwards on the coral reef areas can be studied and monitored in future by the DOD and Space Application Centre,
 Ahmedabad using Remote Sensing and GIS techniques.
            With regard to the studies pertaining to the gene flow and migration of sea bio-community, including introduction of
 invasive alien species, different institutions like the relevant CSIR laboratories, CMFRI, Fisheries Survey of India, Fisheries
 Department of Andaman & Nicobar and Annamalai University may be involved in such studies.
 
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply
Recommendation
            The Committee further feels that while assessing coral health, the incidence of coral diseases may also be studied
 because in most cases etiology of greater number of coral diseases are still unclear and the nature of relationship between
 coral and their associated bacteria are not yet fully established.  Since the reef bleaching and mortality of coral are highly
 co-related, a detailed mapping in this regard is also necessary before designing a proper restoration scheme.  A major and
 topical question concerns the effect of increasing atmospheric CO2 on coral calcification.  Coral calcification rates have
 been used to derive information on carbonates saturation state in the ocean and to derive specific conclusion on atmospheric
 CO2 levels in the past and in the future.        (Para 14)
 
Action Taken by the Ministry
            The incidents of coral diseases can take place where human population is living close to the reef areas.  Some work
 has already taken place in the past on the coral diseases of Andaman coral reefs by NIO.  However, it is very important to
 know any outbreak of disease due to Tsunami.  A survey has to be conducted by the experts in the disease area to find out
 the present status of coral reefs after Tsunami.  Research organizations established under DST, DBT and NIO are supposed
 to conduct such studies.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply
Recommendation
            Geographic Information System (GIS) which is a computer based system could be made useful by the Department
 for generating geographical reference data, management and analysis through digital mapping of coral areas and mapping of
 coral reef condition through tabular database in digital format could be even more useful as what the Committee feels.  
 Apart from this, the knowledge of geotectonic processes is pertinent for studying coral health and its repercussions on coral
 communities.  The Committee is of the opinion that any blending of geological processes and subsequent changes in bio
 diversity pattern of coral can suggest avenues for further research such as molecular genetics of biodiversity patterns of
 coral reefs.  The Committee is of the opinion that the extent of coral bleaching could be used as a promising indicator for
 environmental change and tsunami linked turbidity repercussions on coral community.              (Para 15)
 
Action Taken by the Ministry
            GIS is already in place in all the coral reef areas including Andaman and Nicobar Forest Department.  Space
 application Centre, Ahmedabad is also working on the mapping of these areas with GIS. Apart from this DOD under
 Integrated Coastal and Marine Area management Directorate at Chennai is also developing GIS on the different Critical
 Marine areas of country.  DOD may generate geographical reference data and may do digital mapping of coral reef areas, as

153rd Report of Committee on science & technology, environment & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/153rdreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 this Department is already using remote sensing and GIS techniques for coral reef mapping and monitoring in Andaman &
 Nicobar Islands under ICMAM program.
            Such studies have to be undertaken on an integrated approach involving various research organizations established
 under different Ministries of the Government of India such as DST, MoEF, CSIR, etc.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply
Recommendation
            The Committee would also like to suggest the development of coral nursery project by the Department because this
 will provide resource managers information on various coral species and colonies.  Since coral nurseries may become
 important tools in future, coral reef habitat restoration projects, the development of coral nursery composed of important
 coral schools is absolutely necessary.                                              (Para 16)
Action Taken by the Ministry
            Coral restoration through coral nursery is an important area of study for rehabilitation of Tsunami affected coral reef
 areas.  The technology is still in its infancy.  The Ministry of Environment and Forests is supporting such efforts in Gulf of
 Mannar reefs. Only certain type of fast growing corals may be made available for coral nursery and restoration.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
#Shri Jaswant Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 11th August, 2005 consequent upon his resignation from the Committee.
* Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 23rd December, 2005 consequent upon his expulsion from the Rajya Sabha.
§ Prof. Saif-Ud-Din Soz ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 29th January, 2006 on being inducted into the Union Council of Ministers.