PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 223
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)MAY, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY , 
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY THIRD REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-2013) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 85)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)TH

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY THIRD REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-2013) OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 85)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 TH MAY , 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 TH MAY , 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY , 2012/V AISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—14
4. S UMMARY OF THE R ECOMMENDATIONS .................................................................................. 15—18
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................ 19—27

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2011-12)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
*2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Anil H. Lad
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Dr. Chandan Mitra
@6. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
7. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
@8. Shri A.V. Swamy
9. Dr. Barun Mukherji
10. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
12. Shri Ninong Ering
#13. Vacant
14. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
15. Shri Abdul Rahman
16. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
17. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
18. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
19. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
20. Shri Cosme Francisco Caitano Sardinha
21. Shri Shibu Soren
22. Dr. Rajan Sushant
23. Shri Pradeep Tamta
24. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava
**25. V acant
26. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
***27. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
* Shri Janardan Dwivedi re-nominated w.e.f. 2 nd February, 2012.
@ Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra and Shri A.V. Swamy nominated w.e.f. 15th May, 2012.
# Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  3 rd  January, 2012 on his
resignation from the Membership of the Committee.
** Shri Akhilesh Yadav ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 2 nd May, 2012 on his resignation from the
Membership of the Lok Sabha.
*** Nominated w.e.f.  25 th November, 2011.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Twenty Third Report of the Committee. This
Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2012-2013) of the Department of Science and
Technology (Ministry of Science and Technology) (Demand No. 85).
2. In its meeting of the Committee held on the 12
th April, 2012 the Secretary and other
Officers of the Department of Science and Technology gave an overview of the various activities
of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance
of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the
clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 18
th May, 2012.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
May 16, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

1
REPORT
Science and Technology plays a pivotal role in economic prosperity, social developments
and national security of any country.  Science provides the basic infrastructure for innovations and
technological breakthroughs, especially in the emerging scenario of a developing and competitive
economy like India. In the wake of the new demands of the growing economy, Science and
Technology system in the country is embarking on science projects which have relevance to
national needs and which will also be relevant for the future.
2. During the next two decades, India is expected to emerge as a major global economic
power. It is envisioned that science would be at the heart of such phenomenal national
development. In this direction, the Science Advisory Council (SAC) to the Prime Minister has
presented a vision for growth of Indian science that can help formulate a national strategy for
developmental plans to succeed, and a road map for India to emerge simultaneously as a global
leader in science.
3. For realizing the science vision of India, conscious efforts to synergize various programmes
of the country both in public and private funded institutions are essential. Agencies like the
Department of Science and Technology are required to play a critical and changing role during the
12
th Plan period, if science vision for the country for emerging as a leader in global science is to
be realized.
4. The Department of Science & Technology (DST) was established in May, 1971 with the
primary objective of promoting new areas of Science and Technology (S&T) and to play a nodal
role in organizing, coordinating and promoting S&T activities in the country.
5. The mandate of DST is given below:
• Formulation of policy statements and guidelines on Science and Technology (S&T).
• Promotion of new areas of scientific research.
• Co-ordination of inter-departmental S&T efforts.
• Support basic and applied research in universities and other institutions.
• International S&T Co-operation.
• Support high quality research in autonomous bodies where specialization ranges from
advanced medical research materials to astronomy.
• Catalyzing S&T interaction in societal programmes, and entrepreneurship development.
• Science popularization, communication and S&T Management Information System.
• Promotion of Commercialization of home grown technology.
• Support to technology development programmes, technology information and
assessment.
• Providing services in the areas of:
(i) Surveying & Mapping
(ii) T echnology Development and Application

2
6.  ORGANISATIONAL SETUP
6.1 The Department of Science & Technology is the nodal Department of the Ministry of
Science and Technology, which comprises of three departments viz. Department of Science and
Technology, Department of Scientific & Industrial Research and Department of Biotechnology. The
Organisational Structure of the Department has evolved over the years to respond quickly to the
issues relating to the promotion and development of Science & Technology in the country. Broadly,
the functions of the Department has been divided into Autonomous Institutes, Scientific Groups,
Technology Development Board, Scientific Services besides the Administration and Integrated
Finance divisions. There are 19 Autonomous Institutes and 5 Science/Engineering Professional
bodies which are working in diverse areas for the promotion of Science and Technology. In
addition one new autonomous body viz. National Centre for Molecular Material Research,
Thiruvanathapuram has been recently set up and National Innovation Foundation, Ahemedabad
which was earlier a ‘Corpus Funded’ Financial Institute  has been taken over by the Department
as fully funded autonomous Research Institute. The Scientific Groups inter-alia  consists of the
Science & Engineering Research Council (SERC), National Council for Science & Technology
Communication (NSCTC), National Resources Data Management System (NRDMS), International
Division, National Entrepreneurship Board (NEB), National Science and Technology Management
Information System (NSTMIS). The Scientific Services has two subordinate offices, viz., National
Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organisation (NATMO) and Survey of India (SOI) under its
administrative control.
6.2 The detailed budget allocation of the Department of  Science and Technology, for the year
2012-2013 was considered by the Department-related Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests on the 12th April, 2012.
7. MECHANISM TO MONITOR AND REVIEW THE ONGOING SCHEMES
7.1 The Department informed the Committee that the physical and financial progress of all
programmes/schemes are monitored through half yearly/annual reviews by the respective
Programme Advisory Committees. Regular interactions with stakeholders are held to ensure
completion of projects within time-frame and feedbacks are received from the project implementing
investigators/agencies and problem areas are identified for remedial measures. The Department also
informed that it has recently introduced an instrument called Result Framework Document (RFD),
which contains the agreed objectives, policies, programs, projects and success indicators and
targets to measure progress in implementing them, to monitor physical and financial progress/
achievements of major activities with respect to agreed targets fixed for each programme. All
schemes/programmes mentioned in the RFD are monitored by half yearly/annual review. Apart from
this, Secretary, Department of Science and Technology reviews progress of programmes and
expenditure position through a monitoring meeting with all the Programme Heads/In-charges
every month. It has also been decided that all the major programmes needing investments beyond
Rs. 25 crores will be monitored by Special Monitoring and Review Committees and expert groups
are proposed to be established under the chair of eminent scientists and experts. It is proposed to
strengthen the monitoring mechanisms of all major projects through periodical i.e. quarterly
reviews.
7.2 The Committee is of the opinion that a robust monitoring mechanism is essential for
ensuring timely completion of the various projects to avoid time and cost overrun and to
ensure full utilization of allocated funds. The Committee appreciates that the Department
has adopted the Result Framework Document (RFD), with the objective of effective review
of both the physical and financial progress/achievements in implementation of policies,
programs, projects of major activities vis-a-vis agreed targets fixed for each programme. The

3
Committee hopes effective monitoring of projects would  lead to timely completion of
projects and optimum utilization  of funds in the year 2012-13.
8. FUND UTILISATION IN XI TH PLAN
8.1 The Committee was informed that the Department has assumed a major role in supporting
S&T activities in the country and over the years, investments in the S&T sector have been stepped
up significantly. From an allocation of Rs. 349.00 crore in the Seventh Plan, investments have gone
up to Rs. 1192.00 crore in the Eight Plan and Rs. 1497.00 crore in the Ninth Plan. Total approved
outlay for Tenth Five Year Plan was Rs. 3400.00 crore, against which the actual expenditure
incurred was Rs. 3998.00 crore. Approved outlay for the Eleventh Five Year Plan was Rs.11,028.00
crore against which the actual expenditure incurred during 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10, 2010-11 and
2011-12 were Rs. 1266.89 crore, Rs.1517.42 crore, Rs.1667.41 crore, Rs. 1932.89 crore and
Rs. 2252.00 (R.E.)  crores respectively. As such, during the Eleventh Five Year Plan, out of a total
allocation of Rs. 8734.5 crores, the Department successfully utilized Rs. 8636.61 crores.
8.2 The Committee commends the fact that in all five  years of Eleventh Plan, the
Department has consistently given good performance of fund utilization and hopes the
Department would give even better performance of fund utilization in the 12th Five Year
Plan.
8.3 The Department further informed the Committee of the ongoing programmes of the XIth
Plan of the Department which will continue during the XIIth Plan and also the new initiatives  that
are proposed to be taken up during the XIIth Plan, the details of which are as follows:–
Ongoing programmes:
• Research & Development Support
• Technology Development Programme
• S&T Programme for socio-economic development
• International Cooperation
• State Science and Technology Programme
• Modernization of Mapping Organizations (SOI & NATMO)
• Autonomous Institutions & Professional Bodies
• Technology for Bamboo Products (Mission Mode Project)
• Synergy projects
• Information Technology
• National Training Programme for Scientists/Technologists working with Govt. of India
• Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Research
• National Mission on Nano-Science & Nano-Technology
• Science and Engineering Research Board
• Scholarships for Science in Higher Education
• Water Technology Initiative
• INSPIRE

4
• Innovation Clusters
• Security Technology Initiative
• Mega Facilities for Basic Research
New Initiatives:
A number of new initiatives have been proposed during the 12 th Plan period, besides the
ongoing programmes mentioned above. The new initiatives include the following:
• 1000 Overseas Doctoral scholarships
• 250 Overseas Post-doctoral fellowships
• Women mobility scheme for employed scientists
• Enlarging the PI base to include about 500 teachers from colleges and universities
• Start-up Research grant for Indian Diaspora undertaking faculty assignments in Indian
academia
• “Disha” for women in Science programme
• Building Educators for Science Teaching
• Challenge awards for institutions for global positioning
• National Centres for Advanced Research
• Technology Platforms
• Centre-State Technology partnerships
• Contributions to PAN India missions
• Joint (Virtual) Centres
• North East Centre for Technology Applications and Reach
• Climate Change Programme
• Challenge Award for Technology Solution Design
• District Level Technology Intervention
• Public Private Partnership for Research & Development
• Programme for Research Initiatives in Mathematics Education (PRIME)
• Empowering opportunities for Excellence in Science for SC & ST
• Establishment of Super Computer Facility.
8.4 In reply to the query of the Committee, the Department informed that the thrust of R&D
programmes proposed under the Twelfth Plan can be grouped under broad objectives viz. ,
(a) policy formulation, (b) strengthening human capabilities, (c) strengthening institutional capacity,
(d) technology development and deployment, and (e) partnerships and alliance with S&T based
societal interventions. The programmes will include (a) developing new stimuluses and mechanisms
for promoting basic research in all areas of science, (b) rejuvenation of research in university
sector, (c) developing enabling policy environment for increasing the playgrounds of private sector

5
into R&D and promotion and innovation of eco-system, (d) establishing technology platforms in
10 identified areas, (e) promoting the development of deployment of convergent solution to
problems relating to water, potash, fertilizer, off-Grid energy supply systems (based on hybrid
technologies) and homeland security, (f) promoting incremental bilateral and multilateral S&T
cooperation as well as private-public partnership, (g)  promoting State-Centre technology
partnerships, and (h) promoting S&T application in Rural India through the established council
employing per-capita income of the cluster as the monitoring parameter.
8.5 Thrust areas for investment of science for development will specifically be, (a) water
technology, (b) energy technology, (c) security technology, (d) climate change science, (e) advance
manufacturing, (f) automotive research, (g) geo-spatial technology, (h) super computing and
(i) Astronomy and accelerator physics.
8.6 The Committee takes note of the ongoing programmes of the XIth Plan period that
are proposed to be strengthened during the XIIth Plan period and the new initiatives that
are proposed to be undertaken by the Department during the the XIIth Plan Period. The
Committee appreciates the fact that though the major thrust areas of the Department
continue to be strengthening basic research and expanding Research & Development, both
in terms of Human as well as Institutional capacities, it has also been increasingly
involving itself in diverse programmes aimed at providing benefits of applications of Science
& Technology, to the common masses. The Committee is of the opinion that societal
interventions of Science & Technology are needed to improve the quality of life of our
people and therefore such programmes should be encouraged. The Committee also approves
of the special attention that has been given to nurture and bring women scientists to the
fore and hopes that the new programme named DISHA will help bring gender parity in the
field of Science and Technology and increase the contribution of women scientists to science,
technology and development.
9. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
9.1 The Committee was informed by the Department that it has been allocated Rs. 2873.22
crores (including Rs. 2477.00 crores for Plan allocation) in the fiscal year 2012-13. In comparison
to this, for the year 2011-12, a total outlay of Rs. 2733.00 crores (including Rs. 2349.00 crores
as Plan allocation) was made at the B.E. stage for the Department, which was reduced to
Rs. 2605.50 crores in R.E. stage.
9.2 The Committee observes from the above that allocation initially made at B.E. stage has been
reduced at R.E. stage in the year 2011-12, by Rs. 127.50 crores but the allocation was increased
by Rs. 267.72 crores at B.E. stage of the year 2012-13. When the Committee enquired the reasons
behind the enhanced allocation this year, the Department stated that it perceives this as an
investment into R&D for building capacities both in terms of human as well as infrastructure in
the country. Further, during the year 2012-13, the Department has proposed a number of new and
proactive initiatives and the major flagship scheme ‘INSPIRE’ has now reached its full and planned
scale. The Department further argued that in order to justify the enhanced allocation for the current
fiscal 2012-13, the Department will continue its practice of monitoring physical and financial
progress of programmes mentioned above through monthly meetings and judicial expenditure
planning. Besides quarterly meetings and periodical interaction with stake holders are also proposed
for ensuring physical achievement in major projects within a stipulated time-frame.
9.3 The Department further added that although it was able to utilize benchmark figures of 48%
and 66% of the B.E. allocation last year by September and December 2011, the Department was
advised by Planning Commission, to reprioritize some specific schemes like INSPIRE and Mega
Science Facilities for Basic Research, which could not fulfill its targeted objectives on time and

6
activities of such projects were bit slower at R.E. stage.  However, the Department was somehow
able to utilize 96.44% of the R.E. allocation for the year 2011-12.
9.4 The Committee agrees with the justification given by the Department. The
Committee is of the view that increased investment in R&D including the strengthening of
human and institutional capacities in Science & Technology are necessary for realizing the
vision of India emerging as one of the top five knowledge powers in the world by 2030.
9.5 In reply to a query of the Committee  regarding the total projected demand made by the
Department for B.E. 2012-13 and the total actual allocation received and as to whether the funds
allocated are sufficient to carry out the activities of the Department; the Department stated that the
total projected demand made by the Department for B.E. 2012-13 was Rs. 3905 crore (Plan)
including Rs. 500 crore for the Super Computer facility and Capacity building. However, allocation
of Rs. 2477 crores (Plan) has been received by the Department for the year 2012-13. Within the
fund allotted for 2012-13, some of the proposed programmes cannot be taken up.
9.6 The Department further argued that task of building National Capacity and Capability in
Super Computing was assigned by the Planning Commission and Policy bodies to the Department
of Science and Technology. The Detailed Project Report has already been prepared and the
estimated budget for the facility is Rs. 5300.00 crore for the Twelfth Plan period. Investment into
mega science and large projects like super computing will be phased into the second and third
years of the 12th Plan period.
9.7 The Committee notes with concern that against a projected demand of Rs. 3905.00
crores in 2012-13 (Plan) for B.E. 2012-13, a meagre amount of Rs. 2477.00 (Plan) was
actually received by the Department, signaling a fall of Rs. 1428.00 crores than the
projected demand resulting in non-initiation of some of the important proposed
programmes.
9.8 The Committee observes that this is a very serious issue as some of the proposed
important  projects will either be not taken up or would be delayed which will not be in
national interest. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
pursue the case of higher allocations with the Ministry of Finance and the Planning
Commission so that the pending amount of Rs. 1428.00 crores could be allocated to it during
the R.E. stage of 2012-13.
9.9 The Committee is further of the opinion that atleast the Scientific Departments
should be spared from the routine cuts both at B.E. and  R.E. stages. The Committee feels
that the Budgetary cuts not only hamper the smooth progress of the projects/programmes,
but also demoralize the dedicated scientists who are involved in such projects.
10. MAJOR PROGRAMMES OF THE DEPARTMENT
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT
10.1 The Committee was informed that the Department is committed to the pursuit and promotion
of science & technology with vigor in the 12
th Five Year Plan. The Department through the R&D
Support Scheme has intensified the R&D promotional activities through innovative programmes such
as Intensification of Research in High Priority Areas (IRHPA), Fund for Improvement of S&T
Infrastructure in Universities and Higher Educational Institutions (FIST), FAST Track Young
Scientist’s R&D programme and Prestigious Fellowships like J.C Bose, Ramanujan, Ramanna, etc.
10.2 Since the Science & Engineering Research Board (SERB), legislated through an Act of
Parliament with the prime objective of supporting basic research in emerging areas of science and

7
engineering, is in operation and therefore several of the competitive mode of funding schemes of
the Department, earlier being implemented through the SERC stand transferred to the Board.
10.3 The Committee was informed that allocations for R&D are made under the heads of
Research & Development Support and SERB. Allocations to the tune of  Rs. 411.75 crore and
Rs. 200.00 crores were made for Research & Development Support and SERB respectively in the
year 2011-12 at R.E. stage i.e. a total R.E. allocation of Rs. 611.75 crore was made in 2011-12.
For the year 2012-13 at B.E. stage, Rs. 316.50 and Rs. 400.00 crores have been respectively
allocated for ‘Research and Development Support’ and SERB; hence the total B.E. in 2012-13 for
it is Rs. 716.5 crores. The Department further stated that these moderate allocations would suffice
to meet the increasing importance of indigenous Research & Development in the country.
10.4 The Department, while explaining the higher allocation for SERB in 2012-13, stated that
the SERB, which has started its operation in mid of 2011-12 and will become fully operational in
2012-13. Several of the programmes such as competitive grants for project proposals submitted by
individual investigators under Extra Mural Research; Setting up centres, units/core groups under a
scheme called Intensification of Research in High Priority Areas (IRPHA); Fast Track Young
Scientist project; Various fellowship programmes Support to Seminar/Symposia and S&T Professional
Bodies; and International Travel support scheme, to assist the participation of Indian scientists in
conferences and seminars held abroad will be in full operation under SERB. The Board also would
undertake many new initiatives planned in the XII
th Plan. The administrative and financial autonomy
of the Board would help implementing these programmes efficiently and on a real time scale.
10.5 The Committee is of the opinion that formation of a body, such as the Science &
Engineering Research Board (SERB), to coordinate and to give a renewed boost to the
declining state of research in basic sciences, was long overdue. A need for de-
bureaucratization of the Scientific departments and providing functional autonomy to the
bodies engaged in research has long been felt by the Committee. In this direction the
Committee welcomes the efforts of the Department in the formation of the SERB, with
administrative and financial autonomy of the Board in implementing the basic research
programmes efficiently and on a real time scale. The Committee hopes that the SERB will
enhance S&T capabilities of the country and lead to increased visibility of the Indian
scientists and Indian research establishments globally.
10.6 As regards the state of R&D investments, the Department stated that, if India is to emerge
as one of the top five knowledge powers in the world by 2030, right sizing of R&D investments
as well as broadening the R&D base simultaneously with stronger participation of the private sector
would be necessary. The Committee was told that whereas public investments into R&D have
reached global levels of 0.75-1.0% of GDP, investment of private sector into R&D in India has
remained low at about 0.25% currently against levels of 1.2-2.0% of GDP in many developed and
emerging economies.
10.7    The Committee expresses serious concern at the low level of investment in the
R&D Sector by the private sector, which at present stands at only 0.25% compared to levels
of 1.2-2.0% of GDP in many developed and emerging economies. The Committee feels that
if India has to emerge as a scientifically developed nation, that private sector investment
in R&D has to increase substantially from the present levels. This calls for greater
partnership between the industries and academia, particularly research institutions and
universities. The Committee feels that the Department should formulate such policies and
programmes which would encourage the private sector to invest substantially in the R&D
Sector. The private sector should be enlightened about the advantages that would accrue to
them in long term, besides financial benefits, to encourage their participation in the
country’s progress in the scientific field.

8
11. TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
11.1 The Department informed that this programme is aimed at developing indigenous technology
through joint projects with industry and socio-economic Ministries. It also includes activities
relating to development of Natural Resources Data Management System (NRDMS), Patent
Facilitating Cells (PFC), Instrument Development Programme (IDP), Joint Technology Projects
(JTP), Inter-Sectoral S&T Advisory Council (IS-STAC), Disaster Management Cell (DMC),
National Spatial Data infrastructure (NSDI), Fly Ash Unit (FAU), National Good Laboratory
Practices Compliance Monitoring Authority (NGLPCMA), National Mission on Climate Change and
Solar Energy Research Initiative (SERI).
11.2 The Committee was informed that through its Technology Development Programmes, the
Department has taken a leading role in (a) improving the Industry-Academia partnership,
(b) development of web-based information system providing access to entrepreneurs to good
quality support for Intellectual Property, legal & accountancy, and (c) instituting a fund for
‘incubation’ of technologies in premier institutions.
11.3 New innovative methods for selecting technology priorities complete with techniques for
deriving benchmarks and suggested mechanisms for promoting development of convergent
technology solutions for some key challenges of India using a novel Technology Platform (TP)
approach has been initiated. Mounting of four Technology Platforms are proposed for initiation
during the 12
th Plan viz. (a) Distributed Solar Energy Generation and Storage, (b) Membranes as
technology platform and novel rapid  contaminant detection  sensors for potability of water,
(c) Integrated computational material engineering, and (d) Energy efficient low emission wireless
technology.
11.4 The Committee was also informed that the allocation under ‘Technology Development
Programme’ has seen a rising trend from Rs.130.56 crores at R.E. stage 2011-12 to Rs.140.00
crores in 2012-13. Explaining the reasons for the increase, the Department stated that the existing
programmes under TDP such as Technology Systems Development, Instrumentation Development,
Solar Energy Research Initiatives, Climate Change will be strengthened. In addition, three new
initiatives under XII
th Five Year Plan on Technology Platforms and Challenge Award for Technology
Solution Design and District Level Technology Intervention, have been identified and will be
initiated during this year.
11.5 The Committee appreciates the Department for initiating the Technology
Development Programme which aims at developing the need-based indigenous technologies
through joint participation with the industry on one hand and the socio-economic Ministries
on the other. The Committee feels that the programme will help in enhancing the
technological prowess of the country. It also notes that the thrust areas of the programme
which inter-alia  include technology needs for North-Eastern States, technology convergence
for the production of Sulfate of Potash, are of immense importance. The Committee hopes
that the Department will strive hard to make the programme achieve its objectives. The
Committee further recommends that the Department should initiate more such programmes
for the socio-economic development of the common man.
12. INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
12.1 The Committee was informed that the programme includes the science & technology
cooperation with the United States of America, France and other developed and developing
countries to undertake collaborative projects in the identified thrust areas in the frontiers of S&T,
related areas of science for basic research and to explore other possible areas for future
cooperation and to support the Centre for S&T of the non-aligned and other developing countries

9
and the International Council of Scientific Unions and affiliated Unions/Committees through annual
contributions.
12.2 The Committee observed that the allocation under International co-operation has increased
from Rs. 80.55 crores in R.E. in the year 2011-12 to Rs. 97.35 crores in B.E. 2012-13. On being
asked about the reasons for the increase, the Department explained that new opportunities and
challenges have arisen for India in the 21st century global knowledge and the Department has been
able to strategically leverage ‘international collaborative advantage’ by building chosen international
alliances and partnerships with selected countries that can help in bridging S&T gaps. The
objectives of the programme is as follows:
(i) R&D outputs through international alliances which can contribute directly to national
outcomes;
(ii) enable new paradigms being practiced by other developed and emerging economies for
sustainable adoption by Indian R&D and innovation systems;
(iii) evolve modalities and mechanisms for connecting Indian research with global efforts
particularly in the frontier areas of S&T and in areas addressing global challenges; and
(iv) help India to use the soft prowess of S&T as a tool for international diplomacy.
12.3 The Department also informed the Committee that apart from support to ongoing activities,
the following new programmes have been agreed with the partner countries, which are likely to
be launched during the financial year 2012-13:
• Indo-US Endowment Fund for Innovation
• Outgoing Fellowship with Australia, France, Germany, South Korea etc.
• Establishment of Indo-Russian Scientific & Technological Centre
• Innovation led R&D Programme with Finland, France, Germany, Canada, Israel
• Significant joint projects in Grand Challenge areas with UK, Australia and Spain
• Establishment of new virtual thematic Joint Centers with partner countries.
12.4 The Department also informed the Committee that as a result of the programme India’s
impact and stature in global scientific field has increased considerably. This can be gauged from
the fact that joint patents have been filed with foreign scientists; project based mobility has
provided indirect opportunities to Indian scientists for joining international projects; Impact factor
of papers published under the International Collaboration have increased besides various
consequential benefits.
12.5 The Committee notes that there has been an increase of Rs. 16.80 crores in B.E. 2012-
13 as compared to R.E. 2011-12 under the head of International Cooperation. The Committee
is of the opinion that the need of the hour is to forge new international Science & Technology
initiatives/agreements to help bridge the Science & Technology gaps in the frontier areas of
Science and Technology, besides ensuring sharing of expertise, cost and optimal utilization of
resources. The Committee, therefore, supports the programme and hopes Department would
work towards realisation of the objectives of the programme in right earnest.
13. DRUGS AND PHARMACEUTICAL RESEARCH PROGRAMME
13.1 The Committee was informed that the Department while recognizing the profound influence
of R&D on the prospects and opportunities for the growth of the Indian Drug Industry, initiated

10
the scheme on Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research in 1994-95 for promoting Industry-Institutional
Collaboration in R&D in drugs and pharmaceuticals sector. The programme aims at enhancing
capabilities of institutions and the Indian Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Industry towards development
of new drugs in all systems of Medicine. The specific objectives of this scheme are:
• To synergise the strengths of publicly funded R&D institutions and Indian
Pharmaceutical Industry in developing drugs in areas of national relevance;
• To create an enabling, infrastructure, mechanisms and linkages to facilitate new drug
development; and
• To stimulate skill development of human resources in R&D for drugs and
pharmaceuticals.
13.2 The Committee observed with concern that the budgetary allocation under the head ‘Drugs
and Pharmaceutical Research’ has been reduced from Rs. 60.00 crores in B.E. to Rs. 55.00 crores
in R.E. in the year 2011-12 and then again drastically reduced to Rs. 40.00 crores in B.E. 2012-13
and asked the Department to explain the reasons for reduction which may hamper the progress of
Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research Programme. The Department while explaining the reasons
stated that several new schemes and programmes are being implemented by Departments of
Biotechnology and Scientific and Industrial Research, which also provide grants and soft loans with
and without interest to pharma industry, which are more attractive than ‘Drugs and Pharmaceutical
Research’ schemes being run by the Department of Science & Technology. Hence the number of
projects seeking loans under this programme is decreasing. Further, as the multiplicity of availability
of funds for research for academia and industry has increased, the DST share has come down
resulting in decreased allocation.
13.3 The Committee also recalled that during the examination of Demands for Grants (2010-11),
it was informed by the Department that the ‘Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research’ programme
which was started in 1994-95, is being shifted from Department of Science & Technology to
Department of Biotechnology (DBT), or AYUSH, Ministry of Health or CSIR and the Committee
had expressed its serious concern at the fact that even after so many years of being in existence,
no focused approach has been adopted towards the programme. In continuation of its observation
the Committee had desired to know whether the programme was still under the control of the
Department of Science & Technology or had been shifted to any other Ministry/Department as
proposed earlier. In reply the Department stated that the Department did not shift the Drugs &
Pharmaceuticals Research Programme (DPRP) to any other Department and continued its activities
during 2011-12 and will further be extended to the XIIth Five Year Plan as well. During 2011-12
several projects for new drug development were supported with the DST share of Rs. 40.00 crores.
13.4 The Committee notes with serious concern, the lackadaisical approach adopted by the
Department towards a crucial programme such as the ‘Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research’
programme. It notes that there are overlapping grant of loans and schemes being
implemented by Departments of Biotechnology and Scientific & Industrial Research,
providing grants/soft loans on more attractive terms to pharma industry, which has resulted
in a decline in demand for the ‘Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research’ scheme run by the
Department of Science & Technology and consequent decrease of funds allocated under the
programme. The Committee feels that this is a serious case of lack of coordination between
the three departments viz. DST, DBT and DSIR, which incidentally function under the same
Ministry.
13.5 In this connection, Committee would also like to point out that in its 162
nd Report
on ‘Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research Programme including Herbal Medicines’ (Para 2.5.5,
page 3), it has been stated that wide fluctuations were noticed in allocation made by the

11
Department for ‘Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research’. While the allocation stood at
Rs. 150.00 crores in B.E. 2005-06. this was reduced to Rs. 105.00 crores in R.E. 2005-06 and
again increased to Rs. 130.00 crores in B.E. 2006-07. It is very surprising to the Committee
that, a programme of the nature of ‘Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research’, which assumes
paramount importance as it phenomenally contributes to strategic innovations in medical
sector, has been given an allocation of only Rs. 60.00 crores in B.E. 2011-12, which was
drastically reduced to Rs. 40.00 crores in B.E. 2012-13. The extent of drastic decrease in
fund allocation under this programme would be evident when present allocation are
compared to allocation six or seven years back which were of the tune of  Rs. 130 crores
to 150 crores. This is despite the prevailing general inflation over the years.
13.6 The Committee finds that the logic of the Department is strange, that their
programme is losing its importance as programmes developed by other Departments are
more attractive. In the first place, a coordinated approach ought to have been adopted by
all the Departments of the Government so as to ensure that there is no overlapping
between the programmes offered by the different departments. Secondly, the Department
ought to have made its continuing programme as attractive, if not more attractive than the
similar programmes devised by the other Departments. The Department, it seems, is simply
allowing an important programme to slip out of its hands.
13.7 The Committee is of the considered view that in a country where poverty is rampant
and sizeable part of population suffers from critical diseases, continued support to drug
research programmes is the social responsibility of the Government for providing affordable
drugs/medicines to the poor masses and this responsibility cannot be diluted or absolved at
any stage through reduced allocations. The Committee feels that for a focused approach the
‘Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research Programme’ should preferably be, promoted by a
single Department and the programme should be regulated in such a manner that there is
no overlapping of schemes/loan grants of the various departments. The Committee further
recommends that the various Departments may however pool their scientific expertise to
achieve success of the ‘Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research Programme’.
14. ALLIANCE AND R&D MISSION
14.1 The Department informed the Committee of a new scheme, viz. the Alliance and R&D
Mission, which is proposed to be initiated from this fiscal year. Under the scheme it is proposed
to support the existing  programmes such as  Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research
(INSPIRE) and Scholarship for Higher Education (SHE); besides initiating programmes on Building
Educators for Science Teaching (BEST), Public Private Partnership for R&D, PAN INDIA S&T
Missions, Climate Change Programmes and Establishment of Joint Centres. Since, all the above
programmes have specific missions, partnerships and alliances and therefore they have been merged
under the new scheme “Alliance and R&D Mission”.
14.2 The Department also informed the Committee that the main objective of the INSPIRE and
SHE programmes is to attract talents towards a research career in science. The programme on
Building Educators for Science Teaching (BEST) aims at elevating the professional and teaching
acumen by providing opportunities for gaining global experience of superior methods of mentoring
and teaching. The scheme on Public Private Partnership (PPP) for R&D is to stimulate the private
sector investments into science. PAN India S&T Missions aims at providing knowledge,
technologies and design solutions to the national challenges such as food and nutrition, security,
energy and environment security, affordable health care and water security. The mission will work
for focus R&D on high priority areas such as biomaterials, healthcare & medical instrumentation
and diagnostic tools etc. and develop nationally coordinated inter-Departmental and inter-Ministerial

12
coordination. The main objective of the Climate Change Programme is to coordinate the national
missions on climate change under National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) and joint
centres will be established to enhance Indian research capabilities and provide opportunities to
Indian scientific institutions to coordinate with foreign scientific institutions.
14.3 The Department also informed that an amount of Rs. 400 crores have been allocated  under
the B.E. 2012-13 for the Alliance and R&D Mission.
14.4 The Committee expresses its serious concern at the waning of interest among the
new generations towards a career in science, which has led to the shortage of quality
scientific and technical manpower for the country’s scientific and research programmes. The
Committee appreciates the fact that a significant amount of Rs. 400.00 crores has been
allocated for the Alliance and R & D Mission which inter-alia  aims towards attracting and
encouraging the new generation towards a research career in science. The Committee feels
that the long term requirement of generation of quality manpower needs to be addressed
at different levels by aggressively upgrading the infrastructure in universities in the field
of science and promoting quality research in them. In this direction the INSPIRE and SHE
schemes, which on one hand, aims towards inculcating an interest towards science amongst
the young generation and the BEST scheme which aims at elevating the professional and
teaching skills of the teachers, by providing them an opportunity for gaining global
experience of superior methods of mentoring and teaching, are highly commendable. The
Committee feels that through such schemes the brightest students of the country can be
nurtured and retained for research in science streams and would eventually enable India to
embark on ambitious course of scientific wealth creation.
14.5 The Committee also commends the initiatives of the Ministry in exploring the Public
Private Partnership (PPP) mode of funding for R&D in order to stimulate the private sector
investments into science; the PAN India S&T missions which inter-alia  aims towards
providing solutions of basic problems of the common man such as food and nutrition,
affordable health care and water security and the Climate Change Programme which will
focus towards the pressing issue of Climate change. The Committee would, however, like to
caution the Department to ensure the effective implementation of these commendable
programmes so that targeted benefits actually flow from these programmes.
15. DISHA PROGRAMME FOR WOMEN IN SCIENCE
15.1 The Committee was informed that the DISHA programme has been holistically designed to
facilitate mobility of women scientists and aims towards providing opportunities to women
scientists to re-enter and continue working in S&T fields of their expertise and choice as a long
term alternate career option and provide a platform to women scientists employed in public funded
S&T institutions & universities to continue in S&T fields in the event of relocation due to family
reasons. This scheme also seeks to achieve gender parity in the area of Science and Technology.
15.2 Explaining the reasons for an allocation of Rs. 49.00 crores at B.E. stage for the year 2012-13
under the Head ‘Disha Programmes for Women in Science’, the Department explained that the
DISHA scheme encompasses ongoing gender initiatives of the Department to include fellowships to
women scientists in basic and applied sciences, societal initiatives, one year training in IPR and the
CURIE programme for infrastructure support to women in S&T universities along with an added
component on DISHA mobility. It would provide 1000 contractual pan India positions in teaching,
research, technology development, science administration and management and other areas related
in S&T, which would be open for women scientists to avail. In case specialized skills are required,
training in the relevant field such as policy research and analysis, translational research,
management and regulation, etc. would also be provided and the women professionals would be

13
provided suitable remuneration during the training period. Subsequent employment would be
contractual with a consolidated salary equal to but not less then their last pay drawn and the initial
contract would be for a period of 5 years extendable after a review of their performance. The goal
of these initiatives is to cover 2000 women scientists each year. The fellowships can be availed
in cycles of 5 years up to the age of 60 years subject to regular review.
15.3 The Committee commends the role of the Department in initiating the DISHA
scheme, which it feels would open up ample opportunities for women S&T professionals,
whose careers are otherwise stuck or who are forced to opt out of their careers, due to
familial as well as social obligations. The Committee feels that this scheme would provide
an opportunity to women scientists to re-enter and continue working in S&T fields of their
expertise and also to continue in the field of their choice in case they have to relocate to
different places. The Committee is of the opinion that such schemes which ensure gender
parity should be supported adequately through budgetary support.
16. NATIONAL MISSION ON NANO SCIENCE & NANO TECHNOLOGY
16.1 The Department informed the Committee that under the National Mission on Nano  Science
& Nano Technology, the following areas of research have been identified:
(a) Studies of free atomic and molecular clusters, cluster assembled materials, low
dimensional structures and quantum dots;
(b) Nano-electronics and nano-photonics; and
(c) Applications: nano-device based sensors and diagnostics kits, controlled and targeted
drug delivery systems, nano-phosphor based display devices, etc.
16.2 The Committee observed that the allocation under the head ‘National Mission on Nano
Science & Nano Technology’ has shown a decreasing trend, from Rs.105.00 crores at B.E. in the
year 2011-12, to Rs. 85.00 crores at B.E. stage in the year 2012-13. The Department also informed
the Committee that for 2012-13, it had proposed a budget of Rs. 125.00 crores for the Nano
Mission, however the Department did not receive the desired increase in its budget and only
Rs. 85.00 crores have been allocated.
16.3 Highlighting some of the achievements of some major projects funded by Nano Mission in
the field of design, development and application of carbon nano tubes, the Department stated that
IISc, Bangalore has discovered the use of single walled carbon nano tube as a flow sensor and
the technology has been patented and transferred to a Company in the United States; scientists at
BHU has also developed an anti-leishmanial drug that overcomes drug-induced toxicity and have
also devised a simple method to produce carbon nanotube filters that efficiently remove micro to
nano-scale contaminants from water and heavy hydrocarbons from petroleum. IIT-Madras has
developed water purification systems using nano technology which has been commercialized and
IIT-Delhi has developed a prototype automotive oil filter based on nanowebs.
16.4 The Committee is aware that Nano Technology is an upcoming field of science which
holds great potential specially in the field of designing, developing and application of carbon
nano tubes in many sectors including medicines. The Committee commends that one of the
focussed areas of research of programme, is in the field of nano-device based sensors,
diagnostics kits, controlled and targeted drug delivery systems, which would go a long way
in the treatment of critical diseases. The Committee also appreciates the fact that some of
the technological achievements of the Indian scientists have been patented and
commercialized, even in technically advanced countries like the United States, which proves
the competence of the Indian scientists in the field of nano technology. It also appreciates

14
the support that the Department has provided to the scientists and institutions working in
the field of nano technology and hopes that in future, efforts would also be directed towards
programmes which directly affect the common man such as use of nano technology for
water purification, medical applications etc.
16.5 The path-breaking contribution that nano technology offers to diverse areas, ranging
from industry to medicine, itself advocates for the fact that constant increased allocation
under this head is a compelling necessity, specially in view of the country’s excellent
performance in this field, which is apparent from the growth rate of 9.1% per year achieved
by India in this field and the fact that India has already emerged as the sixth major country
in nano science output. The Committee, however, is unhappy over the fact that in the year
2011-12, the Department failed to utilize allocation of Rs. 105.00 crores made at B.E. stage,
which resulted in reduction of allocations at R.E. stage to Rs. 89.55 crores and provision of
Rs. 85.00 crores in B.E. this year. The Committee hopes that the Department would
efficiently utilize the allocations made this year so that, if needed, allocations could be
raised at R.E. stage of 2012-13. The Committee recommends that budgetary support for this
important programme should be suitably raised at R.E. stage, so that the programme does
not suffer for want of adequate funds.
17. The Committee after examining the various aspects of the Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Department of Science & Technology, is of the view that the Department,
through its various schemes and programmes, apart from promoting research in basic
research and technology is also taking initiative to use technology to benefit the masses.
Some of the initiatives of the Department discussed above are commendable and if properly
implemented will bring immense benefits to the targeted groups. The Department during its
interaction with the Committee, appeared largely satisfied with the funds allocated for its
various programmes. The Committee, while taking note of it, is of the opinion that
programmes for societal benefits and for securing bright future for our country men should
be adequately funded and hopes that in case the Department needs more funds at R.E.
stage, the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance should give due consideration to
its proposals for enhancement of funds.

15
SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Committee is of the opinion that a robust monitoring mechanism is essential for
ensuring timely completion of the various projects to avoid time and cost overrun and to
ensure full utilization of allocated funds. The Committee appreciates that the Department
has adopted the Result Framework Document (RFD), with the objective of effective review
of both the physical and financial progress/achievements in implementation of policies,
programs, projects of major activities vis-a-vis agreed targets fixed for each programme. The
Committee hopes effective monitoring of projects would lead to timely completion of
projects and optimum utilization of funds in the year 2012-13. (Para 7.2)
2. The Committee commends the fact that in all five years of Eleventh Plan, the Department
has consistently given good performance of fund utilization and hopes the Department would
give even better performance of fund utilization in the Twelfth Five Year Plan. (Para 8.2)
3. The Committee takes note of the ongoing programmes of the XIth Plan period that
are proposed to be strengthened during the XIIth Plan period and the new initiatives that
are proposed to be undertaken by the Department during the XIIth Plan Period. The
Committee appreciates the fact that though the major thrust areas of the Department
continue to be strengthening basic research and expanding Research & Development, both
in terms of Human as well as Institutional capacities, it has also been increasingly involving
itself in diverse programmes aimed at providing benefits of applications of Science &
Technology, to the common masses. The Committee is of the opinion that societal
interventions of Science & Technology are needed to improve the quality of life of our
people and therefore such programme should be encouraged. The  Committee also approves
of the special attention that has been given to nurture and bring women scientists to the
fore and hopes that the new programme named DISHA will help bring gender parity in the
field of Science and Technology and increase the contribution of women scientists to science,
technology and development. (Para 8.6)
4. The Committee agrees with the justification given by the Department. The Committee
is of the view that increased investment in R&D including the strengthening of human and
institutional capacities in Science & Technology are necessary for realizing the vision of India
emerging as one of the top five knowledge powers in the world by 2030. (Para 9.4)
5. The Committee notes with concern that against a projected demand of Rs. 3905.00
crores in 2012-13 (Plan) for B.E. 2012-13, a meagre amount of Rs. 2477.00 (Plan) was
actually received by the Department, signaling a fall of Rs. 1428.00 crores than the
projected demand resulting in non-initiation of some of the important proposed
programmes. (Para 9.7)
6. The Committee observes that this is a very serious issue as some of the proposed
important projects will either be not taken up or would be delayed which will not be in
national interest. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
pursue the case of higher allocations with the Ministry of Finance and the Planning
Commission so that the pending amount of Rs. 1428.00 crores could be allocated to it during
the R.E. stage of 2012-13. (Para 9.8)
7. The Committee is further of the opinion that atleast the Scientific Departments
should be spared from the routine cuts both at B.E. and R.E. stages. The Committee feels
15

16
that the Budgetary cuts not only hamper the smooth progress of the projects/programmes,
but also demoralize the dedicated scientists who are involved in such projects. (Para 9.9)
8. The Committee is of the opinion that formation of a body, such as the Science &
Engineering Research Board (SERB), to coordinate and to give a renewed boost to the
declining state of research in basic sciences, was long overdue. A need for de-
bureaucratization of the Scientific departments and providing functional autonomy to the
bodies engaged in research has long been felt by the Committee. In this direction the
Committee welcomes the efforts of the Department in the formation of the SERB, with
administrative and financial autonomy of the Board in implementing the basic research
programmes efficiently and on a real time scale. The Committee hopes that the SERB will
enhance S&T capabilities of the country and lead to increased visibility of the Indian
scientists and Indian research establishments globally. (Para 10.5)
9. The Committee expresses serious concern at the low level of investment in the R&D
Sector by the private sector, which at present stands at only 0.25% compared to levels of
1.2-2.0% of GDP in many developed and emerging economies. The Committee feels that if
India has to emerge as a scientifically developed nation, then private sector investment in
R&D has to increase substantially from the present levels. This calls for greater
partnership between the industries and academia, particularly research institutions and
universities. The Committee feels that the Department should formulate such policies and
programmes which would encourage the private sector to invest substantially in the R&D
Sector. The private sector should be enlightened about the advantages that would accrue to
them in long term, besides financial benefits, to encourage their participation in the
country’s progress in the scientific field. (Para 10.7)
10. The Committee appreciates the Department for initiating the Technology
Development Programme which aims at developing the need-based indigenous technologies
through joint participation with the industry on one hand and the socio-economic Ministries
on the other. The Committee feels that the programme will help in enhancing the
technological prowess of the country. It also notes that the thrust areas of the programme
which inter-alia include technology needs for North-Eastern States, technology convergence
for the production of Sulfate of Potash, are of immense importance. The Committee hopes
that the Department will strive hard to make the programme achieve its objectives. The
Committee further recommends that the Department should initiate more such programmes
for the socio-economic development of the common man. (Para 11.5)
11. The Committee notes that there has been an increase of Rs. 16.80 crores in B.E. 2012-
13 as compared to R.E. 2011-12 under the head of International Cooperation. The Committee
is of the opinion that the need of the hour is to forge new international Science & Technology
initiatives/agreements to help bridge the Science & Technology gaps in the frontier areas of
Science and Technology, besides ensuring sharing of expertise, cost and optimal utilization of
resources. The Committee, therefore, supports the programme and hopes Department would
work towards realisation of the objectives of the programme in right earnest. (Para 12.5)
12. The Committee notes with serious concern, the lackadaisical approach adopted by the
Department towards a crucial programme such as the ‘Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research’
programme. It notes that there are overlapping grant of loans and schemes being implemented
by Departments of Biotechnology and Scientific & Industrial Research, providing grants/soft
loans on more attractive terms to pharma industry, which has resulted in a decline in demand
for the ‘Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research’ scheme run by the Department of Science &
Technology and consequent decrease of funds allocated under the programme. The Committee
feels that this is a serious case of lack of coordination between the three departments viz. DST,
DBT and DSIR, which incidentally function under the same Ministry. (Para 13.4)

17
13. In this connection, Committee would also like to point out that in its 162 nd Report
on ‘Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research Programme including Herbal Medicines’ (Para 2.5.5,
page 3), it has been stated that wide fluctuations were noticed in allocation made by the
Department for ‘Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research’. While the allocation stood at
Rs. 150.00 crores in B.E. 2005-06, this was reduced to Rs. 105.00 crores in R.E. 2005-06 and
again increased to Rs. 130.00 crores in B.E. 2006-07. It is very surprising to the Committee
that, a programme of the nature of ‘Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research’, which assumes
paramount importance as it phenomenally contributes to strategic innovations in medical
sector, has been given an allocation of only Rs. 60.00 crores in B.E. 2011-12, which was
drastically reduced to Rs.40.00 crores in B.E. 2012-13. The extent of drastic decrease in fund
allocation under this programme would be evident when present allocation are compared to
allocation six or seven years back which were of the tune of Rs. 130 crores to 150 crores.
This is despite the prevailing general inflation over the years. (Para 13.5)
14. The Committee finds that the logic of the Department is strange, that their
programme is losing its importance as programmes developed by other Departments are
more attractive. In the first place, a coordinated approach ought to have been adopted by
all the Departments of the Government so as to ensure that there is no overlapping
between the programmes offered by the different Departments. Secondly, the Department
ought to have made its continuing programme as attractive, if not more attractive than the
similar programmes devised by the other Departments. The Department, it seems, is simply
allowing an important programme to slip out of its hands. (Para 13.6)
15. The Committee is of the considered view that in a country where poverty is rampant
and sizeable part of population suffers from critical diseases, continued support to drug
research programmes is the social responsibility of the Government for providing affordable
drugs/medicines to the poor masses and this responsibility cannot be diluted or absolved at
any stage through reduced allocations. The Committee feels that for a focused approach the
‘Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research Programme’ should preferably be, promoted by a
single Department and the programme should be regulated in such a manner that there is
no overlapping of schemes/loan grants of the various Departments. The Committee further
recommends that the various Departments may however pool their scientific expertise to
achieve success of the ‘Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research Programme’. (Para 13.7)
16. The Committee expresses its serious concern at the waning of interest among the
new generations towards a career in science, which has led to the shortage of quality
scientific and technical manpower for the country’s scientific and research programmes. The
Committee appreciates the fact that a significant amount of Rs. 400.00 crores has been
allocated for the Alliance and R&D Mission which inter-alia aims towards attracting and
encouraging the new generation towards a research career in science. The Committee feels
that the long term requirement of generation of quality manpower needs to be addressed
at different levels by aggressively upgrading the infrastructure in universities in the field
of science and promoting quality research in them. In this direction the INSPIRE and SHE
schemes, which on one hand, aims towards inculcating an interest towards science amongst
the young generation and the BEST scheme which aims at elevating the professional and
teaching skills of the teachers, by providing them an opportunity for gaining global
experience of superior methods of mentoring and teaching, are highly commendable. The
Committee feels that through such schemes the brightest students of the country can be
nurtured and retained for research in science streams and would eventually enable India to
embark on ambitious course of scientific wealth creation. (Para 14.4)
17. The Committee also commends the initiatives of the Ministry in exploring the Public
Private Partnership (PPP) mode of funding for R&D in order to stimulate the private sector
investments into science; the PAN India S&T missions which inter-alia aims towards
providing solutions of basic problems of the common man such as food and nutrition,

18
affordable health care and water security and the Climate Change Programme which will
focus towards the pressing issue of Climate change. The Committee would, however, like to
caution the Department to ensure the effective implementation of these commendable
programmes so that targeted benefits actually flow from these programmes. (Para 14.5)
18. The Committee commends the role of the Department in initiating the DISHA
scheme, which it feels would open up ample opportunities for women S&T professionals,
whose careers are otherwise stuck or who are forced to opt out of their careers, due to
familial as well as social obligations. The Committee feels that this scheme would provide
an opportunity to women scientists to re-enter and continue working in S&T fields of their
expertise and also to continue in the field of their choice in case they have to relocate to
different places. The Committee is of the opinion that such schemes which ensure gender
parity should be supported adequately through budgetary support. (Para 15.3)
19. The Committee is aware that Nano Technology is an upcoming field of science which
holds great potential specially in the field of designing, developing and application of carbon
nano tubes in many sectors including medicines. The Committee commends that one of the
focussed areas of research of programme, is in the field of nano-device based sensors,
diagnostics kits, controlled and targeted drug delivery systems, which would go a long way
in the treatment of critical diseases. The Committee also appreciates the fact that some of
the technological achievements of the Indian scientists have been patented and
commercialized, even in technically advanced countries like the United States, which proves
the competence of the Indian scientists in the field of nano technology. It also appreciates
the support that the Department has provided to the scientists and institutions working in
the field of nano technology and hopes that in future, efforts would also be directed towards
programmes which directly affect the common man such as use of nano technology for
water purification, medical applications etc. (Para 16.4)
20. The path-breaking contribution that nano technology offers to diverse areas, ranging
from industry to medicine, itself advocates for the fact that constant increased allocation
under this head is a compelling necessity, specially in view of the country’s excellent
performance in this field, which is apparent from the growth rate of 9.1% per year achieved
by India in this field and the fact that India has already emerged as the sixth major country
in nano science output. The Committee, however, is unhappy over the fact that in the year
2011-12, the Department failed to utilize allocation of Rs. 105.00 crores made at RE. stage,
which resulted in reduction of allocations at B.E. stage to Rs. 89.55 crores and provision of
Rs. 85.00 crores in B.E. this year. The Committee hopes that the Department would
efficiently utilize the allocations made this year so that, if needed, allocations could be
raised at R.E. stage of 2012-13. The Committee recommends that budgetary support for this
important programme should be suitably raised at R.E. stage, so that the programme does
not suffer for want of adequate funds. (Para 16.5)
21. The Committee after examining the various aspects of the Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Department of Science & Technology, is of the view that the Department,
through its various schemes and programmes, apart from promoting research in basic
research and technology is also taking initiative to use technology to benefit the masses.
Some of the initiatives of the Departments discussed above are commendable and if
properly implemented will bring immense benefits to the targeted groups. The Department
during its interaction with the Committee, appeared largely satisfied with the funds
allocated for its various programmes. The Committee, while taking note of it, is of the
opinion that programmes for societal benefits and for securing bright future for our country
men should be adequately funded and hopes that in case the Department needs more funds
at R.E. stage, the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance should give due
consideration to its proposals for enhancement of funds. (Para 17)

19
MINUTES

20

21
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 12 h April, 2012 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Anil H. Lad
4. Shri Rajive Pratap Rudy
5. Dr. Barun Mukherji
6. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
8. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
9. Shri Pradeep Tamta
10. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
11. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
12. Shri Kristapa Nimmala
13. Shri Abdul Rahman
14. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
** *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
21
*** Relates to other matter.

22
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. * * *
16. * * *
17. * * *
18. * * *
19. * * *
20. * * *
21. * * *
22. * * *
23. * * *
24. * * *
Representatives of Department of Science & Technology
1. Dr. T. Ramasami, Secretary
2. Dr. Inder Jit Singh, Joint Secretary (Admn. & Parl. )
3. Ms. Anuradha Mitra, JS & F A
4. Major Gen. (Dr.) R. Siva Kumar, Head (NRDMS)
5. Dr. H.K. Mittal, Head (NEB)
6. Dr. B. Hari Gopal, Head (SERC)
7. Dr. Vinita Sharma, Head (SEED) & GLP
8. Dr. V . Raghupathy, Head (IS-STAC)
9. Dr. G.J. Samathanam, Head (TDT) & PFC
10. Dr. Praveer Asthana, Head ( AI) & Mission Director  ( Nano Mission )
11. Dr. B.P. Singh, Head ( NCSTC)
12. Dr. D.R. Prasada Raju, Head (Technology Mission Cell )
13. Dr. Akhilesh Gupta, Head ( Climate Change )
14. Dr. Vimal Kumar, Head (Fly Ash Unit )
15. Mrs. Sadhana Relia, Head ( IMRC)
*** Relates to other matter.

23
16. Dr. Arabinda Mitra, Head (IBC)
17. Shri Neeraj Sharma, Scientist ‘G’, Plan Coordination
18. Dr. A. Mukhopadhyay, Scientist ‘G’
19. Dr. B.K. Shukla, Scientist ‘G’
20. Dr. Praveen Arora, Scientist ‘F’ (NSTMIS)
21. Shri Aseem Narain, Registrar, National Mission on Bamboo Applications
22. Smt. L. Indumathy, Director ( Finance)
23. Shri N.K. Gayagi, Director (SMP)
24. Shri P.N. Prasad, Director ( Parl.)
25. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, Secretary,
Department of Science & Technology and his team of officials. He informed that the Committee
proposed to discuss the functioning and Demands for Grants for the year 2012-13 of the
Department of Science & Technology. The Chairman desired to know as to how the Department
planned to make available the full benefits of technology to solve the problems of the common
man. He also asked the Secretary to brief the Committee about the budgetary allocations, initiatives
for the year 2012-13 and whether the allocations were sufficient to implement the programmes of
the Department. Thereafter, the Chairman asked the Secretary to start his presentation.
26. While referring to a query raised by one of the members of the Committee, regarding the
Special Science Package for North-East region, J&K and Bihar, the Secretary, DST stated that, he
personally took the initiative to go to North-East and held a meeting with the Vice-Chancellors of
Universities there. A decision was taken to provide monetary assistance to the tune of Rs. 50.00
lakhs, to some selected colleges, for setting up laboratory facilities in the North-eastern region.
27. The Secretary also stated that all the States in the North Eastern region were covered
through the ‘Special Science Package for North East region’ scheme. Besides, a special scholarship
scheme for distinguished scientists in the country was also started for teaching in NE universities.
Similarly, if science faculty members from the NE region, went to other parts of India, travel and
support system were provided.
28. Secretary further mentioned that similarly in case of Bihar, a meeting was held with various
Vice-Chancellors and their assistance was sought for implementing the package. However, unlike
the support the DST got from J&K and the NE States, no encouraging inputs were received from
the universities in Bihar and accordingly, a Special Committee was set up to investigate the
requirement of Bihar in the field of science. Accordingly, a special package for Bihar is being
designed in consultation with the Chief Secretary and the package will be implemented hopefully
by June this year.
29. One of the members raised issues regarding the prevailing unscientific practices in the
country like blind faith etc. and the steps taken by the DST to eradicate the same. In response,
Secretary informed the Committee that National Council for Science and Technology
Communication had been very active in this area and a network has been created in every State,
which was helping to deal with such practices. He also mentioned that science clubs have been
set up in schools and, at present, there are 5600 such clubs working to remove blind faiths. He,
however, stated that it was possible to deal effectively with the issue only with the active
cooperation and participation of civil society. The Chairman then suggested that special lectures in
developing scientific temperament should be designed so that the society could benefit from it. The
Secretary, DST agreed to the suggestion.
30. Thereafter, one of the members of the Committee raised the issue regarding the state of
Himalayan Eco System which is a major source of water in the country and also the recession of

24
the glaciers. He also queried about the state of research on Himalayan Eco System so that constant
supply of water from there could be provided for drinking and agriculture. In response, Secretary
replied that Ministry of Water Resources had collected data on water from the Himalayan glaciers
over a period of time. The DST is also in the process of establishing a National Centre for
Himalayan Glaciology with its main Centre at Mussoorie and branches at J&K, Himachal Pradesh
and Sikkim. The objective of the Centre would be three-fold, first is research; second, it will
connect institutions which are engaged in doing studies on Himalayan region and the third, it will
connect community-based organizations in the region with each other.
31. Thereafter, one of the members enquired about the percentage of expenditure on R&D in
S&T to GDP, which is lower in case of India as compared to other Asian countries, USA and UK.
While responding to the said question, Secretary DST mentioned that globally, the Government’s
investment in R&D is in the range of 0.7-0.8 per cent. He also mentioned that investment by
industries in developed countries is in the range of 1.3-1.4 per cent of their GDP. Infact, advanced
and emerging economies were investing about 2 per cent of their GDP in R&D out  of which 0.7-
0.8 per cent is from  the public sector and 1.2-1.3 per cent is from  the industries. In India, out
of the total investment of 0.9-1.0 per cent, the Government investment is 0.6-0.7 per cent and
industries contribute only 0.3 per cent in R&D. He further mentioned that in the Twelfth Plan
Steering Committee Report, a proposal has been given for  a PPP mode in R&D for  stimulating
industrial investment.
32. He also mentioned that at present, investment in R&D was equivalent to US investment in
R&D during the period 1975. In 1975, US Government investment in R&D was 2/3rd and industry
was contributing l/3rd. He further informed that in the Twelfth Plan, policy has been framed for
earmarking certain amount of money from  public fund for  providing funds to industry to promote
R&D. Secretary, further mentioned that another thing that India is trying to do is translation
research. In comparison to China and USA where number of scientists is 14.23 lakh and 14.5 lakh
respectively, India has only 1.54 lakh scientists. So India is trying to develop absorption capacity
of scientists before investing money in R&D during Twelfth Plan period. In fact, India is planning
a mechanism through PPP mode to use the latent capacity of talent in universities for  engaging the
same in research so that numbers of scientists could be increased from  1.5 lakh to 2.5 lakh in
the next 5 years. Secretary also mentioned that DST is a funding agency and as such Government
would like to create pilot level based R&D in as many areas as possible.
33. While commenting on the issue of vaccination, raised by one of the members, Secretary
mentioned that out  of every 3 children vaccinated in the world, two children are vaccinated with
vaccines made in India. While commenting upon another question from  the same member,
Secretary informed that India has 64 entrepreneur parks through DST and during the last 2 years,
out of 64 parks, 5 parks have been invested with Rs. l crore each as seed capital for entrepreneurs.
34. Regarding a query about the technology portal, Secretary mentioned that India has developed
a technology portal which captures all technologies emanating from the public laboratories across the
country and is being constantly updated. In reply to another query regarding science exhibitions, the
Secretary stated that such exhibitions had been arranged at one or two  places with the help of the
State Governments, under the scheme State and Centre Technology Partnership.
35. Apart from this, Secretary also mentioned that DST had developed farming sector
scientifically and it has also developed water purification methods, solar system application and also
developed biomass or bio-fuel. In agriculture bio-fuel are being used by farmers to run generators
for the purpose of irrigation.
36. Thereafter, in reply to a query regarding the District Level Exhibition and Project
Competition (DLEPC) raised by one of the members, the Department explained that in all States

25
at District and State level, DLEPC are organised and these are funded by DST. The DST also funds
national level exhibitions. Further elaborating on the issue, Secretary mentioned that in Bihar 19,477
children received funds through DLEPC and he also gave details about the number of children who
got funds from the years 2009 to 2012.
A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
37. The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 
P.M.
** *
38 * * *
39. * * *
40. * * *
41. * * *
42. * * *
43. * * *
44. * * *
45. * * *
46. * * *
47. * * *
48. * * *
49. * * *
50. * * *
51. * * *
52. * * *
53. * * *
A verbatim record of the meeting was kept.
54. The Committee adjourned at 6.02 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

26
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, 16 th May, 2012 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri Francisco Sardinha — In Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil H. Lad
3. Dr. Chandan Mitra
4. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
5. Dr. Barun Mukherji
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Shri Abdul Rahman
9. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
10. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
11. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
12. Dr. Rajan Sushant
13. Shri Pradeep Tamta
14. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
15. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them
that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft reports on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) pertaining to Ministries/Departments of *  *  *, Science and Technology. He also
informed that the draft reports, approved by the Chairman of the Committee had already been
circulated to Members and that they must have gone through the reports.*  *  *.
26
*** Relates to other matter.

27
3. The Committee then took-up for consideration, its draft ***, 223 rd, ***, ***, ***, *** and
*** Reports, one by one. The Committee adopted its *** and 223 rd reports pertaining to the
Departments of *** and Science and Technology without any amendments.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The Committee, thereafter, decided to present/lay the Report Nos. 222
nd to 228 th on both
the Houses of Parliament on the 18 th May, 2012. The Committee authorised Shri Francisco
Saradinha and in his absence Shri Pradeep Tamta to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha
and in Rajya Sabha Shri Janardan Dwivedi and in his absence Dr. Barun Mukherji to present the
reports.
8 A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.