44 th report on science and technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/44threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:03]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1996~97)
FORTY-FOURTH REPORT
                                    ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS
 CONTAINED IN THE THIRTY-SECOND REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON DEMANDS FOR
 GRANTS (1996-97) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS
(Presented on 21st April, 1997)
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 1997/Vaisakha 1919 (Saka)
 
 
 
CONTENTS
 
1.       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.        INTRODUCTION
3.        REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4.        MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF .THE COMMITTEE
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMIITEE ON
 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1996-97)
       1. Shri V. Narayanasamy           -Chairman
RAJYA SABRA
2.    Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3.    Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt
4.    Shri N. Giri Prasad
5.    Shri K.R. Jayadevappa
6.    Shri K. Karunakaran
7.    Shri Pranab Mukherjee
8.    Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty
9.    Shri Narendra PradlIan
10.    Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar
11. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 12. Shri G. Swaminathan
 13.  Shri Prakanta Warisa
LOK SABRA
14.    Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma
15.    Shri Ranjib Biswal
16.    Shri A.B.A. Gani Khan Choudhury
17.    Prof. Jitendra Nath Das
18.    Shri Mohd. Ali Ashraaf Fatmi
19.    Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
20.    Shri K.C. Kondaiah
21.    Dr. Ramkrishan Kusmaria
22.    Shri Guman Mal Lodha
23.    Shri Shivaji Mane

44 th report on science and technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/44threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:03]
24.    Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta
25.    Shri Punu Lal Mohle
26.    Shri Sharad Pawar
27.    Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
28.    Shri N .K. Premchandran
29.    Shri Kalpnath Rai
30.    Shri A. Raja
31.    Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
32.    Shri P. V. Rajendran
33.    Shri K.B. Raut
34.    Shri S. Ramachandra Reddy
35.    Shri Harivansh Sahai
36.    Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj
37.    Shrima ti Vijayaraje Scindia
38.    Kumari Selja
39. Capt. Satish Sharma
*40. Shri Surender Singh
41.    Shri Soumya Ranjan Patnaik
42.    Sushri Uma Bharati
43. Shri Srikanta Dutta Wadiyar SECRETARIAT
  Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
  Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary Shri Alok Chatterjee, Under
 Secretary Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer
_______________________________________________________________________
"Nominated w.ef. 4th February, 1997.
INTRODUCI10N
I, the O1ainnan of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the
 Committee to submit the report on its behalf, present this Forty-forth Report, on the Action Taken by the Department of
 Electronics on the recommendations contained in the Thirty-Second Report of the Committee.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Electronics on the recommendations
 contained in the Thirty-Second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
 Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Department of Electronics which was
 presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th August, 1996.
3. There are 9 recommendations contained in the Thirty-Second Report of the Committee.; Action Taken notes on the
 recommendations of the Committee, were received from the Department on 3rd February, 1997.
4. In the meeting held on 20th 
March, 1997 the Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report and adopted the
 same.
 
 
NEW DELHI;
 March 20, 1997
V. NARAYANASAMY,
Chairman,
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
 Forests
 
 
.
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Electronics on the recommendations contained
 in the Thirty-Second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
 and Forests on the Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the Department of Electronics which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th
 August, 1996. There are 9 recommendations contained' in the Thirty-Second Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the
 recommendations of the' Committee', were received from the Department on 3rd February, 1997. 
On scrutiny of' the Action, Taken Report as 'received from the Department of Electronics, the Committee finds that 3
 recommendations have been fully implemented. The Committee is not satisfied ·with the action taken by the Ministry in regard to its
 recommendation' No.2 and in case of reply to recommendation No.3, the Department has been asked to develop certain models based
 on the latest changes. In regard to recommendation No. 
4; the department has been asked ·to be more careful 'in future while

44 th report on science and technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/44threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:03]
 accepting the foreign projects. The Committee in regard to its recommendation No.5, feels that it is necessary to restructure the
 Standardisation. Testing and Quality Control (STQC) as also the Electronics Test and Development Centres (ETDCs) and
 Electronics Regional Test Laboratories (ERTLs) oil, commercial line. 'The Department of Electronics should submit a detailed note
 on the Rural Electronics Programmes in regard to recommendation No.8 and the Department should take up 'the matter with
 Planning Commission for providing sufficient budgetary supports for the' Electronics Programmes of the Department.
The Committee's' recommendation, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the action taken by the Department
 of Electronics are given in the succeeding paragraphs:-
RECOMMENDATIONS:
1. The Committee observes that the overall budgetary allocation of Rs. 132.50 crores for 1996-97 has sharply declined in
 comparison to the budgetary allocation of Rs. 147 crores in 1995-96. There have been reductions in the budgetary allocation of the
 National Centre for Software Technology, System Engineering and Consultancy Programme, Electronics Material Development
 Programme, Electronics Industry Development Programme, Japanese Language Training Programme, Power Sector Electronics
 Programme, Industrial Electronics Promotion Programme, Software Export Promotion Programme, National Radar Council,
 Electronics for Rural Se,ctor a Health Care Transportation Systems Programme, Industrial Robotics and Integrated Automation,
 Energy conservation through Industrial Electronics, Capital Goods Development Programme, Technology Missions and Centre for
 Liquid Crystal Research,
Action taken by the Department
Reduction in budgetary support goes to suggest reduction in the overall activities of the DOE.
Reply: The proposed funds for the programmes for the year 1996-97 were more than th'ose for the year 1995-96. The
 Department of Electronics projected requirement of funds for the year 1996-97 submitted to Planning Commission was Rs. 293.90
 crores compared to 1995-96 budgetary allocation of Rs. 147 crores. However, Planning Commission could allocate only Rs. 132.50
 crores to DOE for 1996-97 due to resource crunch.
1.1 The National Centre for Software Technology (NeST) is a Society generating
1
 
2
income through consultancy, R&D projects and training programmes conducted by it. Over the years, it has increasingly become
 self-supporting. Their R&D requirements have been clubbed with the budget provision for IDC.
The R&D budget for (i) System Engineering and Consultancy Programme, (ii) Power Sector Electronics Programme, (iii)
 Industrial Electronics and Promotion Programme, (iv) National Radar Council (v) Electronics for Health Care, (vi) Industrial
 Robotics and Integrated Automation, (vii) Energy Conservation through Industrial Electronics, (viii) Capital Goods Development
 Programme, (ix) Electronics Material Development Programme and (x) Technology Missions have been clubbed with the Budget
 for TDC for better focus and optimum utilisation of funds. It may be noted that IDC budget which in 1995-96 was only Rs. 1.75
 crores had been increased to Rs. 24.17 crores in 1996-97 by clubbing the funds requirements of the above Programmes.
1.2 The Electronics industry development project is a project for man power development supported by World Bank and
 Swiss Development Cooperation. The project started in June 1991 and is coming to' an end in March 1997. Most of the
 expenditure for various activities has been incurred till 1995-96. The residual work to be completed in 1996-97 has lower
 financial requirements than in 1995-96.
1.3 The Budget provision for the Japanese language training has been curtailed keeping in view that the industry who are the
 ultimate beneficiary of this programme, should also financially contribute towards this programme.
1.4 Thus, the reduction in budgetory support in 1996-97 is not because of lack of programmes but because of lack of funds
 allocated by Planning Commission.
COMMENTS:
The Committee notes the position.
RECOMMENDATIONS:
2. While the overall staff strength is set to register a decline in 1997 as compared to 1996, it is significant to note that the
 posts in higher scales of Rs. 450~5700 and above are on the increase. The decline in the number of posts is mainly confined to
 the Pay Scale of Rs. 3700-5000 and below. This reflects the state of depression which has its bearing on the generation of
 employment.
Action taken by the Department
The Department of Electronics was set up in 1970. At the time of its inception, more posts in the lower level were filled than
 the higher one's. The Department is following the Flexible Complementing Scheme (FCS) in respect of its S&T personnel.
 Under the FCS Scheme, the promotion of S&T personnel is person oriented i.e. at the time of promotion, the lower post is

44 th report on science and technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/44threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:03]
 automatically abolished and the higher post is created.' Hence, gradually the posts in the higher scales have been increasing and
 the lower grades are declining. Moreover, the Government has imposed 10% cut in the staff strength. An exercise to this effect
 was also carried out in this Department and a target of 9.61 % has been achieved by I" abolishing various posts. This is also one of
 the reasons for variations in the number of posts.
COMMENTS:
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply. The Committee feels that the number of higher posts should he in proportion to
 certain number of lower posts. If a sufficient number of lower posts cannot be justified there should be a corresponding reduction
 in the number of higher posts. The Department of Electronics should give a note on the subject.
3
RECOMMENDATIONS:
3. The Committee strongly feels that the DOE has failed to orient itself to the changing needs of the country and development. The
 Department appears to have deviated from its directed policy and therefore it needs introspection for a suitable direction in the context
 of National development.
Action taken by the Department
The Department of Electronics has not deviated from its directed policy. With Iiberalisation of economy, DOE is placing more
 emphasis on its promotional role. As financial allocations have been drastically reduced against requirements and further because of
 the directive that no new programmes are to be supported in the last year of the 8th Plan, all the development programmes could not
 be addressed fully. However, the 9th Plan proposes several new initiatives for accelerated development of electronics.
COMMENTS
As a result of developments in science, changes take place in the field of electronics at a faster pace. Department of Electronics
 should keep itself abreast with all the developments, possess the knowledge, equipment and wherewithal to assess the utility and
 potential of such changes and be in a position to recommend what is best suited in the context of national requirements. If required it
 should be in the position to develop certain models based on the latest changes without effecting substantial changes in its production
 base and recommend the same to the industry.
RECOMMENDA TIONS:
4. The Committee observes that an amount of Rs. 10.40 crores could not be utilised due to non-materialisation of DANIDA project.
 The Committee observes that the project was not planned properly taking all the contingencies into account. This also reflects on the
 inability of the Department to utilise foreign assistance.
Action taken by the Department
The terms & conditions of DANIDA project were not acceptable to DOE both technically and financially. Firstly, the DANIDA
 project was a mixed credit/loan and not a grant-in ­-aid. Secondly, DANIDA insisted procurement of equipment impart training only
 from Denmark, wherein 60% of loan amount would have flown back to Denmark. Thirdly, the entire project management activity was
 to be handled by Danish contractor and not by STQC. Hence, DOE decided to drop the project on its own, as these terms and
 conditions were found to be not suitable.
Regarding proper utilisation of foreign assistance, it is pertinent to mention that STQC has successfully implemented the Indo-
German project for 15 years from 1980 to 1995. Even currently, another Indo-German project viz. Society for Electronics Test
 Engineering. (SETE) is being successfully implemented. This shows that STQClDOE is able to utilise foreign assistance effectively,
 provided the terms and Conditions are favourable to the Indian Government.
COMMENTS:
The Committee feels that Department of Electronics should have, before accepting the project, seen through the terms and
 conditions carefully. It should have declined the offer ab initio if it did not suit us instead of first accepting and then dithering on the
 same. In future, greater care should be taken in accepting the foreign projects and national interest should be uppermost in our 'minds.
RECOMMENDA TIONS:
5 (a): There has been significant increase in the operational expanses (Plan as well as Non-Plan) of Electronics Regional Test
 Laboratories. The actual expenditure was Rs. 3.12 crores (Plan) and Rs. 1.17 crores (Non-Plan) in 1994-95. It went up to Rs. 3.26
 crores (Plan) and Rs. 1.40 crores (Non-Plan) and remained at that level in the revised estimates for 1995-96. The budget estimates
 for 1996-97 provide Rs. 3.75 crores (Plan) and Rs. 1.40 crores (Non-Plan). The Committee feels there is need to check the Non-
Plan expenditure. Same is the case in respect of operational expenses of Electronics and Test and Development centres.
(b): The Committee feels that there is need to make such laboratories and test centres self supporting. They should provide test
 facilities on commercial basis instead of depending on budgetary support.
Action taken by the Department
(a): The reasons for increase in the operational expenditure (Plan as well as Non-Plan) of Electronics Regional Test Laboratories
 (ERTLs) and Electronics Test & Development Centres (EIDCs) is due to general increase in dearness allowance component for
 salaries and increase in travel allowance of employees, electricity, telephone bills, etc. because of enhancement in tariff.
The Committee's suggestion that there is need to check the Non-Plan expenditure of STQC labs has been noted. It may kindly be

44 th report on science and technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/44threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:03]
 seen that during the Eighth Five Year Plan, the total allocation of Non-Plan for STQC HQ., ERTLs, ETDCs, have been Rs. 2.29
 crores every year. However, for ERTLs, the Non-Plan expenditure may be higher for few years, but overall allocation/expenditure of
 STQC as a whole is restricted to Rs. 2.29 crores.
DOE is considering re-structuring the STQC organisation, so as to make them self sustaining gradually. An Empowered Committee
 has been constituted for examining the various alternatives & models and recommend suitable structure for STQC organisation. In this
 connection, it is mentioned that there are some STQC labs, which are performing well and have potential to be self sufficient in
 future. But some lab viz. ETDC Goa, ETDC Guwahati, EIDC Solan, EIDC Agartala, which were set up due to Socio-economic
 consideration will still need support from Government budgetary funding, as these labs can not become viable until electronic
 industries in these region grow. While setting up ETDC Agartala, it was clearly mentioned that this lab would not be self sufficient in
 near future, as there were a less No. of industries in the State. Therefore, for some more time, budgetary support will be necessary for
 operating STQC labs.
COMMENTS
The Committee feels that it is necessary to restructure the Standardisation Testing and Quality Certification (STQC) as also the
 Electronics Test & Development Centres (ETDC;) and Electronics Regional & Test Laboratories (ERTLs) on commercial lines.
 Perhaps, their functional importance is little known to the industry. Instead of having the large number of regular establishments thus
 leading to rise in Non-Plan expenditure efforts should be made to see whether for any of its functions the local talent can be utili sed
 on Piece Rate Work, casual or contractual basis. Likewise, efforts should be made either to utilise the service of the talent of the
 unremunerative units based in NE Region by the nearest remunerative units or transfer certain works to them, whichever is
 economically feasible till North-East. Based Centres becomes self supporting.
RECOMMENJ)ATIONS
6. The reduced allocation of Rs. 21.80 crores in the BE for 1996-97 in comparison to Rs. 25.53 croresin the Revised Estimates for
 1995-96 suggests that the Special Manpower Development Programme is not being taken up with the enthusiasm it deserves. Nor·
 does there seem to be much intake of trained manpower. Perhaps the computer courses have been rendered obsolete in the face of fast
 changing technology. In these circumstances, the Committee fails to understand how the DOE with reduced allocations would
 manage to update the computer courses and achieve results in the Special Manpower Development Programme.
Action taken by the Department
Out of the 1995-96 allocation of Rs. 25.53 crores for Special Man Power Development Programme, a major portion (Rs. 24.68
 crores) was for the externally aided projects-Electronics Industry Development Project (EIDP). The budget for EIDP for 1996-97 is
 20.8 crores. The EIDP is being supported by World Bank and Swiss Development Co-operation and started in June, 1991. It is
 scheduled to be completed by March, 1997. Most of the expenditure has been incurred upto the year 1995-96. The residual activities
 to be completed in 1996-97, require lower expenditure than in 1995-96 and hence lower allocation for manpower development in the
 current year.
COMMENTS
The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS
7. The Committee expresses its concern at another area of reduced allocation of Rs. 3.10 crores in the BE for 1996-97 in comparison
 to Rs. 6.19 crores in the Revised Estimates of 1995-96 in respect of Industrial Electronics Promotion Programmes. Unless these
 activities having a bearing at one or the other aspect of the industrial development are not taken up at appropriate scale, their effect in
 the economy would be marginal.
Action taken by the Department
It has been clarified by the Department of Electronics at page 24 of the Report that such reductions in programme of IEPP etc. are
 covered under increased allocation under TDC. However, the requirements for 1996-97 for Industrial Electronics Promotion
 Programme and other projects under the Applications Development Group now stand restored to Rs. 6 crores (approximately).
COMMENTS
The Committee notes the reply.
RECOMMENDATIONS
8. The Committee feels that the Rural Electronics Programme with an allocation of Rs. 1 crore in the BE for 1996-97 needs to be
 restructured with higher allocations as large chunks of population are in the countryside and the agricultural operations as also the
 output in agriculture is the backbone of the industrial development.
Action taken by the Department
A review of the programme of Rural and Social Electronics Division is being undertaken and it has been decided to fully fund the
 on-going projects and evolve new projects to cover the grant-aid and further allocation if necessary will be reconsidered at an
 appropriate stage.
COMMENTS

44 th report on science and technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/44threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:03]
The Committee would like to have a detailed note on the Rural Electronics Programmes, including if possible, the quantum of work
 done and what remains to be done by the Rural Electrification Corporation (REC) under the Ministry of Power and the co-ordination,
 if any, between Department of Electronics and Rural Electrification Corporation.
 
RECOMMENDATIONS
The Comanittee obserye5 that the reduction of about 8% in budaetary support in -the field of Electronics where the BE for
 1996-97 provide RI. 109.69 crores (Plan) as compared to RI. 118.97 crora in the Revised Estimates for 1995-96 is not a
 welcome sign for the development of the economy. The Committ~ therefore reiterates that the DOE needs to find for itself a
 suitable direction in the context of requirements of a .veloping economy. It is il well known economic principle that the
 reduced budegtary support is not a happy scenario for a developing economy like ours.
Action taken by the Department
As explained in reply to 1, the reduction in the BE for 1996-97 was made by Planning Commission due to resource crunch
 even though our projections were much larger. Consequently, the DOE had to curtail several programmes to make the best of
 available resources. This  may have adverse effect in the long run. As observed by the Committee, the reduction budgetary
 support is not a healthy scenario for developing economy like ours. Electronics can be termed as an infrastructure industry as
 it cuts across virtually every sector of economy and social welfare. It has a leveraging effect on the economic and social
 development - of the country and must receive due emphasis.
COMMENTS
The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation and would like DOE to take up the matter with the Planning
 Commission for providing sufficient budgetary supports for its programmes. Alternatively, the DOE has to pursue its package
 to see what is of least importance to the economy and take it out of the load.
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES
 
 
XXIII
TWENTY· THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday the 20th March, 1997 in Committee Room "B", Ground Floor, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1.    SHRI V. Narayanasamy __ Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.    Shri N. Giri Prasad
3.    Shri K.R. Jayadevappa
4.    Shri Pranab Mukherjee
5.    Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty
6.    Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma
LOK SABHA
6.    Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakatma
7.    Prcif. Jitendra Nath Das

44 th report on science and technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/44threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:03]
8.    Shri K.C. Kondaiah
9.    Dr. Ramkrishan Kusmaria
10.    Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta
11.    Shri Punnu Lal Mohle
12.    Smt. Vasundhara Raje
13.    Shri S. Ramchandra Reddy
14.    Shri Harivansh Sahai
15.    Shri Soumya Ranjan Patnaik
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Under Secretary Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered the draft Forty-Third, Forty-Fourth and Forty-Fifth Reports on Action Taken by the Departments of
 Biotechnology, Electronics and Ocean Develop ­ment on Committee's 34th, 32nd and. 35th Report on Demands for Grants (1996-97)
 respectively and adopted the same with minor amendments.
3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri K.R. Jayadevappa to present the reports to the Rajya Sabha and
 Prof. Jitendra Nath Das and in his absence Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 p.m.
9
 