PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 191
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY , 
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED NINETY FIRST REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY
(DEMAND NOS. 4 & 5)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

25
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED NINETY FIRST REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009)
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY
(DEMAND NOS. 4 & 5)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 TH APRIL, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 TH APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/V AISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—15
4S UMMARY OF R ECOMMENDATIONS .......................................................................................... 16—18
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................ 19—24

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2007-2008)
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
**2. V acant
3. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
4. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
5. Shri Kamal Akhtar
6. Shri Saman Pathak
7. Shri Jabir Husain
**8. V acant
9. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
*10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Francis Fanthome
16. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
17. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
18. Shri Brahmananda Panda
19. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
20. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
21. Shri Pratik P. Patil
22. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
23. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
#25. V acant
26. Shri Rampal Singh
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
29. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
30. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
31. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
** Dr. Prabha Thakur and Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of
their term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2008.
* Nominated w.e.f. 28th August, 2007.
# Shri Rakesh Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 1st December, 2007 on his resignation from
the Membership of the Committee.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Ninety-first Report of the Committee. This Report
deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Atomic Energy
(Demand Nos. 4 & 5).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on 1st April, 2008, the Secretary and other Officers
of the Department of Atomic Energy gave an overview of the various activities of the Department
and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department
to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee express its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the
clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Atomic Energy.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 23rd April, 2008.
DR. V . MAITREYAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
April 23, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

1
REPORT
The Indian Atomic Energy programme aims at utilisation of Atomic Energy for peaceful
purposes—electricity generation, development of radiation technology and application of Atomic
Energy in the field of medicine, agriculture, industry, national security and research. The policies
and programmes are administrated through the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE).
2. The Department’s Plan programmes are multidisciplinary in nature. For their execution, DAE
has evolved itself as a broad based organisation comprising research centres, industrial units, public
sector undertakings and fully aided autonomous institutions, along with service organisations. There
are five Research and Development units, three industrial units, three service organizations and five
public sector undertakings besides eight aided institutions under the Department of Atomic Energy.
These organisations are engaged in research, technology development and commercial operations in
the areas of nuclear power and associated technologies, radiation technologies and their
applications, and basic research. These also enrich university system through beneficial interaction.
3. The detailed budget allocation of the Department of Atomic Energy for the year 2008-09
was considered by the Department-related Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests at its meeting held on the 1st April, 2008 and the Demands for Grants of the Department
has the following provisions.
4. BUDGETARY OUTLAYS
The budgetary outlays of the Department (Plan and Non-plan) as per the guidelines of the
Planning Commission/Ministry of Finance, fall under the following Demand numbers:
• Demand No.4 - Atomic Energy
It covers expenditure of DAE and its organizations (Research and Development, and
Minerals Sectors), as well as DAE Secretariat and Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB).
• Demand No.5 - Nuclear Power Schemes
It covers expenditure towards (i) Russian credit to Nuclear Power Corporation of India
Ltd., (ii) Investment in equity to BHAVINI, (iii) Waste Immobilisation Plants, (iv) Other work
related to PFBR and (iv) Operational expenses of RAPS Unit-I and Fuel Inventory.
4.1 The Department informed the Committee of the following shortfalls in approved allocations
(Plan and Non-plan) as compared to the proposed allocations for the year 2008-09:
(i) Plan Allocation
The shortfall in allocation under the Plan schemes of Demand No.4 – Atomic Energy is
Rs.916.62 crore. The shortfall under Demand No.5 – Nuclear Power Schemes is Rs.263.11 crore.
Thus the total shortfall under Plan is Rs.1179.73 crore. Major portion of this is intended for the
plan project under Research and Development Sector under Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Indira
Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre, Raja Ramanna Centre for
Advanced Technology, Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research and under the
fully aided Autonomous Institutions like Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Institute of Plasma
Research, Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, Tata Memorial Centre, etc and also for the projects
under Industrial Sector in Nuclear Fuel Complex, Heavy Water Board, Bhabha Atomic Research
Centre, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Board for Radiation and Isotope Technology and

2
for the investment in equity in Uranium Corporation of India Ltd under the Minerals sector.
Shortfall under the Power sector is for the ongoing Nuclear Power Project under the Bharatiya
Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Ltd. The Department, however, stated that the shortfall will be reviewed
at Revised Estimates stage depending on the necessity of funds and if required, request for
augmentation through Supplementary Grants, will be sought.
(ii) Non-plan Allocation
The shortfall under Non Plan side of Demand No.4 – Atomic Energy is Rs.255.29 crore.
Major portion of this is intended for the operational budget in Industrial Sector in Heavy Water
production, Nuclear Fuel Complex, Board for Radiation and Isotope Technology, etc.
4.2 The Committee enquired about the drastic cut ( i.e. Rs. l444.l5 crores) resorted to in the
allocations under the head ‘Nuclear Power Schemes’ in Demand No.5., from Rs. 2333.15 crores
in B.E.2007-08 to Rs. 889.00 crores in B.E.2008-09, to which the Secretary of the Department
clarified that this cut is due to the phasing out of some of the projects. So far as the Nuclear
Power projects of the Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd. (NPCIL) are concerned, these
projects will be mostly supported on the basis of Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR)
and may require only a small amount of Budgetary Support(BS). The Ministry further informed that
two 700 and 1000 megawatt projects each were planned to start in the Tenth Plan subject to the
fuel linkage and also the possibility of international cooperation. In the absence of these conditions
being fulfilled, these projects have to be deferred. Another crucial factor that contributes to the
requirement coming down is that out of the three ongoing projects, two are nearing completion.
This is how the total requirement has come down drastically.
4.3 The Committee, however, notes with serious concern the curtailment of funds under
the Plan schemes in Research and Development Sector for premier institutions like Bhabha
Atomic Research Centre, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Variable Energy
Cyclotron Centre, Raja Ramanna Centre for Advanced Technology, Atomic Minerals
Directorate for Exploration and Research, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Institute
of Plasma Research, Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, Tata Memorial Centre, etc. The
Power sector which is responsible for undertaking the ongoing Nuclear Power Project under
the Bharatiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Ltd. has also experienced a cut in allocation. The
Committee also notes the cuts in budgetary allocation under the non-plan schemes which
were intended for the operational budget in Industrial Sector in Heavy Water production,
Nuclear Fuel Complex, Board for Radiation and Isotope Technology, etc.
4.4 The Committee is of the opinion that curtailment of funds for premier Institutions
engaged in comprehensive research and development of frontline technologies, for
harnessing nuclear energy for the benefit of the society, would delay the endeavour of these
institutions in achieving their goals. The Committee fails to understand as to how the
Department will manage to achieve its targets, in the field of Atomic Energy, which is
highly capital intensive with such meager budgetary allocations. The Committee hopes that
in future the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance would exercise utmost
precaution before finalizing allocation for the Department.
5. MONITORING MECHANISMS FOR ONGOING PROJECTS
5.1 The Committee was informed of the following structure of monitoring and reviewing
mechanisms of projects in the Department of Atomic Energy:
(i) Project Co-ordinator and his group of people review and monitor the progress of
ongoing projects on day to day basis.

3
(ii) Unit Head reviews and monitors the projects on month-to-month basis and tries to
remove constraints/lacuna, if any, and monitors the financial and physical progress of
projects.
(iii) At the Department level, Principal Adviser/Secretary monitors and holds quarterly
review meetings to assess the physical and financial progress of the projects and tries
to remove any procedural bottleneck amongst the Units/Divisions for smooth progress
of projects so that there is no time/cost overrun.
(iv) After the above review process the Department assesses the requirement of funds in
each project and formulates the proposal for budgetary support in the form of RE for
the current year and BE for the next financial year.
5.2 In addition to the above steps, the Department has taken concrete steps to ensure that the
Plan targets are achieved. The mechanism of formulation of projects is now based on the concept
of Major Programmes. Further, Steering Committee, Internal Working Group and Specialist Group
have been constituted to review the project report prior to their sanction and also to review the
progress of the projects. Thereafter, their recommendation provides the realistic input to the budget
planning process. In the R&D Sector, the overall programme of the Department has been divided
into twenty themes and Specialists Groups have been formed for each one of them to oversee the
activities during Eleventh Plan. Thus monitoring of projects under R&D Sector is done at three
levels. The first level monitoring is at Section or Group level in the Unit, the second level is by
the higher level of management in the Unit and the third level is the monitoring by Specialist Group
at DAE level.
5.3 The Committee desires that the existing monitoring mechanisms developed by the
Department to monitor and review the progress of the ongoing schemes/projects before
formulating/finalizing proposals for budgetary support should be effectively used to
eliminate any scope of shortage or surrender of funds at a later stage.
PROGRAMMES
The programmes of DAE have been divided into four Sectors for the purpose of allocation
of Funds viz.: Research and Development Sector, Minerals Sector, Industrial Sector and Power
Sector. The major programmes are discussed below.
6. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT SECTOR
6.1 The Research and Development Sector includes research support for nuclear power
programme as well as research and development in non-electricity areas. It covers research and
development for new power reactor concepts and long term research, radioisotope technology with
applications in medicine, agriculture, industry and research; advanced technologies relating to
accelerator, laser, computers, materials and others, and basic and applied research in frontier areas
of science and technology.
6.2 There are Five Research Centres under the Department namely, Bhabha Atomic Research
Centre (BARC) – Mumbai, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research (IGCAR) – Kalpakkam, Raja
Ramanna Centre for Advanced Technology (RRCAT) – Indore, Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre
(VECC) – Kolkata, and Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research (AMD)–
Hyderabad. The main functions of these centres are given below:
• Bhabha Atomic Research Centre pursues comprehensive research and development
(R&D) programmes in the fields of nuclear sciences, engineering and technology, basic
sciences and allied fields for harnessing nuclear energy and also its utility for the benefit
of the society.

4
• Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research is the second largest R&D centre of the
Department engaged in basic research in nuclear sciences and allied areas, technology
development in the field of nanomaterials and nanotechnology and has designed the
500 MWe Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR).
• Raja Ramanna Centre for Advanced Technology is engaged in development of particle
accelerators and lasers along with their applications, besides carrying out substantial
activities in cryogenics and materials research.
• The V ariable Energy Cyclotron Centre is operating the nation's largest and the first
indigenously built Cyclotron and has been produced for the first time in India, the
energetic Neon 20 and Argon 40 beams required for conducting research in Nuclear
Physics.
• Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration & Research carries out survey, prospecting
and exploration of atomic minerals required for the nuclear power programme of the
country.
6.3 The major programmes under the R& D Sector for the Eleventh Five Year Plan are as
follows:
(i) Intensifying of Uranium exploration including development of aerial electromagnetic
survey capability for locating concealed deposits having no surface manifestation.
(ii) Launching of :
• A high flux Multipurpose Research Reactor at Visakhapatnam.
• Upgraded APSARA reactor by enhancing reactor power up to 2 MW.
• A first of its kind in the country 250 MeV Superconducting Cyclotron for
proton beam to be constructed at VECC, Kolkata.
• Demonstration unit of a Compact High Temperature Reactor at BARC, Mumbai.
• Plant for special materials for High Temperature Reactors at Visakhapatnam.
(iii) U pgradation and modernization of scientific infrastructure of all the major R&D
Centres like BARC, IGCAR, RRCAT, VECC, and autonomous institutions like TIFR,
SINP, HRI, IMSc, AEES etc. for overall improvement, pursuing mega science projects
and for staying internationally competitive in S&T.
(iv) Setting up of major large size experimental facilities at Tarapur, supplemented by the
programmes at Trombay to facilitate continued development of advanced technologies
for next generation reactor systems.
(v) Development of Cancer Care facility at Shillong and Ranchi.
(vi) Augmentation of R&D for 700 MWe PHWR and life extension programme for existing
PHWRs including improvement in capacity utilization, safety, control instrumentation,
corrosion, materials etc.
(vii) Strengthening R&D on back end fuel cycle including long term radioactive storage
strategies.
(viii) Development of indigenous technologies related to fuel development for light water
reactors.

5
(ix) R&D for further development of metallic fuel for fast breeder reactors and associated
fuel cycle.
(x) Thorium fuel cycle development.
6.4 As regards the Budgetary allocations for the year 2008-09, the total allocation is
Rs. 2448.14 crores; while the Plan allocation is Rs. 1228.00 crores and the Non-plan allocation is
Rs.1220.13 crores.
6.5 The Committee was informed of the following demand projected by the Department to the
Planning Commission for its various programmes and the allocation that has been agreed to by the
Planning Commission under the R&D Sector:
(Rs. in crore)
Units Proposed Approved
allocation allocation
AERB 4.00 3.00
AMD 78.39 50.00
BARC 520.00 420.00
RRCAT 77.00 55.00
DAE Projects 7.57 5.00
DCSEM 42.36 25.00
AEES 27.46 20.00
Asstt. Universities 119.56 88.00
HRI 20.00 15.00
IGCAR 153.98 90.00
IMS 11.15 7.00
lOP 74.00 70.00
IPR 225.00 140.00
SINP 103.90 35.00
TIFR 170.00 105.00
TMC 70.00 50.00
VECC 71.72 50.00
T
OTAL: 1776.09 1228.00
6.6 The Committee feels that the reduction in the approved allocation vis-a-vis  the
proposed one would somehow affect the programmes envisaged by the Department during
the Eleventh Plan some of which like upgradation and modernization are very crucial. The
Committee is of the opinion that the Department is in a better position to judge its
requirements and hence surreptitious or perfunctory reduction is untenable. Any
compromise on major research programmes is not acceptable to the Committee. This issue,
therefore, needs to be seriously looked into by the Government.

6
7. NUCLEAR IRRADIATION IN AGRICULTURE AND FOOD PROCESSING
7.1 The Committee was informed that the incidence of diseases in seeds and food-borne
diseases can be reduced by food irradiation techniques. It can also inhibit post-harvest sprouting
in potatoes and onions—disinfect fruits and vegetables, delay ripening in fruits, can eliminate
outrightly the food-borne pathogens which can be kept for a long time without refrigeration before
substantial consumption. In addition, the irradiation technology can be used for eliminating pests
nuisance etc.
7.2 The Committee was also informed that presently more than 51,000 consignments of various
isotope products and processing services were provided by the Board of Radiation and Isotope
Technology (BRIT) to institutions all over the country and also some of them located abroad,
bringing in a sales turnover of Rs. 45 crore. Eight new irradiated ‘‘Trombay crop’’ varieties—two
in Mungbean and one each in Groundnut, Soyabean, Mustard, Sunflower, Cowpea and Pigeon pea
were released for commercial cultivation in various agro-climatic zones of the country. So far 35
Trombay crop varieties have been released and notified for commercial cultivation. As regards food
processing BRIT’s Radiation Processing Plant at Vashi, Navi Mumbai continued to offer radiation
processing services to its customers spread all over the country. More than 1000 MT of spices
and allied products were processed at this plant upto November, 2007.
7.3 The Committee was also informed that although irradiation technology could have outright
advantages, there could be certain health risks that might be involved in the application of the
technology of the following nature:
• Irradiation can result in loss of nutrients.
• When food/seeds are exposed to high doses of ionising radiation, the possible changes
in chemical composition and nutritional content of food damage DNA in humans.
• Irradiation does not necessarily inactivate dangerous toxins which have already been
produced by bacteria prior to irradiation.
• Irradiated food products like chicken, meat, etc. could mislead consumers into thinking
that they are biologically safer for consumption.
7.4 The Committee is of the opinion that some precautionary measures should be taken
by the Department of Atomic Energy while irradiating food so that the possible health risks
involved before consumption of irradiated food could be effectively dealt with. In this
connection a timebound programme for evaluation of Radiological Safety, Microbiological
Safety, Nutritional adequacy and Toxicological Safety may be initiated since the irradiation
of seed/food products is in a nascent stage.
8. NUCLEAR MEDICINE
8.1 The Committee was also informed that the Department through its Nuclear Medicine
Centres such as Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC), Tata Institute of Fundamental Research
(TIFR), Board of Radiation and Isotope Technology (BRIT), etc., is also engaged in the production
of diagnostic Radiopharmaceuticals viz. lodine-I3I, phosphorous-32, Chromium-51 etc. which are
quite useful in the treatment of various diseases.
8.2 The Committee feels that diagnostic radiopharmaceuticals are an important constituent of the
various diagnostic tools used for the detection of life threatening diseases like cancer, thaleseemia,
tumors etc. and therefore desires that efforts should be made by the Department to produce
sufficient radio pharmaceuticals in the country itself and provide it to the hospitals at cheaper rates
so that the poor patients can avail of the facility.

7
9. TATA MEMORIAL HOSPITAL AND CANCER TREATMENT THROUGH
TELEMEDICINE
9.1 The Committee was informed that Tata Memorial Centre (TMC) is wholly engaged in
diagnosis, treatment and in basic/advanced researches in the field of Oncology as well as training
and education in cancer to provide highest standard of cancer treatment not only in the country
but even in Asia and has gained specialization in Nuclear Medicine. The TMC is mainly composed
of Tata Memorial Hospital (TMH) and the Advanced Centre for Treatment, Research and Education
in Cancer (ACTREC). A telemedicine network connecting all the Regional Cancer Centres across
the country with TMC has been commissioned. So far 19 cancer hospitals including seven in the
North East and two from abroad have been connected with Tata Memorial Hospital.
9.2 The Committee is of the opinion that cancer is one of the most prevalent diseases in
India afflicting the population across the country and the treatment for the disease is very
costly. Telemedicine is one of the tools of reducing the treatment cost, as it can provide
specialised treatment even at the backward and remote regions of the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts should be made to spread the telemedicine
network by connecting more hospitals across the country with the Tata Memorial Hospital.
10. ASSISTANCE TO UNIVERSITIES AND OTHER INSTITUTIONS
10.1 The Committee was informed that the allocation under Assistance to Universities, etc.,
(Grants to other Institutions) has been increased from Rs. 90.22 crores and Rs. 81.76 crores in
B.E. and R.E. 2007-2008 to Rs. 88.00 crores for B.E. in 2008-2009. The details of the provision
made under the head Assistance to Universities, research institutions, societies and non-Government
institutions are as under:—
(Rs. in crores)
Sl. Details B E RE B E
No. 2007-08 2007-08 2008-09
1. Public Awareness and 0.40 0.40 0.40
Neighbourhood Programme
2. Exhibitions 2.00 2.00 2.00
3. Fellowships 4.20 4.20 4.65
4. Symposia 3.00 3.00 3.00
5. Board of Radiation and 40.00 35.09 36.47
Nuclear Sciences (BRNS)
6. Miscellaneous R&D scheme 2.50 1.35 1.21
7. National Board for Higher 13.00 15.00 16.00
Mathematics (NBHM)
8. Assistance to Radiation Medicine 24.00 20.00 10.00
Centres and Cancer Hospitals
9. External Relations Programme 0.12 0.17 0.17
10. Prospective Research Funding 1.00 0.10 0.50
11. Development of Cancer facility at Shillong and 0.00 0.00 10.00
Ranchi
12. Management Development 0.00 0.00 2.00
T
OTAL: 90.22 81.76 88.00

8
10.2 The Department also informed that in addition to assistance to universities, grant-in-aid is
being utilized for public awareness and neighbourhood programmes, exhibition, fellowships and
miscellaneous R&D schemes, assistance to radiation medicine centre and cancer hospitals,
development of Cancer facility at Shillong and Ranchi, Management Development, etc. The Board
of Research in Nuclear Sciences (BRNS) is an advisory committee constituted by the department
to recommend financial assistance to all the renowned universities/research institutions, laboratories
in the country both to encourage and promote scientific research in the areas which are relevant
to the mandate of the Department. During the current financial year BRNS has extended financial
support to 133 projects.
10.3 The Committee was also informed that the National Board of Higher Mathematics (NBHM)
supports a number of universities for procurement of books to their libraries. In addition, NBHM
has organized workshops, instructional schools, conferences and participation in conferences and
collaboration abroad. The Board also provides scholarships to undergraduate/postgraduate
students and fellowships to Ph.D., Post Doctoral level candidates. Active training programme are
also organized outside the regular educational framework viz. Mathematical Training and Talent
Search is a summer programme for undergraduate students, the nurture programme for extra
training for students in the national Olympiads including those pursuing engineering or other
disciplines. During the year 2007-08, the NBHM released grants to around 74 Universities/
lnstitutions.
10.4 The Committee notes that, while allocations under some of the heads of the
‘Assistance to Universities’ have been decreased, they have remained constant for most of
the programmes like public awareness and neighbourhood programme, exhibitions,
symposia, etc. In some programmes viz. fellowships, prospective research in funding, etc.
insignificant increases have been effected. The Committee is of the opinion that budgetary
allocations under these heads are relatively meagre, keeping in view the fact that there is
an urgent need to develop interest and awareness amongst the masses and especially the
younger generation towards the subject of Atomic Energy and to dispel the negative
impression of the public towards nuclear power. The Committee is of the opinion that more
funds should be allocated towards mass awareness programmes in the field of nuclear
science.
10.5 The Committee feels that the Department should concentrate on increasing its
investments significantly, in the field of research in nuclear science at University level,
which would help in inculcating interest towards nuclear science and attracting more
students to this field. In this direction the Committee recommends that a proactive system
of funding should be initiated by the department, which would focus towards bringing more
and more universities across the country under its coverage of grants.
11. INDUSTRIAL SECTOR
11.1 The Industrial Sector is providing full support to the front-end as well as back end of the
nuclear power programme of the country. The Nuclear Fuel Cycle Programme covers industrial
activities which are ancillary to the nuclear power sector and comprises design, construction and
operation of industrial plants for ore refining, fuel fabrication, heavy water production and others.
The programme relating to the Industrial Applications of Nuclear Energy in the non-electricity fields
addresses applications of radioisotope, laser and accelerator technologies in medicine, food
preservation, agriculture, industry and other such areas.
11.2 Under this sector emphasis has been on the following programmes:
• To vigorously pursue efforts aimed at recovering uranium from secondary sources ( e.g.
phosphoric acid from uranium bearing phosphatic rocks).

9
• To upgrade existing facilities and to set up new ones for fabrication of fuel and
structural materials so as to meet increased demand of the expanding nuclear power
programme. A new plant for production of zirconium oxide and sponge will be set up
at Pazhayakayal, Tamil Nadu. A new fuel fabrication plant is also proposed to be set up
at a location to be decided.
• To set up spent fuel recycle plant for the spent fuel discharged from nuclear power
plants; integrated reprocessing and waste immobilization plant to recover fissile and
fertile materials; and thorium fuel reprocessing plant.
• The Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) has initiated programmes viz. PUSHPAK–
facility to reprocess 400 tonnes of spent fuel per year and Desalination Plant for the
New Zirconium Oxide & Sponge Plant at Pazhayakayal.
• Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research (IGCAR) will set up a Fast Reactor Fuel
Cycle Facility
• Nuclear Fuel Complex (NFC) will set up a Zirconium Alloy Complex
11.3 As regards the Budetary allocations for the year 2008-09, the total allocation is
Rs. 2294.37 crores; while the Plan allocation is Rs. 548.00 crores, the Non-plan allocation is
Rs. 1746.37 crores.
11.4 The Committee was informed of the following demand projected by the Department to the
Planning Commission for its various programmes and the allocation that has been agreed to by the
Planning Commission under the Sector:
Units Proposed Approved
allocation allocation
BARC 300.00 210.00
BRIT 17.57 10.00
DAE Projects
ECIL-R&D 20.00 20.00
PREE & Other Projects 25.70 15.00
Total-DAE Projects 45.70 35.00
ECIL
BS 0.00 0.00
IEBR 43.00 43.00
HWB 103.46 80.00
IGCAR 107.29 80.00
NFC 122.00 90.00
G
RAND T OTAL: 739.02 548.00
BS 696.02 505.00
IEBR 43.00 43.00
Budgetary support, IEBR = Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources.

10
11.5 The Committee is of the opinion that the contribution to this sector is quite
significant for a developing economy like ours. There is a need to augment the existing
programmes as it has a direct bearing on the societal needs. Activities related to fuel
fabrication, spent fuel recycling, recovery of fissile and fertile materials, recovery of
Uranium from secondary sources, etc. would help the country to be less dependant on the
external sources for pursuing our nuclear programme. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the allocation of funds to this sector be augmented adequately to meet the
needs of activities being pursued by the Department.
12. URBAN SOLID W ASTE MANAGEMENT
12.1 The Committee was informed that the Department has taken the initiative of solving the
problem of management of urban waste through technology. The department informed that a part
of the urban waste is biodegradable and while the rest is non-biodegradable. The biodegradable part,
which is normally sent to the landfill, contributes a lot towards bacterial pollution, which in turn
results in common ailments like cough and cold and thereby increases the cities’ health management
expenditure. Also, there is a major energy expenditure on collecting this waste and carrying it to
the landfill across the city. To process the bio-degradable waste, the BARC has developed a
technology, namely, the bio-digester, to convert all biodegradable waste into organic manure and
methane. The bio-digester digests kitchen waste, abattoirs waste, vegetable market waste,
agricultural residues and converts it into manure and methane on which even generators can be run
to produce power. The sludge can be used as organic manure. It also provides livelihood to a large
number of poor people who are involved in waste segregation. Such a plant is presently under
operation in Vadodra.
12.2 The Committee feels that both these technologies can prove to be boon for
conservation of nature and environment and for the society at large which is grappling with
the problem of disposal of sewage as well as solid waste generated in metropolitan cities and
small towns. What is required is the propagation and popularization of these technologies
because their efficacy lies in their use on a large scale. In view of the fact that
environment protection is the need of the hour as hazards of global warming and climate
change are looming large, the urgency of such a step becomes more prominent.
12.3 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should. take effective
steps for marketing these technologies, if possible by creating a special cell for the purpose,
within Radiation Technology Development Section of Bhabha Atomic Research Centre. The
cell should interact with. the municipalities/corporations/State Governments/Ministry of
Urban Development, Ministry of Environment and Forests, etc. to demonstrate the merits
of the technology.
13. MINERALS SECTOR
13.1 The Minerals sector is a starting point of front end of nuclear cycle and provide full
support to the nuclear power programme of the country.
The major programmes are as follows:
• To open new mines and set up new mills and to enhance existing facilities so as to
meet the requirements of operating reactors and to enable NPCIL to set up new
reactors,
• Uranium Corporation of India Ltd. (VCIL) will open,
• New mines at Bagjata, Mohuldih and Banduhurang in Jharkhand to be opened,

11
• Capacity expansion of Turamdih mine,
• Capacity expansion of Jaduguda and Turamdih mills.
13.2 As regards the Budetary allocations for the year 2008-09, the total allocation is
Rs. 5453.50 crores; while the Plan allocation is Rs. 2487.00 crores, the Non-plan allocation is
Rs. 2966.50 crores.
13.3 The Committee was informed of the following demand projected by the Department to the
Planning Commission for its various programmes and the allocation that has been agreed to by the
Planning Commission under the Minerals Sector:
Units Proposed allocation Approved allocation
AMD 63.51 45.00
IREL 1 10.40 110.00
BS 0.00 0.00
IEBR 1 10.40 110.00
UCIL 715.00 556.00
BS 339.00 180.00
IEBR 376.00 376.00
T
OTAL: 888.91 711. 00
BS 402.51 225.00
IEBR 486.40 486.00
13.4 The Committee is of the view that the need for exploring and extracting uranium
from reserves available in the country assumes utmost importance in the context of
attaining greater self-reliance for the country’s nuclear programme. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that priority be given towards this.
14. HEALTH HAZARD OF URANIUM MINES
14.1 The Committee raised the issue of the health hazard created by mining of Uranium ore,
specially in open-cast mines, which are causing tremendous concern to the local population and
desired to know about the steps that have been taken to minimize their impact on the local
population.
14.2 The Department clarified that apart from the steps taken by the Uranium Corporation of
India Ltd., which is responsible for mining, a separate programme in the Health Safety and
Environment Group of the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre is functioning, where a lot of research
regarding minimizing health hazards is conducted and their advice in terms of the protection
measures is being implemented. Further, health audits are also being conducted regularly in the
population affected by the mining. However, the problem of lack of public awareness still exists.
The department also ensures that the mines are covered with greenery once they have been
exhausted. The Department assured the Committee that in DAE, safety comes first and production
next. Safety means industrial safety, radiation safety, health issues connected with mine workers,
connected with the people in the surrounding area, and also issues connected with environment.

12
14.3 The Committee is of the opinion. that awareness regarding health hazards should be
created in the affected population before the mining activity starts and therefore
recommends that mass awareness campaigns should be conducted at regular intervals for
the population residing near the mining area. The issue of displacement of the local
population and sufficient compensation for the displaced, should also be dealt with
sympathetically to avoid public discontentment at a later stage.
15. POWER SECTOR
15.1 This Sector deals with the generation of electricity on commercial basis. It covers design,
construction and operation of pressurized heavy water reactors, fast breeder reactors and thorium
reactors, with associated safety aspects, on commercial scale as well as waste management
environment monitoring.
15.2 The major programmes are as follows:
(i) Completion of Projects under Construction and Capacity Addition of 3160 MWe
• Kaiga 4 — 220 MWe
• RAPP 5&6 — 2X220 MWe
• KK 1&2 — 2X1000 MWe
• PFBR — 500 MWe
(ii) S tart of Work on New Projects based on indigenous efforts
(a) Pressurised Heavy Water Reactors (PHWRs)
• KAPP 3&4 — 2X700 MWe
• RAPP 7&8 — 2X700 MWe
• 7NP 5&6 — 2X700 MWe
• 7NP 7&8 — 2X700 MWe
(b) Pre-project works on Fast Breeder Reactors 1&2
(c) Advanced Heavy Water Reactor (AHWR)
(iii) S tart of Work on New Projects based on Imports subject to fruition of International
Cooperation
• KK 3&4 — 2X1000 MWe
• JP 1 &2 — 2XI000 MWe
• KK 5&6 — 2XI000 MWe
• JP 3&4 — 2X1000 MWe
• LWR 11&12 — 2XI000 MWe
15.3 As regards the Budetary allocations for the year 2008-09, the total allocation is
Rs. 4854.28 crores; while the Plan allocation is Rs. 3433.60 crores, the Non-plan allocation is
Rs. 1421.28 crores.

13
15.4 The Committee was informed of the following demand projected by the Department to the
Planning Commission for its various programmes and the allocation that has been agreed to by the
Planning Commission under the Minerals Sector:
Units Proposed Approved
allocation allocation
Fuel for KKNP - Credit 381.71 335.28
Projects Credit (BS) 593.00 550.00
Fuel for KKNP - Cash 66.62 66.62
Total BS 1041.33 951.90
NPCIL 1841.00 1841.00
IEBR
Total: NPCIL 2882.33 2792.90
BARC (BS) 0.10 0.10
DAE PROJECTS (BS) 17.00 10.00
IGCAR (BS) 16.68 10.00
BHA VINI 780.00 620.00
(BS)
T
OTAL P OWER : 3696.11 3433.00
15.5 The Committee was informed that Nuclear Energy has a huge potential. Presently, the
percentage contribution of Nuclear Energy to the total energy production in the country is quite
low i.e. 3% and in the next five or ten years, it going to be slightly higher i.e. 5% or 7%.
However, as per future projections the department would be in a position to reach something like
200,000 MW i.e. 20% by 2050, purely on domestic efforts through PHWR’s fast reactors and
Thorium utilization.
15.6 The Committee is of the opinion that Nuclear Energy is a very clean source of
energy devoid of any environmental pollution that the production of Thermal or Hydel
energy causes. Therefore, conscious efforts should be made to produce the maximum
amount of energy from Nuclear sources.
16. ENRICHMENT AND UTILISATION OF THORIUM FOR NUCLEAR ENERGY
16.1 The Committee raised the issue of enrichment of Thorium as fuel for utilization in nuclear
reactors instead of Uranium, in view of the fact that India possesses large deposits of Thorium
as compared to Uranium and self-sufficiency can be obtained so far as fuel is concerned, in case
Thorium is used as fuel.
16.2 The department clarified that the nuclear energy programme of the country has been
consistent with the nuclear resource profile and the three stage nuclear energy programme has been
designed accordingly. Though the programme to use Thorium as fuel has been delayed, yet it is
on course right now. The Committee was also informed that since Thorium is not fissile, firstly,
it has to be converted into fissile Uranium-223 and that requires fast reactors where there is excess
of neutrons. In fact, blanket production of Thorium for the fast reactor and its processing has
already been done. However, Thorium utilization in a major way for nuclear energy, will begin only

14
after our fast reactor programme reaches the level of a fairly high megawatt capacity, of the order
of 50,000 to 1,00,000 MWes. As far as technology development is concerned such as Thorium
processing, Thorium fuel-making, the process has already been perfected and the BARC has
developed a 300 MWe Advanced Heavy Water Reactor (AHWR) that aims at developing expertise
for thorium utilization and demonstration of advanced safety concepts.
16.3 The Committee is of the opinion that to gain self-sufficiency in the country’s
requirement of nuclear fuel, the Department has to make concerted efforts towards
development of technology which uses Thorium as Nuclear fuel instead of Uranium, keeping
in view the vast reserves of Thorium. The use of Uranium, makes the country dependent
on other countries and also results in outgo of foreign exchange.
17. REMUNERATION OF SCIENTISTS
17.1 So far as the remuneration of the scientists is concerned, the Committee Was informed that
a plea for a special allowance, over and above the normal salary, was made to the Sixth Pay
Commission, for attracting scientists in the field of Atomic Energy. The Pay Commission has not
agreed to that and instead, they have agreed for getting scientists on contract basis, where market
salaries can be given. However, since the scientists who join the institutions under Atomic Energy,
have a tradition of nationalist feelings, wherein they retire from the institutions after serving for
over 30 years, the contract appointment terms does not fulfill the requirements of the Department.
Secondly, as regards the promotion prospects, the fraction of the scientists who will go to the
topmost posts in the Department are very less as compared to the civil services, which leads to
high level of attrition among the scientists.
17.2 The Committee expresses its serious concern at the fact that the present
remuneration being paid to the scientists is not attractive enough to attract the best of
scientific talent available in the country. Further, to make matters worse, there is a high
level of attrition of scientists from the department, who move towards the private sector for
better salaries and promotion prospects. The Committee recommends that the case for
grant of special allowance over and above the normal salaries may be taken up emphatically
with the Government, keeping in view the the special requirements of the department, and
the scientific community at large, specially in view of the tremendous contributions of the
scientists in the field of Atomic Energy.
18. INDO-UNITED STATES JOINT CIVILIAN NUCLEAR ENERGY AGGREMENT
18.1 The Committee was informed that during the visit of Prime Minister of India to United
States of America (USA) in July 2005, a Joint Statement was signed in which both countries
agreed to work together to achieve full civil nuclear energy cooperation. India was recognized as
a responsible state with advanced nuclear technology and it was agreed that India would acquire
the same benefits and advantages; including full civil nuclear cooperation and have access to the
international fuel market. In turn, India reciprocally agreed to assume the same responsibilities and
practices such as separating its civilian and military nuclear facilities in a phased manner and filing
a declaration regarding its civilian nuclear facilities with International Atomic Energy Agency(IAEA);
taking a decision to voluntarily place its civilian nuclear facilities under IAEA safeguards etc.
18.2. The Committee was also informed that in March 2006 a ‘Separation Plan’ was agreed with
the USA and tabled in the Indian Parliament on the 7th March, 2006. The Separation Plan provides
for assurances by USA on uninterrupted nuclear fuel supplies to reactors that would be placed
under India-specific safeguards in perpetuity, together with India’s right to take corrective measures
in the event of fuel supplies being interrupted. The USA also gave assurance of support to India’s

15
right to build up a strategic reserve of nuclear fuel to meet the lifetime requirements of India’s
rectors. In turn, the USA agreed to have their laws adjusted and also to work with allies to adjust
the international regime such as ‘Nuclear Suppliers Group’ (NSG) to enable full civil nucIear
encrgy cooperation and trade with India.
18.3 The Committee was also informed that on 7th December, 2006 the US Congress adopted
the ‘Henry Hyde – US – lndia Peaceful Atomic Energy Cooperation Act 2006’. India’s concerns
on certain provisions in the Hyde Act were taken up with the USA. A draft Agreement on
Cooperation between the Government of India and the Govcrnment of the Unites States of America
concerning Peaceful Uses of Nuclear Energy has been negotiated and finalized between India and
USA on 1st August, 2007.
18.4. The Ministry further informed that according to the India-US Agreement finalized in July,
2007, India was required to complete the negotiation of ail India specific agreement with the
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA). Thereafter adjustment of the guidelines of the NucIear
Suppliers Group (NSG) and the approval of the US Congress for the operationalisation of the
agreement will be sought. The fifth round of discussions with IAEA on an India-specific agreement
has concluded in February, 2008. Considerable progress has been made during these 5 rounds of
negotiations and further consultations are on with the Agency
18.5 The Committee is of the opinion that the agreement with the United States of
America has to be looked at from the larger perspective of national security as well as
national interest. While acknowledging the increasing energy requirements of the country,
the thrust must be on the indigenous ‘Three-stage Programme’ on which our scientists are
working with great confidence and optimism. The Indo–United States Nuclear Agreement has
caused serious concerns with regard to our foreign policy and security related issues on
which our Parliament had to debate several times. The sense of the Parliament needs to be
taken into consideration.
19. ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT
19.1 The Committee has been informed that the year 2007-08 proved to be a year of
landmark achievements for the Department of Atomic Energy. Export of 4400kg of Heavy
water by Heavy Water Board to a U.S. firm, supply of indigenously developed tele-therapy
machine to Vietnam, commissioning of the latest super computer- Anupam Ajeya  at Trombay
and the first open-pit uranium mine at Banduhrang in Jharkhand, commercial operation of
Kaiga Atomic Power Unit-3 in Karnataka, commissioning of the spent fuel storage facility
at Kalpakkam, releasing of eight new Trombay crop varieties for commercial cultivation,
etc. are some of the highlights of those achievements.
19.2 The Committee places on record its pleasure over the path-breaking achievements of
the Department and would like to commend the entire team of scientists who through
sustained efforts and untiring labour could redeem these dreams into reality, under the able
and dynamic guidance of the Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy. The Committee
would like the Department to keep this spirit up and deliver more and more such goods in
future as well.
20. After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Atomic Energy and
assessing the progress of various important programmes and projects administered by it, the
Committee recommends that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 3908.00 crores under Demand
No.4 (Atomic Energy) and Rs. 889.00 crores under Demand No. 5 (Nuclear Power Schemes)
as sought by the Department for the year 2008-09 may be approved.

16
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Committee, however, notes with serious concern the curtailment of funds under
the Plan schemes in Research and Development Sector for premier institutions like Bhabha
Atomic Research Centre, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Variable Energy
Cyclotron Centre, Raja Ramanna Centre for Advanced Technology, Atomic Minerals
Directorate for Exploration and Research, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Institute
of Plasma Research, Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, Tata Memorial Centre, etc. The
Power sector which is responsible for undertaking the ongoing Nuclear Power Project under
the Bharatiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Ltd. has also experienced a cut in allocation. The
Committee also notes the cuts in budgetary allocation under the non-plan schemes which
were intended for the operational budget in Industrial Sector in Heavy Water production,
Nuclear Fuel Complex, Board for Radiation and Isotope Technology, etc. (Para 4.3)
2. The Committee is of the opinion that curtailment of funds for premier Institutions
engaged in comprehensive research and development of frontline technologies, for
harnessing nuclear energy for the benefit of the society, would delay the endeavour of these
institutions in achieving their goals. The Committee fails to understand as to how the
Department will manage to achieve its targets, in the field of Atomic Energy, which is
highly capital intensive with such meager budgetary allocations. The Committee hopes that
in future the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance would exercise utmost
precaution before finalizing allocation for the Department. (Para 4.4)
3. The Committee desires that the existing monitoring mechanisms developed by the
Department to monitor and review the progress of the ongoing schemes/projects before
formulating/finalizing proposals for budgetary support should be effectively used to
eliminate any scope of shortage or surrender of funds at a later stage. (Para 5.3)
4. The Committee feels that the reduction in the approved allocation vis-a-vis  the
proposed one would somehow affect the programmes envisaged by the Department during
the Eleventh Plan some of which like upgradation and modernization are very crucial. The
Committee is of the opinion that the Department is in a better position to judge its
requirements and hence surreptitious or perfunctory reduction is untenable. Any
compromise on major research programmes is not acceptable to the Committee. This issue,
therefore, needs to be seriously looked into by the Government. (Para 6.6)
5. The Committee is of the opinion that some precautionary measures should be taken
by the Department of Atomic Energy while irradiating food so that the possible health risks
involved before consumption of irradiated food could be effectively dealt with. In this
connection a timebound programme for evaluation of Radiological Safety, Microbiological
Safety, Nutritional adequacy and Toxicological Safety may be initiated since the irradiation
of seed/food products is in a nascent stage. (Para 7.4)
6. The Committee feels that diagnostic radiopharmaceuticals are an important constituent
of the various diagnostic tools used for the detection of life threatening diseases like cancer,
thaleseemia, tumors etc. and therefore desires that efforts should be made by the Department
to produce sufficient radiopharmaceuticals in the country itself and provide it to the hospitals
at cheaper rates so that the poor patients can avail of the facility. (Para 8.2)
7. The Committee is of the opinion that cancer is one of the most prevalent diseases
in India afflicting the population across the country and the treatment for the disease is
16

17
very costly. Telemedicine is one of the tools of reducing the treatment cost, as it can
provide specialised treatment even at the backward and remote regions of the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts should be made to spread the telemedicine
network by connecting more hospitals across the country with the Tata Memorial Hospital.
(Para 9.2)
8. The Committee notes that, while allocations under some of the heads of the
‘Assistance to Universities’ have been decreased, they have remained constant for most of
the programmes like public awareness and neighbourhood programme, exhibitions,
symposia, etc. In some programmes viz. fellowships, prospective research in funding, etc.
insignificant increases have been effected. The Committee is of the opinion that budgetary
allocations under these heads are relatively meager, keeping in view the fact that there is
an urgent need to develop interest and awareness amongst the masses and especially the
younger generation towards the subject of Atomic Energy and to dispel the negative
impression of the public towards nuclear power. The Committee is of the opinion that more
funds should be allocated towards mass awareness programmes in the field of nuclear
science. (Para 10.4)
9. The Committee feels that the Department should concentrate on increasing its
investments significantly, in the field of research in nuclear science at University level,
which would help in inculcating interest towards nuclear science and attracting more
students to this field. In this direction the Committee recommends that a proactive system
of funding should be initiated by the department, which would focus towards bringing more
and more universities across the country under its coverage of grants. (Para 10.5)
10. The Committee is of the opinion that the contribution to this sector is quite
significant for a developing economy like ours. There is a need to augment the existing
programmes as it has a direct bearing on the societal needs. Activities related to fuel
fabrication, spent fuel recycling, recovery of fissile and fertile materials, recovery of
uranium from secondary sources, etc. would help the country to be less dependant on the
external sources for pursuing our nuclear programme. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the allocation of funds to this sector be augmented adequately to meet the
needs of activities being pursued by the Department. (Para 11.5)
11. The Committee feels that both these technologies can prove to be boon for
conservation of nature and environment and for the society at large which is grappling with
the problem of disposal of sewage as well as solid waste generated in metropolitan cities and
small towns. What is required is the propagation and popularization of these technologies
because their efficacy lies in their use on a large scale. In view of the fact that environment
protection is the need of the hour as hazards of global warming and climate change are
looming large, the urgency of such a step becomes more prominent. (Para 12.2)
12. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take effective
steps for marketing these technologies, if possible by creating a special cell for the purpose,
within Radiation Technology Development Section of Bhabha Atomic Research Centre. The
cell should interact with the Municipalities/Corporations/State Governments/Ministry of
Urban Development, Ministry of Environment and Forests, etc. to demonstrate the merits
of the technology. (Para 12.3)
13. The Committee is of the view that the need for exploring and extracting uranium
from reserves available in the country assumes utmost importance in the context of
attaining greater self-reliance for the country’s nuclear programme. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that priority be given towards this. (Para 13.4)
14. The Committee is of the opinion that awareness regarding health hazards should be
created in the affected population before the mining activity starts and therefore

18
recommends that mass awareness campaigns should be conducted at regular intervals for
the population residing near the mining area. The issue of displacement of the local
population and sufficient compensation for the displaced, should also be dealt with
sympathetically to avoid public discontentment at a later stage. (Para 14.3)
15. The Committee is of the opinion that Nuclear Energy is a very clean source of
energy devoid of any environmental pollution that the production of Thermal or Hydel
energy causes. Therefore, conscious efforts should be made to produce the maximum
amount of energy from Nuclear sources. (Para 15.6)
16. The Committee is of the opinion that to gain self-sufficiency in the country's
requirement of nuclear fuel, the Department has to make concerted efforts towards
development of technology which uses Thorium as Nuclear fuel instead of Uranium, keeping
in view the vast reserves of Thorium. The use of Uranium, makes the country dependent
on other countries and also results in outgo of foreign exchange. (Para 16.3)
17. The Committee expresses its serious concern at the fact that the present
remuneration being paid to the scientists is not attractive enough to attract the best of
scientific talent available in the country. Further, to make matters worse, there is a high
level of attrition of scientists from the department, who move towards the private sector for
better salaries and promotion prospects. The Committee recommends that the case for
grant of special allowance over and above the normal salaries may be taken up emphatically
with the Government, keeping in view the special requirements of the department, and the
scientific community at large, specially in view of the tremendous contributions of the
scientists in the field of Atomic Energy. (Para 17.2)
18. The Committee is of the opinion that the agreement with the United States of
America has to be looked at from the larger perspective of national security as well as
national interest. While acknowledging the increasing energy requirements of the country,
the thrust must be on the indigenous ‘Three-stage Programme’ on which our scientists are
working with great confidence and optimism. The Indo-United States Nuclear Agreement has
caused serious concerns with regard to our foreign policy and security related issues on
which our Parliament had to debate several times. The sense of the Parliament needs to be
taken into consideration. (Para 18.5)
19. The Committee has been informed that the year 2007-08 proved to be a year of
landmark achievements for the Department of Atomic Energy. Export of 4400kg. of Heavy
water by Heavy water Board to a U.S. firm, supply of indigenously developed tele-therapy
machine to Vietnam, commissioning of the latest super computer-Anupam Ajeya at Trombay
and the first open-pit uranium mine at Banduhrang in Jharkhand, commercial operations
of Kaiga Atomic Power Unit-3 in Karnataka, commissioning of the spent fuel storage facility
at Kalpakkam, releasing of eight new Trombay crop varieties for commercial cultivation,
etc. are some of the highlights of those achievements. (Para 19.1)
20. The Committee places on record its pleasure over the path-breaking achievements of
the Department and would like to commend the entire team of scientists who through
sustained efforts and untiring labour could redeem these dreams into reality, under the able
and dynamic guidance of the Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy. The Committee
would like the Department to keep this spirit up and deliver more and more such goods in
future as well. (Para 19.2)
21. After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Atomic Energy and
assessing the progress of various important programmes and projects administered by it, the
Committee recommends that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 3908.00 crores under Demand
No.4 (Atomic Energy) and Rs. 889.00 crores under Demand No.5 (Nuclear Power Schemes)
as sought by the Department for the year 2008-09 may be approved. (Para 20)

19
MINUTES

20

21
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thuesday, the 1st April, 2008 in Room No. ‘139’,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Jabir Husain
4. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
5. Dr. D. Raja
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Shri Francis Fanthome
8. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
9. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
10. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
11. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
12. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
13. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
** *
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY
1. Dr. Anil Kakodkar, Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma, Chairman, Atomic Energy Regulatory Board
3. Dr. S. Banerjee, Director, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre
4. Dr. S. K. Jain, CMD, Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd.
5. Shri V . P. Raja, Principal Adviser
6. Dr. Baldev Raj, Director, IGCAR
7. Dr. R.B. Grover, Director, SPG
21
*** Relates to other matters.

22
8. Shri Ramendra Gupta, CMD, Uranium Corporation of India Ltd.
9. Shrimati Revathy Iyer, Joint Secretary
10. Shri S. Mendiratta, Joint Secretary
11. Shri M. Pran Konchady, Chief Controller of Accounts
12. Shri Arun Srivastava, Member, SPG
13. Shri S. Thakur, Executive Director, Nuclear Power Corp. of India Ltd.
14. Shri G.K. Ghai, Director (Finance), NPCIL
15. Shri A. Ramaiah, IFA, BARC
16. Mrs. Uma Seshadri, Head, Planning Division, IGCAR
17. Shri S. Mani, Jt. Controller (F&A) IGCAR
18. Dr. R.K. Bhandari, Associate Director , VECC
19. Dr. A.K. Kohli, Chief Executive, BRIT
20. Dr. R Sarin, Director , ACTREC
21. Dr. B.S. Goyal, Director (Finance), BHAVINI
22. Shri. Arun Kumar, Gen. Manager, UCIL
2. * * *
The officials then withdrew.
3. * * *
4. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Department of
Atomic Energy and requested the Secretary to make a brief presentation on the Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Department. Thereafter, the Secretary made a visual presentation
highlighting the major activities formulated for the year 2008-09 and achievements of the
Department during the year 2007-08. The Secretary also mentioned about the budgetary allocations
made under different heads for the year 2008-09. The Members then sought clarifications on the
points emerging out of the presentation of the Secretary. The Secretary replied to them.
The officials then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.30 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday,
the 2nd April, 2008.
*** Relates to other matters.

23
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 23rd April, 2008 in Room No. ‘139’,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Saman Pathak
4. Shri Jabir Husain
5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK  SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
9. Shri Francis Fanthome
10. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
11. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
12. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
2. The Committee took-up for consideration its draft ***, ***, ***, ***, ***, and 191st
Reports on the Demands for Grants (2008-09) pertaining to the Department of ***, ***, ***, ***,
***, *** and Atomic Energy.
3. The Committee discussed the 191st Report pertaining to the Department of Atomic Energy
and the Chairman decided to add a recommendation regarding Indo-US nuclear deal. It states; ‘‘the
agreement with the United States of America has to be looked at from the larger perspective of
national security as well as national interest. While acknowledging the increasing energy
requirements of the country, the thrust must be on the indigenous ‘Three-stage Programme’ on
which our scientist are working with great confidence and optimism. The lndo-United States
Nuclear Agreement has caused serious concerns with regard to our foreign policy and security
related issues on which our Parliament had to debate several times. The sense of the Parliament
needs to be taken into consideration’’. All the Members of the Committee agreed with the
*** Relates to other matters.
23

24
recommendation made by the Chairman and unanimously decided to add this recommendation in
the aforesaid report. Thereafter, the Committee adopted all the reports with some minor changes.
4. The Committee decided to present all the seven reports (185th to 191st) on 29th April, 2008
in both the Houses of Parliament.. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence
Dr. Barun Mukherjee to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and to lay the copies of the reports
on the Table of Lok Sabha by Dr. Sujan Chakraborty and in his absence by Shri Francis Fanthome.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.