PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 234
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2012/AGRAHAYANA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY FOURTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY FOURTH REPORT OF THE 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FOREST 
ON THE DEMAND FOR GRANTS (2012-13) OF 
THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 20  DECEMBER, 2012)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 20  DECEMBER, 2012)
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY FOURTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2012)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations Contained in the Two Hundred Twenty-
Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment 
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
234
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

57
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY FOURTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations Contained in the Two Hundred Twenty-
Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Ministry of Environment and Forests
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  20 th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  20 th December, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( vi)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—26
5. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 27 —51
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 53—56

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2012-13)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil H. Lad
3. Shrimati Maya Singh
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri Alok Tiwari
6. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi
7. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
8. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
12. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
@13. Vacant
#14. V acant
15. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
16. Shri Marotrao Saiuji Kowase
17. Dr. Ajay Kumar
18. Shri O.S. Manian
19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
20. Shri Basori Singh Masram
21. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
22. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
23. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
25. Shri Yashvir Singh
#26. Vacant
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
30. Shri Ramakant Yadav
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
@ Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 14th December, 2012 on his resignation
from the Membership of the Committee.
# Shri Ninong Ering and Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon their
induction in the Union Council of Ministers w.e.f. 28
th October, 2012.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra,  Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Thirty Fourth Report on the Action Taken by the
Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations contained in Two Hundred Twenty
Fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Environment
and Forests.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment
and Forests on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Fourth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests which
was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18
th May, 2012.
3. There were thirty one recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Fourth
Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were
received from the Ministry on 17
th September, 2012.
4. In the meeting held on 17 th December, 2012, the Committee considered the Draft Action
Taken Report and adopted the same.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
17th December , 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

(v)
ACRONYMS
BRAI : Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India
BOD : Bio-chemical Oxygen Demand
CAMPA : Compensatory Afforestation Management and
CBIPMP : Capacity Building for Industrial Pollution
CPCB : Central Pollution Control Board
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
CSS : Centrally Sponsored Scheme
CZMP : Coastal Zone Management Programme
DAC : DNA Advisory Committee
DLC : District Level Committee
EAP : Externally Aided Projects
EFRs : Environmental Flow Requirements
EIA : Environmental Impact Assessment
GAP : Ganga Action Plan
GEAC : Genetic Engineering Approval Committee
GRBMP : Ganga River Basin Management Plan
GMOs : Genetically Modified Organisms
IBSC : Institutional Bio-safety Committee
ICFRE : Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education
ICMR : Indian Council of Medical Research
IRR : Internal Rate of Return
IWMP : Integrated Watershed Management Programme
JICA : Japan International Cooperation Agency
KVKs : Kisan Vikas Kendras
LMOs : Living Modified Organisms
MNREGS : Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme
MPTs : Multi Purpose Tree species
NAP : National Afforestation Programme
NEAMA : National Environment Assessment and Monitoring Authority
NGRBA : National Ganga River Basin Authority
NMCG : National Mission for Clean Ganga
OECD : Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
RCGM : Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation
SBCC : State Biotechnology Coordination Committee
SFDA : S tate Forest Development Agency
SPMGs : State Programme Management Groups
SRCA : S tate River Conservation Authorities
STPF : Special Tiger Protection Force
TOF : Trees Outside Forest

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment
and Forests on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Twenty Fourth Report
of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Environment
and Forests, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 18
th May, 2012. There
were thirty one recommendations in the Two Hundred and Twenty Fourth Report of the
Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from
the Ministry on 17
th September, 2012.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee
on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests are set out in the subsequent
paragraphs:–
Recommendation (Para 6.5)
The Committee, hopes that the Ministry would not only be able to get full allocation of its
approved budgetary support during the Twelfth Five Year Plan, but would also ensure full utilization
of funds allocated to it and it would not come to the Committee with the same old excuses for
not fully utilizing the allocated funds.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry of Environment and Forests has proposed an outlay of Rs 47856 crore for
its Twelfth Five Year Plan, 2012-17. Detailed scheme/programme wise justification has been
provided to the Planning Commission on such enhanced fund requirements of the Ministry during
the Annual Plan 2012-13 discussions with the Commission. However, the Twelfth Five Year Plan
Document, and corresponding plan outlays for various Ministries, is yet to be finalized by the
Planning Commission. The recommendation of the Committee has been communicated to the
Commission for their consideration and necessary action on fund requirements/demand of the
Ministry.
Various measures have been taken by the Ministry in recent past to ensure utilization of
funds allocated to it. This, inter alia , include streamlining formulation and implementation
mechanism of schemes to enable faster disbursement of funds to the states; undertaking fresh
appraisal of the schemes to provide transparency and outcome orientation; revising guidelines
towards harmonization of cost norms in respect of various components, identification of core/
non core activities; putting in place suitable monitoring mechanisms for receipt of proposals from
and release of funds to states; and effecting other changes in the Centrally Sponsored Schemes
towards ensuring faster and transparent release/utilization of funds by the states. Release of
grants through new mechanisms has/is been developed like the mechanism of State Forest
Development Agency (SFDA) for releases under the National Afforestation Programme (NAP)
scheme. Improvements have also been effected in institutional mechanisms, like setting up of the
National Mission Clean Ganga, to expedite implementation of schemes. The Ministry also prepares
an Outcome Budget defining the outcomes, scheme-wise, in terms of measurable and monitorable
deliverables, which are regularly reviewed. Inclusion of the Ministry under in Modified Cash
Management System w.e.f. 2012-13 would also facilitate better financial planning and proper and
effective utilization of funds.

2
These measures, besides facilitating faster implementation of the schemes/sub-schemes of
the Ministry, would also ensure optimal utilization of their allocations. It is felt that the Ministry
has the necessary absorption capacity and other infrastructural and institutional mechanisms in
place to undertake implementation of its plan proposals during 2012-13 and Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Ministry will make all out efforts to utilize fully the funds allocated to it by the Planning
Commission during the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the action taken and hopes that as a result of
measures taken, Ministry would be able to meet its various targets during 2012-13 and
would be able to fully utilize the funds allocated to the Ministry in the year 2012-13.
Recommendation (Para 6.9)
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has, at the instance of Planning Commission
and the Finance Ministry rationalized its schemes/programmes through merger/clubbing and has been
able to bring down the number of schemes from 22 in the Eleventh Five Year Plan to 18 in the
Twelfth Five Year Plan. The Committee is of the view that integration of programmes through
rationalization helps the Ministry to focus its attention on the programmes in an effective, efficient
and result oriented manner. But, at the same, the Committee feels that the smaller sub-schemes after
getting integrated with a major scheme or programme does not attract as much attention and hence
it’s monitoring and performance gets affected. The Committee, therefore, recommends that while
monitoring the major projects/schemes, the Ministry must ensure that performance of the smaller sub-
schemes is not lost sight of and must ensure that progress and performance of smaller schemes is
also regularly monitored, particularly, the component of wetlands, scheme of corals and mangroves
as these are different from monitoring an inland lake or river.
Action Taken by Government
As per guidelines of the Planning Commission and the Finance Ministry, the Plan schemes
of the Ministry have been further rationalized by suitable merger/clubbing of smaller schemes under
broader thematic or Umbrella schemes. Such a rationalization has resulted in reduction of Ministry’s
total thematic schemes from 22 in the Eleventh Plan to 18 in the Twelfth Plan. However, none of
the smaller schemes has been dropped, and their individual identity has been retained by designating
them as separate sub-schemes under an Umbrella scheme. Thus, the Umbrella scheme of
“Conservation of Natural Resources and Ecosystems” includes, as sub-schemes, Programmes on
Lakes, Wetlands, Mangroves and Corals to ensure progress and performance of these sub-schemes/
programmes. These specific sub-schemes will continue to address the target area or activity as
earlier with enhanced funds, streamlined implementation through updated guidelines and revision of
scheme consequent upon its evaluation/appraisal.
Performance of the schemes is reviewed by the Secretary regularly in Senior Officers
meeting of the Ministry. Review meetings are also undertaken at Minister level. Planning
Commission conducts Half Yearly review meetings with the Ministry, to monitor progress of
various schemes/projects. Further, Ministry has designated its senior officers as Nodal officers for
each state/UT, and these Nodal officers visit their designated states/UTs regularly to, inter alia ,
monitor and review progress of schemes/projects in these states/UTs. Subject Divisions in the
Ministry executing/implementing the schemes also undertake regular field visits to carry out
performance review of the schemes. Finally, Regional offices of the Ministry review/monitor and
follow up on various issues/programmes in the environment, forestry and wildlife sectors. To
review performance of smaller schemes like wetlands, mangroves, corals etc. appropriate

3
Committees have been set up at National and State levels under the sub-schemes to identify, review
and monitor the progress under these sub-schemes.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply and hopes that as a result of robust
monitoring/review mechanism, put in place by the Ministry it shall be able to meet its
targets and utilize fully and efficiently funds allocated to it under various schemes in the
year 2012-13.
Recommendation (Para 7.2)
The Committee is surprised to note that the Twelfth Five Year Plan for the Ministry is yet
to be finalized by the Planning Commission even when the first year of the Five Year Plan has set
in. The Committee expresses its serious concern over delay in finalization of Twelfth Five Year Plan
outlays of an important Ministry engaged in protection of environment and conservation of forests,
so vital for the healthy and comfortable living of human beings. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that henceforth Planning Commission must ensure that such sort of delay does not
recur in future and outlays are finalized well before the beginning of the Plan period. The
Committee is also of the opinion that any further laxity in early finalization of Twelfth Plan outlays
may have adverse consequences on restoration of environmental degradation and control of water,
air and noise pollution in particular and therefore it should be finalized without any further delay.
The Committee is also of the opinion that environment and forests need to be accorded due priority
in the developmental agendas of the nation in view of the lurking challenges that climate change
poses before us. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the proposed outlay of Rs. 47586.00
crore of the Ministry should be given serious consideration by the Planning Commission, so as to
ensure availability of adequate funds to the Ministry for pursuing its avowed objectives successfully.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry of Environment and Forests has proposed an outlay of Rs 47586 crore for
its Twelfth Five Year Plan, 2012-17. Detailed scheme/programme wise justification for such
enhanced fund requirements of the Ministry have been provided to the Planning Commission during
the Annual Plan 2012-13 for discussions with the Commission. However, the Twelfth Five Year
Plan Document, and corresponding plan outlays for various Ministries, is yet to be finalized by the
Planning Commission. The concerns of the Committee have been communicated to the Commission
for their necessary action on fund requirements/demand of the Ministry.
Comments
The Committee is constrained to observe that Plan outlays for Ministry of
Environment and Forests have still not been finalized by Planning Commission despite
serious concern expressed by the Committee some six months back. The Committee takes
a very serious view on the matter and wants the Ministry to take up the matter with the
Planning Commission forcefully.
OUTLAY PROPOSED AND BUDGETARY ALLOCATION MADE FOR THE YEAR 2012-13
Recommendation (Para 8.9)
The Committee takes a very serious view on the consistent reduction in Budgetary
Allocation for such an important ministry, like, Ministry of Environment and Forests during the last
two years. The Committee also feels that if we fail to take timely action and adopt adequate

4
measures now, we will be forced to spend huge resources in not too distant future on adaptation
and mitigation measures to remedy the after-effects of climate change. The Committee notes with
concern that the share of Ministry of Environment and Forests in the Central Plan has consistently
been declining in successive Plan periods. Starting with the percentage share of 0.83% in Seventh
Plan, it came down to 0.67% in Tenth Plan and further down to 0.41% in Eleventh Plan. The share
of the Ministry in the Annual Plan 2012-13 has become a dismal 0.37%. The Committee is
constrained to observe that this is a very disturbing trend which needs to be reversed. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Planning Commission must provide not only adequate
Budgetary Support to the Ministry of Environment and Forests at the R.E. stage of this Financial
Year, but also seriously consider substantially enhancing the percentage share of Ministry of
Environment and Forests in the Central Plan consistent with the growing importance of issues dealt
by the Ministry.
Action Taken by Government
Ministry of Environment and Forests has been consistently highlighting the lowering of its
relative priority/share in plan outlay allocations over the various Five Year Plans to the Planning
Commission despite the growing importance of environmental issues over these years. Conceding
such under provision for the Ministry/sector, Planning Commission, while reviewing the Eleventh
Five Year Plan of the Ministry, has recommended that “an allocation of at least 5% of annual, state,
and central sector outlay for the environment and forestry sectors separately needs to be ensured,
preferably by the Twelfth Plan”. [Planning Commission Mid-Term Review of Eleventh Five Year
Plan, Page 471, Para 22.97].
This concern and recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to the Planning
Commission, which is currently in the process of finalizing the Twelfth Five Year Plan and
associated sectoral outlays.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation (Para 8.13)
The Committee feels that the tardy trend of utilization of resources provides the Planning
Commission with an alibi to affect cut in the allocation of resources. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry should make necessary efforts to fully utilize the allocated resources
in future, so that, Planning Commission does not take recourse to such cut measures.
Action Taken by Government
Savings in 2011-12 emerged from the late start of the Externally Aided Projects (EAP)
projects like the Coastal Zone Management Programme, National Ganga River Basin Authority
(NGRBA), Capacity Building for Industrial Pollution Management (CBIPMP), Capacity Building for
Forest Management and Training of Personnel, and the Bio-diversity Conservation and Rural
Livelihood Improvement Project, whose outlays were earmarked. Ministry’s request for re-
appropriation of these EAP savings to other non EAP projects/schemes of the Ministry with
additional demand for funds was not acceded to by the Finance Ministry. Efforts have, however,
been made in 2012-13 Plan to peg the EAP outlays on a more realistic level to ensure full utilization
of the available outlay. Ministry would further strive towards a more meticulous planning, timely
implementation and strict monitoring of the schemes/projects to ensure a more efficient utilization
of plan funds allocated to it.

5
To ensure proper and effective utilization of funds, the schemes/projects of the ministry are
being monitored regularly, both at central level as well as field level. A mechanism of Nodal
Officers has been established, under which each state/UT has been assigned a senior Officer as
its nodal officer for regular interaction with them. Major schemes of the Ministry also have an in-
built independent monitoring mechanism to ensure effective and timely utilization of funds. The
centrally sponsored schemes in the Forestry and Wildlife sector have streamlined their
implementation mechanism and release of funds to enable faster disbursement of funds to the
states. Similar changes have been effected in other Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) towards
ensuring faster and transparent release/utilization of funds by the states. The Electronic Clearance
of funds for various schemes/projects is also an important improvement for ensuring a quick and
faster disbursement of funds. Further, inclusion of the Ministry in Modified Cash Management
System w.e.f. 2012-13 would also facilitate better financial planning and proper and effective
utilization of funds.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the Action Taken and hopes that the Ministry would
be able to fully utilize the allocated resources in the year 2012-13.
Recommendation (Para 8.16)
A glance at the above statement indicates that plan outlay for National Coastal Management
Programme, National River Conservation Plan, Capacity Building for Forest Management and
Training of Personnel has come down due to rationalization of Budgetary support for Externally
Aided Projects. However, lower allocation for these schemes is due to lower availability of overall
plan funds. The Committee feels that reduction in Budgetary Allocations is hardly justified, as it will
adversely affect environment and forestry activities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
adequate budgetary support should be provided to the Ministry at the R.E level.
Action Taken by Government
Allocation of funds to various schemes of the Ministry has been dictated by the low overall
enhancement of outlay provided to the Ministry in 2012-13, which is only 5.6% over the preceding
year. Rationalization of outlays for EAP in 2012-13 has been prompted by need to avoid a recurrence
of savings under these schemes as in 2011-12. Also, given the low increase in ministry’s overall
outlay, such adjustment in EAP outlays was necessary to provide for funding of important non-EAP
schemes like the Green India Mission, Climate change and Biodiversity conservation.
The Ministry would strive towards an efficient utilization of plan funds allocated to it
towards ensuring adequate availability of funds for its various schemes/programmes. Depending
upon their actual performance in the first half of the year, and revised fund requirements of these
schemes/programmes, the issue of more funds allocation at RE stage will be taken up with the
Planning Commission/Finance Ministry, if necessary.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
CENTRAL POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD (CPCB)
Recommendation (Para 10.4)
The Committee further feels that the major constraint in effective functioning of CPCB is

6
the shortage of technical staff, scientists and lack of quality laboratory facilities. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should focus its attention in addressing these constraints,
so that CPCB is able to effectively discharge its duties and functions. The Committee also feels
that there is a need to improve internal working of the CPCB and its coordination with SPCBs,
etc. The Committee is of the view that CPCB should hold meetings more frequently and its
Members should regularly visit various places and hold discussion with concerned SPCBs, etc. so
as to have a firsthand experience of ground realities prevailing in the country and to sensitize the
ground functionaries to effectively discharge their duties.
Action Taken by Government
Efforts are being made to fill-up the existing technical and scientific vacancies in CPCB.
A proposal to create 102 new posts in CPCB was taken up with the Department of Expenditure
who opined that CPCB may fill-up the existing vacant posts and get revive the abolished posts
having functional requirement in the first instance and then initiate the process of creation of new
posts. As such the proposal to revive 38 deemed abolished posts in CPCB is under examination
in MoEF. After an appropriate view is taken on this issue, further action would be taken
accordingly to strengthen the manpower in CPCB. The suggestions regarding holding of Board
meetings wore frequently, field units and discussions with SPCBs have been noted for
compliance.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply and desires that besides manpower, technical
facilities like lab, etc. too need to be simultaneously augmented/strengthened.
Recommendation (Para 10.5)
The Committee finds that although pollution in some form or the other has spread its
wings throughout the length and breadth of the country, CPCB, in terms of its infrastructure,
manpower, etc. has not been able to keep pace with the phenomenal growth of the pollution –
industrial, vehicular, sewage and solid waste, etc. It has six zonal offices with each zonal office
covering 3 to 8 States while the number of industries, vehicular load, sewage and solid waste,
etc. has multiplied manifold in the course of time. The Committee feels that the number of zonal
offices of CPCB needs to be increased so that it is able to keep a closer watch on air, water
and noise pollution in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry of
Environment and Forests should consider enhancing the number of zonal offices in a phased but
time-bound manner.
Action Taken by Government
At present, Zonal Offices of CPCB are functioning at Bangalore, Bhopal, Kolkata, Shillong,
Lucknow and Vadodara, and a Project Office is functioning at Agra. The Zonal Offices are
entrusted with the responsibility to undertake environment surveillance in their areas and particularly
to verify compliance by the industries based on surprised checks. Besides, Zonal Offices play a
key role in undertaking performance studies of various common waste management facilities and
interact with SPCBs/PCCs on state-specific issues. The suggestion of the committee for enhancing
the number of Zonal Offices in the country is under examination.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.

7
Recommendation  (Para 10.7)
While informing that there has been an increase in outlay over the years, the Ministry
agreed that increase in allocation of funds has not been substantial and commensurate with the need
of quantum of funds required for improving the challenges of pollution control. It further informed
that the Ministry has been emphasizing upon the Planning Commission for enhanced allocation, but
the Ministry has not been able to get the required allocation despite justification and persuasion. The
Committee takes a very serious view that despite justification and persuasion, the Planning
Commission did not allocate adequate resources for prevention and control of pollution. The
Committee recommends that sufficient budgetary allocation should be allocated under this Head by
the Planning Commission, so that the Ministry could take effective measures to deal with the ever
increasing problem of pollution.
Action Taken by Government
The matter is being taken up again with the Planning Commission for enhancement of
budget allocations to accommodate the activities of CPCB.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 10.8)
The Committee, however, finds that during the year 2011-12, CPCB had not been able to
utilize even the Plan budgetary allocation of Rs.40.00 crores and could only utilize Rs.30.00 crores
by 29
th February, 2012 which can be adjudged as a poor performance in terms of financial
progress. Poor financial progress had its impact on physical targets as well. Out of the 60 new
ambient air quality and 160 noise monitoring stations proposed to be established during the year,
43 ambient air quality monitoring stations could be established and the process of setting up of
noise monitoring stations is still under way. The Committee expresses its serious concern over the
slow progress of financial and physical targets and desires, that in future, CPCB must ensure that
whatever budgetary support they get from the Government is fully utilized and targets set achieved.
Action Taken by Government
Out of Plan allocation Rs.40 crores, CPCB spent Rs.38.8168 crores during 2011-2012. An
amount of Rs.1.1832 relating to the construction of zonal office-cum-laboratory building at Bhopal
could not be spent as the matter is under examination.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply but would like Ministry to ensure that, in
future, examination of projects, for which funds have been sought and earmarked, is not
unduly delayed to an extent that leads to non-utilisation of funds so earmarked.
Recommendation (Para 10.9)
The Committee feels that for effective monitoring of ambient air and water quality and
control of pollution, close coordination between CPCB, SPCBs and Pollution Control Committees
is essential. The growing levels of pollution throughout the country are however indicative of lack
of active coordination and cooperation between CPCB and SPCBs and also of their failure to
discharge their duties effectively and efficiently. The Committee was unhappy to know that State

8
Governments are not according due priority to environment and in majority of States, it is almost
a non-issue. The Committee, however, feels that for getting the desired support from SPBC/PCCs,
CPCB, first, needs to galvanize and activate itself so as to play a lead role in coordinating the
activities of State Pollution Control Boards, a function statutorily assigned to it. It should also
actively exercise its mandate to plan and cause to be executed a nationwide programme for the
prevention, control, or abatement of water and air pollution. In suitable cases, CPCB can also take
recourse to Section 18(1)(b) of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, which
imposes a statutory duty on State Board to abide by the directions of the Central Board given to
it in writing, to garner necessary support from those State Pollution Control Boards who are not
discharging their assigned duties properly. The above provisions underscore the pivotal position
provided to the CPCB under the scheme of the Act to ensure effective control of pollution.
Action Taken by Government
CPCB is co-ordinating with SPCBs on various matters pertaining to abatement of pollution.
Some of the key on-going programmes being implemented in coordination with SPCBs are;
/head2rightWater and ambient air quality monitoring;
/head2rightDevelopment of standards and their enforcement through SPCBs/PCCs;
/head2rightEnvironmental quality assessment in 43 critically polluted industrial clusters;
/head2rightPollution control compliance in 17 categories of industries and for industries discharging
waste water into rivers and lakes.
With regard to control of pollution relating to sewage, municipal solid waste, plastic
waste, bio-medical waste, hazardous waste, etc., CPCB and SPCBs are not able to show
tangible results because of dependence on other implementing agencies such as
Municipalities, State Urban Development Departments and others departments. However,
CPCB is making concerted efforts toward abatement of pollution.
Comments
The Committee had desired that CPCB played a pivotal role in coordinating the
activities of SPCBs/PCCs and if needed, took recourse to Section 18(1)(b) of the Water
(Prevention & Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 to motivate/activate those who were not
performing. But the Ministry has surprisingly maintained silence on this particular issue.
The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation.
Recommendation (10.10)
The Committee also understands that the Ministry is running a centrally sponsored scheme
called “Assistance for Abatement of Pollution” the objective of which inter-alia is to strengthen
SPCBs for enforcing statutory provisions for pollution abatement. The Committee feels that the
Ministry may also think of linking financial assistance with performance of SPCBs, thus
encouraging the non-performing Boards to be active in order to get financial assistance.
Action Taken by Government
The suggestion of the committee is under examination.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply but would like the Ministry to complete its
examination at the earliest.

9
Recommendation (Para 10.12)
It further added that more stringent standards have been notified for cement industries
which are being complied with. Apart from the above, CPCB is carrying out surprise checks of
industries on random basis under environmental surveillance activities. It also submitted a list of
visits made and the actions taken against the defaulting industries according to which the number
of actions taken in the year 2008-09, 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12 (till February, 2012) is 260,
248, 258, and 239 respectively. A statement showing Action Taken against the industrial units by
SPCBs during the last four years reflects that the number is 78, 40, 112 and 135 respectively. It
shows that SPCBs are not very active towards initiating action against defaulting industries. It has
also come to the notice of the Committee that some industrial units closed on the direction of the
CPCB for violation of environmental norms start their operations even without taking appropriate
measures for compliance of environmental norms for violation of which they were closed down.
The Committee takes a very serious view of such a toothless approach adopted by the CPCB in
ensuring compliance of environmental norms and recommends that CPCB, while intensifying its
efforts towards compliance must ensure that a polluting industry once closed due to violation of
environmental norms is allowed to operate only after adequate measures for control of pollution has
been taken by it.
Action taken by Government
CPCB has noted the suggestions of the Committee for compliance. CPCB shall ensure that
once the orders for closure of an industrial unit are issued, the permission to restart operations of
that unit will be given only after the unit comply with the standards and submit time bound action
plan for implementation.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 10.13)
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry proposes to establish a National
Environment Assessment and Monitoring Authority (NEAMA) as a part of environmental
regulatory reforms to improve the environmental governance in the country, particularly, in the
fields of an Environment Impact Assessment and Coastal Zone Management. This authority will
be an autonomous body under the Ministry and it shall have its head office at National Capital
Region with a network of 6 regional offices. The Committee is of the view that environment
regulation in the country needs to be strengthened and enhanced so as to keep the ever
increasing pollution of varied nature under effective control. The Committee hopes that the
proposed NEAMA shall support and supplement the efforts of CPCB in achieving the desired
objectives. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the process of setting up of NEAMA be
expedited.
Action taken by Government
The proposal to setup NEAMA is under consideration.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply but hopes that Ministry would take a final decision
in the matter expeditiously.

10
NATIONAL RIVER CONSERV ATION PLAN
Recommendation (Para 11.3)
The Committee takes note of the fact that the initiative to clean Ganga started somewhere
in the Sixth Five Year Plan under Ganga Action Plan. Thereafter, Ganga Action Plan-II and some
other schemes with different names were operationalised by the Ministry but the end result is for
everyone to see. The quality of Ganga water is going down day by day.
Action taken by Government
1.0 The Central Government has been implementing Ganga Action Plan (GAP) since 1985. The
pollution abatement works taken up under the Plan include interception and diversion of raw
sewage, setting up of sewage treatment plants, creation of low cost sanitation facilities, setting up
of electric/improved wood crematoria and river front development. Sewage treatment capacity of
1091 mld (million litres per day) has been created so far under GAP.
2.0 Water quality monitoring of Ganga by reputed independent institutions shows improvement
in river water quality over pre-GAP period in terms of indicators such as Bio-chemical Oxygen
Demand (BOD) and Dissolved Oxygen (DO). The level of bacterial contamination in terms of fecal
coliform, however, exceeds the maximum permissible limit at most of the monitoring locations.
3.0 Cost Benefit Analysis of Ganga Action Plan Phase-I was carried out during 1995-97 by
Harvard Institute of International Development, U.K. Observations of the study were that river
clean up programme involve a long time period and large resources for effective action. In terms
of both the time taken and cost involved, GAP compares favourably with those of other major
rivers of world like Thames, Rhine and Danube. As per the study, financial Internal Rate of Return
(IRR) for the project is around 20-24%.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, however, is of the view that the
Ministry should not become complacent in view of the findings contained in the report of
a study conducted more than 15 years back. Huge resources have been spent since 1995 on
GAP and it is the time that impact of GAP should become visible to the public.
Recommendation (11.4)
The Committee is constrained to observe that despite whatever efforts made hitherto and
a huge investment incurred under various schemes/projects, pollution level in both rivers, i.e., the
Ganga and the Yamuna continues to increase unabated. The pathetic condition of Yamuna which
has virtually turned into a ‘Nala’ to carry sewage falling into it from various drains, is deplorable.
The water quality of the Ganga has not shown any significant improvement either and it is
deteriorating day by day. The quality of Ganga water downstream at several important locations,
such as, Kanpur, Allahabad, Varanasi and Patna still continues to be a major concern for the
environmentalist, as well as, the common man. The Committee feels that one of the reasons for
the failure of Government schemes lies in the fact that Government has so far adopted only
engineering centric approach to solve the problem with undue emphasis on creation of sewage
treatment plants, etc. The Committee feels that engineering centric activities alone will not be
successful and the Ministry should also approach it as a social engineering problem and now the
time has come when we should integrate engineering centric approach with social centric or
society centric approach through which people living on and around the banks of the rivers are
involved and assimilated in the Mission Clean Ganga. The Committee also recommends that services

11
of various institutes of social sciences, apart from IITs should be sought by the Government to
seek a viable solution of the pollution.
Action taken by Government
1.0 As municipal sewage has been the major reason of pollution through point sources, the core
pollution abatement works taken up under the Ganga Action Plan have been interception and
diversion of sewage and setting up of sewage treatment plants. As mentioned earlier, Water quality
monitoring of Ganga by reputed independent institutions shows improvement in river water quality
over pre-GAP period in terms of indicators such as Bio-chemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) and
Dissolved Oxygen (DO).
2.0 The Central Government has set up the National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA) in
February 2009 as an empowered planning, financing and monitoring authority. The objective is to
ensure effective abatement of pollution and conservation of the river Ganga by adopting a holistic
river basin approach. Key features of the new approach are as following:
• River Basin will be the unit of planning and management. This is an internationally
accepted strategy for integrated management of rivers. Accordingly, a new institutional
mechanism in the form of National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA) will
spearhead river conservation efforts at the national level. Implementation will be by the
State Agencies and Urban Local Bodies.
• The minimum ecological flows for the entire Ganga will be determined through modeling
exercises. NGRBA will take appropriate measures in cooperation with the States to
regulate water abstraction for maintaining minimum ecological flows in the river.
• Attention would also be paid to the restoration of living parts of the river ecosystem
for its holistic treatment to enable conservation of species like dolphin, turtles, fishes
and other native and endangered species in the river.
3.0 Measures are being initiated for public awareness and involvement in the conservation,
including mobilisation of youth volunteers, conducting public awareness campaigns during festivals/
melas on the banks of the rivers as part of the conservation programme.
4.0 Based on the decisions of NGRBA, the Central Government has set up a Standing
Committee under NGRBA to monitor implementation and an Empowered Steering Committee to
approve pollution abatement projects on fast track basis; declared Gangetic Dolphin as the national
aquatic animal, decided to share costs towards operation and maintenance of the assets created
under NGRBA between Centre and the States in the ratio of 70:30.
5.0 Several measures have been taken  to improve implementation of projects under NGRBA.
These include; (i) Constitution of State level Empowered State River Conservation Authorities
(SRCAs) under the Chief Ministers in the five Ganga States, (ii) Setting up of State Program
Management Groups (SPMGs) as Dedicated implementation institutions in States, (iii) Signing of
Tripartite Memorandum of Agreements (MoAs) with the State Governments/Urban Local Bodies,
(iv) Independent Appraisal of Detailed Project Reports by reputed professional institutions, (v) Third
Party Inspection for projects under NGRBA, (vi) Setting up of a dedicated cell in CPCB for
inspection and monitoring of industrial units discharging effluents into the river Ganga.
6.0 A comprehensive River Basin Management Plan for Ganga is being prepared. This work has
been entrusted to a consortium of seven IITs (Kanpur, Delhi, Madras, Bombay, Kharagpur,
Guwahati and Roorkee). The Plan is with the objective of taking comprehensive measures for
restoration of the wholesomeness of the Ganga system and improvement of its ecological health,

12
with due regard to the issue of competing water uses in the river basin. The Basin Management
Plan will be rolling and dynamic in nature and will be the basis for NGRBA’s Action Programme.
The Plan would identify projects to be undertaken, policy interventions required and non-project
investments.
7.0 To supplement the efforts of State Governments in addressing the problem of pollution of
river Yamuna, Government of India is implementing Yamuna Action Plan (YAP) with assistance
from Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) in a phased manner. YAP-I was commenced
in April, 1993 and completed in Feb, 2003 at a total cost of Rs. 682 crore covering various
pollution abatement works including creation of Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) of total 753.25
million litres per day (mld) capacity. YAP-II was approved in 2003 at an estimated cost of Rs. 624
crores with major items of works such as rehabilitation of sewerage network and STPs and
construction of new STPs. An expenditure of Rs. 711.05 crore, which also includes State’s share,
has been incurred under this plan till date.
8.0 The  YAP-III programme with JICA loan assistance at Delhi is at an estimated cost of
Rs.1656 crore. The project cost will be shared on 85:15 basis between the Government of India
and the Government of NCT of Delhi. The project will be implemented by DJB under the
supervision of the Department of Urban Development, Government of NCT of Delhi. The Ministry
of Environment and Forests will monitor the progress of work. The implementation of the project
will be over a period of 7 years. It is proposed to rehabilitate the damaged trunk sewers to
maximize the utilization of available treatment capacity, rehabilitate and modernize the STPs in three
catchment areas of Delhi namely Okhla, Kondli and Rithala and to equip them with tertiary level
treatment facilities to achieve treated effluent quality of 10 mg/l for Biochemical Oxygen Demand
(BOD) and Total Suspended Solids (TSS) so as to improve the water quality of river Yamuna.
9.0 To bridge the treatment capacity deficit in a phased manner the Delhi Government is taking
measures for creation of additional capacity at the existing STPs and setting up new STPs. A
number of projects for rehabilitation of trunk sewers are being implemented by DJB to enhance
capacity utilization. For treatment of untreated sewage flowing into river Yamuna from three major
drains namely Najafgarh, Supplementary and Shahdara, DJB is implementing an interceptor sewer
project under JNNURM at a cost of Rs. 1357 crore.
10.0 The water quality monitoring is undertaken by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) .
While the water quality in the stretch of the river Yamuna from Tajewala to Palla in Haryana is
within the prescribed limits, the stretch of the river in the vicinity of Delhi (downstream of
Wazirabad barrage to upstream of Okhla barrage) and in parts of Uttar Pradesh does not meet the
standards in terms of Bio-chemical Oxygen Demand due to reasons such as the discharge of
untreated sewage in to the river, gap between the demand and availability of sewage treatment
capacity and the lack of fresh water in the river for dilution.
Comments
The Committee finds that the Ministry has furnished a routine, general and
stereotyped pre-prepared reply instead of initiating any action in pursuance of the
recommendation of the Committee. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its
recommendation to shift its approach from engineering to social centric approach and utilize
the services of institutes of Social Science apart from IITs.
Recommendation (Para 11.5)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take steps to stop
encroachment and illegal commercial activities on the catchment areas of all the major rivers

13
including the Ganga and Yamuna. Yet another reason for the failure is cleaning the rivers is the day
by day dwindling of their natural flow which has resulted in the assimilating capacity of the river
Yamuna almost coming to a naught and of the river Ganga going down. The Committee is of the
opinion that unless the flow of the river is maintained at a reasonable level, no other effort is going
to be successful. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should pay due attention
on this issue and take steps to ensure that the flow of the river Yamuna and Ganga upstream is
not disturbed or blocked.
Action taken by Government
1.0 Under the National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA), a Ganga River Basin
Management Plan (GRBMP) is being prepared by the Consortium of Indian Institutes of Technology
(IIT). The objective of GRBMP includes maintenance and restoration of wholesomeness of the
Ganga system and improvement of its ecological health considering the water uses in the entire
river basin. As a part of the GRBMP, a separate thematic group on ‘E-flows’ in the main stem of
river Ganga has been constituted by the IIT Consortium. The expected completion of the
deliverable on ‘Assessment of Environmental Flows’ is proposed by September, 2013.
2.0 The Ministry of Environment & Forests have also sponsored studies to AHEC, IIT, Roorkee
on ‘Assessment of Cumulative Impact of Hydropower Projects’ in Alaknanda & Bhagirathi Basins
up to Dev Prayag and to Wildlife Institute of India (WII), Dehradun on ‘Assessment of Cumulative
Impact of Hydropower Projects’ on Aquatic and terrestrial Bio-diversity in Alaknanda & Bhagirathi
Basins in Uttarakhand. The outcome of these studies reports which were submitted in Dec, 2011
& March 2012, also provides inputs on the Environmental Flow Requirements (EFRs) for
maintaining the river ecology & perennial nature in the upper reaches of the river Ganga.
3.0 Towards effective conservation of rivers and prevention of pollution of rivers, issues
pertaining to illegal encroachment of embankments and floodplains of major rivers due to pressures
of urbanisation are to be comprehensively addressed by the States and concerned Urban Local Bodies.
Comments
The Committee expresses its deep displeasure over the business as usual buck
passing approach of the Ministry to the recommendation of the Committee. It is quite
disturbing to find that the Ministry has not bothered to carefully go through the
recommendation of the Committee which called for action on the part of the Ministry and
not a nonchalant, evasive and irrelevant reply. The Committee takes a very serious view
in the matter and hopes that in future the Ministry would prepare Action Taken Note with
the due diligence and utmost attention.
Recommendation (Para 11.6)
The Committee notes with concern slow progress in enhancing the sewage treatment
facilities and fears that unless problem is tackled with seriousness and urgency, the gap would
further widen in view of the growing urbanization and, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
should intensify its efforts for building enough treatment capacity to bridge the gap between the
sewage treatment and sewage generation in a time bound in cities situated on the banks of major
rivers. The Ministry may coordinate with other concerned Ministries of the Government of India
and State Governments so that coordinated efforts are made to realize this goal.
Action taken by Government
1.0 Conservation of rivers and lakes is an ongoing and collective effort of the Central and State

14
Governments. The discharge of partially treated and untreated wastewater from towns along the
rivers and lakes constitutes the major source of pollution load in these water bodies and there is
a huge gap between the sewage pollution loads generated and the treatment capacity available in
the country. This Ministry, therefore is supplementing the efforts of the State Governments for
providing sewerage facilities through the centrally sponsored National River Conservation Plan.
Interception and diversion of sewage, setting up of Sewage Treatment Plants have been among the
main components of pollution abatement schemes implemented under this Scheme.
2.0 River conservation activities such as creation of civic infrastructure for sewage management
and disposal are also being implemented under other central schemes, such as Jawaharlal Nehru
National Urban Renewal Mission, Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium
Towns, as well as under state schemes.
3.0 The Authority has decided that under Mission Clean Ganga  it will be ensured that by 2020
no untreated municipal sewage and industrial effluents flow into Ganga. An estimated investment
of Rs.15,000 crores over the next 10 years will be necessary for creating the necessary treatment
and sewerage infrastructure. This will have to be shared suitably between the Central and the State
Governments.
4.0 Projects amounting to Rs. 2598.47 crores have been sanctioned so far under the NGRBA
in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Bihar and West Bengal for development of sewer
networks, sewage treatment plants and sewage pumping stations, electric crematoria, community
toilets, development of river fronts, etc.
5.0 The Central Government has approved a project for ‘World Bank assistance to NGRBA for
abatement of pollution of river Ganga’ at an estimated cost of Rs.7000 crore. The Bank will
support the Government of India by providing technical assistance and financing of US $ 1 billion.
The share of Government of India will be Rs. 5100 crore and that of the State Governments of
Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal will be Rs.1900 crore.
Implementation of the Project will be spread over a period of 8 years. The principal objective of
the project is to set up institutional structure at Centre and States and fund priority infrastructure
investments for conservation and restoration of the water quality of the river Ganga. The project
will render benefits of significant order to the local populations. It would contribute to lessening
the pollution loads due to untreated sewage from cities and towns located along Ganga. Tackling
of industrial effluents and municipal solid wastes impacting the river water quality would also help
move towards the objective of Mission Clean Ganga. A dedicated institutional setup in the form of
National Mission for Clean Ganga (NMCG) has been set up by the Ministry as a registered society
to implement the NGRBA programme including the World Bank supported project.
Comments
The Committee expresses its displeasure over the action taken by Government on
the recommendation. The Committee has desired the Ministry of Environment & Forests to
play a more proactive role in coordination with State Governments to enhance sewage
treatment facilities but the Ministry somehow seems reluctant to undertake this challenge.
The business as usual buck passing approach adopted by the Ministry, in the view of the
Committee, is, to certain extent responsible for high levels of pollution in major rivers. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation.
ENVIRONMENT IMPACT ASSESSMENT
Recommendation (Para 12.3)
The Committee during its interaction with the other Ministries found that environmental

15
clearances were being unduly delayed due to lack of infrastructural facilities and the business as
usual approach adopted by the Ministry which is still following old and outdated methodology for
giving these clearances. Moreover, the undue delays give rise to a public perception that
environmental issues are hindering the development of the country. Such a perception should not
be allowed to be created in public mind as development and environment have to coexist for
survival of mankind. It is unfortunate that the time schedule laid for giving these clearances is
rarely adhered to and it generally takes years to get the required clearances with the result that
developmental work suffer and there is widespread criticism of unduly long period taken by the
Ministry. Conditions laid down while giving environmental clearance which are necessary for
environmental safeguard and mitigating developmental impacts, are not being properly monitored for
the purpose of compliance as a result of which there are a large number of violations of these
conditions.
Recommendation (Para 12.5)
The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that there is an urgent need for the Ministry
to streamline its procedures, fix realistic time schedule for giving various clearances and adhere to
those time schedules. The Committee is further of the view that there should be a system of
surprise inspections to check adherence to the conditions laid while giving clearances and the
Environmental Impact Assessment Studies need to be carried out with greater objectivity.
Action taken by Government
1. The Government of India has enacted the Environment (Protection) Act 1986, and also
brought out the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Notification 1994 under this Act requiring
prior EC for certain sectors of developmental activities. This Notification was superseded by EIA
Notification dated 14.09.2006, according to which 39 major developmental sectors/activities listed
in the Notification require prior environmental clearance (EC).
2. A large number of projects are received by the Ministry for availing environmental
clearance. In order to streamline and expedite the environmental clearance process, a number of
steps have been taken by MOEF. These include the following:
3. The environmental clearance (EC) process prescribed under the EIA Notification 2006
consists a 3-stage process of (1) Scoping and grant of Terms of Reference (TOR) for preparation
of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) Study- Environmental Management Plan (EMP) thereon,
(2) conduct of Public Hearing and (3) preparation of an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
Report - Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for the project. The Ministry of Environment and
Forests (MOEF) is the Impact Assessment Authority (IAA) in the Central Government for granting
environmental clearances to Category ‘A’ Projects.
4. The powers of the Central Government have been delegated to State level Impact
Assessment Authorities (SEIAAs) constituted by the MOEF , under the provisions of the EIA
Notification 2006, for projects below a certain capacity, which are categorised as Category B
Projects. As on date, 23 State level SEIAAs have been constituted for appraisal and grant of
Category B projects.
5. The process of appraisal of the projects and recommendation of grant of TOR and EC is
undertaken by an Expert Appraisal Committee (EAC) constituted by the MOEF, vide the provisions
of the EIA Notification 2006. Projects of Category A are apprised at the Central level and State level
Expert Appraisal Committees (SEACs) have been constituted under the State Level Impact
Assessment Authorities (SEIAAs) to appraise Category ‘B” projects.

16
6. The MOEF has constituted sector-specific EACs for the sectors of Hydro-Power, Thermal
Power, Industry, Mining (Coal and Non-coal) and Infrastructure. In case of Industry, two EACs
have been constituted and the EAC constituted for Thermal Power and Coal sector projects meets
twice a month. The multi-disciplinary Expert Appraisal Committees consist of experts from the
sectors concerned, engineering, ecology, hydrology, wildlife, R&R, etc. In case of Coal Sector,
Advisor (Projects) from Ministry of Coal is also a special invitee when the Committee discusses
issues relating to policy on coal sector, on policy issues regarding the EIA Notification 2006,
linkages, etc.
7. The MOEF has prepared Technical Guidance Manuals for the 39 sectors listed in the EIA
Notification 2006, which also contain a generic Model TOR for each of these sectors. The manuals
and Model TORs serve as a guideline in preparation of EIA-EMP Reports for EC. All the Sector
specific EIA Manuals are available on the MOEF website for information of all stakeholders.
8. A number of Circulars have also been issued by the MOEF from time to time on the EIA
Notification 2006 and related issues. These are also available on the MOEF website for clarification
of the environmental clearance process and other related matters.
9. In order to improve the quality of EIA-EMP Reports of various projects requiring EC, a
process of accreditation of consultants preparing the EIA-EMP Reports has been established
through the Quality Council of India.
10. The MOEF has 6 Regional Offices at Bhopal, Bangalore, Shillong, Lucknow, Chandigarh and
Bhubaneshwar for monitoring the compliance of environmental clearance. The compliance reports
furnished by the project proponents are also uploaded on the MOEF website. The EC conditions
also require that the project proponents increasingly evolve a mechanism of ‘self regulation’ through
furnishing Reports and regular uploading on the company website of status of the compliance of
EC, status of environmental quality of the projects and status of R&R, if involved, status of
expenditure made on CSR, etc.
11. The Ministry has also introduced a system of uploading of the environmental clearances and
status of pending projects regularly on the MOEF website. In addition, other details such as agenda
and minutes of the EAC meetings are also regularly updated. The Ministry has recently introduced
uploading of all the applications and relevant documents of the EIA-EMP Reports of various
projects of all sectors and clarifications sought thereon by the EACs.
12. The total budget for the Financial Year 2011-12 for Impact Assessment was Rs 3.5 crores
and the expenditure there under was Rs 3.40 crores. The budget of the Impact Assessment
Division is mainly for travel of the Sectoral Expert Appraisal Committees and for site visits of the
EACs to be conducted on various projects. However, a pilot project for digitisation of the records
of Impact Assessment Division was undertaken and an expenditure of Rs. 14.30 lakhs incurred
during the Financial Year 2011-12.
13. Thus, in conclusion, the Ministry of Environment & Forests has initiated a number of steps
and measures to expedite the process of EC, introduce transparency in its functioning and to bring
into the public domain the status of environmental clearance of projects and other related
information pertaining to different stages of EC.
Comments
The Committee takes note of steps taken to bring transparency in giving
Environmental Clearances (ECs). The Committee would, however, like the Ministry to
undertake a study to see if as a result of measures taken by it, time taken to give
environmental clearance has reduced and clearances are now being given, at least in most

17
cases, within the time schedules laid for such clearances and, if not, take a deeper look into
the whole issue so that undue delays in giving ECs are avoided.
FORESTRY AND WILDLIFE
Recommendation (Para13.4)
In view of the above, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment and
Forests should accord priority to regenerate and intensify forestry activities in the degraded forest
areas which are already with the Ministry and in this way the constrain of non-availability of land
could be overcome. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should make efforts to get
a buffer of forest cover created by those agencies which require forest land for non-forestry
purposes. Ministries of Coal; Power; Steel; etc. may be involved in this activity, so that, their
requirement of forest land for non-forestry purposes could be met as compensatory afforestation
is required to be done by them in advance.
Recommendation (Para 13.5)
The Committee is of the view that achieving the target of 33 per cent is quite ambitious
and very difficult to achieve and, therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should
set a short - term pragmatic target and try to achieve the long-term target of 33 per cent in a
phased manner.
Recommendation (Para 13.6)
The Committee finds that it is the dismal performance on the part of the Ministry which
needs to be improved and intensified in order to protect our pristine forest cover. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make all our efforts to utilize the approved outlay
this year and any laxity on the part of the Ministry would be viewed seriously by the Committee.
Action taken by Government
Realizing the crucial role of forests in maintaining ecological balance and socio-economic
development, the National Forest Policy (NFP) aims at maintaining a minimum of 33% of country’s
geographical area under forest and tree cover. Against the prevailing global trend of decreasing
forest cover, India has been successful in stabilizing its area under forests over the years despite
pressures of population and livestock.
As per the latest assessment, State of Forest Report 2011, the Forest and Tree cover of
the country is 78.29 million ha, which is 23.81% of the geographical area of the country. While
15 States have registered aggregate increase of 500 sq.km in their forest cover 12 States/UTs have
shown decrease to the extent of 867 sq. km which includes 281 sq. km in Andhra Pradesh mainly
attributed to harvesting of mature plantation of Eucalyptus and other species and that of North East
is particularly due to prevailing practice of shifting cultivation. However, it is important that as per
in the State of Forest Report 2011, there has been qualitative improvement in the forest cover
which also enhances the wildlife and bio-diversity in the area. Moderately dense forest has
increased in about 1700 sq. Km and similarly there is decrease in the open forest of about 550 sq.km.
Though the National Forest Policy 1988 aims at a target of 33% forest and tree cover, the
achievement of this target in a short term may not be very realistic as rightly observed by the
Honorable committee. The main constraint in the achievement of 33% of the forest cover is the
availability of non forest land. The Ministry is taking necessary action to prioritise and afforest the
degraded forest areas resulting in quality of forest.

18
(i) At present, the Ministry is implementing the National Afforestation Programme (NAP)
for eco-restoration of degraded forests and adjoining areas in the country.
(ii) The dense forest have also increased from 1.66 % in the 2005 report to 2.54% in the
2009 report due to such quality improvement of forests of various programmes
combined with protection and eco-development activities.
(iii) The Green India Mission also envisages holistic treatment of degraded forests and
other activities covering about six million hectare of forest land in identified
landscapes.
The Green India Mission envisages increase in both quality and quantity of forest cover
adopting landscape approach to treat the forest and non forest lands simultaneously. Apart from
afforestation activities livelihood improvement programmes are also envisaged to address the drivers
of degradation through effective convergence of various schemes, multi-sectoral approach and of
enhancement of people’s participation. The mission proposes to treat 10 million ha of forest and
non forest land under the landscape approach and the various categories of land to be treated has
been included in different submissions which is given in the Annexure-I. The area envisaged in the
mission is mostly forest lands in about 6 million ha as suggested by the Hon’ble committee and
the afforestation in the non forest areas are mostly Agro forestry and Social forestry component
in about 3 million ha in unproductive and unutilized lands. In the preparatory year 2011-12, 71 such
landscapes have been identified in 21 states and the village level micro planning activities for actual
interventions are under process.
The Ministry has made enabling provisions regarding the recommendation of the Hon’ble
Committee for creating buffer of forest cover by agencies which require forest land for non-
forestry purposes. Though the guidelines under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 do not provide
for the direct involvement of user agencies including Ministries of Coal, Power, etc., in
afforestation/rehabilitation of degraded forest lands, the ministry has issued guidelines for
participation of private sector through involvement of Non-Government Organizations (NGOs) and
forest department in afforestation/rehabilitation of degraded forest lands. The other provisions
include establishment of Special Purpose vehicle (SPV) under Compensatory Afforestation
Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) for undertaking Compensatory Afforestation
particularly by involving large public sector undertakings and identification of pool of degraded
forest land by state Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan for compensatory afforestation
for Central Government projects as per FCA guidelines.
In the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Capacity Building for Forest Management and
Training of Personnel, the year 2010-11 being the initial year of project implementation, project
implementation framework was developed and put in place. As a result, the expenditure was less
during 2010-11. However during 2011-12 the expenditure was 97.4% of the revised allocation of
36.89 crores. The project implementation is in full swing and already an expenditure of 17 crores
has been incurred during the current year which amounts to 34% of the total allocation for the
year 2012-13. The total amount available will be utilized during the current financial year.
Shortfall in fund utilization in Intensification of Forest Management Scheme(IFMS) during
the year 2010-11 and 2011-12 is attributed to non availability of UCs from the states. Most of the
activities undertaken under the IFMS scheme being infrastructure development activities tend to
spill over to the next financial year and therefore often do not get reflected in the UC of the same
financial year. In order to complement state government’s efforts in forest protection and in order
to bridge the gaps of fund constraint experienced by many states, the allotted budget seems
insufficient considering the demand from States and UTs. The ministry was able to achieve the
allotted targets significantly, seeing the overall performance in 2010-11, with the above said

19
constraints. The complete progress reports from the states for the year 2011-12 is yet to be
received by the Ministry. Details of target achievements are submitted in Annexure II and III.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY
Recommendation (Para 14.1)
“To make it mandatory for public and private Corporates to spend 50% of fund available
for Corporate Social Responsibility for the massive afforestation in the country, is the policy matter
of the Government. Therefore, Parliamentary Standing Committee directs that in the interest to
achieve massive afforestation in the country, the Ministry of Environment & Forests should
approach the competent authority in Government to formulate the policy. The policy perhaps could
be finalised/ agreed at the level of Prime Minister / Cabinet and therefore, the Ministry should
approach this competent authority to formulate the policy. The Committee further desires that this
should be done expeditiously.”
Recommendation (Para 14.3)
The Committee expresses its serious displeasure over the fact that the Ministry has
miserably failed in taking appropriate follow up action and capitalising on the recommendations of
the Committee for arranging additional resources for massive plantation. The Committee is
dismayed to find that the Ministry of Environment & Forests, instead of being proactive has taken
the recommendations of the Committee, so passively, nonchalantly and casually. The Committee
finds that the Ministry has simply passed the buck on the Ministry of Corporate Affairs and let
the matter rest there.
Recommendation (Para 14.4)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that instead of adopting a casual and callous
approach to the recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry should proactively organise
meeting with all the stakeholders and persuade them to voluntarily participate in the mass plantation
movement.
Action taken by Government
Apart from the Ministry of Environment and Forests, the afforestation activities is carried
out by the schemes of other Ministries like the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment
Guarantee Scheme (MNREGS), Integrated Watershed Management Programme (IWMP), National
Bamboo Mission, Externally Aided Projects, State Plans.The funds under the Corporate Social
Responsibility for the massive afforestation programmes as recommended by the committee would
also add to the financial resources for afforestation.
As per recommendation of the Hon’ble committee, the issue of Corporate Social
Responsibility in respect of afforestation has been pro actively taken up by this ministry and follow
up action is being taken capitalizing on the recommendation of the committee. The Ministry of
Environment and Forest is consistently pursuing with Ministry of corporate affairs to make the
provisions/guidelines to enhance the committed investment from corporate social responsibility to
50% for massive afforestation and to furnish the information on the location wise and corporate

20
wise details of the funds spent and afforestation carried out by various corporates under CSR
during the eleventh plan period so as to enable the Ministry of Environment and Forests to proceed
with convening consultation with all the stake holders to take up this issue and persuade them to
partake investment out of CSR for afforestation.
Comments
The Committee notes down the reply.
PROJECT ELEPHANT
Recommendation (Para 16.1)
The Committee recommends that there must not be any let up in the utilisation of allocated
resources under this head as was the case during the year 2011-12 and the entire outlay should
be properly utilized by the Ministry.
Action taken by Government
In the year 2011-12, an amount of Rs. 20.88 crores (99.42 %) was incurred against
the allocation of Rs. 21 crores (BE). For the year 2012-13, out of the current allocation of
Rs. 22.08 crores, an amount of Rs. 8.93 crores (40.4%) has been released to the states under the
scheme.
So it is to mention that there is no let up in the utilization of allocated resources under the
PE head during the year 2011-12. For the current year also, the total amount will be utilized
properly.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
PROJECT TIGER
Recommendation (Para 17.4)
The Committee expresses its deep anguish over a well thought out suggestion/
recommendation of the Committee being taken so lightly and not acceded to even after a lapse of
over 16 months and recommends that Planning Commission should give serious consideration to
the need of the Ministry for adequate funds for preservation and conservation of wildlife. The
Committee is of the view that the reduction in proposed demand of the Ministry of Rs. 1276.30
Crores to Rs. 167.70 as final outlay under Project Tiger, is not at all justified. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the proposed allocation of the Ministry should be restored by the
Planning Commission as such a drastic reduction in allocation would badly affect the progress of
the scheme which has raised a lot of hue and cry in the recent years.
Action taken by Government
The justification for additional demand of Rs. 50 crore at least for the current financial year
alongwith a copy of “Approach Paper to Twelfth Plan for the Scheme of Project Tiger” submitted
to Planning Commission (Annexure-IV) which, inter-alia , vide Para 9 includes the provision of
Rs. 1276.30 crores for the Annual Plan of 2012-13.

21
Comments
The Committee, reiterating its recommendation, impresses upon the Ministry to
keep on pursuing its demand for additional resources for ‘Project Tiger’ forcefully with the
Planning Commission till it is met.
INDIAN COUNCIL OF FORESTRY RESEARCH AND EDUCATION (ICFRE), DEHRADUN
Recommendation (18.2)
The Committee feels that during the last almost 23 years of its existence, ICFRE should
have made significant contribution in conservation of forests and rehabilitation of degraded land
and established itself as a premier research institute on the pattern of CSIR, which has made
remarkable achievement in scientific and technological development of the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that ICFRE should galvanize its resources in such a manner
as to provide viable solutions for the problems afflicting the goal of preservation of forests and
rehabilitation of degraded land, so that, the green/forest cover of the country could be
substantially enhanced.
Action taken by Government
Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE),  is the premier Forestry
research organization of the country. The research activities of ICFRE has made significant
contribution for the improvement of productivity of the forests, rehabilitation of degraded lands,
addressing the needs of the stakeholders/industries and the society livelihood issues of fringe forest
dwellers in particular dependent on forests for their livelihood.
Following are some of the important achievements made by ICFRE and its institutes in the
area of Forestry research:
• Eco-restoration of Uranuim, Phosphate, iron-ore and limestone mines have been
successfully done.
• Agroforestry Models of Poplar-Turmeric, Poplar-Sugarcane, Casuarinas-coconut-
groundnut and with many other species have been developed and demonstrated.
• In the process of genetic improvement selection of superior trees, establishment of seed
orchards and vegetative multiplication gardens and breeding populations of different
species like Teak, Chir pine, Semul, Eucalyptus, Sandal, Red sanders, Babul, Poplars,
Neem Casurina, Tecomella undulate, Gmelinaarborea, Leucaenaleucocephala,
Madhucaindica, Shorearobusta, Pinuswallichiana,  Rose wood, SissooProsopis,
Meliacomposita, Madhucaindica, tamarind  and Bamboos etc., was undertaken across
the country. With due selection of superior genotypes, multiplication, breeding,
techniques have been developed for 20 Multi Purpose Tree species(MPTs). ICFRE has
also developed propagation techniques  for these species for mass multiplication of
improved trees.
• The Council introduced germplasm of poplars, tropical pines, eucalyptus, Subabul
and Paulonia in different parts of India. India is second among the countries having
eucalyptus plantation after Brazil. Populusdeltoides  which is most widely planted species
in India constitutes the backbone of agroforestry in the country. Similar is case of
Causarina in coastal areas of Southern States. ICFRE and its institutes has been playing
significant role in the development of improved varieties of plantation species which
forms the main stay of Tree Outside Forests (TOF).

22
• The research on improvement on nursery techniques of various commercial species was
carried out. Nursery techniques of the species such as Dalbergiasissoo, Bamboos,
Teactonagrandis  and Quercus  spp. have been improved after conducting series of
experiments in the nurseries.
• Studies on Poplar improvement in India  have been undertaken and different exotic
poplar clones have been tested in various agro-climatic zones of the country,
multiplication and selection of individual genotypes of different families and to study
clonal testing control crosses and field trials of poplar clones. In these studies, the
survey and selection of superior clones of Populusdeltoides  was done from U.P. forests
experimental trails. About 53 contributions were made using 24 males and 14 females
in control crosses. Sixty promising clones comprising selected clones and newly
released clones of WIMCO, UP Forest Department and UHF, Solan were selected for
multilocational field trials and plant material (cutting) were supplied to all coordinating
centres of the country. New species i.e. Populusillicifolia  and Populuseuphratica  have
been introduced. Paulowniafortunii  an exotic species from China was introduced in
various climate conditions of North India.
• Vegetative propagation techniques of ornamental bamboos viz. , Bambusa vulgaris
(green), B.vulgaris (yellow), B.wamin (pitcher) and Gigantochloaatter (kalabans) have
been developed after planting nodal/binodal culm cuttings.
• Collection, extraction and processing of seeds of various forest tree species are being
done. The seeds are supplied in small to semi-bulk quantities mainly for introduction
trials and research purpose. Seeds in bulk quantities have also been sent for meeting
specific requirements of Forest Departments, NGOs, and farmers etc.
• Technologies for utilization of plantation timber  which is mainly coming from Trees
OutsideForest (TOF) like eucalyptus, poplar were developed and perfected and passed
on to user groups. Nearly 65 plantation species have been studied for their utilization
potential.
• ICFRE has immense contribution in developing improved planting material last two
decades which has helped farmers, and industries in raising trees outside forest for
meeting their requirements. In addition, research in protection of trees, developing
nursery protocols and seed germination protocols for number of species have been
major contribution.
• To expand the vistas of forestry research initiation of new programmes from 2012-13
has been started under the leadership of DG, ICFRE. Research has been embarked upon
under Six Thrust Areas designating six National Project Directors for the respective
thrust area. These Thrust areas are:
• Managing forests and forests products for livelihood support and economic growth
• Biodiversity conservation and ecological security
• Forest and Climate Change
• Forest genetic resource management and Tree Improvement
• Forestry Education and Policy Research to meet Emerging Challenge
• Forestry Extension for taking research to people

23
In the area of Forestry Extension , ICFRE has following works carried out:
• People’s participation at every level:  Forest is under control of States and ICFRE has
no, whatsoever control over the area under forest. However, ICFRE is aware of the
targets of National Forest Policy and striving hard to achieve the targets. We are
emphasizing on the people’s participation at every level under schemes such as Social
Forestry, Agroforestry, JFM etc. ICFRE is also encouraging the involvement of
various agencies national and international  in this task. Presently, ICFRE is
associated with Project “Sustainable Land Ecosystem Management” for enhancement of
people participation in Land Management and its natural ecosystem.
• Establishment of Van Vigyan Kendras and Demo Villages - With a view to
disseminate ICFRE technologies to the end users, these two schemes have been
launched during Eleventh Five Year Plan. The VVKs have been established at 26
locations throughout the country with active participation of concerned State Forest
Departments. DVs were established at eight locations with active participation of NGOs/
local bodies. Both these schemes are operational and striving to generate environment
awareness and to provide simple innovative technologies to the stakeholders including
farmers. It is planned to expand the VVK Network on the lines of KVKs. The target
for Twelfth Five Year Plan is to open 200 more VVKs in addition to the present VVKs.
50 more DVs are also planned to open in the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
• Linking of VVKs with Kisan Vikas Kendras (KVKs)- With a view to outreach the
larger audience the VVKs are being linked with KVKs of ICAR. This will facilitate in
dissemination of ICFRE technologies to a much larger group.
• Adivasi Van Vikas Kendras-  It has been envisaged to open 30A VVKs to address the
problems of adivasis related to the forests and to provide them alternate means instead
of forest products. This will help in raising their livelihood and also help in saving the
forests.
• ICFRE through its institutes promote holding/participating/observing in various events to
generate environment awareness such as workshop/seminars/trainings/kisanMela/
exhibitions etc.
• ICFRE is in the process of compilation of State of Knowledge Report on
Agroforestry and Farm Forestry Extension – which will help end user to use best
forestry practices and implementation of recent Technologies developed by ICFRE.
• ICFRE is also preparing, Forestry Sector Report India-2010.
• Published an important book titled “Forestry in the service of Nation: ICFRE
Technologies” which has been released during Ist Indian Forest Congress 2011 at New
Delhi. The book provides a comprehensive account of technologies and processes
developed by ICFRE and its institutes spread across the country. It also gives an idea
about history of scientific forestry in India, various functions of the forestry sector and
achievements made by the Council. Besides, the book presents pictorial details of
different repositories like FRI Herbarium, National Forest Insect Collection, Xylarium,
Fungi collection and Museums, besides Shatabdi Van Vigyan Kendra, Photo Gallary,
Arboretum and Bambusetum etc.
In the area of Forestry Education , ICFRE has:
• Provided Grants-in-aid  to 27 Universities for infrastructural development to the tune of
Rs.54 crores helping in establishment of forestry as a formal stream of education from
1990-91-2011-12.

24
• Taken up quality assurance of forestry education and 18 universities have already been
accredited for a period of three year.
• Revised the Course curricula of forestry at UG/PG level in the country.
• ICFRE has also been involved in capacity building of Indian Forest Service at the
National level to meet the growing challenges
• The ICFRE has adopted a five year HRD programme for capacity building of the
managerial cadre, Scientific cadre and the Technical Cadre which aims at:-
o Increasing the management skills of the manager and Senior researcher and to keep
them abreast with current thinking and trends in forestry research.
o Enhancing the core competence of the researchers in their area of specialization
through training, research workshops, seminars etc.
o Providing in-service training in professional skills, Lab management, field
investigation etc., to all levels of supporting staff.
It is thus evident that the Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE),
Dehradun is an autonomous body of Ministry of Environment and Forests registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860, has been doing good work and has made significant contributions
in the field of Forestry Research and Education and is recognized as a premier organization of the
country in this field. With the view to further strengthening it, a review of ICFRE is under
consideration.
Comments
Perusal of the Action Taken Note of the Ministry suggests that everything is fine in
the ICFRE and that there is absolutely no need of its introspection, assessment and critical
evaluation. However, in the last line, the Ministry has hinted at the probable review of
ICFRE with a view to further strengthening it. The Committee is of the opinion that a
review of the functioning of the Council should be initiated at the earliest so as to make
it more focused and goal oriented.
Recommendation (19.3)
The Committee is constrained to observe that although Biological Diversity Act was enacted
in 2002. It is yet to be fully implemented. State Biodiversity Boards have so far been set up by
25 States while 3 States viz. Bihar, Maharashtra and J&K are yet to set up their Boards. Only 14
States have so far notified the State specific rules in accordance with section 63(1) of the Act.
So far, over 31,000 Biodiversity Management Committees have been constituted by the local bodies
in 14 States. It shows lack of seriousness both on the part of the Central Government and the
State Governments towards the implementation of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002. The
Committee therefore recommends that the Ministry should actively pursue this matter with the State
Government to set up their State Boards and particularly, Panchayat level Biodiversity Management
Committees which give sanction and agree on benefit sharing agreement, so that they are activated
and constituted at the earliest.
Action taken by Government
In compliance with the provisions of Section 22 of the Biological Diversity Act, 26 States
have so far constituted State Biodiversity Boards, which includes the State of Maharashtra which
formed the Board on 02.01.2012. With regard to Bihar and Jammu & Kashmir, the matter for
setting up of State Biodiversity Boards is being followed up. With regard to the State rules, the

25
matter is being pursued to notify the rules and put in operation. In respect of BMC, as of May
2012 around 32,887 BMCs have been formed across the country.
Letters were sent from the Minister of State (Independent Charge), Environment and
Forests to the Chief Ministers of all States to implement the provisions of the Biological Diversity
Act and Rules, especially those relating to State Biodiversity Boards, Biodiversity Management
Committees and People’s Biodiversity Register by the Ministry of Environment and Forests in
August 2009. This was followed up with letters from Secretary (Environment and Forests) to the
Chief Secretaries of all the States in February 2012.
Comments
The Committee desires that the Ministry must keep on following up the matter of
implementation of Biological Diversity Act, 2002 with the concerned State Governments and
should see to it that it is implemented in all the States.
Recommendation (19.4)
In such a situation, the Committee feels that there is an urgent need to develop strong and
impartial regulatory mechanism which could inspire confidence in the public, so that, decision taken
by it enjoy credibility of all the stakeholders.
Action taken by Government
(i) India has one of the oldest regulatory frameworks which address the issue of biosafety
associated with Genetically Modified Organisms (GMOs). GMOs and products thereof
including GM crops are regulated product in India under the Rules for Manufacture,
Use/Import/Export and Storage of Hazardous Micro Organisms/ Genetically Engineered
Organisms or Cells, 1989 (Rule 1989) promulgated under the Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986 to ensure safety of environment & human health. These rules and
regulations commonly referred as Rules 1989 cover areas of research as well as large
scale applications of GMOs and its products. These rules and regulations are
implemented by the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Department of Biotechnology
(DBT) and the state governments through various committees. Rules 1989 are
supported by several biosafety guidelines.
(ii) These rules define the competent authorities and composition of such authorities for
handling of various aspects of the rules. Presently there are six Competent Authorities
i.e.  The Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RDAC), Institutional Biosafety
Committee (IBSC), Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM), Genetic
Engineering Approval Committee (GEAC), State Biotechnology Coordination Committee
(SBCC), District Level Committee (DLC). While RDAC has an advisory role, IBSC,
RCGM and GEAC are involved in regulations and SBCCs and DLCs are involved in
monitoring. The compliance of the regulatory procedures during GM crop field trials
is also monitored by the Monitoring Committees set up by the RCGM/GEAC.
(iii) Under the Rule, 1989, Government of India follows the policy of case by case event
based approval of Genetically Modified (GM) crops. Evaluation of the safety of GM
crops and regulatory approval process takes place right from the research stage. The
development of GM crops at the laboratory stage, confined multi-location trials for
generation of biosafety data known as biosafety research trials – I and biosafety
research trials-II (BRL-I and BRL-II) require prior approval of the RCGM and the
GEAC set up in DBT and MoEF, respectively under the Rules, 1989.

26
(iv) Recognizing that regulation is a dynamic process and safety assessment of GM plant
is the most important regulatory step, these guidelines and protocols along with the
regulatory framework are being regularly reviewed/updated through a consultative
approach and following the international norms prescribed by the Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), CODEX Alimentarius Commission
and International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC). V arious bio-safety guidelines
which are regularly updated keeping in tune with the international practices and
developments in biotechnology are:
a. Recombinant DNA Safety Guidelines, 1990 and 1994
b. Revised Guidelines for Research in Transgenic Plants and Guidelines for Toxicity
and Allergenicity Evaluation, 1998
c. Guidelines and SOPs for the conduct of Confined Field Trials of Transgenic Plant,
2008
d. Guidelines for the Safety Assessment of GM Foods, 2008 developed by Indian
Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
e. Protocol for Safety Assessment of Genetically Engineered Plants/crops, 2008.
(v) The GEAC takes into consideration the findings of the biosafety and agronomic studies
as well as recommendations of the RCGM before according approval for environmental
release. Only those transgenic crops which are found to be safe for human
consumption as well as the environment are recommended for environmental release.
(vi) Further, taking into account apprehensions received from various State Governments
and other stakeholders in recent time; and recognizing the fact that agriculture is a
State subject, GEAC during its 111
th meeting held on 6.7.2011 made ‘No Objection
Certificate’ (NOC) from State Government a prerequisite for issuance of approval letter
by GEAC for field trials of GM crops in the State.
(vii) A draft Bill to establish Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India (BRAI) as an
autonomous and statutory agency to regulate the research, transport, import,
manufacture and use of organisms and products of modern biotechnology under DBT
is under consideration. The safety aspects including both environmental safety and
food safety with respect to genetic manipulation are proposed to be regulated by BRAI.
Accordingly, all GM foods (living as well as processed) shall be cleared by BRAI with
respect to introduced genetic modification. The bill has been prepared through a
consultative process involving interdisciplinary and inter-ministerial experts, State
Governments and Stakeholders. The Cabinet Committee has approved the note for
introduction of Biotechnology Regulatory Authority of India (BRAI) Bill, 2010 on 18
th
November 2010. On necessary legislative procedure, the BRAI Bill, 2011 has been
submitted to Lok Sabha Secretariat for introduction in parliament. No specific time
frame can be given for setting up the authority at this stage.
(viii) Moreover, India being a party to Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety adopted under
Convention on Biological Diversity, several measures has been taken to implement
obligations under the Protocol in order to ensure safe handling, transport and use of
living modified organisms (LMOs) resulting from modern biotechnology that may have
adverse effects on biological diversity taking also into account risk to human health.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.

27
ANNEXURES

29
ANNEXURE-I
Submissions/Interventions to achieve Mission Outputs/targets
Sub Missions Type Area
(Million ha)
Categories
a) Moderately dense forest
cover, but showing
degradation
b) Eco-Restoration of
degraded open forests:
c) Restoration of grasslands
Total Sub Mission 1
Rehabilitation of Shifting
Cultivation areas
Restoring Scrub lands
Restoring/planting Seabuckthorn
Restoration of Mangroves
Ravine Reclamation
Restoration of abandoned
mining areas
Total Sub Mission 2
Total Sub Mission 3
Farmers land including current
fallows
Shelterbelt plantations
Highways/ Rural road/Canal/Tank
Bunds
Total Sub Mission 4
Total Mission 5
1.5
1.8
0.6
0.6
0.4
4.9
0.6
0.8
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.1
1.8
0.2
0.2
2.3
0.1
0.6
3
0.1
0.1
10
Type A
Type B
Type C & D
Sub Mission 1: Enhancing
resilience of ecosystem/
landscopes high on
vulnerability (increase in
quality of forest cover and
ecosystem services) 4.9m
ha.
Sub Mission 2:
Restoration/of ecologically
challenged ecosystems
(increase in forest cover)
1.8 m ha.
Sub Mission 3: Enhancing
tree cover in Urban &
Peri-Urban areas (including
institutional lands): 0.20 m
ha.
Sub Mission 4 : Agro
forestry and social
Forestry (increasing
biomass & creating
carbon sink):3 m ha.
Sub Mission 5: Restoration
of Wetlands: 0.10 m ha.
Total Sub Missions

30
ANNEXURE-II
Details of physical and financial target/achievement during the year 2010-11 under
Intensification of Forest Management Scheme
(Rs. in lakhs )
Sl. No. Component Name Target Achievement
Physical Financial Physical Financial
1. Creation and maintenance of 3,10,909 1023.89 2,97,563 832.13
firelines (kms)
2. Firewatch towers 12 32.48 8 23.48
3. Fire watchers 1,99,054 601.88 1,84,987 417.27
4. Construction of Boundary pillars 50,465 695.95 40,446 522.61
5. Construction of water storage 186 273.18 154 195.91
structure
6. Construction of roads 5 29.20 5 29.20
7. Construction of Building 213 1232.26 180 1155.18
8. Purchase of vehicles 60 327.00 31 157.88

31
ANNEXURE-III
Details of physical and financial target/achievement during the year 2011-12 under
Intensification of Forest Management Scheme
(Rs. in lakhs )
Sl. No. Component Name Target Achievement
Physical Financial Physical Financial
1. Creation and maintenance of 68,402 1336.64 59,170 1032.79
firelines (kms)
2. Firewatch towers 14 47.00 12 34.87
3. Fire watchers 1,63,665 1336.90 1,23,667 863.71
4. Construction of Boundary pillars 27,947 728.30 14,755 317.80
5. Construction of water storage 102 127.58 90 102.75
structure
6. Construction of roads 0 0 0 0
7. Construction of Building 580 3818.38 313 2201.41
8. Purchase of vehicles No funds has been 20* 1 17.24*
released for vehicles
in 2011-12
*The amount of 2010-11 has been revalidated for 2011-12.

32
ANNEXURE-IV
Additional demand alongwith justification for the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of
Project Tiger during 2012-13
1. An allocation of Rs. 167.70 crore (BE) has been provided to the ongoing Centrally
Sponsored Scheme of Project Tiger for 2012-13, as against the proposed outlay of
Rs. 1276.30 crores. The enhanced outlay was proposed for supporting the States towards
securing inviolate space for tiger in core areas of tiger reserves through village relocation,
raising and deploying the STPF, addressing livelihood dependency in fringe areas,
strengthening infrastructure, addressing man-wildlife conflicts to prevent revenge killings
and launching Phase-IV monitoring.
2. Since only Rs. 167.70 crore has been provided as BE for Project Tiger during 2012-13. An
additional allocation of at least Rs. 50 crore is required during the current financial year
(2012-13) for the following important components owing to reasons cited against each:
(i) Raising, arming and deploying the Special Tiger Protection Force (STPF)
This is a special initiative with 100% central assistance based on the budget announcement
made by the Finance Minister in 2008 to strengthen field protection in tiger reserves. The States
would be provided 100% central assistance for STPF, which needs to be raised on the lines of
India Reserve Battalion. This specialized armed Battalion of 112 personnel would receive special
training to combat poachers to compliment the protection efforts of frontline staff in tiger reserves.
To start with, only 13 tiger reserves have been identified for assistance in this context and central
assistance has been provided only to four. It is important to extend this assistance to other sensitive
reserves as well during the current financial year which would require an amount of at least Rs.
27 crores (@ Rs. 3 crore per reserve for 9 reserves).
(ii) In August, 2011 with the approval of the CCEA, several new components have been
included under Project Tiger which, inter alia  includes: (a) raising compensation for man-animal
conflict to Rs. 2 lakhs, (b) establishment of Tiger Safari, interpretation/awareness centres under the
existing component of ‘co-existence agenda in buffer/fringe areas’, and management of such
centres through the respective Panchayati Raj Institutions. An amount of at least Rs. 5 crore is
required for supporting such centres in Corbett and Sariska Tiger Reserves.
(iii) Out of 40 tiger reserves, 25 have declared the peripheral buffer zone around core areas of
tiger reserves, which is a statutory requirement under the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972. An
amount of Rs. 18 crores would be required to support the coexistence agenda in such areas,
besides addressing man-tiger conflict issues.
Total additional requirement :
(i) + (ii) + (iii) = Rs. 27 crore + Rs. 5 crore + Rs. 18 crore = Rs. 50 crores
PROJECT TIGER : APPROACH PAPER TO TWELFTH PLAN
1. Background
1.1 “Project Tiger”, now ongoing as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme, was launched by the
Government of India in 1973 in nine reserves of different States (Assam, Bihar, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal) over an

33
area of approximately 14,000 sq. km. Since then, the project coverage has expanded
considerably to 40 tiger reserves (TR), encompassing an area of around 46,388.22 sq.km.
in 17 tiger States with 32578.78 sq.km. of notified core/critical tiger habitats in 16 tiger
States. Further, in-principle approval has been accorded for creation of 6 new tiger
reserves, besides advising the States for 6 additional areas which are important for tiger
conservation.
1.2 The Project has saved the tiger from the brink of extinction. Due to ongoing conservation
efforts under the Project in designated tiger reserves, India has the maximum number of
tigers along with its source areas amongst the 13 tiger range countries in the world.
1.3 Project Tiger has a holistic, ecosystem approach. Its core–buffer strategy, protection and
development initiatives gave a new perspective to the concept of wildlife management in our
country and has been “role model” for conservation.
2. Present status of tiger, co-predators, prey and habitat
2.1 The second countrywide assessment of the status of tigers, co-predators and their prey was
released in March, 2011. This assessment of 2010 is the second such countrywide
assessment using the refined methodology as recommended by the Tiger Task Force. The
findings indicate a countrywide 20% increase in tiger numbers in 2010 with an estimated
number of 1706 (1520-1909). The 2006 estimation was 1411 (1165-1657 tigers). A decline
of 12.6% in tiger occupancy from connecting habitats has also been reported. This has
occurred in peripheral and dispersal areas having low densities outside tiger reserves and
tiger source populations.
2.2 The increase in tiger numbers is due to the fact that tiger populations in Uttarakhand, Tamil
Nadu, Maharashtra and Karnataka have shown an increase in tiger density. The inclusion of
Sunderbans, some portions of North East and parts of Maharashtra have also contributed
to the increase.
2.3 Tiger occurrence and density were dependent on availability of habitats that were remote,
with minimal human disturbance and having a high availability of large wild prey (chital,
sambar, gaur, and wild pig).
2.4 Tiger occupied forests in India were classified into 6 landscape complexes : (a) Shivalik
Hills and the Gangetic Plain, (b) Central India (c) Eastern Ghats, (d) Western Ghats,
(e) North-Eastern Hills and Brahmaputra Plains, and (f) Sunderbans.
2.4.1 In Shivalik-Terai Landscape tigers occupied 6712 km
2 of forested habitats with an
estimated population of 353 (320 to 388) in five separate populations.
2.4.2 Central Indian Landscape  (inclusive of Nagarjunasagar Srisailam of the Eastern Ghats)
tiger presence was reported from 39,017 km 2 with an estimated population of 601 (518 to
685) distributed in 20 tiger populations with a few other sporadic occurrences.
2.4.3 Western Ghats Landscape  was 29,607 km 2 and registered a decline of about 11.5%
compared to that of 2006. The current tiger population was estimated at 534 (500 to 568)
registering a rise of about 32% since 2006.
2.4.4 T iger occupancy of 4,900 km
2 and population numbers between 118 to 178 tigers should
be considered as minimal for the North East  since systematic coverage of the entire
landscape was not done.
2.4.5 Population estimation of the Sundarbans tigers was done with a combination of camera
trapping and satellite telemetry. A tiger density of 4.3 (se 0.3) tigers per 100 km 2 was

34
estimated. The total population for the Indian Sundarbans was estimated to be between 64
to 90 tigers.
2.4.6 Currently, only a few populations Nagarhole-Bandipur-Mudumalai-Wayanad-Moyar-Segur,
Corbett population, Sundarbans (India and Bangladesh) and Kaziranga-KarbiAnglong
populations have the required population size for long term survival without immigration.
The remaining tiger populations require habitat connectivity for genetic and demographic
viability.
2.4.7 Comparative status of tiger (2006 and 2010)
Landscape Tiger estimation 2006 Tiger estimation 2010
complex
Statistical Population Statistical Statistical Population Statistical
Lower estimate Upper Lower est imate Upper
limit  l imit limit limit
Shivalik-Gangetic 259 297 335 320 353 388
plains
Central Indian & 486 601 718 518 601 685
Eastern ghats
Western ghats 336 402 487 500 534 568
Northeastern hills 84 100 118 118 148 178
and Brahmaputra
flood plains
Sunderbans Not Not Not 64 70 90
assessed assessed assessed
T
OTAL 1165 1411 1657 1520 1706 1909


35
3. Management Effectiveness Evaluation of Tiger Reserves
3.1 Independent assessment of Tiger Reserves based on IUCN criteria, as adapted to our
conditions, was done for the first time in 2005-06 for 28 tiger reserves. This assessment
was peer reviewed by IUCN experts. Both assessment as well as peer review reports were
placed in the Parliament.

36
3.2 The second round of independent assessment based on refined criteria has been done in 2010-11
for 39 tiger reserves. This is also based on the globally used framework, as adapted to our
conditions. In all, five independent teams conducted the evaluation using 30 indicators. The
framework consisted of 6 elements: context, planning, inputs, process, outputs and outcomes.
3.3 The 39 tiger reserves were grouped in landscape clusters as followed in country level tiger
estimation. An additional category comprising of tigers in ‘red corridor’ (areas affected by
left wing extremism) was also included. The outcome of the evaluation is as below:
Rating Number of Tiger Reserves Percentage
Very Good 15 38
Good 12 31
Satisfactory 8 21
Poor 4 10
T
OTAL 39
3.4 The Management Effectiveness Evaluation ratings of 2010-11 and 2005-06 have been
compared for 28 tiger reserves, which were part of 2005-06 evaluation. The ‘very good’
rating increased by 4%, the ‘good’ rating increased by 3%, ‘satisfactory’ rating decreased
by 7%, while there is a status quo for the ‘poor’ rating.
Table-1: MEE Score (% age) of Landscape Clusters (2010-11)
Cluster Cluster Name States No. of Mean MEE
Number Tiger MEE Score
Reserves Score% Range%
I Shivalik-Gangetic Plain Uttar Pradesh, 8 64 56-73
Landscape Complex and Uttarakhand,
Central Indian Landscape Rajasthan,
Complex and Eastern Maharashtra
Ghats Landscape
Complex
II Central Indian Landscape Madhya Pradesh 6 79 56-88
Complex and Eastern
Ghats Landscape Complex
III Shivalik-Gangetic Plain Bihar, Chhattisgarh, 8 42 33-63
Landscape Complex and Orissa, Andhra Pradesh,
Central Indian Landscape Jharkhand
Complex and Eastern Ghats
Landscape Complex
IV Western Ghats Landscape Karnataka, Kerala, 9 75 63-80
Complex Tamil Nadu
V North East Hills & Arunachal Pradesh,
Brahmaputra Flood Plains Assam, Mizoram,
and Sundarbans West Bengal 8 66 56-77
T
OTAL 39 65 33-88

37
Table-2(a): Category-wise outcome of MEE Process (2010-11)
Sl. No. Category Name of Tiger Reserve
1. Very Good Annamalai, Bandhavgarh, Bandipur, Bhadra, Dandeli-Anshi, Kalakad-
Mundanthurai, Kanha, Kaziranga, Mudumalai, Parambikulam, Pench
(Madhya Pradesh), Periyar, Satpura, Sundarbans
2. Good Buxa, Corbett, Dampa, Dudhwa, Manas, Melghat, Nagarole, Pakke,
Pench (Maharashtra), Ranthambhore, Tadoba-Andhari
3. Satisfactory Achanakmar, Nameri, Namdapha, Sanjay, Sayadari, Valmiki
4. Poor Satkosia
Table-2(b): Category-wise outcome of MEE Process (2010-11) of Tiger Reserves falling in the
‘Red Corridor’
Sl. No. Category Name of Tiger Reserve
1. Very Good —
2. Good Nagarjunasagar-Srisailam
3. Satisfactory Similipal
4. Poor Indravati, Palamau, Udanti-Sitanadi
Table-2(c): Category-wise outcome of MEE Process (2010-11) of Tiger Reserves, which had
recently lost all tigers
Sl. No. Category Name of Tiger Reserve
1. Very Good Panna
2. Good —
3. Satisfactory Sariska
4. Poor —
Summary of MEE Process of Tiger Reserves
Rating Number of Percentage
Tiger Reserves
Very Good 15 38
Good 12 31
Satisfactory 8 21
Poor 4 10
T
OTAL 39

38
Table-3: Comparison of MEE Rating of Tiger Reserves in 2005-06 and 2010-11
Category 2005-06 % 2010-11 %
Very Good 09 32 10 36
Good 10 36 11 39
Satisfactory 07 25 05 18
Poor 02 07 02 07
T
OTAL 28 28
Table-4 (a): Performance of Headline Indicators (Top Ten)
Table-4(b): Performance of Headline Indicators (Middle Ten)

39
Table-4(c): Performance of Headline Indicators (Bottom Ten)
4. General reasons for tiger decline in areas outside tiger reserves
The reasons for tiger decline in areas outside tiger reserves/protected areas are as below:
(i) Degradation of forest status outside Protected Areas/Tiger Reserves owing to:
(a) human pressure
(b) livestock pressure
(c) ecologically unsustainable land uses
(ii) Fragmentation leading to loss of gene flow from source populations
(iii) Loss of forest quality in terms of prey biomass
(iv) Tiger deaths due to man-animal conflict
(v) Tiger deaths due to poaching
(vi) Loss of reproduction owing to disturbance on account of heavily used infrastructure
like highways, etc
(vii) Lack of adequate protection in outside areas
(viii) Insurgency/law and order problems
5. Present approach to tiger conservation
Owing to habitat fragmentation on account of ecologically unsustainable land uses, biotic
pressure and poaching, the following approach is imperative:
5.1 Consolidating/strengthening the “source” population of tiger and its prey in tiger
reserves, protected areas and tiger bearing forests
This involves the following active managerial interventions:

40
(i) Protection/antipoaching operations/intelligence networking
(ii) Strengthening of infrastructure within tiger reserves
(iii) Creation of inviolate space through relocation
(iv) Capacity building of frontline staff/local people and officers (including strengthening
of training centres and training in related fields, viz. enforcement, intelligence
networking, tourism activities, etc.)
5.2  Managing the “source-sink dynamics” by restoring habitat connectivity
This involves the following managerial interventions:
(i) Actively providing incentives to local people for the eco-system services/corridor
values provided by them by not degrading the forest (payment for eco-system
services)
(ii) Incentives to local people for taking up plantations and protecting natural root stocks
besides preventing free grazing
(iii) Encouraging stall feeding of cattle and fostering marketing of dairy products
(iv) Providing subsidized gas connection to local people for reducing their dependency on
forest towards fuel wood collection
5.3 Mainstreaming tiger/wildlife concerns in the landscape through smart practices with
other sectors to prevent/address man-tiger conflicts (sectors: forestry, agriculture, welfare
activities through the district Collector sector, tourism, fisheries, tea-coffee estates, road/rail
transport, industry, mining, thermal power plants, irrigation projects, temple tourism and
communication projects operating in the landscape).
6. Milestone Initiatives taken for strengthening tiger conservation
Several milestone initiatives have been taken in the last few years to strengthen tiger
conservation in the country. The urgent recommendations of the Tiger Task Force constituted by
the National Board for Wildlife under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister have been
implemented. The important ones are indicated below:
Legal steps
1. Amendment of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 for providing enabling provisions for
constitution of the National Tiger Conservation Authority and the Tiger and Other Endangered
Species Crime Control Bureau.
2. Enhancement of punishment in cases of offence relating to a tiger reserve or its core area.
Administrative steps
3. Strengthening of antipoaching activities, including special strategy for monsoon patrolling,
by providing funding support to Tiger Reserve States, as proposed by them, for deployment of
antipoaching squads involving ex-army personnel/home guards, apart from workforce comprising of
local people, in addition to strengthening of communication/wireless facilities.
4. Constitution of the National Tiger Conservation Authority with effect from 4.09.2006, for
strengthening tiger conservation by, interalia, ensuring normative standards in tiger reserve

41
management, preparation of reserve specific tiger conservation plan, laying down annual audit
report before Parliament, constituting State level Steering Committees under the Chairmanship of
Chief Ministers and establishment of Tiger Conservation Foundation.
5. Constitution of a multidisciplinary Tiger and Other Endangered Species Crime Control
Bureau (Wildlife Crime Control Bureau) with effect from 6.6.2007 to effectively control illegal trade
in wildlife.
6. The in-principle approval has been accorded by the National Tiger Conservation Authority
for creation of four new tiger reserves, and the sites are:, Pilibhit (Uttar Pradesh), Ratapani
(Madhya Pradesh), Sunabeda (Orissa), Mukundara Hills (including Darrah, Jawahar Sagar and
Chambal Wildlife Sanctuaries) (Rajasthan), Kudremukh (Karnataka), and Kawal (Andhra Pradesh).
Besides, the States have been advised to send proposals for declaring the following areas as Tiger
Reserves: (i) Bor (Maharashtra), (ii) Suhelwa (Uttar Pradesh), (iii) Nagzira-Navegaon (Maharashtra),
(iv) Satyamangalam (Tamil Nadu), (v) Guru Ghasidas National Park (Chhattisgarh), and (vi) Mhdei
Sanctuary (Goa).
7. The revised Project Tiger guidelines have been issued to States for strengthening tiger
conservation, which apart from ongoing activities, interalia, include funding support to States for
enhanced village relocation/rehabilitation package for people living in core or critical tiger habitats
(from Rs. 1 lakh/family to Rs. 10 lakhs/family), rehabilitation/resettlement of communities involved
in traditional hunting, mainstreaming livelihood and wildlife concerns in forests outside tiger
reserves and fostering corridor conservation through restorative strategy to arrest habitat
fragmentation.
8. A scientific methodology for estimating tiger (including co-predators, prey animals and
assessment of habitat status) has been evolved and mainstreamed. The findings of this estimation/
assessment are bench marks for future tiger conservation strategy.
9. An area of 32578.78 sq. km. has been notified by 16 Tiger States (out of 17) as core or
critical tiger habitat under section 38V of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, as amended in 2006
(Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Mizoram, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh and
West Bengal). The State of Bihar has taken a decision for notifying the core or critical tiger habitat
(840 sq.km.).
Financial steps
10. Financial and technical help is provided to the States under various Centrally Sponsored
Schemes, viz. Project Tiger and Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats for enhancing the
capacity and infrastructure of the States for providing effective protection to wild animals.
International Cooperation
11. India has a Memorandum of Understanding with Nepal on controlling trans-boundary illegal
trade in wildlife and conservation, apart from a protocol on tiger conservation with China.
12. A Global Tiger Forum of Tiger Range Countries has been created for addressing
international issues related to tiger conservation.
13. During the 14 th meeting of the Conference of Parties to CITES, which was held from
3rd to 15 th June, 2007 at The Hague, India introduced a resolution along with China, Nepal and the
Russian Federation, with directions to Parties with operations breeding tigers on a commercial
scale, for restricting such captive populations to a level supportive only to conserving wild tigers.

42
The resolution was adopted as a decision with minor amendments. Further, India made an
intervention appealing to China to phase out tiger farming, and eliminate stockpiles of Asian big cats
body parts and derivatives. The importance of continuing the ban on trade of body parts of tigers
was emphasized.
14. Based on India’s strong intervention during the 58
th meeting of the Standing Committee of
the CITES at Geneva from 6 th to 10 th July, 2009, the CITES Secretariat has issued a notification
to Parties to submit reports relating to compliance of Decisions 14.69 and 14.65 within 90 days
with effect from 20.10.2009 (Progress made on restricting captive breeding operations of tigers
etc.).
Reintroduction of Tigers
15. As a part of active management to rebuild Sariska and Panna Tiger Reserves where tigers
have become locally extinct, reintroduction of tigers/tigresses have been done.
16. Special advisories issued for in-situ build up of prey base and tiger population through
active management in tiger reserves having low population status of tiger and its prey.
Creation of Special Tiger Protection Force (STPF)
17. The policy initiatives announced by the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech of 29.2.2008,
interalia, contains action points relating to tiger protection. Based on the one time grant of
Rs. 50.00 crore provided to the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) for raising, arming
and deploying a Special Tiger Protection Force, the proposal for the said force has been approved
by the competent authority for 13 tiger reserves. Rs. 93 lakhs each has been released to Corbett,
Ranthambhore & Dudhwa Tiger Reserve for creation of STPF during 2008-09. Since then, the
guidelines of the STPF have been revised for deploying forest personnel in place of Police as an
option-II, with scope for involving local people like the Van Gujjars.
18. In collaboration with TRAFFIC-INDIA, an online tiger crime data base has been launched,
and Generic Guidelines for preparation of reserve specific Security Plan has been evolved.
Recent initiatives
1. Implementing a tripartite MOU with tiger States, linked to fund flows for effective
implementation of tiger conservation initiatives.
2. Rapid assessment of tiger reserves done.
3. Special crack teams sent to tiger reserves affected by left wing extremism and low
population status of tiger and its prey.
4. Chief Ministers of tiger States addressed at the level of the Minister of State (Independent
Charge) for Environment and Forests on urgent issues, viz. implementation of the tripartite MOU,
creation of the Tiger Conservation Foundation, stepping up protection etc.
5. Chief Ministers of States having tiger reserves affected by left wing extremism and low
population status of tiger and its prey addressed for taking special initiatives.
6. Steps taken for modernizing the infrastructure and field protection, besides launching ‘M-
STrIPES’ for effective field patrolling and monitoring.
7. Steps taken for involvement of Non-Governmental Experts in the ongoing all India tiger
estimation.

43
8. Special independent team sent to Similipal for assessing the status, besides constituting State
level Coordination Committee for redressing the administrative problems.
9. Issue of tiger farming and trafficking of tiger body parts discussed at the level of Minister
of State (Independent Charge) for Environment and Forests with the Chinese Authorities.
10. Action taken for amending the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 to ensure effective
conservation.
11. Initiatives taken for improving the field delivery through capacity building of field officials,
apart from providing incentives.
12. Steps taken for the independent Monitoring and Evaluation of tiger reserves.
13. Action initiated for using Information Technology to strengthen surveillance in tiger
reserves.
14. Providing special assistance for mitigation of human-tiger conflicts in problematic areas.
15. As an outcome of the fourth Trans-border Consultative Group Meeting held in New Delhi,
a joint resolution has been signed with Nepal for biodiversity/tiger conservation.
16. Regional Offices of the National Tiger Conservation Authority have been sanctioned at
Nagpur, Bengaluru and Guwahati.
The Revised Cost Estimate of Project Tiger has also been approved by the competent
authority in August, 2011 by enhancing the allocation for the Eleventh Plan period from Rs.650
crore of central assistance to Rs.1216.86 crore. The upward revision has been necessitated due to
increased action for relocation of villages from the notified core/critical tiger habitats as also
inclusion of additional components.
(Rs. in crore )
Sl. Item Allocation Proposed
No. additionality
1. Village relocation 323.08 405.17
2. Change in funding pattern of North Eastern States – 1.12
3. Enhancement of compensation for man-wildlife conflict 14.00 3.52
4. Cheetah reintroduction – 50.00
5. Continuing implementation of existing components of the 312.92 107.05
Scheme
TOTAL 650.00 566.86
7. Thrust areas for the Twelfth Plan period
1. Stepping up protection  by supporting the States for raising, arming and deploying the
Special Tiger Protection Force (so far, the STPF has been constituted only in
Karnataka for Nagarahole; funding support has been provided to UP, Uttarakhand and
Rajasthan where process of constituting the same is ongoing. Funding has also been
provided to Orissa for STPF constitution at Similipal Tiger Reserve).

44
2. Need for enhanced funding support to States for voluntary village relocation  from
core areas to provide inviolate space for tigers (800-1200 sq.km.) for a viable
population (CCEA process ongoing).
3. Strengthening infrastructure and habitat management.
4. Use of information technology in wildlife crime prevention.
5. Capacity building of field personnel.
6. Addressing man-wildlife conflicts to prevent revenge killings.
7. Addressing the issue of livelihood dependency  in the fringes of core/critical tiger
habitats by supporting the States for managing the buffer/peripheral areas of tiger
reserves as a multiple use zone through village level participatory planning for
ecodevelopment with reciprocal commitments (out of 40 tiger reserves 25 have notified
buffer area.
8. Launching Phase-IV  tiger reserve level continuous monitoring with capacity building.
9. Active management involving translocation  of tiger  to suitable low density tiger
habitats within a landscape.
10. Supporting field oriented research work.
11. Strengthening the Regional Offices  of the NTCA at Nagpur, Guwahati and
Bengaluru (AIGs posted at Nagpur and Bengaluru Regional Offices; IGFs are required
to be posted in the 3 Regional Offices, besides an AIG at Guwahati).
12. Declaring and consolidating new tiger reserves  (6 have been given in-principle
approval, and for another 6 the States have been advised).
13. Fostering awareness/supporting reserve specific communication strategy to elicit
public support for tiger conservation with the active involvement of Panchayati Raj
institutions.
8. Field strategies with sub-activities
(a) Stepping up protection: (antipoaching squad/Tiger Protection Force deployment)
The antipoaching operations in Tiger Reserves are site specific. However, the following
activities, inter alia , would form part of the protection strategy in Tiger Reserves:
• Raising, arming and deployment of Special Tiger Protection Force.
• Use of information technology in wildlife crime prevention.
• Launching M-STrIPES for field patrolling.
• Deployment of antipoaching squads.
• Establishing and maintenance of existing patrolling camps/chowkis and deployment of
camp labourers for patrolling.
• Organising vehicular patrolling by constituting squads (Tiger Protection Force),
comprising of field staff, labourers and police/SAF/ex-army personnel, with wireless
handset and paraphernalia for apprehending offenders, apart from prescribing a
patrolling calendar for the squad.
• Establishing and maintenance of wireless network.

45
• Organising surprise raids jointly with the local police in railway stations, local trains,
bus-stops, buses, catchers and cafeteria.
• Ensuring special site-specific protection measures, during monsoon as ‘Operation
Monsoon’ – considering the terrain and accessibility of Protected Areas.
• Deployment of ex-army personnel/home guards.
• Deployment of local work force for patrolling, surveillance of water holes, manning
barriers.
• Procurement of arms and ammunition.
• Procurement/maintenance of elephant squads.
• Rewards to informers.
• Legal support for defending court cases.
• Procurement of vehicles, boats.
• Procurement field gear, night vision device.
(b) Deciding inviolate spaces for wildlife and relocation of villagers from core or critical
tiger habitats in Tiger Reserves within a timeframe and settlement of rights:
The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, as well as the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional
Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006, require that rights of people (Scheduled
Tribes and other traditional forest dwellers) recognized in forest areas within core/critical tiger/wildlife
habitats of tiger reserves/protected areas may be modified and resettled for providing inviolate spaces
to tiger/wild animals. This requires payment of compensation (rights settlement in addition to the
relocation package offered under the CSS at present). Chapter IV of the Wild Life (Protection) Act,
1972 (Section 24) provides for acquisition of rights in or over the land declared by the State
Government under Section 18 (for constituting a Sanctuary) or Section 35 (for constituting a National
Park). Sub-section 2 of Section 24 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, authorizes the Collector to
acquire such land or rights. Therefore, payment of compensation for the immovable property of
people forms part of modifying/settling their rights which is a statutory requirement.
The ongoing study and the analysis of the available research data on tiger ecology indicate
that the minimum population of tigresses in breeding age, which are needed to maintain a viable
population of 80-100 tigers (in and around core) require an inviolate space of 800-1200 sq. km.
Tiger being an “umbrella species”, this will also ensure viable populations of other wild animals
(co-predators, prey) and forest, thereby ensuring the ecological viability of the entire area/habitat.
Thus, it becomes an ecological imperative to keep the core areas of tiger reserves inviolate for the
survival of source populations of tiger and other wild animals.
The proposed package has two options:
Option I – Payment of the entire package amount (Rs. 10 lakhs per family) to the family
in case the family opts so, without involving any rehabilitation/relocation process by the
Forest Department.
Option II – Carrying out relocation/rehabilitation of village from protected area/tiger reserve
by the Forest Department.
(c) Strengthening of infrastructure within Tiger Reserves:
The following activities, inter alia , would form part of reinforcing the infrastructure of
Tiger Reserves (including support to new tiger reserves):

46
• Civil Works (staff quarters, family hostels, office improvement, patrolling camp, house
keeping buildings, museum, culverts).
• Maintenance/creation/upgradation of road network.
• Maintenance/creation of wireless tower.
• Maintenance/creation of fire watch tower.
• Maintenance/creation of bridges, dams, anicuts.
• Maintenance/creation of firelines/firebreaks.
• Maintenance/creation of earthen ponds.
• Procurement/maintenance of vehicles (Gypsy, Jeep, Truck, Tractor).
• Habitat improvement works.
• Procurement of hardware, software/GIS.
• Procurement of compass, range finder, GPS, camera traps.
• Procurement of satellite imageries for management planning.
• Map digitization facility for management planning.
(d) Habitat improvement and water development:
These, inter alia , may include:  weed eradication, removal of gregarious plant growth from
grasslands, grass improvement, water retention structures and the like. These initiatives would
increase the forage and browse values of the habitat for wild animals.
(e) Addressing man-animal conflict (ensuring uniform, timely compensation for human
deaths due to wild animals, livestock depredation by carnivores, crop depredation by wild
ungulates) (compensation for crop loss is a new component):
This would involve:
• Payment of compensation for cattle lifting, death of human beings and crop
depredation due to wild animals.
• Creation of crop protection structures.
• Procurement/deployment of traps, cages to catch problematic animals.
• Procurement of tranquilizing equipments, rescue vehicles and drugs.
(f) Co-existence agenda in buffer/fringe areas:
The fringe areas around Tiger Reserve have corridor value, and their ecological
sustainability is important to prevent the area from becoming ecological sinks on account of over
use of resources and unwise land use. This calls for delineation of buffer zone around a tiger
reserve to incorporate such fringe areas so that it can fulfill the following objectives:
• Providing ecologically viable livelihood options to local stakeholders for reducing their
dependency on forests.
• Conserving the forest area through restorative inputs involving local people for
providing habitat supplement to wild animals moving out of core areas.

47
(g) Rehabilitation of traditional hunting tribes living around tiger reserves:
There is an urgent need to launch a rehabilitation and development programme for the
denotified tribes and tribes involved in traditional hunting, living around tiger reserves and tiger
corridors. The following denotified tribes/communities are involved in traditional hunting of wild
animals : Behelias, Ambalgars, Badaks, Mongias, Bavariyas, Monglias, Pardhi, Boyas, Kaikads,
Karwal Nat, Nirshikaris, Picharis, Valayaras, Yenadis, Chakma, Mizo, Bru, Solung and Nyishi. While
this list is not exhaustive, around 5,000 such families are required to be taken up under a welfare
programme (forming part of NTCA initiatives) during the Plan period. The rehabilitation/welfare
package should be evolved in a site specific, consultative manner with livelihood options, to include :
wages for such people towards their deployment in foot patrolling for protecting wildlife, providing
agricultural land with irrigation, basic health care, housing and related community welfare inputs
and basic education facilities. The experience gained in the past for settling denotified tribes by the
salvation army is required to be considered dispassionately while structuring the programme.
(h) Research and field equipments:
The All India tiger estimation using the new methodology approved by the Tiger task Force
has resulted in a permanent monitoring protocol for the field units. The Phase-IV tiger reserve level
would be launched to monitor the source populations of tiger. Further, assistance would be
provided for fostering field oriented research and to equip the staff with facilities like GPS, camera
traps, night vision, range finder and related accessories including hardware and software.
(i) Staff development and capacity building:
This would involve:
• Capacity building/training.
• Providing project allowance and special incentives.
• Specialized training in the use of GIS, antipoaching operations.
• Specialized training in jurisprudence and wildlife forensics.
• Study tours for appraisal of good practices in other reserves.
• Dissemination workshops.
• Specialized training in park interpretation.
• Specialized training in management planning.
The above inputs are extremely important for enhancing the skill of field staff. Several
instances of poaching occur for want of specialized training in crime detection and related skills.
(j) Mainstreaming wildlife concerns in tiger bearing forests and fostering corridor
conservation through restorative strategy involving locals to arrest fragmentation of
habitats:
This would involve:
• Redressing man-animal conflict.
• Capturing problematic/aberrant wild animals.
• Monitoring of wild animals.
• Antipoaching operations.
• Habitat improvement measures.

48
(k) Safeguards/Retrofitting measures in the interest of wildlife conservation:
Several Tiger Reserves are affected on account of heavily used infrastructure like roads, railway
tracks and others. The high tension electric lines passing through many reserves cause mortality of wild
animals due to electrocution by poachers. In the interest of wild animals several safeguards as well as
retrofitting measures may be required, which would be supported on a site-specific basis.
(l) Providing basic infrastructure/Project Tiger Headquarter expenditure for consultancy,
all India tiger estimation/continuous monitoring of tigers outside tiger reserves,
strengthening of NTCA at the Center. The following are envisaged:
• Creation of office space at Delhi for National Tiger Conservation Authority.
• Carrying out All India Tiger Estimation, monitoring.
• Support to research work.
• Contractual arrangement for special studies.
• International/National Workshops.
• Contractual arrangement for data entry, analysis.
(m) Independent monitoring and evaluation of tiger reserves:
The second round of independent monitoring has been completed using globally accepted
indicators. This would be further refined and continued.
(n) Establishment and development of new Tiger Reserves:
‘Project Tiger’ has a holistic ecosystem approach. Though the focus is on the flagship
species ‘tiger’, the project strives to maintain the stability of ecosystem by fostering other trophic
levels in the food chain. This is essential to ensure an ecologically viable population of tiger, which
is at the ‘apex’ of the ecological food chain. The community pressures on forests are ever on the
increase in developing countries, and India is no exception. As a sequel, the tiger habitat has
become fragile and weak at several places, warranting a focused conservation approach. Our
protected areas/Tiger Reserves are analogous to “islands” in an ocean of the other-use patterns.
Empirical evidences from ‘island biogeography’ indicate that “isolated” reserves lose their species
rapidly owing to ‘ecological insularization’. Further, apart from fragmentation, the situation is
aggravated by degraded forest cover owing to biotic pressure, dislocated prey – predator ratio,
absence of effective measures to ensure the desired level of protection and lack of eco
developmental initiatives for the fringe dwelling stake holders to reduce their dependency on forest
resources. Since ‘Project Tiger’ would go a long way in redressing the above situation, the
Steering Committee of Project Tiger in its meeting held on 23.1.2003 recommended inclusion of
new Tiger Reserve areas so as to increase the total area of Project Tiger from existing 37761 sq.
kms. to 50,000 sq. kms. during the Tenth Plan period.
(o) Provision of Project Allowance to staff of Project Tiger:
The tiger States would be supported (100%) for Project Allowance to staff of Tiger
Reserves.
(p) Staff welfare activities:
Staff welfare inputs like residential accommodation for the children of frontline staff in
nearby towns/villages, supply of kerosene, medicine, field kit, mosquito net, torch and the like
would be supported.

49
(q) Fostering Eco-Tourism in Tiger Reserves:
‘Ecotourism’ in the context of Tiger Reserves is ecologically sustainable nature-tourism,
which is emerging as an important component of tourism industry. It is distinct from ‘mass
tourism’, having sustainable, equitable, community based effort for improving the living standards
of local, host communities living on the fringes of Tiger Reserves. Ecotourism is proposed to
be fostered with financial support to the host community through ‘soft loans’ from
Ecodevelopment Committees, in accordance with site – specific ‘Ecotourism plan’ and carrying
capacity of Tiger Reserves in the buffer areas. The core/critical tiger habitats would not be used
for any form of tourism, and the ongoing tourism activities in such areas should be phased out
in the fringe/buffer areas, without affecting its corridor value. The development of tourism
related facilities within the buffer zones of Tiger Reserves would continue with inputs under
Project Tiger. The opportunities for stakeholders would include management of low cost
accommodation for tourists, providing guide services, providing sale outlets, managing
excursions, organizing ethnic dances and the like.
9. Five Year projection of budget requirement
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Activities/Year 2012- 2013- 2014- 2015- 2016- T
OTAL
No. 13 14 15 16 17
1 2 34 56 7 8
1 Anti-poaching including STPF 32 35 35 35 35 172
2 Strengthening of infrastructure 11 12 12 12 12 59
within Tiger Reserves (including
new Tiger Reserves)
3 Habitat improvement and water 4 4 4 4 4 20
development
4 Addressing man-animal conflict 3 3 4 4 4 18
(ensuring uniform, timely
compensation for human deaths
due to wild animals, livestock
depredation by carnivores, crop
depredation by wild ungulates)
5 Co-existence agenda in buffer/ 120 120 120 120 120 600
fringe areas (landscape approach/
sectoral integration/ecologically
sustainable development
programme/livelihood options/
eco-tourism)
6 Rehabilitation/resettlement of 3 3 3 3 3 15
denotified tribes/communities
involved in traditional hunting

50
1 2 34 56 7 8
7 Research, providing equipments 1 1 1 1 1 5
(camera traps, GPS, etc.),
computer softwares, All India
Estimation of Tiger/Co-predators/
Prey Animals, habitat monitoring
and evaluation
8 Staff development 1 1 1.5 1.5 1.5 6.5
9 Deciding inviolate spaces for 1000 1000 1000 1000 500 4500
wildlife and relocation of villagers
from core or critical tiger habitats
in Tiger Reserves within a time-
frame and settlement of rights
10 Mainstreaming livelihood and 10 10 10 10 10 50
wildlife concerns in forests
outside tiger reserves and
fostering corridor conservation
through restorative strategy
involving locals to arrest
fragmentation of habitats
11 Safeguards/Retrofitting measures 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 1.5 7.5
in the interest of wildlife
conservation
12 Providing basic infrastructure/ 2 2 3 3 3 13
Project Tiger Headquarter
expenditure for consultancy, all
India tiger estimation/continuous
monitoring of tigers outside tiger
reserves, strengthening of NTCA
at the Center and establishing a
monitoring lab in the Wildlife
Institute of India
13 Independent Monitoring and 0.8 0.8 1 1 1 4.6
evaluation of tiger reserves
14 Establishment and development 9 10 10 10 10 49
of eight new tiger reserves
15 Provision of project allowance to 10 10 10 10 10 50
all categories of Project Tiger
field staff
16 Staff welfare activities 1 1 1 1 1 5
17 Fostering ecotourism 1 1 1 1 1 5

51
1 2 34 56 7 8
18 Launching of M-STRIPES 20 20 20 20 20 100
19 Capacity-building, exchange of 10 10 10 10 10 50
practices & strengthening
knowledge institution
20 Assessment of values of Tiger 1 1 1 1 1 5
Reserves/Eco-system services
21 Information Technology in 30 30 30 20 20 130
surveillance
22 Smart practices/ecosystem 5 5 5 5 5 25
management to address tiger
concerns in semi urban areas
T
OTAL 1276.30 1281.30 1284 1274 774 5889.60

MINUTES

54

55
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the 17 th December, 2012 in Committee Room.
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri M. Rama Jois
3. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
LOK SABHA
4. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
5. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
6. Shri O.S. Manian
7. Shri Basori Singh Masram
8. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
9. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
10. Shri Pradeep Tamta
11. Shri Joseph Toppo
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and
informed them that the Committee would consider and adopt its draft 232
nd to 238 th Reports on
the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 222 nd to
228th reports on Demands for Grants (2012-13), pertaining to the Ministries/De partments of Atomic
Energy, Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, Space, Earth Sciences, Scientific and
Industrial Research and Biotechnology respectively.
2. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration, one by one, the Draft Action Taken
Reports and adopted the 232
nd to 238 th reports without any amendment.
55

56
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Committee, thereafter, decided to present/lay on the table of both the Houses of the
Parliament its 232 nd to 238 th Reports on 20 th December, 2012. The Committee authorised its
Chairman and in his absence Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra to present the Report in Rajya Sabha and
Shri Pradeep Tamta and in his absence Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde to lay the copy of the report
on the table of Lok Sabha.
The Committee, then, adjourned at 10.35 
A.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.