Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2015/Ashadha, 1937 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
263
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 21th July, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 22nd July, 2015)
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY THIRD REPORT
High Level Committee Report to Review Various Acts 
Administered by Ministry of Environment, 
Forest & Climate Change

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY THIRD REPORT
High Level Committee Report to Review Various Acts
Administered by Ministry of Environment,
Forest & Climate Change
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the  21st July, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the  22nd July, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2015/Ashadha, 1937 (Saka)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—18
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS - AT G LANCE .................................................................. 19
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 21—28
7. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 30—53

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1 st September, 2014-15)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri Bhupinder Singh
 9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Beig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
22. Shri Nana Patole
23. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
24. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
25. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
27. Shri Nagendra Singh
28. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati V asanthi M.
*31. Shri Chirag Paswan
*  Nominated w.e.f.  25 th March, 2015.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
& Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred and Sixty-third Report on High Level
Committee Report to review various Acts administered by Ministry of Environment, Forest &
Climate Change.
2. In the meeting of Committee held on 9
th January, 2015, the Committee heard the views
of Experts and Civil Society Organisations/NGOs on the report of the High Level Committee
to review various Acts administered by Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Experts and Civil Society Organisations/
NGOs for presenting their views before the Committee and for replying to the clarifications
sought by the Members.
4. In its meeting held on 3 rd July, 2015, the Committee considered the draft report and
adopted the same. 
ASHWANI KUMAR
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
July 3 , 2015 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Ashadha 12, 1937 Science and Technology, Environment and Forests
Rajya Sabha

(iv)
ACRONYMS
HLC : High Level Committee
LIFE : Legal Initiative for Forest and Environment
ELMA : Environmental Laws Management Act
NEMA : National Environmental Management Authority
SEMA : S tate Environmental Management Authority
TERI : The Energy Research Institute
CA : Compensatory Afforestation
NPV : Net Present V alue
CAMPA guidelines : Compensatory Afforestation and Management Planning Authority
guidelines

REPORT
The Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change administers a number of statues
enacted by the Parliament.  These statutes inter-alia  include:
(i) Environment (Protection) Act, 1986;
(ii) Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980;
(iii) W ildlife (Protection) Act, 1972;
(iv) The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974;
(v) The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981; and
(vi) Indian Forest Act, 1927. 1
2. Based on experience gained in the implementation of aforesaid Acts, the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change constituted a High Level Committee (HLC) under the
Chairmanship of Shri TSR Subramanian, former Cabinet Secretary, on 29 th August, 2014, to
review the above six major Acts that protect country’s environment and to suggest appropriate
amendments to bring them in line with their objectives.
3. The Terms of Reference of the High Level Committee were as follows:
(i) To assess the status of implementation of each of the aforesaid Acts vis-à-vis
the objectives;
(ii) To examine and take into account various court orders and judicial
pronouncements relating to these Acts;
(iii) To recommend specific amendments needed in each of these Acts so as to bring
them in line with current requirements to meet objectives; and
(iv) To draft proposed amendments in each of the aforesaid Acts to give ef fect to
the proposed recommendations.
The Committee was required to submit its report to the Ministry within two months from the
date of its constitution.  The tenure of the Committee was, however, extended by one month
i.e.  upto 28.11.2014.
4. The Committee submitted its report to Government on 18 th November, 2014. An
executive summary of the Report, as provided in the High level Committee Report is appended
at Annexure-I. In addition, the specific recommendations of the high level Committee are
appended at Annexure-II.
5.1 The recommendations of the Committee elicited widespread reaction and criticism as reported
in the media. It was also commented that the Report was hurriedly prepared without comprehensive
consultations with Experts/Institutions/NGOs etc. and therefore needed further scrutiny.
1Added vide  Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change office order dated 18 th September, 2014.

2
5.2 In this backdrop, the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
& Technology, Environment & Forests, decided to take up the Report of the High Level
Committee for examination and report.  The Committee invited memoranda from various
stakeholders on the recommendations of the High Level Committee.  A list of stakeholders from
whom memoranda were received is at Annexure III.  The Committee heard  the views of the
experts/Civil Society Organisations/NGOs on the issue at its meeting held on the 9 th January,
2015 (list of those who deposed is at Annexure IV) on the various recommendations of the
Subramanian Committee Report and its likely impact on Environment, Forests and Wildlife. The
representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change were also present in
the meeting.
Summary of objections from the Civil Society organisations/Experts/NGOs
6. While deposing before the Committee, almost all representatives of Civil Society/NGOs
and experts expressed serious reservations on the recommendations contained in the High Level
Committee Report. Some of the objections are delineated in the following paragraphs:-
7.1 A threshold objection was raised with regard to the composition of the Committee on
the ground that none of the persons who were Members of the Committee had any expertise
in the field of environment and wildlife.  Further questions as to whether the Minister of
Environment, Forest & Climate Change was empowered, under a notification issued by the
Ministry, to constitute a High Level Committee were also raised because as per convention, an
HLC can be constituted only by the Prime Minister and not by individual Ministries.
7.2 It was submitted by almost all those who deposed that the High Level Committee did
not hold enough and adequate public hearings to elicit public views.  Only select groups were
invited in the meetings organised in a few metropolitan cities. Among smaller cities, only in
Mangalore, environmentalists and other stakeholders were invited to a meeting.  A wide
spectrum of civil society representatives, environmentalist and other stakeholders were not
given an opportunity to express their views.  In addition, word limit for public comments was
restricted to 1,000 characters which meant 120 to 150 words only.  Elaborating the point Shri
Ritwick Dutta of Legal Initiative for Forest and Environment (LIFE), New Delhi stated that
there was genuinely no public meeting that took place. No villages and no critically-polluted
areas were visited by the HLC. Shri Ravi Chellam of Bombay Natural History Society stated
that since interactions with the public were based on invitation, they had an access to the
Committee.  There was hardly any public consultation and the geography of these meetings
was also pretty restricted. It was suggested strongly that the draft report should be made
available to the public for comment.  Unfortunately, that also did not happen.
7.3 The HLC report proposes a new law, the Environmental Laws Management Act (ELMA)
but how this will be harmonised with the present Environmental Protection Act as well as
Water Act and Air Act, is still to be worked out.
7.4  The recommendations of the HLC report will not empower regulatory agencies to
safeguard the environment. In many cases implementation of the  High Level Committee Report
will lead to multiplicity of institutions and authorities with little strength, power and capacity
in the institutions such as the proposed National Environmental Management Agency and State
Environmental Management Agency. Ms. Sunita Narain, Director, Centre for Science and

3
Environment, New Delhi in this regard stated that the Report does not go far enough, and,
therefore, it needs more work because there is a need for reform, and, there is a need for
strengthening the existing legal framework but the Report does not go far enough to do what
needs to be done to actually improve the system. It will add to multiplicity of institutions and
authorities. Biggest problem in environment is that there are too many institutions with too little
strength, power and capacity in the institutions.
On this point, Shri Chandra Bhushan of Centre for Science and Environment stated that HLC
recommendation to keep Environmental Protection Act as well as Water Act and Air Act will
lead to multiplicity of laws. Similarly, the Committee’s recommendation of National
Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) and State Environmental Management Authority
(SEMA), was not thought through simply because different States will have different
requirement of institutional structure for environmental governance in India.  In fact, HLC
recommendation, and the draft model law, is going to bureaucratize the environmental
governance in the country.  The HLC did not discuss many details but had time actually to
discuss that the head of NEMA and SEMA should be Additional Secretary of the Government
of India.  A lot more thought needs to go into deciding what kind of an institution this country
needs in the future. Already there are National Green Tribunal; District Courts; High Courts and
the Supreme Court. The HLC is recommending to add two more institutions, an appellate
authority as well as District Courts.
7.5   It was further suggested that the HLC report has not holistically addressed the issue
of rooting out arbitrariness from the process of enforcement, and that the recommendations
of the HLC report do not touch upon the challenge posed by the lack of institutional capacity
on the part of regulatory and enforcement institutions to monitor the enforcement of existing
laws.
7.6 Engaging the public, creating awareness and promoting people’s involvement are
essential in strengthening and securing the environment. The HLC report is silent on ways to
ensure greater public participation in this respect. In this connection, Ms. Sunita Narain,
Director, Centre for Science and  Environment, New  Delhi stated that the environmental
governance in India needs to be made much more coherent and streamlined.  From that point
of view, they are not saying that they are against the setting up of an effort to look into the
reforms of the system. People are the ones who are worst affected by environmental
mismanagement and their voice needs to be strengthened and not weakened in the process. The
HLC Report talks about stronger monitoring and enforcement system but, it just does not build
a strong enough case on how it will actually have a strengthened monitoring and enforcement
system.  The fear is that the Report could be taken selectively by the Government.  There are
certain parts of it which are relatively good but needs strengthening.  There are certain parts
of it which are not so good and their worry was that these might be taken selectively . Whereas
Ms. Sejal Worah, Programme Director, World Wildlife Fund for Nature India, New Delhi stated
in this regard the big area of concern was the issue of public participation and the project
approval process.  There are a number of things about genuine public participation, what was
allowed in a public participation, who is allowed to participate, etc. The fact that people
downstream, people away from the actual project site, might be even more affected than
people near the project site and to not allow them a say in the public hearing process is just
wrong. There is need to look at these clauses again because it just disempowers civil society

4
in the process and, it will probably lead to just more unrest and more delays and more
problems.
7.7 The HLC has not done a thorough legal audit and is guilty of inadequate review of
existing legal architecture and the rich case law.  The Committee, for instance, has not looked
into the recommendations of the National Environmental Policy, 2006. Dr. Prodipto Ghosh,
Distinguish Fellow, The Energy Research Institute (TERI) on inadequate review of the existing
law stated that the Report has overlooked what already exists. HLC has not been sufficiently
diligent in reviewing the material already on record. Plantation of approved species on private
lands could be considered for compensatory afforestation with facility for ‘tree land’ trading.
There is a provision on environmental offsetting in the National Environment Policy.  It says
that environmental offsetting must essentially seek to restore as nearly as may be feasible the
same environmental services to the impacted public.  What the trading would do is that it may
simply facilitate trading in plantations which have no particular bearing on the loss of
environmental services, like soil conservation, water conservation and so on, to the particular
communities which are impacted by the diversion of forest land in a particular project. The
conceptual basis already exists in the Kanchan Chopra Report, which is reflective of the
principles of environmental economics. The HLC has not looked into what the National
Environmental Policy has to say and the point is that in the early seventies, some 600 protected
areas aggregating the size of the State of the Tamil Nadu were notified without proper
examination of ecological aspects through scientific due diligence, and, this was really the root
cause of the problem of man-animal conflict that is seen around the protected areas. The
imperative really is, and, the National Environmental Policy does, in fact, say this, that is to
that the total area under protected areas increases and delineation must be done protected area
by protected area, taking into account the requirement of wildlife corridors on a proper
ecological assessment. This was something which the HLC could have looked into.
7.8 On the issue of Compensatory Afforestation, HLC has recommended that the
Compensatory afforestation guidelines be revised; Compensatory Afforestation (CA) on revenue
land to be enhanced to 2:1 as against 1:1 at present; CA in degraded forest land be now fixed
at 3:1; the Net Present V alue (NPV) should be at least 5 times the present rates fixed. An
appropriate mechanism to be created to ensure receipt of the CA funds, and their proper
utilisation, delinking the project proponent from the CA process, after he obtains other
approvals, and discharges his CA financial obligations.
7.9 Representatives of Civil Society and environmentalists were of the view that
Compensatory Afforestation approach which was currently largely limited to tree plantation,
therefore it should be replaced by ecological restoration. All restored areas should be designated
as Reserved Forests for their long-term protection and to safeguard from land-use change.
Ecological restoration should mandatorily involve ecologists and subject experts as well as
appropriate local communities. The Experts cautioned that in many instances states have
claimed that they do not have enough land available for compensatory afforestation/ecological
restoration. It was also opined that the NPV should be increased 5 times the current values.
The NPV rates that are fixed should reflect the value of the land and the ecological services
that it provides. The NPV rate should be revised every three years. Funds raised from NPV
should be used only for restoration and regeneration of degraded lands/habitats. On this point
Shri Ravi Chellam, Bombay Natural History Society while deposing before the Committee stated

5
that there is need to clearly make the distinction between trees and forests, and tree lands
should not be part of the forest statistics provided by the FSI.  Tree lands are a poor
substitute for natural forests.  Invariably one or two species, which are extremely poor
species, do not provide the eco system services or home to the biodiversity that natural forest
will hold.  And, tree land should not be a part of the compensatory afforestation system at all
because when land is diverted, it is not just forest which is diverted; all other kinds of lands
are also diverted.  Any attempt to compensatory afforestation should actually be ecological
restoration rather than just afforestation.  Afforestation is presently understood as merely
planting, and it needs to move away from planting to ecological restoration. On Net Present
Value, Shri Shankar Gopalakrishnan, Secretary, Campaign for Survival and Dignity, New Delhi
added that the HLC recommendation to increase the amount of money to be paid for
compensatory afforestation and the Net Present V alue was being presented as a pro-
environment recommendation.  This was nothing of the kind.   The payments that are required
for Net Present Value and compensatory afforestation, for a large corporation entering into a
large project, such as a mine or a dam. These compensations constitute less than one to two
per cent of the project cost.  So, this is no inconvenience for them.  They would, in fact,
be quite happy to pay even larger sums of money.  Where this, in fact, becomes a problem
is in the small minority of genuinely locally-beneficial projects, such as drinking water
pipelines, schools and so on where a Government agency has to pay this sum of money to
the Forest Department, and it is unable to do so because it is beyond their budgetary
allocations.  So, this recommendation will also, in no sense, protect the environment.  This is
also not a rational way of responding to a regulatory problem. Compensatory afforestation is
no solution to forest destruction.  The plantations that are made do not replace natural forests
either in biodiversity terms or in terms of services to the local people.  The HLC has stated
that compensatory afforestation should be done in ecologically-sensitive way.  These words
have been repeated in every policy of the Government of India for the last 15 years.
References exist in the Compensatory Afforestation and Management Planning Authority
guidelines (CAMPA guidelines) which currently govern the expenditure of NPV money.  Despite
these guidelines, this money is being used to buy guns, radios, jeeps and to set up Forest
Department houses.  So, the payment of this money is extremely difficult to spend in any
rational or useful way.  It is, in no sense, a substitute for genuine regulation. The critical
issues that have been completely ignored by the HLC, is that the entire process is built around
information provided by the project proponent.
7.10 The Forest Rights Act, 2006 and The National Green Tribunal Act were not part of the
mandate of the High Level Committee, but the Committee has given recommendations which
refer to the areas which are strictly in the domain of the Forest Rights Act, 2006 and the NGT
Act. HLC has overreached its mandate.  Shri Ritwick Dutta of Legal Initiative for Forest and
Environment (LIFE) while echoing the same view, stated that the National Green Tribunal and
the Forest Rights Act were not included in the Terms of Reference of HLC.  The HLC knew
that these are the two laws which have worked and which are the hope for environmental
movement and have given a new voice and a new right to the forest dwellers and the National
Green Tribunal is dealing with more than 5,000 cases.  On this HLC recommendation says that
the appeal against an environmental clearance will be filed before an appellate body to be
comprised of two serving Secretaries to the Government and a retired High Court Judge, who
will then hear the appeal, and, within 30 days the appeal will have to be filed.  Sixty to seventy

6
per cent of the appeals in the NGT are dismissed because people can’t file appeals within
ninety days.  And, it is now being changed to 30 days!
7.11 The HLC has invoked the principle ‘utmost good faith’ in corporations/individuals, but,
at the same time, there seems to be a lack of faith in local communities because there is  an
attempt at diluting public consultations. The dispensing of Gram Sabha consent for linear
projects was objected to by the Experts. Shri Ravi Chellam of Bombay Natural History Society
on the issue was of the view that it was a little curious that we have utmost good faith in
corporations, but, at the same time, there seems to be a lack of any faith in local communities
because there is an attempt at diluting public consultations, giving a say for gram sabha  in
decision making while we are expected to trust the corporation.  At least, in India and
definitely globally also, the track record completely indicates otherwise. Dr. Asad Rahmani,
Director, Bombay Natural History Society, Mumbai, while associaing himself with the issue,
expressed very serious concern with regard to the whole dispensing of Gram Sabha consent
for linear projects. He argued that it was extremely undesirable aspect especially because, on
the one hand, the HLC says that linear projects will be welcomed by the Gram Sabha, and,
on the other hand, it says, they don’t want their consent. So, there seems to be a bit of
contradiction there.  That needs to be looked into.
7.12 The other recommendation that has invited serious concern is clause 7.1 of the report
which is about according special treatment for certain projects. This includes linear projects
i.e. roads, mining, power, strategic projects and that the projects of national importance, etc.
Experts are of the view that all projects should be treated the same except for projects relating
to defence or of strategic importance and that the environmental impact of every project should
be clearly assessed through the normal process. Ms. Sejal Worah, Programme Director, World
Wildlife Fund for Nature India, New Delhi on this issue while deposing before the Committee
argued that there are a large number of projects which have been proposed for special
treatment.  This includes linear projects, mining projects, power projects, strategic projects,
projects of national importance, etc.  Nothing was left out when are look at this list of projects
that need not go through a process of normal clearances.  All projects should be treated the
same and that the impacts of every project should be assessed very clearly and then go
through the normal process, and no project should be considered as fast track or special
projects because once we have lost something, it is irreversible.  We are not going to get it
back whereas we can look for alternatives to minimise impacts if we look at projects in their
entirety rather than fast tracking them. Shri Shankar Gopalakrishnan, Secretary, Campaign for
Survival and Dignity, New Delhi was also of the same view on linear projects. He stated that
the critical problems with the clearance system that India has today have been completely
ignored by the HLC. In fact, the clearance process already depends almost entirely on
information submitted purely by the project proponent. The Environment Impact Assessment is
paid for by the company.  The proposal is produced by the company.  In the forest clearance
process, all the reports are prepared either by local officials or by the concerned project
proponent.  So, we already have a system that effectively relies entirely on the project
proponent and we have seen the results of that system and to take this to a further extreme
by incorporating a principle of utmost good faith in law, will make the current irrational system
even worse.  In fact, a vast majority of projects that have been cleared in forest areas since
the 1 st  of January, 2008 have been cleared illegally because the Forest Rights Act

7
implementation was not complete and consent had not been taken.  However, the only thing
that these provisions offer was that very few people in the area would come to know that a
project is happening.  Without these processes that requires some level of public notice, people
who are affected by projects do not even know that a decision is being taken that may destroy
their entire livelihood or their lives until the stage at which construction begins. Yet, the HLC
wishes to effectively remove this requirement in the case of linear projects. It wants to remove
the requirement of public hearings where it claims that there are no settlements, where the
pollution load has already been predetermined, where local conditions are not conducive. In all
these cases, they say that public hearings may be dispensed with.
7.13 On the issue of identifying and specifying ‘No Go’ areas, it has been argued by HLC
that protected areas and forest cover would be with over 70 per cent canopy. HLC’s
recommendations in this regard will leave large tracts of forest areas, natural forests, and areas
of high endemism of genetic resources open to encroachment causing severe and irreparable
ecological imbalances. Dr. K. Ullas Karanth, Director, Centre for Wildlife Studies, Bengaluru
while deposing before the Committee stated that the  premise in the HLC’s approach that
somehow the Conservation Laws have been the reason why our economy is in doldrums
seemed questionable.  We have a trillion dollar economy, that is, the tenth largest in the world
which is linked to global economic cycle. What is forgotten is the fact that the most strictly
protected parts of India’s landscape occupies less than 4 per cent of our land.  If a country
cannot have economic growth, social equity, gender equity and all other social progressive
things in 96 per cent of the land, I don’t think sacrificing this remaining 4 per cent is going
to speed up either economic growth or, in any way, really demonstrate progress that is
different from what has been there.  This perception is wrong that there is a huge amount of
area in the country that is locked away and not available for progress.  All the protected areas
add up to less than 4 per cent and if you actually look at it this is legally protected area.  If
one examines the presence of manpower, presence of resources, reasonable management,
terrestrially it is less than 2 per cent.  The country occupies a unique position on the earth
not because of anything that we did but because of millions of years of evolution we are
strategically placed on the globe.  Because of that, although India occupy 2 per cent of the
surface, we have 15 per cent of the world’s birds, 7 per cent of the world’s mammals and
one of the largest diversity of carnivorous mammals. 25 per cent of the world’s carnivores
exist in India.  So, this incredible diversity was created due to ecology and due to geology
primarily.  To say that by just giving this away and doing something in the next ten or fifteen
years to sacrifice it we are going to speed up the economic growth is a premise that does not
seem credible. Explaining the point Ms. Belinda Wright, Executive Director, Wildlife Protection
Society of India, New Delhi added that the idea of forest cover of over 70 per cent canopy
is simply not workable. There are some really, really critical, important and amazing areas
which don’t have 70 per cent canopy and, of course, that includes grasslands, wetlands,
deserts, which are extremely vital eco systems, which actually need to be protected. Shri Ravi
Chellam, Bombay Natural History Society also argued that India has an amazing diversity,
ranging from deserts to high icy mountains to deep oceans.  All of which hold biodiversity,
all of which provide eco system services and all of which require some element of protection.
So, ‘no go’ area should cover the habitat and eco system diversity of this country. Several
endangered populations of endangered species, several sights of migratory birds, migratory
mammals and migratory reptiles do not find representation in protected areas and high canopy

forests. There are several sights of geo-morphological and evolutionary significance which also
need protection under ‘no go’ areas.  ‘Corridors’ is another thing, and many corridors don’t
have protection as protected areas and where corridors get disrupted is where our highest
levels of conflicts take place.  So, corridors also should find some protection under ‘no go’
areas.
8. Comments of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change were invited to
the objections raised by various stakeholders.  A statement indicating objections made and
comments of the Ministry thereon are at Annexure V .
Conclusion
9. Considering the various objections as aforesaid and comments of the Ministry,
the Committee finds that objections raised by members of civil society/NGOs/experts are
prima facie valid and require serious reflection.  The Committee is of the view that the
period of three months allotted to the High Level Committee for reviewing the six
environmental Acts was too short and that there was no cogent reason for hurrying
through with the Report without comprehensive, meaningful and wider consultations
with all stakeholders.
10. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest &
Climate Change, instead of proceeding with the implementation of the recommendations
contained in High Level Committee Report, should give due consideration to the views/opinion
and objections raised by stakeholders including environmental experts. Some of the essential
recommendations of the HLC have been doubted and would result in an unacceptable dilution
of the existing legal and policy architecture established to protect our environment. Further, an
impression should not be created that a Committee whose constitution and jurisdiction are itself
in doubt, has been used to tinker with the established law and policy. Should the government
wish to consider specific areas of environmental policy afresh, it may consider appointing
another Committee by following established procedures and comprising of acclaimed experts in
the field who should be given enough time to enter into comprehensive consultations with all
stakeholders so that the recommendations are credit worthy and well considered which is not
the case with the recommendations of High Level Committee under review.
8

9
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS—AT A GLANCE
1. Considering the various objections as aforesaid and comments of the Ministry,
the Committee finds that objections raised by members of civil society/NGOs/experts are
prima facie valid and require serious reflection. The Committee is of the view that the
period of three months allotted to the High Level Committee for reviewing the six
environmental Acts was too short and that there was no cogent reason for hurrying
through with the Report without comprehensive, meaningful and wider consultations
with all stakeholders. (Para 9)
2. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest
& Climate Change, instead of proceeding with the implementation of the
recommendations contained in High Level Committee Report, should give due
consideration to the views/opinion and objections raised by stakeholders including
environmental experts. Some of the essential recommendations of the HLC have been
doubted and would result in an unacceptable dilution of the existing legal and policy
architecture established to protect our envir onment. Further, an impression should not
be created that a Committee whose constitution and jurisdiction are itself in doubt, has
been used to tinker with the established law and policy. Should the government wish to
consider specific areas of environmental policy afresh, it may consider appointing
another Committee by following established procedures and comprising of acclaimed
experts in the field who should be given enough time to enter into comprehensive
consultations with all stakeholders so that the recommendations are credit worthy and
well considered which is not the case with the recommendations of High Level
Committee under r eview. (Para 10)

MINUTES

VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2.00 P.M. on Friday, the 9 th January, 2015 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
3. Shri C.P. Narayanan
4. Shri Paul Manoj Pandiah
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
6. Shri Bhupinder Singh
7. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
8. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
9. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
10. Kum. Sushmita Dev
11. Shri Ninong Ering
12. Shri Laxman Giluwa
13. Dr. K. Gopal
14. Shri Daddan Mishra
15. Shri Nana Patole
16. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
17. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
18. Shri Nagendra Singh
19. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
20. Shri Vikram Usendi
21. Shrimati V asanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
13

14
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change
1. Dr. S.S. Negi, Additional Director General (Forest Conservation)
2. Shri Bishwanath Sinha, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Manoj Kumar Singh, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Harish Chowdhary, Director
5. Shri Satish C. Garkoti, Director.
Experts/Representatives of NGOs
1. Dr. Prodipto Ghosh, Distinguished Fellow, The Energy Research Institute (TERI),
New Delhi.
2. Ms. Belinda Wright, Executive Director, Wildlife Protection Society of India,
New Delhi.
3. Dr. K. Ullas Karanth, Director, Centre for Wildlife Studies, Bengaluru.
4. Dr. Asad Rahmani, Director, Bombay Natural History Society, Mumbai.
5. Ms. Sejal Worah, Programme Director, World Wildlife Fund for Nature India,
New Delhi.
6. Shri Ullas Menon, Secretary General, The United Planters’ Association of Southern
India (UPASI), Coonoor, Tamil Nadu.
7. Shri Shankar Gopalakrishnan, Secretary, Campaign for Survival and Dignity,
New Delhi.
8. Shri Ritwick Dutta, Legal Initiative for Forest and Environment (LIFE), New Delhi.
9. Shii Ravi Chellam, Vice-President, Foundation for Ecological Security, Mumbai.
10. Ms. Sunita Narain, Director, Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi; and
11. Shri Chandra Bhushan, Centre for Science and Environment, New Delhi.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, the representatives of Ministry of
Environment, Forests and Climate Change and the experts/representatives of NGOs on
environmental issues, to the meeting of the Committee. Thereafter, while initiating the subject
of meeting, he stated that there had been reports stating that T.S.R. Subramanian Committee
Report has been prepared hurriedly and without comprehensive/wider consultations with
various stakeholders and, therefore, needed further scrutiny.
3. The Chairman requested the experts/representatives of NGOs, to apprise the Committee
of their suggestions/reservations on the various recommendations of the Subramanian
Committee Report and its likely impact on environment, forests and wildlife and whether the
recommendations of the said Committee would promote inclusive and sustainable development
by redressing environmental concerns.
4. First of all, Executive Director, Wildlife Protection Society of India expressed her
reservations about definition of environmental laws in the Wildlife Protection Act and inclusion

15
of offences under both the provisos to section 51 of the Act in Schedule 1. She stated that
the proposed Environment Law (Management) Act sought to deal with environment
management and environmental clearances, etc. but it did not deal with illegal possession,
hunting and trade of protected species, which are punishable offences under the ‘Wildlife
(Protection) Act. She also expressed her apprehensions on ‘no go’ and protected areas simply
because the idea was not workable. She also stated that the animal worship referred to in Para
6.14 of the report caused actual harm and stress to animals since it involved unnatural handling
by humans.
5. Thereafter, Director, Centre for Wildlife Studies in his presentation tried to alley the
general perception that conservationists are against progress. He stated that they had made a
plea to the Subramanian Committee that decision making, regulation and implementation policy
should be science based but that was not reflected in the report. He also pointed out that some
observations in the Report were contradictory.
6. Deposing before the Committee, Distinguished Fellow, The Energy Research Institute
(TERI) stated that the aim of the report was to harmonise environmental concerns with social
equity concerns but expressed surprise that there was no reference of the National
Environment Policy, 2006 in the body of the Report. The said policy was drafted after
consultation of over these years with all relevant stakeholders. According to him, Subramanian
Committee had overlooked the documents which already existed and they had not been
sufficiently diligent in reviewing the material already on record. He also referred to identifying
and specifying ‘no go’ areas, mainly comprising protected and forest areas, which had been
left out in the report. He also referred to the recommendation regarding defining the term
‘forest’ at an early date and was of the view that there was confusion between the expression
‘forests’ and ‘forest land’. He also made his observation on the recommendation regarding
offering economic incentives for increased community participation in farm and social forestry,
removal of condition of Gram Sabha approval for linear projects, reviving the compensatory
afforestation guidelines and creation of National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA).
He was also of the view that the implementation of certain recommendations of the Committee
could run into rough weather being administratively and legally non-feasible.
7. Vice-President, Foundation for Ecological Security, Mumbai, was of the opinion that the
time allotted to the Committee was too less, given the enormity of the task. He made his
observations on ‘no go’ areas, wastelands and Wildlife Management Plan. He also spoke about
the impact of religious, cultural and local festivals on wildlife and species. He was also of the
view that the Committee had given recommendations on Forest Rights Act and NGT Act,
which were not part of its mandate.
8. Programme Director, World Wildlife Fund for Nature, stated that there were anomalies
in notification of ‘No Go’ areas, definition of ‘Forest’, removal of process of field verification
and removal of gram Sabha approval to speed up the clearance process. She was of the view
t~at issues like compensatory afforestation, respect to cultural traditions, mechanism for public
hearing, special treatment for certain projects, concept of ‘utmost good faith’ were not
properly addressed in the Report. She further stated that constitution of National Environment
Management Agency (NEMA) and State Environment Management Agency (SEMA) was
improper and Environment Law (Management) Act was also not considered properly.

9. Secretary General, The United Planters’ Association of Southern India (UPASI), stated
that the term’ forest’ as defined by Supreme Court, which included any area recorded as a
forest in the Government record, was creating difficulties for new plantations in southern
States. He submitted that the land cultivated with tea, coffee, rubber, cardamom, spices, etc.
should be taken out of the purview of forest land.
10. Secretary, Campaign for Survival and Dignity, stated that the Government’s own data
indicated that for too many projects were being cleared too fast and it was impossible for so
many projects to be constructed within a short period. Public Sector banks were reeling under
the burden of Non-Performing Assets. He was of the view that accelerating the clearance
process would harm the environment and the economy.
11. Representative of the Legal Initiative for Forest & Environment, New Delhi questioned
the very constitution of the High Level Committee on legal grounds. He was of the view that
there were abnormalities in Forest Governance including forest clearance and procedure
adopted for forest diversion. He further added that Report provided no provision for field visit
after constitution of NEMA. Issues related to public hearing, clarification of the special
procedures and Gram Sabha approval were also not addressed properly. According to him
recommendation regarding setting up of Appellate Board for controlling National Green Tribunal
was unconstitutional.
12. Director, Centre for Science & Environment, was of the view that the Report fell short
of what was actually required to improve the system. The representative from Centre for
Science & Environment was of the view that forest clearance process recommended by the
Committee was going to dilute the forest clearance process. There was no recommendation of
the Committee to have proper assessment of the forest for ecology and livelihood before it was
diverted for industrialization and other developmental processes. He stated that the current
process of environmental clearance had too much multiplicity and stressed upon the need to
streamline the process of environmental clearance. He further stated that the Committee’s
recommendation on monitoring and enforcement was very weak. Further the Committee’s
recommendation of keeping Environment Law (Management) Act (ELMA), as well as Water Act
and Air Act will lead to multiplicity of laws.
13. Director, Bombay Natural History Society, was of the view that more attention was
needed to be given to the neglected eco-systems. As regards afforestation, he was of the view
to go in for natural restoration.
14. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
15. The Committee then adjourned at 4.08 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Saturday,
the 10 th January, 2015.
16

XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 3 rd July, 2015 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYASABHA
2. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
3. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
5. Shri Bhupinder Singh
LOKSABHA
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapshinh Chauhan
7. Shri Laxman Giluwa
8. Dr. K. Gopal
9. Shri Daddan Mishra
10. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
11. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
12. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
13. Shri Nagendra Singh
14. Shri Vikram Usendi
15. Shrimati V asanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed
them that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft *** 263rd report on
*** High Level Committee Report to review various Acts administered by Ministry of
Environment, Forest & Climate Change’ respectively.
17

3. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the *** 263rd report for consideration.
After deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft 263rd report with amendment in para 10.
The Committee also decided to lay the evidence tendered in relation to its 263rd report, by the
experts/NGOs etc. on the High Level Committee Report to review various Acts administered
by Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change, on the Table of two Houses of
Parliament.
4 . *                                *                                *
5. The Committee authorized the Chairman to seek necessary permission from the Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha for the said study visit and also for interaction with the State
Government and other concerned authorities.
6. The meeting of the Committee, then, adjourned at 4.05 p.m.
18

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE -I
Executive Summary of Report of the High Level Committee on
Forest and Environment Related Laws
(i) The management of the forest/environmental issues is a continuum with interlocking
relationship between legislation, rules, regulations and executive instructions.  Overall,
forest and environment policy is inextricably intertwined with implementation issues in
all its dimensions. The Committee covered the entire gamut of issues, with
consultations to the best extent possible, on matters including laws, procedures,
regulations, implementation issues and monitoring. While India has a strong
environmental policy and legislative framework, much of the problem relates to weak
implementation of the various acts and the rules thereunder.  Conservation advocates,
project proponents and judiciary – none is satisfied with current environmental
governance and the policy tools currently deployed in the management of the sector.
The basic principles applied by the Committee, inter alia, included primacy to
conservation of the environment; reconstruction of degraded environment; transparency
in the management of environment; technology-aided speedy and accountable decision
making for project approval; effective monitoring; capacity building in environmental
management; and elimination of ambiguity and reduction in litigation. The recommended
framework relies primarily upon the principle of integration of development with
environmental concerns, transparent institutional governance, accountability; effective
deterrent and punitive action, and governance with the aid of technology to the extent
feasible. Accordingly, the Committee has not just suggested new legislation, it has also
provided a roadmap for amendment of existing rules, regulations, procedures and
executive directions; it has also called for review of current policy, for the
consideration of the MoEF&CC.
(ii) The primary focus of environmental and forest governance in the country needs to be
re-aligned through a series of structural and process-oriented changes. While the pace
of diversion of forest land has decreased in recent years, the target of 33% of land
area as forest cover is a long way off; the more disturbing aspect is that the quality
of forest cover has seen a secular decline. New forestation policies to attract
investment of growing forests in private land, and providing a statutory safeguard – a
classification of ‘treelands’ as distinct from ‘forest’ has been recommended. Early
definition of the term ‘forest’, to remove ambiguity and minimise litigation has also
been suggested.
A revision in the Compensatory Afforestation (CA) Policy has been outlined with the
following key features – double CA area in revenue land, three times CA area in
degraded forest land, encouragement to industry associations and other holders of
private land to participate in CA; clarity in procedures, as well as delinking the project
proponent from CA obligations after he fulfils the necessary financial commitments, are
21

22
some features in the proposed approach; the Committee also recommends that the net
present value (NPV) of forest land is currently underestimated, and should be increased
at least five times.
(iii) The Committee also has recommended identification of ‘no go’ areas, which are in
forest areas or inviolate zones – primarily with the criteria of over 70% canopy cover
and ‘Protected Areas’ which should not be disturbed except in exceptional
circumstances, and that too only with the prior approval of the Union Cabinet.
(iv) The Committee has recommended revisions in ‘Wild Life Protection Act and Rules’; and
sought obligatory preparation of wild life plans. Enhanced punishment for offences
under the WLP Act, with a stronger process for registration and prosecution has also
been suggested. Eco sensitive zones around protected areas need to be demarcated
unambiguously at an early date.
(v) A new project clearance mechanism, based on the ‘single window’ concept, with a
unified, integrated, transparent and streamlined process, which would also significantly
reduce the processing time, has been elaborated. Use of GIS reference maps, combined
with use of multilayer data captured through satellite imagery for relief and topography,
hydrology including underground water resources, soil characteristics and settlement
patterns etc. would be used for preliminary screening and speedy process of project
clearance applications using available technology.  Newly proposed full time expert
body National Environmental Management Authority (NEMA) at the Centre, and State
Environmental Management Authority (SEMA) would be the premier institutions to
evaluate project clearance, using technology and expertise, in a time bound manner,
providing for single window clearance (the existing Central Pollution Control Board and
corresponding State agencies would be subsumed respectively in NEMA and SEMA
when they come into existence). A ‘fast track’ procedure for ‘linear’ projects which
provide benefit to community at large, as well as power/ mining projects, as also
projects of national importance has been recommended.  A new concept of ‘utmost
good faith’ has been inducted, through a new legislation, to ensure that the applicant
for clearance is responsible legally for his statements, but would be severely penalized,
as prescribed, for any deliberate falsehood, misrepresentation or suppression of facts.
While this would throw the responsibility primarily on the project proponent, this would
also significantly reduce ‘Inspector Raj’.
(vi) Environmental Management policies and programmes, and environmental mapping of the
country, will facilitate pre-identification  of locations for industries. The Committee
recommends that the ‘environmental reconstruction cost’ of a project should be
estimated and dovetailed with the project; the cost being recovered to be realised as a
cess or duty during the life of the project. Noting that current procedures for
monitoring conditions imposed are ineffective, a regime based on technology, along
with deterrent penal action has been outlined by the Committee. The framework of
penal provision includes financial burden as well as imprisonment in appropriate cases.
(vii) Some of the new institutional arrangements proposed include creation of an
Environment Reconstruction Fund (ERF); establishment of a high quality National
Environment Research Institute; creation of a new All India Service – Indian

23
Environment Service; regular review of quality of forest cover and forest management;
creation of a national ‘data base’ etc. Attention has also been drawn to the need to deal
effectively with urban waste, as also air-pollution in cities, primarily caused by motor
vehicles.
(viii) A new model ‘umbrella’ law, ELMA, {Environment Law (Management) Act} to give a
statutory cover to the above has been recommended, incorporating inter-alia the
concept of utmost good faith, as also the proposed national institutions and agencies.
ELMA will, inter alia, strengthen the process of dealing with and penalising/prosecuting
non-performance of conditions of project clearance. As decisions are taken on the
above, including the proposed new legislation by government, at the next stage the Air
Act and the Water Act could be clubbed and merged with the EP Act.
ELMA also provides for an appellate mechanism against the decision of SEMA/ NEMA/
MoEF&CC as the case may be, in respect of project clearance, prescribing a three-
month time limit for disposal of appeals.
(ix) The specific recommendations are listed, ad seriatim, in Chapter 10.

ANNEXURE -II
Summary of specific recommendations of T.S.R. Subramanian Committee Report
1. Identify and pre-specify ‘no go’ forest areas, mainly comprising PAs and forest cover
over 70% canopy. (Para 5.4)
2. It is suggested that the Ministry may define the term ‘forest’ at an early date.
(Para 5.5)
3. To offer economic incentives for increased community participation in farm and social
forestry by way of promoting and proving statutory safeguards to ‘treelands’ as
distinct from ‘forest’. (Para 5.6)
4. Plantation of approved species on private lands could be considered for compensatory
afforestation with facility for ‘treeland’ trading. (Para 5.7)
5. Revise procedure for clearance under FC Act as above, which is intended to reduce the
time taken, without compromising the quality of examination. For linear projects, it is
recommended that FR Act needs amendment to consider removal of the condition of
Gram Sabha approval. (Para 5.10)
6. The Compensatory afforestation guidelines be revised; CA on revenue land to be
enhanced to 2:1 as against 1:1 at present; CA in degraded forest land be now fixed at
3:1; the NPV should be at least 5 times the present rates fixed. An appropriate
mechanism to be created to ensure receipt of the CA funds, and their proper utilisation,
delinking the project proponent from the CA process, after he obtains other approvals,
and discharges his CA financial obligations. (Para 5.11)
7. The quantum of NPV for compensatory afforestation needs to be sharply increased.  A
reliable mechanism for ensuring that CA is actually implemented, utilising either private
or forest land, needs to be put in place. (Para 5.12)
8. Schedule 1 to be amended to include species likely to be threatened by illegal trade.  An
expert group should review the existing Schedules and address discrepancies relating to
several species and sub species. (Para 6.2)
9. Regarding the issue of tackling damage to agriculture and farmland by amendments
in Schedule 3, the MoEF&CC may issue circulars to all States apprising them of the
legal position, suggesting that they may take appropriate action based on legal
provisions. (Para 6.3)
10. Preparation of Wildlife Management plans should be made mandatory and a provision
to this effect inserted in the Wildlife Protection Act, 1972. (Para 6.4)
24

11. Section 26A sub section (3) and section 35(5) should be amended so that permission
from the Central Government would only be necessary when the State Government
proposes to reduce the boundaries of an existing PA. (Para 6.5)
12. Manufacture and possession of leg and mouth traps should be completely
prohibited, except where they are required for visual display for educational
purposes. (Para 6.6)
13. Officers entrusted with the task of settlement should be given minimum tenure of
2 years. Regular review of such work should be done to ensure completion within
time. (Para 6.7)
14. ‘Expert’ status may be given to the forensic facility of WII, after suitably
strengthening it. (Para 6.8)
15. Section 50 and 55 of the WLP Act may suitably provide for adequate and purposeful
delegation appropriate for faster and better prosecution in respect of a wildlife
crime. (Para 6.9)
16. There is need to authorise officers of the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau under the
MOEF&CC to file complaints in Courts. (Para 6.10)
17. Polythene bags and plastic bottles may be added to the banned list in Section 32.
(Para 6.11)
18. Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change to take immediate steps for
demarcation of eco-sensitive zones around all the protected areas; States may be asked
to send proposals in a time-bound manner. (Para 6.12)
19. Powers to approve applications for bona fide observational research, through
photography, including videography may be delegated to the level of Park Director,
after verifying the credentials. (Para 6.13)
20. The Schedules should provide appropriate provision for taking into account the needs
of local festivals, subject to no harm or injury to animals. (Para 6.14)
21. Proposal to revamp this project clearance/ approval process. (Para 7.7)
22. Create National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) at Central Level and State
Environment Management Authority (SEMA) at the State level as full time processing/
clearance/ monitoring agencies. (Para 7.8)
23. Proposed composition, functions and responsibilities of NEMA. (Para 7.9)
24. Proposed composition, functions and responsibilities of SEMA. (Para 7.10)
25. The proposed revised project approval process envisages ‘single-window’ unified,
streamlined, purposeful, time-bound procedures. (Para 7.14)
25

26
26. Special treatment for linear projects, power/ mining and strategic border projects.
(Para 7.15)
27. Review of A/B category units, to delegate a large number brought under the purview
of SEMA. (Para 7.16)
28. The present monitoring processes, exclusively based on physical inspection should be
strengthened by induction of technology, measuring instruments incorporating latest
improvements; the standard setting and verification systems need to be tightened, to
ensure all violators are identified.  (Para 7.18)
29. (i) To create a new ‘umbrella’ law – Environmental laws (Management) Act (ELMA)
– to enable creation of the institutions NEMA and SEMA. (Para 8.2)
    (ii) To induct the concept of ‘utmost goodfaith’, holding the project proponent responsible
for his statements at the cost of possible adverse consequences; thus also contributing
to reduction in ‘inspector raj’. (Para 8.2)
30. The new law prescribes new offences, as also for establishing special courts presided
over by session judge. ‘Serious offences’ as defined to attract heavy penalties,
including prosecution/ arrest. (Para 8.4)
31. Abatement of central and State Pollution Control Boards on creating of NEMA/SEMA.
(Para 8.5)
32. Suggestion for incorporation of noise pollution as an offence in EP Act. (Para 8.6)
33. Procedure for appeals – creation of an appellate tribunal. (Para 8.7)
34. Judicial Review role for NGT. (Para 8.8)
35. i) Establish a National Environment Research Institute, through an Act of
Parliament. (Para 9.1) – SEMA
ii) Identify specific technical institutions/ universities in India to act as technical
advisors to the proposed NEMA/ SEMA and other environmental enforcement
agencies, to provide credible technical back-stopping for management of the
environment. (Para 9.1)
36. An Indian Environment Service may be created, as an All India Service, based on
qualifications and other details prescribed by MoEF&CC/ DoPT/ UPSC. (Para 9.2)
37. The Indian Forest Service may encourage specialisation in various aspects of forestry
and wildlife management, among the members of the service, as well as familiarity with
all aspects of management of environment. (Para 9.3)
38. The MoEF&CC may like to undertake a comprehensive review of departmental forest
management policies, practices and procedures, to initiate wide-ranging improvements
and reforms. This preferably should not be an internal exercise, and should include

27
independent knowledgeable experts from India and abroad, as well as qualified
researchers. (Para 9.4)
39. MoEF&CC may consolidate all existing EIA Notifications/circulars/instructions into one
comprehensive set of instructions. Amendments or additions may normally be done only
once a year. (Para 9.5)
40. The MoEF&CC may arrange to revamp the Environment Protection Act, by inducting
relevant provisions of the Water Act, 1977 and the Air Act, 1981 ; the latter two could
be repealed, when the revamped EP Act, 1986 comes into force. This exercise may be
done keeping in view the provisions of the proposed Environment Management Act.
(Para 9.6)
41. Create an Environment Reconstruction Fund for facilitating research, standard setting,
education and related matters. (9.7)
42. a) While overall responsibility vests with the Ministry, it is expected that the State
Governments and the local bodies will play an effective role in management of the
environment.
b) The Governments should provide dedicated budgetary support for environmental
programmes as a part of each development project in all the sectors. (Para 9.8)
43. There is urgent need for creation of a comprehensive database, using all instruments
available, on an on-going basis, in respect of all parameters relating to environment.
(Para 9.9)
44. Environmental mapping of the country, using technology, should be undertaken as an
on-going process. (9.10)
45. Identification & recovery of environmental reconstruction cost relating to each
potentially polluting unit should be in-built in the appraisal process. (9.11)
46. The system of empanelment of ‘consultants’ needs to be reworked. (9.12)
47. A ‘green awareness’ programme need to be sponsored, including interweaving issues
relating to environment in the primary and secondary school curriculum. (9.13)
48. MoEF should prepare regional plan for carrying out remediation of polluted sites in
consultation with the State Governments and enabling provisions should be incorporated
in EP Act for financing the remediation task.(Para 9.14)
49. Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) management has not been given requisite attention
hitherto. New systems and procedures for handling MSW need to be in place early,
for effective management of MSW and with accountability. Cities should set a
target of reaching 20% of current levels in 3 years time to work out a mitigation
plan. (Para 9.15)

50. Noting that vehicle emissions are the major cause of deterioration of air quality in urban
areas, a concerted multi-pronged effort needs to be launched to not only to contain it,
but to improve the situation in relatively short time.(Para 9.16)
51. Use of science and technology, wherever possible and appropriate should be
encouraged; approval and enforcement agency should use latest technology to the
maximum possible. (Para 9.17)
52. The MoEF&CC may finalise the CRZ demarcation, and bring it into public domain to
pre-empt ambiguity. (Para 9.18)
53. In view of the key role played by the power sector, as also mining of various minerals
in national development, NEMA may have a suitable cell, with specialisation, to speedily
deal with environmental approvals in these sectors, with due regard to environmental
considerations. (Para 9.19)
54. All specified type of units would employ fully qualified technical personnel to manage
their pollution control/ management equipment, and to keep the emission levels within
prescribed limits. (Para 9.20)
55. MoEF&CC may consider reworking standard-setting and revising a system of financial
penalties and rewards to proceed to a market-related incentive system, which
encourages ‘green projects’. (Para 9.21)
28

ANNEXURE -III
List of representations/Letters received on the T.S.R. Subramanian Committee Report
to the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests
Sl. Name NGOs
No.
12 3
1. Shri Mahesh Pandya Paryavaran Mitra, Ahmedabad.
2. Shri Cleetus J. K.R.C.
3. Shri Sameer S. Shirodkar/ Chamber of Small Industry Associations,
Shri Dilip Salvekar Thane, Maharashtra.
4. Dr. Ajith Kumar National Centre for Biological Sciences,
Bangalore.
5. Shri Sai Manon Paikattil Individual, Doha, Qatar.
6. Shri Sabyasachi Patra IndiaWilds, New Delhi.
7. Dr. Jean-Philippe Puyravaud Individual
8. Shri Abdul Gafoor P. Mayookham Individual, Malappuram, Kerala.
9. Shri Vijayan V adyil Salim Ali Foundation, Thrissur, Kerala
10. Shri R. P. Singh Society for Environment & Development
Alliance, New Delhi
11. Shri Shripad Dharmadhikary Manthan Adhyayan Kendra,Pune
12. Dr. Shaju Thomas Tropical Institute of Ecological Sciences,
Kottayam
13. Shri Fr. Abraham Kavilpurayidathil Thamarassery
14. Shri Fr. Sebastian Kochupurackal Highrange  Samrakshana Samithy, Idukki,
Kerala.
29

30
15. Shri Ullas Menon,Secretary General, UPASI The United Planters Association of
Southern India, (UPASI).
16. Shri Debi Goenka, Executive Trustee Conservation Action Trust, Narayan Nagar
Ghatkopar (West), Mumbai.
17. Shri Kochera Mohanan Nair Spices Growers Association, Idukki,
Kerala.
18. Ms. Falguni Joshi Individual
19. Shri Rohit Kumar, D-236,Dashrath Puri, New Delhi
20. Shri Chandra Bhushan Individual
21. United Council of Rajashthan Industries, Rajasthan
UCORI
22. Shri Joice George 109,Kerala  House, New Delhi.
23. Shri Salu Abraham Mecheril, Chairman Christian cultural Forum Wayanad.
24. Shri P.C. Joseph Thodupuzha, Kerala
25. Shri V .C. Sebastian, Secretary General Indian Christian Community National
Council, 21, Balwant Rai Mehta Road,
New Delhi.
26. Shri Satish Panchal, Managing Director V adodara Enviro Channel Limited,
Dhanora, Near GIPCL, Vadodara, Gujarat.
27. Shri Jose Rodrigues  (Vice President) Benaulim Civic & Social Forum,
Benaulim,Salcete-Goa 403716
28. Shri Nilesh Gaonkar (President) Caurem Adivasi Bachao Samiti C/o Nilesh
Gaonkar, Gaonkarwada, Caurem, Quepem
Taluka, Goa.
29. Shri John Da Silva    (President) Curtorkarancho Ekvott
30. Dr. K. V . Chacko W estern Ghats and Peoples Protection
Forum Kozhikode
31. Shri Ritwick Dutta Legal Initiative for Forest and
Environment (LIFE)
32. Shri P. C. Saiju Pottakkarn House, kuttiakd
12 3

31
33. Shri Jinnet Mathew Naranath (President) Pariyaram farmers protection forum
Mothirakanni
34. Shri K. S. Syamsundar Confederation of Indian Industry Institute
of Logistics
35. Ms. Parineeta Dandekar Parineeta Deshpande-Dandekar South Asia
Shri Himanshu Thakkar Network on Dams, Rivers and People
(SANDRP)
36. Dr. N. K. S. Pillai Kerala Sastra Sahithya Parishath, Bhavan,
Thrissur, Kerala
37. Shri S.P. Ravi Secretary Chalakudy Puzha Samrakshana Samithi
Pariyaram. PO, Thrissur District Kerala
38. Dr. Latha Anantha ( Ashoka Fellow) River Research Centre Ollur. Kerala 
Director
39. Nilesh Gaonkar, (President) Citizen consumer and civic Action Group
(CAG) 9/5, II Street, Padmanabha Nagar
Adyar, Chennai 600 020.
40. Shri Lalit Kumar Singhania Paryavaran Urja Times, Raipur Chattisgarh.
41. Shri Ravi Chellam Foundation for Ecological Security &
Vice-President, (M) 91-9900901112
42. Shri C. Vinayaraghavan, Chairman, P.B. No. 63, 3
rd Floor, 3D, Capitol Centre,
Association of Planters of Kerala Opp. Govt. Sec retariat, M.G. Road,
Thiruvananthapuram, Kerala
43. Shri  Renee Borges,Chairman,Centre for Indian Institute of Science,
Ecological Sciences Bangalore - 560012
12 3

ANNEXURE -IV
List of Experts who appeared the before the Committee on High Level Committee
Report on Forest and Environment Related laws
1. Ms. Sunita Narain, Director, Centre for Science and  Environment, New  Delhi
2. Shri Chandra Bhushan, Centre for Science and Environment.
3. Ms. Belinda Wright, Executive Director, Wildlife Protection Society of India, New Delhi.
4. Dr. K. Ullas Karanth, Director, Centre for Wildlife Studies, Bengaluru.
5. Dr. Asad Rahmani, Director, Bombay Natural History Society, Mumbai.
6. Ms. Sejal Worah, Programme Director, World Wildlife Fund for Nature India, New Delhi.
7. Shri Ullas Menon, Secretary-General, The United Planters’ Association of Southern
India (UPASI), Coonoor, Tamil Nadu.
8. Shri Shankar Gopalakrishnan, Secretary, Campaign for Survival and Dignity, New Delhi.
9. Shri Ritwick Dutta, Legal Initiative for Forest and Environment (LIFE), New Delhi.
10. Shri Ravi Chellam, Bombay Natural History Society. and
11. Dr. Prodipto Ghosh, Distinguish Fellow, The Energy Research Institute (TERI), New Delhi.
32

ANNEXURE -V
Statement indicating objections made and comments of the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change thereon
Sub: V iew/ Comments/ Suggestions of the Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate
Change on the memoranda received on Report of High Level Committee headed
by Shri T.S.R. Subramanian to review various Acts administered by Ministry of
Environment, Forests and Climate Change
The report of High Level Committee headed by Shri T.S.R. Subramanian, former
Cabinet Secretary, Govt. of India to review various Acts administered by Ministry of
Environment, Forests and Climate Change is submitted to the Ministry. The recommendations
given by Committee for the reform in environmental laws are under consideration/ examination
in the Ministry. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, headed by Shri Ashwani Kumar, Hon’ble M.P., Rajya
Sabha to consider the Report and the views/suggestions/comments thereon from individuals/
experts/Non Governmental Organisation/Stake-holders interested in the subject matter has
convened a meeting on 9 th January, 2015. The comments of the Ministry are as follows:
1 Suggestion in
regard of MSME
2 Suggestions for
high level Committee
Constituted to
review various
environmental laws
United Council of Rajasthan
Industries
Memoranda-1  inter alia demands for
categorization of Industries in red and
orange category, exemption of non
polluting industries form registration
by PCB’s and non applicability of E
Waste rules on MSME. It also says
that the technical support to industry
along with setting up of CETP should
be given by Government.
Shri Debi Goenka, Executive
Trustee, Conservation Action Trust,
Mumbai
The Memoranda No-2  states that
issues like strengthening of existing
The present categorization
of industry is based upon
the pollution potential of
the project. This
indicative list has been
prepared by the Central
Pollution Control Board
and it can be adopted by
the State pollution
Control Boards with
required amendments.
The introduction of online
application system for
clearances has been done
to increase transparency
and speed. The same is
Sl. Subject matter Name of Organization/ Individual and V iews/Comments/
No. gist of their Comments/ Suggestion Suggestion of the Ministry
on the Bill of Environment, Forests
and Climate Change
12 3 4
33

34
12 3 4
administered by
MoEFCC
3 Grave concerns
regarding the
report of the High
Level Committee
headed by T.S.R.
Subramanian
4 Legal Initiative for
Forest and
Environment
environmental legislations,
transparency portal at state levels,
adaptation of environment friendly
practices and proper management of
waste, strengthening of EIA process,
environmental standards should be
considered.
Nilesh Gaonkar, President and
Tulsidas velip, Secretary, Grass
root Organazation, Goa
Memoranda No-3  describes that the
report has not given clarification
about ‘no go’ forest areas, term
‘forest’, economic incentives for
farm and social forestry, tree land
trading, diversion of forest land.It
also says that the new umbrella law
would dilute all existing environmental
laws. Efforts should be made to get
scientific and reliable data and put
restriction on submission of false
information/data by project proponent.
It is an ignorance of gigantic global
threats by Committee as role of gram
sabha, protection to eco sensitive land
etc are not considered.
Legal Initiative for Forest and
Environment, New Delhi
Memoranda No-4  found abnormalities
in Forest Governance including forest
clearance, procedure adopted for
forest diversion, provides no
provision for field visit after
constitution of NEMA. Issues related
to public hearing, Clarification of the
special procedures, Gram sabha
approval are not addressed properly.
also being introduced at
state level. The review of
environmental standards
is under taken by the
CPCB from time to time.
The Ministry is
considering the mechanism
to strengthen the system
of monitoring of
environmental compliances.
The recommendation of
the HLC is under
examination. The Ministry
is also in the process of
finalizing the inviolate
areas. Efforts are on to
have the centralized data
base system as a decision
support system and the
project proponent can
utilize this data.
The recommendations of
the Committee are under
examination and the
anomalies (if any) as
pointed out in the
memoranda will be taken
care of while finalizing
the view in the Ministry.

35
5 Overarching request:
Reject the HLC
report as it stands
now
6 Comment on TSR
Subramanian
Committee Report
The report recommended setting up
of Appellate Board for controlling
National Green Tribunal which is
unconstitutional.
Shri Himanshu Thakkar, South
Asia Network on Dam, Rivers and
People (SANDARP), Delhi
Memoranda No-5  It provides that the
Report is lack of credibility, and has
sweeping mandate and unclear TOR.
The time given to the Committee was
very short. The Committee has not
addressed the issue of climate
change. Reducing and eliminating
public participation in decision
making, and bypassing the ‘Principle
of Non- regression’ by the Committee
Dr Latha Anantha, Director, River
Research Centre, Kerala
Memoranda No-6  stated that  there
is absence of environmental expertise
in the Committee, lack of credible
database, doubtful creation of NEMA
and SEMA. The Committee has put
their efforts towards reducing legal
purview of NGT. It has Lack of
references and community participation
while criteria for selection and role of
EIA expert are not mentioned. The
issues related to environmental
reconstruction and revival of river
basin, term ‘forest’, concept of good
faith, No Go areas, role of gram
sabha remain un answered. In
addition to it, definition of project
proponent in proposed ELMA,
transparency and accountability ,
project cycle approach and
Environmental audit should also
considered while reviewing the
recommendation of the Committee.
The Committee has
prepared its report after
wide consultation. The
report submitted is
under examination in the
ministry.
The Committee  comprised
of members with long
and outstanding experience
in the field of
administration, environment
and Law.
12 3 4

36
The recommendations of
HLC are under consideration.
The suggestions provided
in the memoranda will be
kept in view while taking
a final decision in the
matter.
The recommendations of
HLC are under consideration.
The suggestions provided
in the memoranda will be
kept in view while taking
a final decision in the
matter.
It has been mentioned in
the memoranda that
there are reports enclosed
with the memoranda,
however, only one
report “Strengthen
institutions, reform
law and streamline
processes”  is annexed
with the memorandum.As
the Committee has
submitted its report which
is under examination in
the Ministry, the
representative of the CSE
may seek time to make
their presentation in the
Ministry.
Shri Lalit Kumar Singhania,
Editor, paryavaran Urja Times,
Raipur (C.G .)
Memoranda No- 7 , provides for
restructuring and reform of state
environmental agencies, amendment in
present EC system  and stressed that
there should be  provision of only
one agency for environment related
issues instead of NEMA and SEMA.
Shri Asad R Rehmani, Bombay
Natural History Society, Mumbai
Memoranda No-8  states that the
issues related to ‘No Go’ areas, term
‘forest’, tree lands, revision of CA
guidelines, wildlife management plans,
appropriate provisions for taking in to
account the need of local festivals
have not been properly addressed in
the report. It also suggested for
revamping the clearance/ approval
process and special treatment for
linear projects.
Shri Chandra Bhushan, DDG,
Centre for Science and
Environment, New Delhi
Memoranda No-9  Not commented on
the Committee report; however urge
to present their views before the
Committee.
7 Comments on
Report of High
Level Committee
to review various
Acts
8 Comments on the main
recommendations
of High Level
Committee for review
of Environmental
Acts by BNHS-
India
9 Strengthen
institutions,
reform laws and
streamline
processes
12 3 4

37
12 3 4
10 UPASI’s views on
HLC report headed
by TSR
Subramanian
11 Views/Suggestions
on the report of
High Level
Committee
12 Grave concerns
regarding the
report of the High
Level Committee
headed by T.S.R.
Subramanian
Secretary General, The United
Planters Association of Southern
India
Memoranda No-10 , assessment of
the Supreme Court’s order relating to
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 is
provided and suggested to refer the
same while finalizing the
recommendations.
Shri Praveen Bhargav and Others,
Wildlife First, Bangalore
Memoranda No-11  suggested for
exclusion of Wildlife (Protection) Act
and Forest (Conservation) Act from
proposed ELMA. It also urged for
deletion of proposal of “Utmost Good
Faith”. In addition,  suggestions on
Wildlife (Protection) Act and Forest
Conservation Act are given in the
Memoranda.
Shri Josh Rodrigues and Others,
Benaulim Civic and Social Forum,
Goa
Memoranda No-12  describes that the
report has not given clarification
about ‘no go’ forest areas, term
‘forest’, economic incentives for
farm and social forestry, tree land
trading, diversion of forest
land.Further, it has been stated that
the new umbrella law would dilute all
existing environmental laws. Efforts
should be made to get to get
scientific and reliable data and
restriction on submission on false
information/ data by project
proponent. It is an ignorance of
gigantic global threats by Committee
as role of gram sabha, protection to
eco sensitive land etc are not
considered.
The recommendations of
HLC are under consideration.
The suggestions provided
in the memorandum will
be kept in view while
taking a final decision in
the matter.
The recommendations of
HLC are under consideration.
The suggestions provided
in the memorandum will
be kept in view while
taking a final decision in
the matter.
Issues are same as given
in Memorandum- 3The
recommendation of the
HLC is under
examination. The Ministry
is also in the process of
finalizing the inviolate
areas.

38
13 Hearing upon High
Level Committee
report
14 Comments on
report of High
Level Committee
headed by Shri T.
S.R. Subramanian
to review various
Acts administered
by Ministry of
Environment,
Forests and
Climate Change
15 Views and suggestion
to High Level
Committee to
review various
environmental laws
Dr K V Chacko, General
Convener, Western Ghat and
Peoples Protection Forum,
Kozhikode
Memoranda No-13  states that in the
TSR report, Western Ghat Reports
and report of High level working
group on Western Ghat are flawed.
Issues related to wildlife (Protection)
Act and Costal Regulation Zone
(CRZ) notifications are raised in the
memoranda and requested for
consideration.
K Vishnu Mohan Rao, Citizen,
Consumer and Civic Action Group,
Chennai
Memoranda No-14 , provides that
there are flaws in report like, absence
of vigorous and motivated approach,
non level playfield, no wider
consultation, imbalance in environment
and economic development and vague
term of reference.  In addition to it,
issues related to environmental
governance like; validity of NEMA and
SEMA, diluting community
participation, sidelining of CSOs and
NGOs, lack of understanding of
cumulative pollution impact etc. are
also observed in the report.
Shri Rohit Kumar, Advocate,
New Delhi
Memoranda No- 15  describes that
depredation to standing crop by wild
animals and respect for culture,
removal of conditions of Gram sabha,
provisions of new umbrella Act and
Institutional reforms are the main
issues which were not addressed
properly by the Committee.
The points raised in the
Memoranda will examine
in the Ministry.
The recommendations of
HLC are under consideration.
The suggestions provided
in the memorandum will
be kept in view while
taking a final decision in
the matter.
The recommendations of
HLC are under consideration.
The suggestions provided
in the memorandum will
be kept in view while
taking a final decision in
the matter.
12 3 4

39
12 3 4
Shri Satish Panchal, Managing
Director, Vadodara Enviro Channel
Limited, Vadodara
Memoranda No-16 , the suggestions
are related to environment clearance
of projects.
Shri Sejal Worah, Programme
Director, WWF, India
Memoranda No-17  finds anomalies in
notification of ‘No Go’ areas, definition
of ‘Forest’, removal of process of field
verification and removal of gram sabha
approval to speed up the clearance
process. It states that issues like;
compensatory afforestation, respect to
cultural traditions, mechanism for
public hearing, special treatment for
certain projects, concept of ‘utmost
good faith’, constitution of NEMA and
SEMA and Environmental Law
Management Act are also not
considered properly.
Dr Shaju Thomas, Head, DEEC,
Tropical Institute of Ecological
Sciences (TIES), Kottayam
Memoranda No-18   describes that
issue like definition of forest,
treelands, constitution of NEMA/
SEMA, environmental reconstruction
fund, integration of IFS, term
‘utmost good faith’, public hearing,
role of NGT and environmental
education in Higher education are not
addressed properly in the report.
Shri Sudhir Vyas, IFS (Retd),
Former Secretary MEA
Memoranda No-19  pointed out that
State wildlife management plans and
use of environment friendly
technologies need inclusion in the
report. It also expressed the need of
another high level study for wetland.
16 Report of the High
level Committee
headed by Shri T.
S.R. Subramanian
to review various
Acts administered
by Ministry of
Environment, Forests
and Climate Change
17 Suggestions on
report of the High
level Committee
headed by Shri T.
S.R. Subramanian
to review various
Acts administered
by Ministry of
Environment,
Forests and
Climate Change
18 Comment on TSR
Committee
19 Comments on TSR
Subramanian HLC
Report
The introduction of online
application system for
clearances has been done
to increase transparency
and speed.
The recommendations of
HLC are under consideration.
The suggestions provided
in the memorandum will
be kept in view while
taking a final decision in
the matter.
The recommendations of
HLC are under consideration.
The suggestions provided
in the memorandum will
be kept in view while
taking a final decision in
the matter.
The suggestions will be
examined and will be kept
in view while taking a
final decision in the
matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.