Parliament of India 
Rajya Sabha  
  
 
(Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations contained in the Seve
Fourth  Report of the  
Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on  
Science and Technology, Environment & Forests on the  
Demands for Grants (2000-2001) 
 of the Department.) 
  
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  15.12.2000) 
(Adopted on December 7, 2000) 
 REPORT 
The Report of the Committee deal s with the Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology o n
recommendations contained in the Seventy-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Comm
on Science & Technology, Environm ent & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the Departm e
Biotechnology which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th April, 2000.  There are ten recommendations conta
in the Seventy-fourth Report of the Committee. Ac tion Taken notes on the recomm endations of the Committe e
received from the Department on 25th July, 2000. 
  
On scrutiny of the Action Taken Repo rt as received from the Department  of Biotechnology, the Committee 
that all the ten recommendations have been fully implemented.   
  
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken th ereon and comments of the Committee on the a c
taken by the  Department of Biotechnology are given in the succeeding paragraphs: - 
Recommendation 
The Committee observes that the demand for biotech products has been steadily increasing and cou n
with country’s tremendous potential of biodiv ersity, scientific and technical manpower and ex i
infrastructure it is likely to become an important gl obal player in biotechnology in the next 10 years o r
Keeping the mandate of the Department in view the Co mmittee feels that sufficient funds need to be provid
the Department so that it can carry out its  mission effectively. 
Action taken by the Department 
The Department of Biotechnology has been making ef forts to make available th e requirement of funds f o
sectors of Biotechnology, keeping in view the enormous potential Biotechnology has for the development in the f
of agriculture, human, health, industry, environment and biod iversity etc.  As only Rs.125.00 crores of  plan b u
was provided by the Planning Commission/Finance Ministry against the projected requirement of Rs.162.97 crore
Department has again taken up the matter with the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Finance for enhancin
plan funds to carry out the recommended research pr ogrammes and schemes by various committees viz Scie
Advisory Committee, Task Forces, Expert Committees.  However, the Department  has tailored the scheme s
programmes with in the provided budget. 
Comments 
While, the Committee notes the position, it observes that the Department may continue its endeavour for g e
enhanced allocations for carrying out the research activities from the Ministry of Finance.  
   Recommendation 
83 
Page 1 of 683rd R E P O R T
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/83cont.htm

      The Committee feels that with the rising  costs of chemical fertilisers and the accompanying  risks of degradati
soil fertility because of increasing re source of these fertilisers, the role of  biofertilisers and biopesticides is bec o
significant.  The Committee recommends that the Departme nt  should  encourage  the  use of     biofertiliser s
biopesticides by educating the farmers though Print & El ectronic media and field dem onstrations, so as to ac h
higher consumption levels of the bioproducts and with a view to increase their yields.  
Action Taken by the Department 
The Department is promotin g large scale production and use of biofertilisers and biopesticide
is being done through demonstrations in farmers’ field at various locations.  The printed materials
video films have also been made for popularization and creating awareness. 
Comments 
The Committee notes the position. 
Recommendation 
       The Committee feels that with a view to rep lenish the depletin g forest cover and improv e
environment  the role of tissue culture technique  has assumed importance.  The committee obs e
that the techniques if proved successful in case of on going projects, may be replicated in  case of v
based forest trees, horticultural crops and plantation crops. 
Action taken by the Department 
Concerted efforts are bein g made b y the Department to utilize the tissue culture technolo gy
large scale production of most of the economicall y important forest trees,  horticulture and plant a
crops.  A large number of value based multipurpose forest tree species and horticulture and planta
crops with both export and domestic market potential are being multiplied through tissue culture. 
those plant species which are of  hi gh priorit y and re generation protocols are not available, R
efforts are underwa y for standardizin g these.  The re gion based hardenin g units and the 
Microporpagation Technology Parks (MTPs) set up by Department, are catering to the requiremen
the different a groclimatic zones and producin g large quantities of elite plantin g material.  The M
are providing assistance to the State De partments and other user a gencies to replicate this techn o
in other regions. 
Comments 
            The Committee commends the efforts made b y the Department in the field of tissue cu l
technique. 
Recommendation 
4.   The Committee recommends that besides supportin g and developin g indi genous dia gnostics
major communicable and non-communicable dise ases, the department should simultane o
endeavour to find market for indi genous products, and strive for be tter qualities to ensure priority
indigenous products over the imported ones.  
  
Action taken by the Department 
The Department is makin g concerted efforts to interact with  Indian Biotech industries to tra n
the dia gnostic technolo gies developed throu gh sponsored pro grammes of the department.  Su r
have been conducted to assess the available market for dia gnostic and vaccines for ma jor infect
and hormonal disorders and these surve ys clearl y indicated the existence of a bi g marke t
diagnostics and a possible escala tion of the same in the years to come.  The Department has been 
to transfer several diagnostic technologies to industries for commercial exploitation.  In addition to
market available in private sector, there is a bi g market available with the Government sectors 
Page 2 of 683rd R E P O R T
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/83cont.htm

part of health care system.  The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, the end user Ministry
been apprised of the dia gnostics developed throu gh the department pro grammes.  The effort s
continuing to develop better quality diagnostics, which could replace the imported ones. 
Comments 
 While the Committee notes the reply it would like sustained efforts to achieve the targets. 
Recommendation 
      While the Committee commends the efforts made b y the Department in providin g counseling
diagnostics services for the common genetic disorders prevalent in the countr y to the affected fam
the question remains how man y people are aware of su ch facilities.  Such pro grammes and faci l
should be named in a lan guage which people can understand.  The s ymptoms of such disorders sh
be publicised as  also the pro grammes and facilities.   The Co mmittee therefore recommends tha t
Department ma y provide wide publicit y to the pro gramme b y involvin g print as well as elect r
media so that the benefits of th ese activities of the Department could percola te to the underprivil
and weaker sections of the society. 
Action taken by the Department 
The Department has taken steps to provide publicit y t o  s u c h  p r ogrammes and facilities thr o
demonstrations, exhibitions and print media.  Pu blications and brochures  have also been brou ght
from time to time for creating public awareness. 
Comments 
The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation 
      The Committee notes with sa tisfaction the achi evements made b y the Department in the fie l
food Biotechnology.  The Committee however feels, that mu ch more efforts are needed in the fie l
create awareness about the progarmme. 
Action taken by the Department 
The Department has launch ed the details about pro grammes and schemes includin g 
biotechnology on the website which is being used by scientists and academicians.  The Department
ogranises conferences, s ymposia, seminars and field demonstrations for creatin g awareness abou t
programmes. 
 Comments 
The Committee notes the repl y.  It however emphasi zes that the steps ma y continue to be tak e
create awareness about the achievements made in the food sector amongst the rural masses. 
Recommendation 
      The  Committee  notes  with satisfaction the efforts made b y the Department for upliftme n
SC/ST population of countr y, Women and rural poor . The Department ha s launched Biotechn o
based pro gramme  for the welfare of  SC/ST population throu gh proven technolo gies.  It facili t
SC/ST population to up grade their skills and create additional job avenues or help in improvin g t
health status.  The main  activities are cultivation and distil lation of medicina l and aromatic pl a
vermicomposting, spirulina production, fish and poultr y  farmin g,  production and  applicatio n
various biofertilisers  for  better  soil  health, biolo gical control a gents for plant pests and surv e
genetic disorders and coun seling.  Forty-three pro jects have been pursue d in 19 states and u
territories, which benefited ab out 15,000 families.  The Committee observes that benefits of 
programmes should be equally distributed among all the intended sections of the society. 
Page 3 of 683rd R E P O R T
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/83cont.htm

Action taken by the Department 
Department has ensured b y taking steps to generate and implement the pro jects in various S t
across the country so that the benefits can reach the target groups.  Such programmes are scattere
various regions of the country, particularly inhabited by weaker sections of the society. 
Comments 
The Committee commends the efforts being made by the Department 
Recommendation 
      The Committee commends the efforts made b y the Department of Biotechnolo gy in the fie l
bioinformatics, which are expected to yield multidimensional results in variet y of areas.  
Committee, however, recommends that the Depart ment should make all out efforts to ensure 
biological data created in a gricultural and other sector s be disseminated in a wa y that it also re a
the persons working at grassroots levels and desiring to make use of it, so as to ensure optimum u
the data created. 
Action taken by the Department 
The Bioinformatics centers, mentioned below are havin g specialization in a griculture sect o
addition to the services offered in all other fields of Biology and Biotechnology: 
1. Distributed Information Centre (DIC), Indian Agriculture Research Institute, New Delhi.  
2. Distributed Information Sub-Centre (DISC) , Central Institute for Freshwater Aquacul t
Bhubaneshwar. 
3. DISC, G.B. Pant University of Agri culture and Technology, Pant Nagar.  
4. DISC, Punjab Agricultu re University, Ludhiana.  
5. DISC, Tamil Nadu  Veterinary & Anim al sciences University, Chennai.  
6. DISC, University of Agricu lture Sciences, Mangalore.  
7. DISC, Kerala Agricultur e University, Thrissur.  
8. DISC, Assam Agricultural University, Jorhat.  
9. DISC, Dr. Y.S. Parmar University of  Horticulture and Forestry, Solan.  
10. Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore.  
11. M.S. Swaminathan Research Foundation (MSSRF), Chennai.  
These centers have developed in-house as well  as subscribed to databases specific to A
gricul
and Allied areas for disseminatin g the information resources to the end users.  The center at MS S
Chennai has also st arted disseminatin g the information resou rces in the local lan guages w
facilitates to make use of the know-h ow and other information resources b y the users at the grassr
level. 
Comments 
The Committee notes with  satisfaction the pro gress made in the field of bioinformatics 
observes that further steps ma y continue to be taken b y the Department for proper disseminati o
information generated in the field. 
Recommendation 
      The Committee is satisfied with the work bein g done b y the National inst itute of Immunol o
However it observes that  there are  certain unex plored areas in the field of  Immunodia gnostics 
Page 4 of 683rd R E P O R T
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/83cont.htm

other diseases, where the institut e can focus its research activiti es.  The Committee has been ma d
understand that 80% of all the R&D and scientific research is supported b y the Government, a
smaller portion is funded b y the Research Institutes/Industr y. The Committee recommends 
Department should stri ve to raise funds  b y directl y collaboratin g with the Industr y for prov i
additional support to Research activities. 
Action taken by the Department 
      The observation of  the Committee that  ‘there are certain unexp lored areas in the fiel
Immunodiagnostics and other diseas es where the institute can focu s its research activities’ is in
with the emphasis given b y the NII, and th e Institute has been continuousl y focussin g its rese
activities in unexplored areas including Immunodiagnostics, diseases, as well as their basis. 
      As a result, NII has developed immunodia gnostic tests for a number  of diseases such as v
hepatitis, t yphoid fever, amoebic liver abscess and strep tococcal infection, as well as for pre gna
detection.  All these technologies have  been licensed  to  the  pharmaceutical  industry  
 for commercialization.  Commercialization has not yet been completed in those cases where the In
biotechnology industry has been havin g difficulties in absorbin g these new technolo gies, or has b
hesitant in making appropriate financial commitments for product development.  
      However, NII continues its efforts.  Du ring the year 2000-2001, NII has focused on a simple tes
detecting tuberculosis, whic h will soon be read y for transfer to industrial partners for eve n
commercialization.  NII has also developed and licensed a test for detection of HIV infection, and p
scale development is progressing. 
      In the area of diseases unexplored as yet, NII has initiated research on number of such cases.  
effort relates to the genetic factors associated with development of diabetes at a young age, which
study the genetic predisposition to develop diabet es early in life, particularly the ketosis-resi s
diabetes of the young, with a view to eventual development of therapeutic approaches.  Another tak
novel approach to the problem of mycobacterial infections such a tuberculosis and leprosy by initia
an anal ysis of the chemical biolo gy of m ycobacteria to decipher the role of the prom i
mycrobacterial genes involved in polyketide synthesis.  This project will eventually lead to novel d
for controlling mycobacterial virulence.  Another project on the ro le of carbohydrates in host-par
interactions will also  lead to identificati on of modes for desi gning carbohydrate based a gents aga
amoebiasis and leishmaniasis (kala-azar). 
      Regarding raising funds, NII has some pharmaceutical fundin g for basic research.  Hoechst I
funded a research programme on  autoimmunity in Institut e during 1995-1998 for the equivale n
100,000 US dollars.  Similarl y, there are currentl y two on going collaborations with pharmace u
companies for developm ent of products from Institute’ s research leads  under memorand a
understanding which provide for grants from the companies for upstream research.  Ne gotiations
currently on for si gning a similar a greement with another compan y, and other such avenue s
regularly and systematically explored. 
      The Institute has proposed an innovative program for pro-active industry-academia interaction
provide close intellectual and infras tructural support to the biotechnolo gy industry through the j
development of incubator laborator y facilities.  The pro gramme is visualized as a series of stra t
partnership pro ject between academ ia and biotechnolo gy industries where NII will develop 
laboratory space with services, infrastructure and basi c instrumentation, which will be develop e
project-specific fashion in intellectual-fi nancial  partnershi p with collaboratin g biotech indu s
which will have the benefit of NII’s theoretical as well as bench-top expertise in cutting-edge fields,
through which NII hopes to be able  to contribute to the transl ation of theoretical knowled ge into
availability of products for the co mmon people.  The pro gram is currentl y under consideration 
the government for approval. 
Page 5 of 683rd R E P O R T
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/83cont.htm

Comments 
      The Committee commends the research efforts being made by the Department  in the unexplored are a
the field of immunodiagnostics and other diseases a nd recommends that the Department should keep u p
tempo of its activities. 
 Recommendation  
      The Committee is of the view that A griculture is not really sustainable anywhere on account of
of top soil and excessive use of pesticides and fertilizers besides growth of population at a rapid p
Hence the need for hi gher productivit y and for nutritious food.    The ob ject can be achieve d
changing the plant characteristics b y genetic modification.  Th e Committee impresses upo n
Department to work with full vi gour in this area and efforts sh ould be made to cover  value b
crops under its ambit which may solve the problem of under nourishment  at the glassroot levels o
society. 
Action taken by the Department 
Transgenic plants with important traits such as  pests and herbicide resistance are necessar y w
inherent resistance has been demo nstrated within the local cult ivars.  The department is pu t
intense research efforts on the development of  plant resistance to vira l, bacterial  and fun gal dise
and on tolerance to abiotic stresses (e.g. salinity and drought).  The department has supported a m
programme on h ybrid seed development in oilseed crop Brassica juncea.  The trans genic plants h
been produced throu gh molecular biolo gical tools and wo uld soon be sub jected to field tria l
collaboration with Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR). 
The department is also considering supp ort to another multi-institutional pro ject on w
improvement using biotechnological tools.  This has emer ged from the leads obtained from an e a
project supported on charac terization of qualit y traits in.  In this pro ject four genes responsible
protein content, quality grain hardiness and pre-harvest sprouting have been successfully tagged. 
The department is aware that qualit y improvement of crop plan ts is important area in w
biotechnology can significantly contribute.  In a countr y like India where maln utrition is still a m
problem, superior qualit y  of the produce, assumes great si gnificance.  Efforts were made b y
National Centre for Plant Genome Research (NCPGR), New Delhi to en gineer quality by mobili
heterologous genes such as 2S stora ge proteins from amrathus into potato.  It has been demonst r
that this storage protein as hi gher level of some of the essential amino ac ids than those recomme n
by World Health Or ganisation.  The trans genic plants are bein g tested in collaboration with Ce n
Potato Research Institute (CPRI), Shimla.  A Swiss group has recently produced transgenic rice, w
will reduce vitamin-A deficienc y, affecting 40 million children and iron deficiency, effecting 1.4 bi
women in the world.  The department  in consultation with ICAR is ne gotiating with this grou
acquire the technology if all conditions are favourable. 
Comments 
The Committee notes the reply. 
  
             
  
  
  
  
Page 6 of 683rd R E P O R T
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/83cont.htm