PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/52nd%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:06]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA
 SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1996-97)
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1997-98) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF
 SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (DEMAND NO. 75)
.
(Presented on 14th May, 1997)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRET ARIA T NEW DELHI
May, 1997Naisakha 1919 (Saka)
CONTENTS
PAGES
1.         COMPOSSION  OF THE COMMITI'EE ••••••••••••••••••••••••    (i)-(ii)
 
2.         REPORT•••••.••.••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••.    1-7
 
3.         MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITI'EE •••••••••    9-12

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/52nd%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:06]
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
 ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1996-97)
 
Shri V. Narayanasamy- Chairman
 RAJYA SABRA
2.    Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3.    Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt
4.    Shri N. Giri Prasad
5.    Shri K.R. Jayadevappa
6.    Shri Pranab Mukherjee
7.    Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty
8.    Shri Narendra Pradhan
9.    Dr. A1ladi P. Rajkumar
10.   Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma
11.Shri G. Swaminathan 12. Shri Prakanta Warisa
@13. Vacant
·14. Vacant
LOK SABRA
15.  Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma
16.  Shri Ranjib Biswal
17.  Shri A.B.A. Gani Khan Choudhury
18.  Prof. Jitendra Nath Das
19.  Shri Mohd. Ali Ashraaf Fatmi
20.  Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
21.  Shri K.C. Kondaiah
22.  Dr. Ramkrishan Kusmaria
23.  Shri Guman Mal Lodha
24.  Shri Shivaji Mane
25.  Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta
26.  Shri Punnu Lal Mohle
27.  Shri Sharad Pawar
28.  Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
29.  Shri N.K. Premchandran
30.  Shri Kalpnath Rai
31.  Shri A. Raja
32.  Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
33.  Sltri P.V. Rajendran
34.  Sltri K.B. Raut
35.  Shri S. Ramachandra Reddy
36.  Shri Harivansh Sahai
37.Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj
38. Shrimati Vijayaraje Scindia
39. Kumari Selja
40. Capt. Satish Sharma
@ Shri Ko Karunakaran ceased to be a Member of the Committee due to his retirement from Rajya Sabha woe.f. 21st April, 1997.
·  ProfoSaif-Ud-Din Soz was nominated w.e.f. 31st December, 1996 and ceased t(l be a member of the Committee on his appointment as Minister
 w.e.f. 20 February, 19970
 
·41.  Shri Surender Singh

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/52nd%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:06]
42.    Shri . Soumya Ranjatl Pafnaik
43.    Sushri UmaBbaiati
44. Shri Srikanta Dutta Wadiyar
$45. Vacant
 SECRETARIAT
Shri Salish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee , Under Secretary
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer
• Nominated w.e.f. 4th February. 1997.
$ Srimati Atka Nath ceased to be a Member of the Committee due to her resignation from Lok Sabha w.t.f. 315t
 December, 1996.
REPORT
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment & Forests, having been
 authorised by the Committee to present the report on its behalf, present the Fifty-Second Report, on the Demands for
 OJ-ants pertaining to the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the year 1997-98 (Demand No. 75).
2. In its meeting held on 1st April, 1997, the Committee discussed in details the Demands for Grants of the
 Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the basis of documents made available to it and the submissions'
 made before it by the Secretary of Scientific and Industrial Research and other officers of the Department.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by
 the Members and. placing before it the requisite material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants
 of the Department.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on 8th May, 1997.
5. Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, (DSIR) forms part of the Ministry
of Science & Technology and is entrusted with the matters concerning the following:-
(i) Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
(ii) National Research Development Corporation
(iii) Central Electronics Ltd.
(iv) National Information System on Science & Technology (NISSAT) (v) Registration and
 Recognition of R&D units
(vi) United Nations Conference on Trade & Development and WIPO (vii) National register for
 foreign collaborations
(viii) Creation of a pool for temporary placement   Indian Scientists and Technologists (ix) National register of
 scientific manpower.
6. The thrust of the programmes and activities at the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) is on
 the activities of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) - a premier Science & Technology (S&T) agency
 with a network of 40 national laboratories, two complexes and 81 Extension and Regional Centres spread all over the
 country that undertake R&D in various disciplines.
7. Other major programmes of the Department include Research and Development by Industry (RDI) consisting of
 in-house R&D in Industry, Scientific and Industrial Research Organisations (SIROs) and Fiscal Incentives for

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/52nd%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:06]
 Scientific Research; Programme Aimed at Technological Self Reliance (P A TSER) consisting of development of new
 or improved technologies, and to promote indigenous development of capital goods, absorption and adaptation of
 improved technology, studies and interactions concerning Technology Evalua ­tion and pre-feasibility ,reports of
 major sectors/products; Scheme to Enhance the Efficacy of Transfer of Technology (SEETOT), National Register of
 Foreign Collaborations (NRFC), Industrial Technology, Transfer and Trading in Technology (TA TI), Linkages with
 International organisations including Asian and Pacific Centres for Transfer of Technology (APCTI) and Promotion
 and Support to Consultancy Services (PSCS) including the Consultancy Development Centre (CDC) and two Public
 Enterprises viz. National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) and Central Electronics Limited (CEL) engaged
 in the commercialisation of indigenously developed technologies.
8. Budgetary Estimates of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) for the year 1997-98
 provide Rs. 513.49 crores (Plan as well as non-Plan). The plan compr)nent amounts to Rs. 230 crores while the non--
plan component amounts to Rs. 283.49 crores. The big chunk of allocation has gone to the Council of Scientific and
 Industrial Research which has got Rs. 486 crores ( Plan as well as non-Plan) against Rs. 444 crores at RE stage of 1996-
97 and Rs. 412.68 crores at BE stage of 1996-97. There has thus been an increase of Rs. 74.68 crores in the overall
 allocation approved for CSIR. The Plan expenditure which remained at the level of Rs. 161 crores at BE as well as RE
 stage of 1996-97 has gone up to Rs. 204 crores whereas non-plan component has risen from Rs. 251.68 crores (BE of
 1996-97) to Rs. 283 crores at BE stage of 1996-97 and has slightly declined to Rs. 282 crores in the BE of 1997-98. A
 large part of non-Plan expenditure amounting to Rs. 130 crores has been allocated to national laboratories whereas a
 sum of Rs. 50 crores has been earmarked for modernisation. Even in the case of administration, the non-Plan
 expenditure amounting to Rs. 46 crores provided in the BE for 1997-98 is higher by Rs. 3 crores over the expenditure
 of 1996-97 and Rs. 1 crore over the RE of 1996-97. It has been stated that the activities and programmes in respect of
 national laboratories will be guided by the white paper, CSIR 2001, vision and strategy drawn up recently with a
 mission statement as "to provide scientific industrial research and development that maximises the economic,
 environmental and societal benefits for the people of India."
9. Major scientific and technological achievements of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research during the
 Eighth Five Year Plan were in the areas of aerospace, biology and biotechnology, chemicals, drugs and
 pharmaceuticals, earth resources and natural hazards mitigation, ecology and environment, electronics and
 instrumentation, energy, food and food processing, housing and construction, leather, rural development and exports of
 R&D and services.
10. In the field of chemicals, the country today is in a position to offer among others internationally competitive
 teshnologies for aromatic extraction, food grade hexane pyroly­sis, gasoline hydrogenation. In the area of organic
 chemicals cost effective novel process for NMB (a solvent used in refinery processes) was developed. In the area of
 polymers about 35 industrial adhesive formulations were developed.
11. In the area of drugs and pharmaceuticals a new molecule centchroman discovered earlier was developed by
 Central Drug Research Institute, first as a new non-steroidal as a female oral contraceptive. Besides, piperine isolated
 from an indigenous plant has been developed by Regional Research Laboratory (Jammu) as a novel bio-enhancer that
 enables the dosages of the common anti-TB drugs, particularly, Rifampicin to be reduced by at least 50% resulting not
 only in the reduction of cost of medication but more importantly in the reduced side effects such as hepatotoxicity and
 neurotoxicity. The know-how has been transferred to industry. Its use with other modem drugs is being pursued.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/52nd%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:06]
12. Another memory enhancer Brahmi has been standardised and validated by CDR!.
Besides, CSIR has developed novel and drug intermediates which have been licensed and most of them have been
 commercialised. These are anti-Aids, anti-Viral, anti-Cancer, anti­Bacterials, anti-Malarial, Cardiovascular, analgesics
 and anti-inflammatory, anti-allergic, anti-ulcer, anti-glaucoma and anti-hypertensive. In the field of ecology and
 environment CSIR's achievements have been in the field of environmental monitoring, environmental biotechnology,
 toxic waste management, environmental system design and optimisation.
13. In the field of food and food processing CSIR was designated as the nodal agency for the Mini Mission on post-
harvest technology  of the Technology Mission on oilseeds and pulses. It is participating in the mission through its
 laboratories namely CFTRI, IICT & RRLS (Thiruvananthapuram and Jammu). Besides, in-house activities have
 resulted in development and transferring of several processes to the industry and for their commercial utilisation.      
14. In the area of housing and construction, CSIR has contributed to the development of newer housing designs,
 construction techniques, building material to substitute wood and utilised wastes and dwelling units for disaster hit
 populace, .etc.
15. In the area of leather, the significant achievements of CSIR/CLRI include establishment of the model carcass
 recovery centre at Bakshi Ka Talaab in V.P. for training and demonstration techniques of better collection, and
 recovery of products from fallen carcasses, modernisation of two tanneries through improvement of implant ecology,
 partial automation and process control for product consistency, cleaner leather processing, technology, packages ..
 Besides, a Modem Footwear Design, Development, fabrication and Testing Centre was set up with a pilot facility for
 stuck-on and stitch-down type computer aided design and laser cutting of pattern for footwear and conveyer fabrication
 facility,
16. The major programmes proposed to be undertaken, during the Ninth Plan including the first year of the Plan
 i.e., 1997-98 fall into the following schemes-(i) national laboratories, (ii) National S&T Human Resource
 Development, (iii) R&D Management Support (Central Administration), (iv) "Residential Building and other
 Amenities, (vi) modernisation, and (vii) intellecutal property and technology management.
           17. The first five schemes are continuing in nature with additional new components built in as per the national
 requirement and priorities. A new scheme on intellectual property and technical management has been proposed with a
 view to attain mastery over management and intellectual property and technology in the global context in the years to
 come. Besides, 40 national laboratories would pursue programmes categorised for convenience under various socio-
economic structures and covering areas of aerospace, biology and biotechnol ­ogy, chemicals, drugs and
 pharmaceuticals, earth resources and hazards mitigation, ecology and environment, electronics and instrumentation,
 energy, food and food processing, housing and construction, non-products, leather machinery and equipment minerals,
 metals and materials, rural development exports and R&D and services, national S&T human resource resource
development.
18.In the case of plan expenditure although, there is an apparent sizeable increase of Rs. 43 crores, this is not really
 so significant as it apprises there was no plan increase in 1996-97 over 1995-96. Besides, during 1997-98, the
 committed liability of salary and pension expenditure is expected to go up ,by Rs. 41.35 crores as compared to 1996-
97. The expected increase of Rs. 41.35 crores does not include any element of increase on account of implementation of
 the recommendations of the Fifth Pay Commission. In the event of the implementation of the recommendations of the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/52nd%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:06]
 Fifty Pay Commission during 1997-98 a gap between the Budget allocation and the committed liability will get further
 widened.
19. DSIR has stated that in the Eighth Five Year Plane part of salary expenditure was met out of the plan allocation
 right from the beginning of the plan. In the year 1996-97, out of the total expenditure of Rs. 221.75 crores on pay and
 allowances about Rs. 50 crore had
to be met out of plan funds. It has. been stated that the problem may continue even in the Ninth Plan peiod. Out of the
 total estimated expenditure of Rs. 247.80 crore on pay and allowances for the year 1997-98, a sum of Rs. 25 crore is
 proposed to be met from the plan funds at the Budget EstimateJstage. The Committee has been informed that during
 the annual plan discussions for 1997-98, the Planning Commission has taken a stand that no expenditure on pay and
 allowances should be met out of plan allocation and the same should be made from the non-plan Budget only. The
 Planing commission further advised CSIR that it should approach the Ministry of Finance for additional allocation
 under non-Plan to meet this liability. This diversion from plan to non-Plan of funds has placed CSIR in serious
 difficulty as the deficit under .. non-Plan Budget on account of pay and allowances and pension alone has gone up
 toRs. 91.35 crores (Rs. 41.35 crores + Td. 50 crores).
20. It has been stated that in addition to the above, the expenditure on contigencies and maintenance has been
 gradually increasing due to general rise in price level. They have. not been provided with any increase under non-plan
 to neutralise this additional liability which is estimated to be Rs. 10 to 15 crores. There would thus be a deficit of Rs.
 100 to 107 crores under non-plan for the year 1997-98.
21. The Committee observes that the CSIR has a work force of 25,233 employees comprising of 19,095 scientific
 and technical and 6,138 administrative employees. The ratio of scientific and technical employees to administrative
 employees works out to 3:1. The Committee feels that the entiresfaffing pattern of CSIR should be reviewed with a
 view to bringing down the ratio of scientific and technical personnel to administrative personnel to a level where the
 productivity is optimum. As regards the diversion of plan expenditure to non­plan expenditure, the Committee
 reiterates its earlier recommendation that the Ministry of Finance should give one time additional allocation to regula
 rise the diversion. At the same time, the DSIR should sincerely endeavour to review its non-plan expenditure so that the
 necessity of diversion in future does not arise.
22. Out of the total allocation of Rs. 486 crores (Plan as well as non-Plan) for the year 1997-98, a total of Rs.
 335.65 crores has been provided for 40 national laboratories with 80 field extension centres which. CSIR has built up
 over the years and which have expertise and knowledge and diverse scientific disciplines and serve practically the
 entire gamut of socio­economic sectors. Programmeslprojects of the national laboratories that would be pursued by
 them have been categorised under various socio-economic sectors such as aerospace; biology and biotechnology;
 chemicals; drugs and pharmaceuticals; food and food processing; housing and construction; information products;
 leather; machinery and equipment, miner­als; metals and materials and rural development. Another sum of Rs. 50
 crores (Plan) has been provided for modernisation of these laboratories. Justifying the allocation, it has been stated that
 a most significant factor in realising the goals set for CSIR is the immediate upgradational replacement of the obsolete
 equipment and communication and networking system in CSIR. The mo/dernisation of the ageing equipment and
 facilities has been of concern at different levels and a vexing issue in the CSIR for the past decade. This is stated to
 have adversely affected the productivity and competitiveness of CSIR labs. It, therefore, need hardly be stressed that

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/52nd%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:06]
 phenomenal advances in equipment and instruments have come about as a result of developments in micro-electronics
 and information technology. It has been further stated that if the CSIR is to have some semblance of global
 competitiveness, upgradation and modernisation of facilities is called for besides creating new facilities which have
 since become essential CSIR's endeavour, it is stated, would be to modernise and upgrade facilities in these
 laboratories.
23. The Committee fully shares the concern expressed with regard to the functioning and modernisation of
 laboratories. It feels that at present the laboratories give a look of some department-run officis with not much takers
 of its facilities.
The Committee agrees that of course there is a need to modernise these laboratories. The point which the
 Committee seeks to stress is that the test facilities given by these laboratories should be charged on commercial basis
 except where they facilitate a national effort. Even i,n the process of modernisation apart from the equipment the
 laboratories should have faster communication facilities and give a business like appearance which attracts the
 customers and provides business to the laboratories. At the same time, the Committee recommends that the CSIR
 should endeavour to cut down, as far as possible, the non-plan expenditure which they may fund from their
 commercial activities so that the burden on the national exchequer is reduced.
24. It was pointed out to the Secretary that the technology innovation of excellence mainly depends on discovery
 in the field of science and technology. Therefore, stress should be laid on fundamental research and basic sciences.
 In fact, as earlier suggested, technology boards could be renamed as Science and Technology Boards but this was
 not done. The fact remains that the stress needs to be laid on fundamental stress and basic sciences. The Secretary
 was requested to look into the possibility of establishment of a National Physical Laboratory in Calcutta. The space
 for the purpose is available as also the infrastructure required for that. The Secretary replied that as far as the
 question of setting up of National Physical Laboratory at Calcutta was concerned, the matter could be looked into.
The Committee hopes that the question of setting up a National Physical Laboratory at Calcutta would be
 examined expeditiously.
25. It was pointed out to the Secretary, DSIR that the country has a rich heritage in respect of herbal medicines.
 He was asked whether any attempt was being made to gather these secrets and commercially exploit them as the
 allopathic medicines were costlier which the common people could not afford to buy. Besides, herbal medicines
 were being commonly usede in countries like China where every hospital had a branch of herbal medicines with
 doctors some of whom were pioneer in their field in the application of herbal medicines. Asked whether the
 Department "had examined the feasibility of establishing an R&D institution on herbal medicines in West Bengal
 and possibly near Calcutta as the Sunderbans area in West Bengal was rich in bio-diversity, the Secretary replied
 that they were trying to create linkages between a formal system of innovation and a foreign system.
The Committee is not satisified with the reply given by the Secretary, DSIR and feels that no sincere attempts
 have been made to commercially exploit the bio-diversity and herbal plants and feels that much more can be done in
 this area. The Committee recommends that DSIR should harness its resources for full exploitation of the herbal
 potential of the country and apprise the Committee early of action taken in the matter.
26. Another area of interest is the intellectual property and technology management which has been allocated an
 amount of Rs. 2 crores (Plan). Focus on this area started with the introduction of Dunkel proposals which have

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/52nd%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:06]
 ultimately led to WTO regime. In the process of expenditure of the Dunkel proposals, the initial steps of integrating the
 Indian economy with the global system had taken shape. The pace of integtrating the residual elements not hitherto
 taken place is gaining momentum. In order to be a competitive global player, the country will require masterly over
 management of technology as also enhancing the levels of innovation and creativity. In future, Indian corporate
 strategy will no longer be dictated by manipulating the financial resources but by command over technology. CSIR has
 been amongst the leaders in change management in Science & Technology. In fact, CSIR has been pace setter for the
 management of the intellectual property in the country. It has been filing its own patents in India for decades. In terms
 of the management of technology CSIR has been endeavouring to catalyse this effort both from a policy perspective of
 a nation and the corporate perspectives of a firm. A number of pioneering studies on bench marking of global
 technology practices have been undertaken by CSIR and results disseminated through publications and workshops. The
 manipulation of technology management as a part of CSIRs corporate strategy is sought to be attempted through
 alliances and external acquisitions/barter in the area of intellectual property rights. This would, therefore, require
 investment in accessing commercially valuable information and data globally as also the induction of people well-
versed in using technology as an element of corporate strategy. Article 27.2 of the Draft Agreement on TRIP~ provides
 that parties shall provide for the protection of planned varieties either by patents or an effective suigeneries system or
 by any combination thereof. This provision shall be reviewed after four years after the entry into force of this·
 agreement.
27. The Committee feels that intellectual property rights is an important area where apprehensions have been
 expressed in the country that the products particularly natural as well as herbal which have been put to medicinal uses
 in the country for last several centuries are being exploited abroad where foreign countries have taken patents. CSIR
 must rise to the occasion to see that the country does not Sutter as a result of our inability to exploit our potential,
 technically and legally, in the context of patent require.
28. National Research & Development Corporation has been provided total Annual Plan Allocation of Rs. 3.7
 crores for 1997-98. In 1997-98 only the continuing schemes have been approved. A sum of Rs. 90 lakhs has been
 provided for Invention Promotion Programme. From the details furnished in the Annual Report it appears that the
 Corporation received 80 proposals for prize awards and 34 proposals for providing financial assistance. It has been
 further stated that an amount of Rs. 3.30 lakhs to 11 inventors for 3 inventions were announced during last year.
29. The Committee feels that the utilisation under the programme is poor. The Corporation should give a wide
 publicity to the programme and invite all and sundry interested in experimenting their ideas. The Corporation may
 examine providing necessary infrastructure in the form of laboratories/workshops and throw it open to all those who
 are keen to try their ideas . in various fields. The Committee, in principle, would like the allocation for the purpose to
 be
enhanced. However, in view of 'poor utilisation it is not in a position to recommend the same. Likewise, the Technology
 Promotion Programme has been provided with an amount of Rs. 2.30 crores.
The programme comprises of following components:-
(i) Development & Promotion of Rural Technology (ii) Promotion of Export of
 Technology
(Hi) Informatics for Technology Transfer
(iv) Technology Development Programme for Priority Projects (v) Design & Engineering

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/52nd%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:06]
 Programme for upscaling scale process (vi) Techno-Commercial support to NRDC licensee.
30. The Corporation directly promotes and funds technology development on a chosen set of priority projection
 R.&D laboratories, IITs and selected universities, both on its own and also on a joint basis with industry .
31. The Committee feels that the Programme needs to be pursued vigorously. It should also be given a wide
 publicity.
32. Further, considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and
 assessing the process of various programmes and projects adminis ­tered by it, the Committee recommends that the
 Demands for Grants of Rs. 513.49 crores as sought by the DSIR for the year 1997-98, under Demand No. 75 may· be
 approved.
 
 
NEW DELHI;
May 8, 1997
 
V. NARAYANASAMY
Chairman, Committee on Science and
 Technology Environment and Forests.
 
__________________________
MINUTES
XXXII
THIRTY -SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Thursday the 8th May, 1997 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House,
 New Delhi.
PRESENT
1.      Shri V. Narayanasamy __ Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.    Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty
3.    Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma
4.    Shri G. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
5.    Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma
6.    Shri Ranjib Biswal
7.    Prof. Jitendra Nath Das
8.    Smt. Maneka Gandhi
9.    Dr. Ramkrishan Kusmaria
10.    Shri Guman Mal Lodha
11.    Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta
12.    Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
13.    Shri N.K. Premchandran
14.    Shri A. Raja
15.    Smt. Vijayaraje Scindia

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/52nd%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:06]
16.    Shri Surender Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Under Secretary
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer
2. The Committee took up consideration of the draft Fifty-First & Fifty-Second Reports on the Demands for Grants
 (1997-98) of the Departments of Biotechnology and Scientific '& Industrial Research and adopted the same with minor
 amendments.
3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty to present the reports in
 the Rajya Sabha and Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma and in his absence Shri N.K. Premchandran to lay the reports on
 the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee also decided to visit lucknow, Allahabad, Varanasi, Patna and Calcutta tentatively from 26th
 May to 1st June, 1997, in order to asses the work done under Ganga Action Plan and the level of water/air pollution in
 general at these places. The Committee also authorised its Chairman to seek the permission of the Hon'ble Chairman,
 Rajya Sabha in this regard.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 10.35 A.M.