PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-EIGHTH REPORT
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Two Hundred Eightieth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on Demand for Grants (2016-17)
of the Department of Science and Industrial Research
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
288
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-EIGHTH REPORT
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Two Hundred Eightieth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on Demand for Grants (2016-17)
of the Department of Science and Industrial Research
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-13
5. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 15-18

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-17)
(Constituted on 1st September , 2016)
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury— Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
5. Shri C.P. Narayanan
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
8. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Shri Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
(i)

(ii)
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati M. Vasanthi
31. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Two Hundred Eighty-eighth Report on the Action Taken by the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Eightieth
Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research, which was presented/laid in the both the Houses of Parliament on 9th May, 2016.
2. There were nineteen recommendations in the Two Hundred Eightieth Report of the Committee.
Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Department on
26th October, 2016.
3. In the meeting held on 29th November, 2016, the Committee considered the draft Report and
adopted the same.
   N
EW D ELHI; RENUKA CHOWDHURY
1 December, 2016 Chairperson,
Agrahayana 10, 1938 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests,
Rajya Sabha.

(iv)
ACORONYMS
RE : Revised Estimate
RFD : Result Framework Document
CSIR : Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
NCAD : National Civil Aircraft Development Programme
SPV : Special Purpose Vehicle
R&D : Research and Development
P ACE : Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research & Technology
Development
BIPP : Biotechnology Industry Partnership Programme
BIRAC : Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council
MNRE : Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
DST : Department of Science and Technology
DSIR : Department of Scientific & Industrial Research

REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Eightieth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
on the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, (Ministry
of Science and Technology) presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 9th May, 2016. There were
nineteen recommendations in the Report of the Committee. Action Taken note on the recommendations
of the Committee were received from the Department on 26th October, 2016. On scrutiny of the Action
Taken note furnished by Department of Industrial Research, it has been observed that action has been
taken on all 19 recommendations of the Committee.
The Committee's recommendations, action taken note thereon and comments of the Committee on
the Action Taken by the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research, are set out in the following
paragraphs:-
FINANCIAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT
Recommendation
The Committee notes that despite utilizing more than 99% of allocation during 2013-14 and
2014-15 the budgetary allocation of the Department was reduced at RE stage during the two
financial years i.e. 2013-14 & 2014-15. The Committee is of the view that investments in scientific
research are extremely important for the development of the nation and that reduction in budgetary
allocation at RE stage results in delay in implementation of schemes/programmes of the Department.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that since the Department has the potential of fully utilizing
its budgetary allocation, reduction in allocation at the RE stage should not be resorted to. Further,
the Committee notes that allocation was enhanced at RE stage during the last financial year i.e.
2015-16 from Rs. 4031.00 crore to 4036.70 crore. However, the Department has utilized Rs. 3811.43
crore (upto 16.03.2016) only which shows that proper and timely planning for utilization of the
allocated fund was not done. In view of this, the Committee observes that the Department must have
proper planning for utilizing the allocated funds so that optimum utilization of allocated funds may
be ensured. (Para 2.2)
Action Taken by Government
Department appreciates Committee's concern for reduction in budgetary allocation at Revised Estimate
(RE) stage. Department will convey Committee's recommendation to Ministry of Finance.
Further CSIR has utilized its allocated funds i.e. Rs. 3988.14 crore (RE) fully during 2015-16.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

2
REQUEST & JUSTIFICATION FOR ADDITIONAL ALLOCATION PLAN & NON-PLAN BUDGET
(2016-17)
Recommendation
In view of the above submissions of the Department, the Committee feels that request for the
enhancement in the budgetary allocation to the tune of Rs. 1300 crore (Rs. 500 crore in Plan Budget
& Rs. 800 crore in Non-Plan Budget) for the financial year 2016-17 is fully justified and the matter
should be taken up with the concerned Ministry/Department vigorously. The Committee also observes
that investment in R&D activities, core creation of infrastructure for new labs of CSIR/ Technology
Parks, recruitment of adequate manpower in CSIR, adequate funding for existing schemes of CSIR
etc. are immensely important for the development of our country and hence adequate and sufficient
allocation of funds must be made. (Para 3.12 )
Action Taken by Government
Department is thankful to the Committee for endorsing the requirement of enhancement in budgetary
allocation. Department will take up the issue with Ministry of Finance at R.E. stage. Department will
make all out efforts to allocate requisite funds to core creation of infrastructure for new labs of CSIR/
Technology Parks, recruitment of adequate manpower in CSIR.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
SCHEMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
Recommendation
In all, the above cited four schemes viz. Promoting Innovations in Individuals, Startups MSMEs,
Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research and Technology Development, Building Industrial
R&D and Common Research Facilities and Access to Knowledge for Technology Development and
Dissemination of the Department, there has been gross underutilization of allocated resources. The
reasons cited for the same are administrative and in a way were avoidable. Because of
underutilizations, allocation at BE stage for 2015-16 for all the said schemes was reduced quite
drastically. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should strengthen
its administrative and monitoring mechanism for utilizing the allocated resources in each quarter.
Not utilizing the allocated fund during first three quarters of the year and then using one third
allocation during last quarter as an explanation for underutilization, is untenable. (Para 4.15 )
Action Taken by Government
The Department takes note of the Committee's recommendation and will make all efforts to utilize
the allocated funds in each quarter. However the fund utilization would improve, if Secretary of the
Department is empowered to allow expenditure more than one third the allocation in the last quarter, in
exceptional cases.

3
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that funds allocated for various schemes would
be utilized optimally in the current financial year.
RESULT FRAMEWORK DOCUMENT (RFD)
Recommendation
The Committee has noted the performance of DSIR evaluated by third party under Result Framework
Document (RFD) and finds that performance is declining continuously. From a score of 96% in
2010-11, it has decreased to 80% in 2014-15. The Committee strongly disapproves such a trend. The
Committee also notes that RFD for the year 2015-16 was not initiated by PMD in view of adoption
of other mechanisms of performance review by the present Government e.g. PRAGATI (Pro-Active
Governance And Timely Implementation), eSamiksha, a real time, on-line system for monitoring of
follow-up action on the decisions taken during the presentations made by different Ministries/
Departments to the Hon'ble Prime Minister etc. In view of this, the Committee would like to suggest
that timely planning, approval and execution of the various programmes of the Department may be
ensured in order to perform better on this account. The Committee would also like to be informed
about the performance of the Department under PRAGATI (Pro-Active Governance And Timely
Implementation), eSamiksha etc. time to time so that the Committee may keep itself abreast of the
performance of the Department. (Para 5.5)
Action Taken by Government
The Department notes the Committee's suggestion. The eSamiksha portal gives status of action
taken by Departments/ Ministries on Presentations to Prime Minister, Centre State Coordination, Generic
Issues of Project Monitoring, PRAGATI- Grievance Redrssal, Cabinet decisions etc. Response on the
issues pertaining to DSIR is regularly updated on eSamiksha portal by the officer in the Department,
authorized to log on to the portal.
Comments
The Committee would like the Department to spell out the details of the plans and strategy
to ensure original research work.
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR)
Recommendation
The Committee notes and appreciates the efforts of CSIR in publishing large number of research
papers in International SCI journals every year. However, the Committee observes that 5743 research
papers published in International SCI journals during 2015 also includes a large numbers of
articles, reviews, proceeding papers, editorial materials, letters etc. In view of this, the Committee
would like to suggest that CSIR's main focus should be on original research work.
(Para No. 6.5)

4
Action Taken by Government
Department takes note of the Committee's suggestion for focusing on original research work.
Comments
The Committee would like the Department to spell out the details of the plans and strategy
to ensure original research work.
FILING OF PATENTS AND GRANT OF PATENTS
Recommendation
The Committee takes note the efforts of CSIR in obtaining patents in India and Abroad. However,
the Committee feels that much more is needed to be done in order to have more patents. The
Committee recommends that the matter may be taken up vigorously with National Biodiversity
Authority for clearance of around 150 patents, in order to file the same with the Indian Patent
Office in the field of Biological Sciences, at the earliest. (Para 7.3)
Action Taken by Government
Department has been pursuing the matter with National Biodiversity Authority (NBA). CSIR would
get approval from NBA from this year onward which would facilitate granting of 150 pending patent
applications of CSIR.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that efforts of the Department would yield the
desired result.
WORLD RANKING OF CSIR
Recommendation
The Committee is extremely disappointed to note that the world ranking of CSIR has dipped from
73 in 2011 to 84 in 2014. The Asia ranking of CSIR has also gone down from 15 in 2011 to 17
in 2014. CSIR may be holding No. 1 position in the country but its 17th rank in Asia again is
indeed a matter of concern. The Committee is of the view that CSIR's contribution in the fields of
research, innovation and technology development to improve its world ranking can bring laurels to
the country and therefore, recommends that in order to fulfil the aspirations of modern India, CSIR
should aim to become amongst at least first 10 global organizations in its field and it should strive
hard to achieve that ranking. (Para 8.3)
Action Taken by Government
CSIR is a globally benchmarked and positioned organization today. It has been ranked continuously
within the top 100 organizations globally. According to the Scimago Institutions Ranking World Report
2014, CSIR is the only Indian organization among the top 100 global institutions, ranked at 84th among
4851 institutions worldwide. CSIR holds the 17th rank in Asia and leads the country at the first position.

5
From research output perspective, CSIR is ranked No. 72 in a global context, according to the
Nature Index 2014, published by Springer Nature in December 2015. As per this, CSIR is among the
only two Indian organizations of the top 100 institutions across the world. Access to the SCIMAGO
Institutions Ranking World Report 2015 has yet not been enabled by the publishers.
CSIR would further like to bring to the kind notice of the Hon'ble Committee that the Council is
the pioneer of India's intellectual property movement. CSIR today is strengthening its patent portfolio to
carve out global niches for the country in select technology domains. Commercialization of CSIR patents
is 13.33% in comparison to ~3% global average. Amongst its peers in publicly funded research organizations
in the world, CSIR is a leader in terms of filing and securing patents worldwide. Thus in terms of S&T
outputs, besides scientific publications in scholarly journals CSIR is also mindful of protecting its
Intellectual Property through patents. Thus CSIR is consciously and continuously endeavouring to
improve its global ranking.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
NATIONAL S&T HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the fact that during 2015-16, an amount of Rs. 216 crore only (upto
December, 2015) was spent against the allocated RE of Rs. 295 crore which apparently shows that
physical targets could not be achieved. The Committee is of the view that financial constraints
apart, lack of proper planning and methodology for grant of awards also played a pivotal role in
CSIR not being able to achieve its targets in respect of award of scholarships/fellowship/associate
ships, as a result of which a large number of bright students were denied opportunity of these
scholarships/fellowships. Creating a bank of well-trained researchers is extremely important for the
development of science and technology in the country. The fellowship/scholarships under this
scheme provide motivation and encouragement to the personnel pursuing/engaged in scientific
fields. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in future, CSIR should set a realistic target for
award of its fellowships/scholarships so that it does not fall short of the targets set by it.
(Para 9.9)
Action Taken by Government
Department has utilized its allocated funds of Rs. 295.00 crore (RE) fully. Further Department notes
the Committee's recommendation for setting a realistic target for award of fellowships/ scholarships.
Comments
The Committee would appreciate if the Department gives a commitment to implement the
recommendation of the Committee instead of simply noting the recommendation.

6
Recommendation
The Committee also observes that the allocation made for S&T Human Resources has remained
almost the same since the last three years despite the fact that the emoluments for research personnel
have been revised. A number of sanctioned posts are also lying vacant. These need to be filled up
urgently. CSIR has also highlighted the need for additional funds under this head. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the budgetary support to this scheme should be adequately increased at
RE stage so that lack of funds does not come in the way of incentives devised to encourage
scientific research in the country. (Para 9.10)
Action Taken by Government
Department will take up the issue of additional allocation with Ministry of Finance at R.E. stage.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
NATIONAL CIVIL AIRCRAFT DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NCAD)
Recommendation
The Committee is extremely disappointed to note that a programme of great national importance
such as National Civil Aircraft Development Programme (NCAD) has made very little, rather no
progress during the last four years. The Committee is constrained to remark that although our
country has mastered space technology, we are yet to develop technology for developing a commercial
aircraft. The Committee takes note of the efforts and complexities involved with National Civil
Aircraft Development Programme and would like Department to intensify their efforts for effective
operationalization of the programme. The Committee also recommends that adequate financial
allocations be made for the above programme so that its execution is not delayed any further.
(Para 10.4)
Action Taken by Government
Recommendation was made for setting up a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) between M/s Hindustan
Aeronautics Limited and CSIR-NAL. Department is making all out efforts to make the project operational.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply. However, the Committee would like to be informed about
the progress made in this direction at regular intervals.
CSIR-800 SCHEME
Recommendation
The Committee feels that a scheme launched to augment the income and improve the quality of lives
of one million rural citizens geographically spread across the country, was merged with another

7
scheme, the objectives of the new merged scheme have no direct relation whatsoever with CSIR-800
scheme. However, the Committee hopes that with the merger of the CSIR-800 scheme with the
National Laboratories scheme, the objectives of the original CSIR-800 scheme will not be lost. The
Committee recommends that there should be no letup in the activities of the Department on this front
and adequate financial support should be provided to this important scheme for achieving the
objectives of the scheme in the new merged scheme. (Para 11.3)
Action Taken by Government
Department would like to submit that CSIR has reviewed and merged the CSIR-800 with 'National
Laboratories' scheme in pursuance of the direction of Government of India to rationalize the implementation
of schemes. Further, department has noted the Committee's expectations with sense of responsibility.
Towards fulfilment of the objectives of the program CSIR has adequately funded its laboratories.
Rs26.04crore was released during 2015-16 for projects under CSIR 800 program to augment the
incomes and improve the quality of lives of rural citizens. Similar efforts would be continued during
2016-17 as well.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
STEVIA PROCESSING DEVELOPED BY CS IR
Recommendation
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by Department in the matter. The Committee recommends
that the technology should be extended to other States of North-East also. The Committee is also
of the view that Department should run an awareness drive about this technology for the benefit
of farmers. (Para 11.4)
Action Taken by Government
CSIR through its one of the constituent laboratories i.e. CSIR- Institute of Himalayan Bio resource
Technology, Palampur, Himachal Pradesh has signed 'Confidentiality Agreement' with an NGO M/s
Foundation for Environment and Economic Development Services, Henbung, Kangpokpi, Senapati district,
Manipur for establishing stevia plantation and processing facility at Henbung, Kangpokpi.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
SKILL DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation
The Committee while appreciating the efforts of the Department in this matter, also observes that
much more is needed to be done for employment generation as there is thrust on this issue in the

8
12thFive Year Plan. Also, there should be short term 'Diploma Courses' for unemployed educated
youths of the country in consultation with the industry in each institute of the CSIR so that these
skilled persons could get employment in the industry. The Committee is also of the view that CSIR
should consider forging linkage with Ministries of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, Small
Scale Industries, Labour& Employment etc. to enhance and widen its contributions for Skill
Development in the country. Further, the Committee also stresses the need for proper training of the
trainers of the various institutes of CSIR so that they could impart trainings to unemployed youths
of the country in a better and professional manner. (Para 13.3)
Action Taken by Government
CSIR has been playing a noteworthy role in S&T human resource development in the country. It
nurtures Research Scholars leading to Ph.D. degree and specialised training beyond it, by supporting
them through fellowships namely Junior Research Fellowship (JRF), Senior Research Fellowship (SRF),
Research Associateship (RA), Dr. Shyama Prasad Mukherjee (SPM) Fellowship, CSIR-Nehru Science
Postdoctoral Research Fellowship, etc. It also provides Extra Mural Research funding to Publicly Funded
institutions. Ph.D. through fellowships. Over 600 Ph.Ds are produced by CSIR laboratories annually.
CSIR constituent laboratories, as part of the project work or Masters/Ph.D. course/research work,
impart training and skills in identified S&T areas to students through summer training. CSIR also
connects with industry in a significant manner to develop technological knowledgebase, enabling industry
on one hand and providing desired human resource for R&D and innovation functions on the other.
Towards skill development as well as dissemination of knowledgebase, CSIR, centrally and at
laboratories level, organizes awareness programmes, workshops and training programmes. Through
these CSIR provides hands on training to the concerned stakeholders on the identified technologies/
interventions, so as to disseminate the valuable knowledgebase developed in-house for societal/ MSME/
industrial benefits. As a part of Skill Development Programme, CSIR has also been running short and
medium term courses/diploma courses to impart hands-on training in several S&T domains. Some few
examples are below:
• CSIR-CSIO - FNDO-SWISS Training Centre:
- 3Year Diploma in Mechanical Engineering (Tool & Die)
- 3 Year Diploma in Electronics Engineering
- Advanced Diploma in Mechatronics and Industrial Automation
-  Advanced Diploma in Die and MouldMaking
• CSIR-CLRI
- 1 Year P.G. Diploma in Leather Processing
- 1 Year Diploma in: Leather Processing; Leather Goods; Leather Garments; and Footwear.

9
• CSIR-CFTRI
- M.Sc. Food Technology
- 12 Months Programme in Flour Milling Technology
- 25 Regular Short Term Training Programmes and number of Custom Made Courses
covering all the major areas of Food Science and Technology
• CSIR-CECRI
- Industry /Academic Oriented Technology Refresher Courses in all aspects of Electrochemical
Science & Technology
• CSIR-URDIP
- 1 Year Diploma in Patinformatics (Patent Informatics).
In order to enhance its contributions towards skill development in the country, CSIR proposes to
conduct industry specific diploma/certificate courses targeting XII Std. students, Under-graduates,
Graduates, Post-graduates, Semi-skilled, etc., in various domains such as: Petroleum Refining and
Petrochemicals; Chemicals: Processing & Quality Control Methodologies; Medicinal And Aromatic Plants
- Cultivation and Processing - Aroma, Flavors and Fragrance; Material Characterization; Water Quality
Monitoring; Blasting processes in Mines, Tunnels and Construction; Microbial Taxonomy and Fermentation
Processes; Solar Salt Production; Toxicology; Phytopharma: cGMP Manufacturing; Electronics &
Instrumentation; Automotive components; and Earthquake Resistant Building Construction.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that efforts of the Department would generate
employment opportunities for unemployed skilled youth of the country.
CSIR'S ROYALTY FROM PARTNER INDUSTRIES
Recommendation
The Committee observes that royalty component had been kept very low while giving the technology
to various companies/industries in the past. The Committee is of the view that Department is getting
meagre money as royalty from the various companies/industries against the investment made on
R&D on technology development/inventions vis-a-vis income earned by those companies/industries.
In view of this, the Committee recommends that MoU should be signed with the companies/
industries for fixing royalty component while making technology transfer/inventions for allowing its
product for commercial utilization so that Department could be financially self-reliant in every
aspect and invest in R&D. (Para 14.2)
Action Taken by Government
For technology licensing, the CSIR follows 'Guidelines for Technology Transfer and Utilization of
Knowledgebase 2005'. The endeavour has been to enhance the earnings from Industry sponsored projects.

10
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
ADVERTISEMENT POLICY OF THE DEPARTMENT
Recommendation
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Department and feels that much more is needed in this
direction as general public at large is not much aware of the successes of CSIR, its diverse inventions
of public utilities, medicines including clot buster, vaccines, varieties of rice, detection of milk adulteration
device, achievements in the field of Agri& Food Technologies etc. which could be immensely beneficial
for the general public and farmers etc. The Committee therefore recommends that there should be regular
advertisements in the newspapers, electronic media about the achievements/inventions of the Department
for the benefit of the public. (Para 15.3)
Action Taken by Government
Department has taken steps for wider dissemination of CSIR achievements through print and
electronic media. The following activities have been identified:
• Release of national level advertisements on CSIR achievements in the Print Media and Electronic
Media.
• Extensive use of social media through CSIR Facebook and Twitter.
During the CSIR Platinum Jubilee Year 'September 2016 - September 2017', CSIR will be organizing
several activities including exhibitions, lecture series, other events targeted at furthering the public image
of CSIR by building media relations exercise around each of these activities. A large number of short
films are also being produced as a part of this exercise that would be showcased in electronic channels
and other communication channels including You Tube and social media handlers.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
SCIENTIFIC VISION FOR THE FUTURE AND GENERAL OBSERV ATIONS &
RECOMMENDATIONS
Recommendation
The Committee has taken note of the response of the Department and feels that the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research, Ministry of Science and Technology plays a pivotal role in the
promotion of Science and Technology in the country. New initiatives in the field of S&T play a
significant role in the development of a nation, be it in the field of Aerospace Science & Engineering,
Agro, Food Processing & Nutrition Technology, Biology and Biotechnology, Healthcare, Marine
Sciences & Engineering, Chemicals & Petrochemicals, Ecology & Environment, Energy, Electronics

11
& Instrumentation, Mining, Metrology and Housing, Road & Construction, etc. All the great
scientific discoveries and technological achievements in our country have brought the societal
development and grown economic status and have created many new ways for the new generations
to grow in the technologically advanced environment. The Committee is of the view that although
the Department has undertaken many new initiatives & measures for achieving excellence in the
field of Science & Technology, a lot more needs to be done and achieved in this area. In order to
successfully meet the challenges of the future, the Committee recommends that the Department
should undertake meaningful initiatives to establish strong foundations for a leadership role in the
world in various areas of Science & Technology in order to compete with the developed nations
like USA and China. To achieve this goal, the Committee further recommends that adequate
allocation of funds be made available to the Department in order to fulfil its vision into reality.
(Para 16.6)
Action Taken by Government
Department is thankful to the Committee for its appreciation on Department's initiatives in the field
of Science & Technology. Department always strives to take a leadership role in global S&T arena.
Department will apprise Committee's recommendation for allocation of adequate funds with Ministry of
Finance during discussion at Revised Estimate stage.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee observes that investment in Research and Development (R&D) is decreasing. It is
only about 0.48% of our GDP whereas in some other countries, it is 2-3%. It is also a matter of
concern that all over the world, as per information available with the Committee, about 66 per cent
of R&D funding comes from the private sector and about 25-33 per cent comes from the public
sector. In India, the ratio is reverse. In view of this, it is essential that representatives of private
sector/ industries are get involved in order to contribute more in R&D in the country. Therefore,
the Committee recommends that investment in R&D must be increased so that research work may
be taken up at large scale and more and more representatives of industries/companies should be
motivated for making investment in R&D of the Scientific Ministries/ Departments of the country.
(Para 16.7)
Action Taken by Government
With a view to enhance industry's share in National R&D expenditure, the Government has launched
R&D support programmes where industry is asked to contribute at least 50% of the R&D projects cost
for example Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research & Technology Development (PACE) programme
of DSIR, Biotechnology Industry Partnership Programme (BIPP) of Biotechnology Industry Research
Assistance Council (BIRAC) - DBT and R&D programme of Ministry of New and Renewable Energy
(MNRE) etc. The target of the Government is to raise National R&D expenditure to 2% of GDP with
50% contribution from industry.

12
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee also feels that even though good amount of research work is being done, it is not
actually percolating down for the use of society. It is just good on the paper. Further, the Committee
also observes that a large number of patents have been obtained in India and abroad, but only few
of them have been transferred in sustainable technologies. Therefore, the Committee recommends
that efforts should be made by the Department for making use of various research works for societal
development and transferring patents into sustainable technologies. (Para 16.8)
Action Taken by Government
As per the recommendation of the Committee, Department will make all out efforts to convert its
technologies for societal benefit.
Comments
The Committee would like to be apprised of the progress made in the matter at regular
intervals.
Recommendation
The Committee observes that similar kind of research in various fields is going on in the Scientific
Ministries/Departments of the country especially in the Departments of Science & Technology,
Biotechnology, and Space and Ministry of Earth Sciences etc. For example, same type of devices
like electronic machine for checking blood pressure, blood sugar and milk adulteration is also
developed by the Department of Science and Technology (DST) besides Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research (DSIR). In view of this, the Committee recommends that a mechanism
should be evolved for having a constant and broad consultation/ co-ordination amongst the various
scientific Ministries/ Departments about the areas/ fields of research so that time, energy, money,
manpower and brain of the country may be utilized optimally. (Para 16.9)
Action Taken by Government
Department would like to apprise the Committee that to address particular issue many approaches
are adopted. Products and technologies may look similar but they differ in very basics, functioning
(leading to desired output), cost, etc. Basic purpose should be to provide solutions to many issues being
faced by the Society. For example Devices for checking adulteration in milk developed by DSIR and DST
although serve the same purpose i.e. checking adulteration in milk. However they differ in the sense that
Ksheer Scanner developed by DSIR (CSIR) gives quantitative estimation of adulteration whereas DST-
developed one gives qualitative i.e. only in Yes/No form.

13
Following the enquiry posed by the Committee during its meeting 0f 31.03.2016, DSIR has made
a comparative study of the devices developed by DSIR and DST which is presented below for the
perusal of the Committee.
(a) CSIR- developed Ksheer-Scanner for Detection of Adulterated Milk
With an aim to provide an effective method for monitoring the issue of high levels of milk
contamination in the country, CSIR, has developed a system, named 'Ksheer-Scanner', which is capable
of detecting adulterants such as urea, salt, detergent, liquid soap, boric acid, caustic soda, soda and
hydrogen peroxide in milk. The 'Ksheer-Scanner' is an embedded system based on electrochemical
method (sensor-based) with a specially designed hardware which is efficient in detection of adulteration
in raw milk. It is a low cost portable system with user friendly features. It enables detection of
contaminants in just 40-45 seconds. The Minimum Detection levels of contaminants are: Urea: 1gm/l;
Salt: 2gm/l; detergent: 2gm/l; soap: 1%; soda: 1gm/l; boric acid and hydrogen peroxide in ppm. It is safe
to use and ideal for installation at milk collection centers of milk societies at village and Tehsil level which
can help in prevention of adulteration in milk. About 50 systems have been deployed at dairies in Punjab,
Gujarat, Goa, Rajasthan & Kerala.
(b) Milk Tester- developed with help of DST
The Milk Tester developed by National Hub for Healthcare Instrumentation Development, Anna
University, Chennai is a hand-held battery operated device with a probe and display, easy to operate and
maintain as well. The instrument can detect synthetic milk contamination of about 5% (though cannot
identify the individual components and thus no claim of selectivity). It is thus a device for low cost first
level screening of synthetic milk contamination.
The CSIR system is thus a more advanced system that can provide information on the quantities
of the different contaminants while the DST system is a preliminary instrument that can qualitatively
provide information on the contamination through Yes/No as indicators.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

MINUTES

V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 29th November, 2016 in Room No.'67' First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury— Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
6. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
8. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
9. Kum. Sushmita Dev
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Shri Laxman Giluwa
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Chirag Paswan
14. Shri Nana Patole
15. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
16. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
17. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
18. Shri Vikram Usendi
19. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
17

18
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. She
informed the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 286th, 287th,
288th, 289th, 290th and 291st reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in reports of the Committee on the Demands for Grants
(2016-17) pertaining to Departments of Biotechnology, Space, Scientific and Industrial Research, Science
& Technology, Atomic Energy and Ministry of Earth Sciences. The Committee then considered the draft
286th to 291st Reports and after some deliberations adopted the same.
3. The Committee also decided to present/lay its 286th to 291st reports to both the Houses of
Parliament on 1st December, 2016. The Committee authorised the Chairperson and, in her absence, Shri
Prasanna Acharya and in his absence Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan to present the reports in the Rajya
Sabha and Shri Vikram Usendi and, in his absence, Shri Laxman Giluwa, to lay the reports on the Table
of Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.05 
P.M.
*** relate to other matters.