PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABRA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND 
FORESTS (1996-97) 
THIRTY-SECOND REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1996-97 OF THE DEPARTMENT 
OF ELECTRONICS 
(DEMAND NO. 89) 
(Presented on the 27th August, 1996) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 1996/Bhadra, 1918 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITIEE. (i)-(ii) 
2. REPORT OF THE COMMITIEE 1-13 
3. RECOMMENDATIONS 14-17 
4. ANNeXURE. 19-24 
5. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITIEE 25-30 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1996-97) 
1. Shri V. Narayanasamy-- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt 
4. Shri N. Giri Prasad 
5. Shri K.R. Jayadevappa 
6. Shri K. Karunakaran 
7. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
8. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty 
9. Shri Narendra Pradhan 
10. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar 
11 .. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
12. Shri G. Swaminathan 
13. Shri Prakanta Warisa 
LOK SABHA 
14. Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma 
15. Shri Ranjib Biswal 
16. Shri A.B.A. Gani Khan Choudhury 
17. Prof. Jitendra Nath Das 
18. Shri Mohd. Ali Ashraaf Fatmi 
19. Smt. Maneka Gandhi 
20. Shri K.C. Kondaiah 
21. Dr. Ramkrishan Kusmaria 
22. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
23. Shri Shivaji Mane 
24. Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta 
25. Shri Punnu La! Mohle 
26. Smt. Alka Nath 
27. Shri Sharad Pawar 
28. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
29. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
30. Shri Kalpnath Rai 
31. Shri A. Raja 
32. Smt. Vasundhara Raje 
33. Shri P.V. Rajendran 
34. Shri K.B. Raut 
35. Shri S. Ramachandra Reddy 
36. Shri Harivansh Sahai 
37. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
38. Smt. Vijayaraje Scindia. 
39. Kumari Selja 
(i) 

40. Capt. Satish Sharma 
41. Shri Soumya Ranjan Patnaik 
42. Sushri Uma Bharati 
43. Shri Srikanta Dutta Wadivar 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer 

1 
REPORT 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests, 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, present this 
32nd Report on the Demands for Grants pertaining to the Department of Electronics for the 
year 1996-97. 
2. The Committee held in all one meeting on August 13, 1996. In the meeting held on 
13th August, 1996 while deliberating on the Demands for Grants of the Department of 
Electronics, the Committee sought detailed clarifications and explanations from the 
representatives of the Department of Electronics. The Committee wishes to express its 
thanks to the officers of the Department of Electronics and the Planning Commission for 
placing before it the requisite material and answering the queries raised by Members on 
various aspects of the Electronics programme and related aspects to enable it to scrutinise 
the Demands for Grants . 
3. The Committee considered and adopted its draft report at its meeting held on 23rd 
August, 1996. 
4. Electronics, in one form or the other, is the backbone of the entire industrial activity. 
Department of Electronics (DOE) is the promotional department of Government of India 
committed to development of Indian industry and applications of IT and electronics in the 
general walk of life in India. DOE is committed to development of technology tools and 
applications and in geheral to the proper utilisation of technology in society in public. DOE 
does technology forecasting exercise in which technology plays profound impact on society 
and people. Computer networking was one such area identified 10 years ago by DOE before 
it was perceived by other agencies in the country. In a similar approach DOE initiated a 
programme calle.d ERNET to fo~s on development of national capability in computer 
network in the country. It has led to the movement similar to Internet which was infact not 
known in those days. DOE has played a pioneer role in publidsing E-Mail and subsequently 
providing it in the country. 
5. While DOE is the promotional agency for electronics in the country, Department of 
Telecommunications (DOT) is the nodal agency in the field of telecommunications and it has 
played a big role in the development of telecommunications in the country. As such DOT 
and DOE are complimentary agencies in furthering the total area on IT, electronics and 
telecommunications. Therefore, the two agencies have to work together to converge at the 
technology level in telecommunications and IT electronics. 
6. DOE has ~hree public sector undertakings namely CMC, ET &T and SCL. Besides, a 
large number of societies including C-DAC, ER&DC, STPI, SAMEER, CEDT , DOEACC, 
NCST. DOE also has a large outfit of STQC laboratories all over the country. These 
agencies act as the anns of the Department in fulfilling its goals. 
7. The Department of Electronics is entrusted with the task of formulation and review 
of national policies in the _field of electronics~ The objectives of the Department are (i) to 
provide a focal point for Government's attention to electronic sector and · also act as a 
coordinator within and outside the Government, (ii) to bring the benefit of electronics to 
every walk of Jife in the country, and (iii) to make the Indian Electronics Industry a global 
player. The major programmes of the Department are in the fiold of (i) Technology 
Development, and (ii) Industri~l Electronics Promotional Programme. 
1 

8. The Department has a budget provision contained in its Demand No. 89 for 1996-97 
as follows : 
BUDGET PROVISION 
Revenue 
Capital 
PLAN 
110.91 
21.59 
132.50 
NON-PLAN 
23.10 
0.60 
(Rs. in crores) 
TOTAL 
134.01 
22.19 
156.20 
Plan provision of Rs. 132.50 crores comprises of Rs. 103.00 crores as local component and Rs. 29.50 crores 
is External Aid. 
(•) The total Non-Plan provision of Rs. 23.70 crores comprises of Rs. 15.50 crores towards Administrative 
Expenditure, Grants-in-aid to Department's Societies, wages and means loans to ET&T etc. and Rs. 8.20 crores 
towards adjustment of value of equipment received as aid from Foreign Governments. Details with regard to 
allocations on different heads/Projects are set out in Appendix. 
9. The Committee at its meeting held on the 13th August, 1996 heard the Secretary in 
the Department of Electronics in connection with the Demands for Grants and the function 
of the Department in relation to some of the projects as follows. 
10. The Committee was informed that Semiconductor Complex Ltd. (SCL), SAS Nagar 
Mohali (Punjab) was set up to design develop and manufacture LSI/VLSI circuits/ device 
for telecommunication, industrial electronics, data processing, strategic application etc. 
The device manufacturing and process R&D facilities at SCL were destroyed in a fire 
accident in 1989. Government approved rebuilding of the facility at a cost of Rs. 183.29 
crores in 1990. While the rebuilding was in progress, the project cost increased substantially 
basically due to devaluation of the rupee. The Revised Cost Estimate (RCE-1) of Rs. 315.13 
crores was approved by the Cabinet in March, 1993. The RCE-1 envisaged initially setting 
up a facility with a configuration of 20,000 six inch wafars per annum (wpa) at a technology 
level of 1.2 micron in Pha~ I to be subsequently upgraded to 33,000 wpa/0.8 micron in 
Phase II and 44,000 wpa/0.8 micron in Phase III. 
11. At the time of RCE-1 there was no Counter Vailing Duty (CVD) for the capital 
equipment proposed to be procured by SCL for the project, CVD was imposed in 1994-95. 
During September, 1994 SCL submitted revised outlay figures for the project as a result of 
imposition of CVD, price escalation etc. Keeping in view the extant orders of the 
Government, the project was put on hold in September, 1994. Various options for the future 
of SCL were considered, thereafter, by the Government culminating in a meeting taken by 
the PM in June, 1995. The PM directed that the project should be continued and not held 
up and that the DOE should process the revised cost estimates for the approval of the 
Cabinet. Accordingly, the Revised Cost Estimate (RCE-11) for the project has been worked 
out. RCE-II was considered by the Board of Directors of SCL in October, 1995 and 
subsequently by the PIB under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Electronics) in January, 
1996. 
It was decided to upgrade the fabrication facility in Phase II to 33,000 wpa/0.8 micron 
and in Phase III to 44,000/0.8 micron. In RCE-II it is proposed to rebuild the VLSI 

fabrication facility at SCL to realise a capacity of 20,000 wpa at a technology level of 1.2 
micron without the mask making facility but with additional provisions for CAD augmenta­
tion, design know-how fee, systems, pre-production expenses, R&D revenue, and working 
capital margin money. The total outlay proposed for the RCE-11 is Rs. 332.56 crores. Pffi 
has recommended RCE-11 as proposed above. The note for the Cabinet Committee on 
Political Affairs (CCPA) is being processed. 
As per the directions of the then PM, the work on the VLSI rebuilding project at SCL 
has been progressed. SCL has so far received Rs. 211.30 crores (budgetary support = 
168.71, insurance settlement = 41.50, internal resources = 1.09). SCL has spent I committed 
nearly all the funds received. CMD, SCL had further indicated an immediate requirement of 
additional funds for the project to the extent of Rs. 41.91 crores during May I June, 1996. 
However, due to non-availability of funds it is not possible for the company to establish 
further LCs for the remaining in equipment for the project. 
12. The Annual Plan (1996-97) allocation by the Planning Commission for the project is 
Rs. 56 crores. Any delay in releasing the requisite funds to SCL would cause time and cost 
over-runs in the RCE-ll and would be seriously deterimental to the project. During a 
meeting taken by Principal Secretary to PM relating to Department of Electronics on July 7, 
1996, following decisions were taken : 
(i) For the present the Department of Electronics would proceed on the basis of the 
present Plan outlay of Rs. 1031- crores for 1996-97, which includes an allocation 
of Rs. 27/- crores for SCL. 
(ii) The Department would seek approval of the Cabinet for the Revised Cost 
Estimates of Phase-I of the SCL project as soon as possible. 
(iii) The Department's request for additional outlay for SCL will be reviewed during 
the course of the year, around Septembet, 1996, when the matter for additional 
allocation may be taken up with the Planning Commission. 
13. In view of the strategic nature of the project towards national self-reliance in the 
broad area of electronics as also the spirit of the directions given by the then PM that the 
rebuilding work on the project should be continued without any hold-up and that the revised 
cost estimates should be processed for approval, it is imperative that an amount of Rs. 29.00 
crores may by provided to SCL as extra allocation during 1996-97, in addition to the amount 
of Rs. 27.00 crores which has already been provided, to enable timely complet ion of the 
project and avoid time and cost over-runs. The requirement of balance funds during 1997-98 
would be Rs. 65.26 crores. 
14. Regard ing the technology Development, the Committee was informed that R&D 
projects designed to encourage application oriented research, design and development were 
supported through Technology Development Council (TDC), the National Radar Council 
(NRC), the National Micro-electronics Council (NMC) and the Electronics Materials 
Development Council (EMDC). Major areas of support for R&D were in Micro-electronics, 
Photonics, Opto-electronics and Technology Development of Indian Languages. 
15. The Department atso undertook inhouse R&D activities as a back-up support to 
electronics industry and provided technology information, forecasting & assessment support 
to electronics sector. 
16. The Department had also initiated following different Technology Missions at the 
national level to give thrust in identified areas of development: 

(1) Massive Paralled Processing (C-DAC) 
(2) Micro-Electronics 
(3) Photonics I Opto-Electronics 
(4) Future Air Navigations System (FANS) 
(5) Retrofit Automation in Economic Sector 
(6) Electronic Components (Strategic & Non-Strategic) 
(7) New Electronics Materials 
The Committee was apprised that the Industrial Electronics Promotion Programme 
(IEPP) covers Appropriate Automation Promotion Programme (AAPP) for industrial sector 
and Microprocessor Applications Engineering Programme (MAEP) for non-industrial 
applications. Projects were also undertaken in power, energy conservation, jute and health 
care sectors. 
17. Electronics Industry Development Project (EIDP) (Project IMPACT) aimed at 
upgrading, the quality of Electronics & Computer Education in selected Engineering colleges 
& polytechnics with an intention to make the Indian Electronics Industry Internationally 
competitive. It also envisaged training of in-service professionals to enable them to upgrade 
their knowledge and skills. 
Standardisation Testing & Quality Certification (STQC) is designed to improve the 
quality of Indian electronic products. The concerned Directorate runs various certification 
schemes viz. 'SQ' scheme for ISO 9000, Safety including EMIIEMC, testing of Personal 
computers, T.V. receivers etc., and provides Test & Calibration Services to Electronic 
Industries through its laboratories. 
Both Product Certification Scheme ('S' mark) & Quality System Certification Scheme 
('SQ') of STQC Directorate have been accredited by the Dutch Council for certification 
(RVC), Netherlands. About 140 industries have been covered under certification schemes 
namely 82 industries in SQ (ISO 9000), 40 in IECQ and 18 in S. Mark (Safety). 
18. During 1995-96, 25 industries had been covered to ISO 9000 (SQ Scheme). Thus the 
total number of industries certified so far stands at 64. Besides, 47 requests were at various 
stages of approvals. 
In respect of Safety S. Mark 15 industries have so far obtained 'S' mark certificate for 
their product (s) this year. Besides, 20 more industries are at various stages of certification. 
Under, the IECQ certification scheme no. of approvals has gone up to 25 manufacturers 
(15 types of products) and one for capability approval. 
STQC Directorate has launched certification scheme for electromagnetic compatibility 
(EMC Mark) as per European/International Standards. The first compliance registration 
under the scheme has been awarded and four more industries are at various stages of 
approval. 
It was clarified that there was no proposal to replace STQC by SETE. STQC 
Directorate functions as an Attached Office of the Department of Electronics with 13 
Subordinate Offices-8 Electronics Test & Development Centres (ETDCs), 4 Electronics 
Regional Test Laboratories (ERTLs) and a Centre for Reliability (CFR). The main activities 
of STQC are Testing, Calibration, Training, Counselling, Certification and support for 
Standardisation activities in Electronics at the National and International level. 

19. SETE is a Society for Electronics Test Engineering set up recently under the STQC 
Directorate for imparting training to industry personnel for developing skills & knowledge in 
the area of Test Engineering & Quality Assurance, as per Agreement between the Indian & 
German Governments . The contribution from Government of Germany for this Project is 
DM 7.9 million with Indian counter part contribution of Rs. 3 crores over five years period. 
Under SETE, a Centre for Electronics Test Engineering (CETE) has been functioning at 
Calcutta to provide the necessary services. Based on a project progress review recently 
carried out jointly by German & Indian Experts, another Centre . for Electronics Test 
Engineering has been recommended at Bangalore and this has started functioning recently. 
SETE has been given an additional task of marketing the STQC services such as 
Training, Counselling, Certification etc., The revenue thus generated is being paid in SETE 
(Services) account. 
Funds in SETE(Services) account are being utilised for: 
(a) Expenses towards marketing of STQC services (Printing of Brochures, Releasing 
of Advertisements, participation in Exhibitions, etc.). 
(b) Payment for International Examination Team and Maintenance of Recognitions 
for STQC Certification Services. -
(c) Maintenance of Laboratory Buildings/Equipment of STQC. 
(d) Setting up specialised test facilities for the Industry where gaps exist in the STQC 
labs/Centre. · 
Out of total earning of Rs. 724 lakhs during 1995-96, a sum of Rs. 156 lakhs has been 
earned through marketing services of SETE . 
Simultaneously, Department is also considering restructuring the STQC organisation, so 
as to make them self-sustaining gradually. A Committee has been constituted by the 
Secretary and empowered for examining various alternatives and models for restructuring 
STQC organisation. 
Asked what made the Department to .deman_d Rs. 14 crores for Standardisation Testing 
and Quality Certification (STQC) as compared to that of Rs. 20.90 crores in budget 
estimates for 1995-96, it was stated that during 1995-96, budgetary allocation of Rs. 20.90 
crores was made for STQC as per following break up: 
Budget Support (BS) 
External Budgetary Support 
(EBS) 
- Rs. 8.50 crores 
- Rs. 12.40 crores 
(Indo-German Project-Rs. 3.00 crores & 
DANIDA Project-Rs. 9.40 crores 
20. Due to non-materialisation of DANIDA Project and savings of Rs. 1 crore in Indo­
German Project (due to late start of SETE Project) an amount of Rs. 10.40 crores could not 
be utilised. The balance allocation during 1995-96 was therefore, only Rs. 10.50 crores. Out 
of this Rs. 70 lakhs was cut subsequently as per directives from Ministry of Finance. The 
effective budget utilisation for STQC during the year 1995-96 was therefore Rs. 9.80 crores 
only (Rs. 7.8 crores BS+Rs. 2.00 crores as External Budgetary Support (EBS) for Indo­
German Project). 

21. A budgetary allocation of Rs. 14 crores has been made for the year 1996-97. The 
break up of this was as follows: 
Budget Support (BS) - Rs. 10.00 crores 
External Budgetary Support (EBS) - Rs. 4.00 crores 
(for SETE Under Indo-German Project) 
The Budget Support of Rs. 10 crores includes Rs. 1.50 crores for setting up of 
Electronics Test & Development Centre (ETDC) at Agartala in Tripura State and Rs. 65 
lakhs as the counter part contribution of Govt. of India towards SETE Project as approved 
by the Planning Commission. 
The Committee was apprised that the Software Export Promotion Programme (SEPP) 
seeks to promote integrated development of software in the country for domestic as well as 
export market. In order to achieve this objective the Department of Electronics has set up 
an autonomous body for providing infrastructure facilities the Software Technology Parks of 
India and has undertaken promotion activities like organising seminars, workshops, etc. 
The Committee was informed that the total budgetary outlay for Software Export 
Promotion Programme (SEPP) programme, for the entire 8th Plan period, was Rs. 20.6 
crores. Since this was exhausted during the first three years of this Plan period, the 
Department sought an enhanced amount of Rs. 33.25 crores against Rs. 20.6 crores, 
approved earlier for the Plan period, for activities connected with creating additional 
capacity/strengthening data. communication infrastructure, and improvement in productivity 
and standards by promoting software engineering practices. However, the Planning 
Commission did not agree to the request for enhanced allocation and the total allocation fer 
the Programme stood at Rs. 20.6 crores as originally approved. The Department, however, 
managed to get an additional allocation of Rs. 4.25 crores for the year 1995-96, which was 
Rs. 35 lakhs less than that of the previous year. 
22. The project has thus not suffered since the additional requirement was met through 
the loan taken from the Three Sta'te Agencies i.e. Andhra Pradesh Government Rs. 1.00 
crores; Kerala Government-Rs. 2.82 crores; and NOIDA Authority-Rs. 3.00 crores 
(Total Rs. 6.82 crores) for the purchase of Datacom equipment. As per the terms of the 
loan, the loan amount would be repaid by the STPI through their internal revenue 
generation. 
23. Advanced Technology Programme in Computer Networking (ATPCN). ERNET 
(Education & Research Network) project, for building up national expertise in the field of 
computer networking, has bloomed into a pioneer network for academic and research 
community and provides Internet access. 
Computer Maintenance Corporation (CMC) Ltd. 
24. In 1994-95 the company achieved a sales turnover Rs. 145 crores. The following 
projects were undertaken by the company during the year: 
The Screen-based Stock Trading System (BOLT) for the Bombay Stock Exchange. 
Across the counter sales of Unit Certificates for Unit Trust of India. 
Jgcket Inspection System for ONGC. 
Container Terminal Control System (CTCS) for Bombay Port Trust. 
CMCMAIL Package for Madras Stock Exchange. 
ELINT Ground Processing & Display System Project (EGDPS) for DLRL. 

During 1995-96, the company achieved a turnover of Rs. 180 crores. The Company 
formed five strategic Business Units in Customer Service, System .Integration, International 
Operations, Education & Training and INDONET with specific directions formulated for 
each of the units. 
Electronics Trade and Technology Development Corporation (ET &T) 
25. During the year 1994-95 the company achieved a turnover of Rs. 51.47 crores. 
ET &T has been selected by Overseas Trading Houses as its buying agent for exportable 
goods and has exported 6400 numbers of CfV sets to Germany. 
The Company has gone in for a revival plan which is under consideration of the 
Government. A turnover of Rs. 30 crores (provisional) was recorded during 1995-96. 
Society for Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering & Research (SAMEER) 
26. During the year 1994-95, SAMEER, Bombay took up installation of a perimeter 
protection radar, a bistatic radar at its premises for demonstration. 
Besides, four different types of communication antennas V-UHF, UHF, C-band and L­
band have been designed and developed for LCA project sponsored by ADA, Bangalore. 
During 1995-96 Industrial Consultancy work on development of an energy audit 
software package for Maharashtra State Electricity Board was completed. Under IQEC 
programme an integrated optical 2X2 directional complex on Lithium Niob:tte substrate had 
been fabricated. 3 link pairs of Microwave fence radar were fabricated an<\ tested. An 
Engineering model of Collision avoidance radar had been completed. 
National Centre for Software Technology (NCST) 
27. The Committee was informed that the first nation-wide competence examination in 
Software Technology was conducted at 3 levels during September, 1994. The second 
examination in this series was conducted in the month of March, 1995 . 
. 
NCST staff members bagged the first three prizes in an international contest conducted 
by Global Information Systems Technology, Inc., a US based company which works in the 
area of computer based training. 
During 1995-96, a version of the pipeline scheduling system had b~en completed and 
was under operational test. A working version of the aircraft scheduling system was also 
completed. A prototype of the transportation scheduling shell was stated to be ready for 
demonstration and evaluation. In the field of network trouble shooting system requirements 
and design documents for the development of a prototpye were ready. In the area of 
remedial teaching system the final version of mathematics was being field tested. A 
relational Algebra Workbench has been developed. In the case of Text simplification 
system-Version I had ben completed and Version II was under progress.The educational 
cooperation system had been developed further, extending NCST educational courses to 
three new locations in Madras, Pune and Mumbai. Authentications software for use by 
banks had been implemented and delivered. Besides, software for automatically translating 
telephone directory entries from English database of Hindi has been developed and would 
be used for producing the MTNL, Mumbai Hindi Telephone Directory. 

Centre for Electronics Design & Technology of India (CEDTI) 
28. CEDTI, now registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860, as a single society 
by merging the existing 6 CEDTs has adopted an integrated approach to achieve economy. 
The training courses were conducted as per schedule at all centres. 
During 1995-96 all the seven CEDTs continued to run short term/long tenn training 
programmes in their respective areas. Besides, the following thrust areas were identified for 
national priority: 
- Process control Instrumentation & Manufacturing Technology. 
- Electronics Product Design & Technology. 
- Information & Maintenance Technology. 
- Industrial Instrumentation & Transmission Technology. 
- Power Electronics. 
- Reliability of Electronic Equipments. 
- Opto-Electronics. 
- Agni-Instrumentation & Control. 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) 
The Committee was Informed that an 8 node PARAM 9000 prototype computer was 
fabricated and demonstrated. The prototype of P ARAM 9000/SS was unveiled in 
Supercomputing '94 in Washington DC, USA. 
Besides, porting of the T-80 for weather forecasting on P ARAM 8600 and on P ARAM 
9000 had been completed in multilingual technology, several new products were introduced, 
such as, technology for voter ID Cards, teleprompter for Doordarshan etc., multilingual on­
line video editl>r using LIPS technology which was used to subtitle 50 films for telecasting in 
various regional languages. 
Electronics ·Research & Developme~t Centre of India (ER&DCI) 
29. The following projects by ER&DCI were completed: 
1. Remote Control system for EOT cranes. 
2. Dual Power DC-DC converter. 
3. Medium power DC-DC converter. 
4. Electronic weighing system for wagon Tippler in Coal Handling Plants. 
5. Minimum DAS and efficiency software for Kolaghat Thermal Power Station, 
WBPDCIL. 
6. Loud Speaker System for Vidyasagar Setu, Calcutta. 
7. Electronic Road Guide System. 
About 57 technologies were stated to have been transferred and technology consultation 
had been provided to 137 ind.~try partners. 
During 1995-96 the Centre augmented its infrastructural facilities and undertook R&D 
projects and consultancy work in the areas of information technology, computer software, 
solar apRlications, communications and rural applications. 
The following projects continued during the year under review: 
- Magnetic billing for car parking. 
- Telemonitoring system for coal mines. 

- Switch Mode Power Supply (SMPS) unit for Programmable Logic Controller (PLCs). 
- Micro-controller based UPS. 
- Electric Photo Identity Cards for Indian Citizens. 
- Intruder Alarm System for office building. 
- Development of 14 bit industrial synchronous digital converter. 
- Microprocessor based control circuits for GTO Inverters. 
- Controller for Vector Controlled Cycloconvertor Based Synchronous Machine. 
- Switched Reluctance AC Drive. 
- High Performance UPS. 
- Computerised Announcement cum Enquiry System for Airports and Railways 
(CAESAR). 
- Frame Relay Interface. 
-VERSA PC Video. 
- KU Bank DRS. 
- Multimedia for Biomedical Engineering Gallery. 
- Direction Finder for locating the beacon (rescue aid for fishermen). 
Software Technology Parks of India (STPI) 
30. IBS Earth Station installation at Gandhinagar was completed and INTELSA T have 
listed this facility for operation as an F3 Earth Station. With this the facilities at Bangalore, 
Hyderabad, Thiruvan ·anthapuram and Gandhinagar/Ahmedabad were stated· to have been 
identified by INTELSAT for operation as international gateways. Besides, STPI has 
developed a Home Page on its World Wide Web (WWW) servers located at STPI­
Hyderabad and Bangalore for dissemination of Information about STPI operations. About 
50,000 Internet users around the globe have accessed this information. 
OTHER PROGRAMMES 
Technology Development Council (TDC) 
31. During the year, the Council pursued about 30 ongoing projects. Besides, 8 new 
projects were initiated. The following projects are nearing completion and technology 
transfer is underway: 
(a) Vector controlled AC motor drives. 
(b) Optical power meter. 
(c) Gamma camera. 
(d) Route interlocking system for Indian Railways. 
(e) Expert system in CNC machines to assist process planning. 
In 1995-96, 8 projects were completed and work in respect of 17 other projects 
progressed. Nine new projects were initiated in the year. Specific projects relating to socio­
economic impact of electronics were being persued as follows: 
- Development of cartographic software system in urban and regional planning. 
- Electronics data loggers to optimise use of natural resources in village level planning. 
- Development of spatial information system on data availability in planning of 
Science and Technology inputs. 
- Farmer information system etc. 

10 
Asked about the justification for the increased allocation from a sum of Rs. 1.49 crores 
for the Technology Development Council Projects in the last years Budget to Rs. 24.17 
crores in the budget estimates for 1996-97, it was stated that the extra-mutual funding of 
R&D projects scattered under various sub-heads namely Technology Development Council 
itself, NRC, NMC, EMDC, IEPP, Health Care and part of Technology Missions have been 
pooled under Technology Development Council programme and the budget has also been 
pooled accordingly. This pooling has been done for better, focus and improved 
prioritisation, monitoring and evaluation. 
National Radar Council (NRC) 
32. NRC has supported 137 technology development projects in 44 different institutions 
located in 14 States. Of these, 119 projects have been completed. As a result of techniques, 
technologies and equipment developed under this programme, indigeneous production of 
about Rs. 57 crores has been realised. 
Participation at the International Defence Exhibition'95 (IDEX-95) held at Abu Dhabi, 
UAE was supported under this programme. The participation led to initial trial orders for 
small arms training simulators. 
Six projects were completed in 1995-96 and 13 ongoing ones were pursued. The working 
group under the NRC recommended 8 projects, out of which one for initiation at the 
Regional Engineering College, Trichy was approved. 
The projects have resulted in creation of a wide technology base capable of supporting 
manufacturing and product development in high tech areas. It has also led to generation of 
skilled manpower and establishment of a sound infrastructure required for carrying out 
advanced research. 
The Department was asked about the justification for reduction to the tune of Rs. 0.83 
crores in the allocations in budget estimates 1996-97 under the National Radar Council 
Projects and whether the provision of Rs. 1 lakh was sufficient. In reply the Department. 
informed that the budget head of National Radar Council had been merged with Technology 
Development Council Programme and only an indicative budget provision of Rs. 1 lakh had 
been kept under National Radar Council projects. The National Radar Council Projects 
would be funded from Technology Development Council budget depending on the merits to 
ensure better performance. 
Some Members referred te the failure of Radar network in the context of arms 
dropping incident which took place at Purulia some time back. It was explained by the 
representatives of the Department of Electronics that the civil and military Radar Network 
functioned differently keeping in view the strategic aspects as also the possible surveillance 
by the enemy. 
Electronics Material Development Council (EMDC) 
33. During 1994-95, 11 on-going projects were under implementation. Two projects in 
the area of electro-ceramic Grade BaC03/SrC03 and specialised epoxy for printed circuit 
board were completed. 
In..1995-96, thirty one projects had been completed under EMDC funding which include 
14 industry oriented R & D projecrs, 4 infrastructure building and characterisation projects ' 
and 13 Advanced Materials, Development projects. 
Two New projects in the area of dielectric resonators and filters and epoxy resin for 
copper clad laminates were approved for funding during the year. The technology for high 
purity silica glass developed under EMDC funding was transferred to the industry and that 
for microwave ferrites was advertised for transfer of technology. 

11 
Asked whether the allocation of Rs. 3.01 crores in Electronics Material Development 
Programme affected the Department. Adversely, it was stated that out of the above 
allocation, Rs. 3 crores were towards Electronics Material Development Programme 
basically for Centre for Materials for Electronics Technology (CMET) - a Society under 
the Department of Electronics and only a notional amount of Rs. One lakh was for R&D 
funding through Electronics Material Development Council (EMDC). This would meet most 
of the ongoing commitments for the building, recurring requirements as well as some capital 
equipments of C-MET. However, as per EFC provision, upto 1996-97 a total of Rs. 19.80 
crores was planned to be spent for C-MET activities. Due to sho'rtage of funds, only Rs. 
13.57 crores were released till 1995-96. With the proposed release of Rs. 3 crores during 
1996-97, still there would be a shortfall of Rs 3.2 crores. This shortfall has resulted in the 
material characterisation equipment which was the most important part for the successful 
implementation of project. Therefore, the facilities needed to be urgently augmented to 
ensure that development projects are satisfactorily carried out. Additional funds would help 
in this regard. 
Advanced Technology Programme in Computer Networking (ATPCN) 
34. During the year consolidation of ERNET efforts in infrastructure and service 
provision to academic and research community was advanced and was backed by R&D 
efforts undertaken at various sites. 
~RNET is stated to be the first Network in the country to support satellite and 
terrestrial WAN as a single composite internetwork WAN connecting campus LANs. The 
number of institutions connected has crossed 600 and the number of users availing of full 
suite of internet services increased manyfold. Resources on the network have also gathered 
momentum with over ten web servers coming into operation during the year. 
In 1995-96, Installation and commissioning of the VSAT network (SATWAN, the 
Satellite WAN) has been successfully implemented with 45 VSATs in operation. The 
Satellite backbone has proved excellent complement to Terrestrial backbone network which 
was a combination of 64 K and 9.6 K links, by providing a robust infrastructure and 
potential for wide geographical reach. International link capacity has also been tripled by the 
additional 128 K from satellite hub. 
In line with the strengthened backbone infrastructure, the mail services, communication 
servers, routers, etc., were also upgraded. There is a tremendous user demand and number 
of institutions connected has crossed 650. 
Electronics Industry Development Project (EIDP) 
35. The programme undertakes upgrading the quality of training in Electronics & 
computers in selected Engineering colleges & Polytechnics relevant to the needs of Indian 
electronics industry. Strengthening the laboratories, libraries & class infrastructure, training 
of faculty & support staff, development of learning material for various courses, training of 
in-service professionals etc. are being undertaken. About 2900 manweeks of training has 
been provided for teachers. Over 2000 students participated in the Industry Attachment 
Programme. 
The Instruction Enhancement Programmes (IEPs) for 43 courses have been conducted 
by RCs for the faculty members of the Participating Institutions . About 500 faculty members 
have so far benefited from IEPs. In addition, 20 courses have also been conducted so far for 
laboratory and library support staff. Industry Attachment Programme in 14 Engineering 
colleges (Electronics and Computers Streams) for the students of 3rd/4th year is continuing. 
2000 students have already bene'fited from this programme. About 350 industries have been 
involved so far. 

Generation of Special Manpower for Computers 
36. The University Grants Commission (UGC) and the All India Council for Technical 
Education (AicrE) jointly worked out a scheme to support proposals for the augmentation 
of Computer Hardware/Software facility in the existing MCA institutions. 
Based on the AlcrE's recommendations, DOE jointly with the UGC and AICTE has 
worked out a pilot scheme to carry out strengthening of four of the existing MCA 
institutions , one from each region, two jointly with the UGC and two with the AlcrE on a 
cost sharing basis. 
During the year, the S.N.D.T. Women 's University, Mumbai and Thapar Institute of 
Engineering and Technology, Patiala received the first instalment of grant of Rs. 15 lakhs. 
Asked about the justification for decline in the allocations made in the budget estimates 
and revised estimates of last year and the budget estimates for this year in respect of Special 
manpower Development Programme from Rs. 30.53 crores in budget estimates, R s. 25.53 
crores in revised estimates of last year and Rs. 21.80 crores in budget estimate for 1996-97, it 
was stated that the major portion of budget allocations under the Special Manpower 
Development Programme were on account of the Electronics Industry Development Project. 
This was a programme which, in addition to being supported by Govt. of India, was also 
being supported by the World Bank and Swiss Development Cooperation (SDC). Base4 on 
reviews of the project by World Bank and SDC, the project had been resulting into reduced 
cost of the project. 
Technology Development for lndlan languages (TOIL) 
37. The achievements in the field of Technology Development for Indian Languages as 
on March 1995 in various thrust areas were as follows: 
(1) Corpora & Machine Translation systems have been developed in many Indian 
languages. 
(2) Human Machine lntedace Systems (HUMIS) Unit has been developed. 
(3) Fundamentals of Natural Language Processing (FNLP) in various software modules 
were developed for generation, analysis and identification of Sanskrit nouns and 
verbal forms. • 
The following were the achievements under ongoing projects: 
(a) Corpora of texts for about 30 lakh words has been completed for English, Hindi 
and Urdu languages, Corpora of about 25 lakh words for Punjabi and Gujarati, 16 
lakhs words for Kashmiri, and 6 lakhs words for Sindhi language have been 
completed. 
(b) Laboratory demnostratable systems 'Anusaraka' are available for machine aided 
translation from Telugu/Malayalamlfamil to Hindi. 
(c) A speech database of acoustic~phonetic features for 1000 words of spoken Hindi 
has been developed. The database is being used for speech synthesis for Hindi 
language. 
(d) A prototype system for computational rendering of Paninian grammar and 
DESIKA is currently under development. Based on Ashtadhyayi, nominal 
generation rules and verbal generation rules have been implemented. 

13 
Rural Development Programme 
38. Under the programme a controller equipment has been developed and has 
undergone successful lab trials including user review. 
Besides, the installation of automatic data logger and sensors to record wind speed, 
wind directions, atmospheric temperature, relative humidity, rainfall and evaporation and 
also three automatic stream flow measuring instruments had been completed. 
Geographic Information Resource Centre (GIRC) was created to process Remote 
Sensing Data and its use for watershed. Six watershed planhing assignments were completed 
for the benefit of NGOs involved in Watershed Planning. 
The following achievements were stated to have taken place in 1995-96: 
(1) Field trials of the rodent controller was commenced in consultation with the Indian 
Grain Storage Institute, Hyderabad. 
(2) Participatory perspective plan preparation methodology of data collection and 
analysis has so far been completed in about 85 villages in Ranchi. 
(3) The Computer Literacy Awareness Programme (CLAP) has been successfully 
implemented in about 256 schools benefiting 10,000 students . 
(4) The milk accounting and collection system for dairies developed by Rajasthan 
Electronics and Instrumentation Ltd., Jaipur was tested at NDDB and Amul, 
Anand. 
Photonics Development Programme 
39. A MOU between RDSO, Ministry of Railways and ECIL-Hyderabad with respect 
. to the project "Fibre Optic Railway Signalling and Communication System for Basin Bridge 
(Mark II)" was finally signed in Feb.' 95. 
In 1995-96, the Optoelectronics Techno1ogy Project was started during the year. An 
industry interaction meeting with LABO Ambala was organised for further considering an 
MoU or technology transfer document under the NPC-WG project "Design and 
Development of Endosocopes" 
The process for technology transfer of the results obtained under the NPC-WG project 
"Preparation of Optical Fibre Grade Silicon Tetrachloride" C-MET, Pune commenced 
during the year. 

RECOMMENDATIONS 
The Coqtmittee observes that the overall budgetary allocation of Rs. 132.50 crores for 
1996-?7 has sharply declined in comparison to the budgetary allocation of Rs. 147 crores in 
1995-96. Viewed from a microscopic angle there have been reductions in the budgetary 
allocation of the National Centre for Software Technology, System Engineering and 
Consultancy Programme, Electronics Material Development Programme, Electronics 
Industry Development Programme, Japanese Language Training Programme, Power Sector 
Efectronics Programme, -Industrial Electronics Promotion Programme, Software Export 
Promotion Programme, National Radar Council, Electronics -for Rural Sector & Health Care 
Transportation Systems Programme, Industrial Robotics and Integrated Automation, Energy 
Conservation through Industrial Electronics, Capital Goods Development Programme, 
Technology Missions and Centre for Liquid Crystal Research. 
The Committee feels that with the overall increase in price level the same level of 
activities should cost more in a subsequent year. Reduction in budgetary support goes to 
suggest reduction in the overall activities of the Department. 
At the same time while the overall staff strength is set to register a decline in 1997 as 
compared to 1996, it is significant to note that the posts in higher scales of Rs. 4500-5?00 
and above are on the increase. The decline in the number of posts is mainly confined to the 
Pay Scale of Rs. 3700-5000 and below. This reflects the state of depression which has its 
bearing on the generation of employment. 
The Committee strongly feels that the DoE has failed to orient itself , to the changing 
needs of the country and development. The Department appears to have deviated from its 
directed policy and therefore it needs introspection for a suitable direction in the context of 
National development. 
The Committee observes that an amount of Rs.10.40 crores could not be utilised due to 
non-materialisation of DANIDA project. The Committee observes that the project was not 
planned properly taking all the contingencies into account. This also reflects on the inability 
of the Department to utilis~ foreign assistance. 
There has been significant increase in the operational expenses (Plan as well as Non­
plan) of Electronics Regional Test Laboratories. The actual expenditure was Rs. 3.12 crores 
(Plan) and Rs 1.17 crores (Non-Plan) in 1994-95. It went up to Rs. 3,26 crores (Plan) and 
Rs. 1.40 crores (Non-Plan) and remained at that level in the revised estimates for 1995-96. 
The budget estimates for 1996:97 provide Rs. 3.15 crores (Plan) and Rs. 1.40 crores (Non­
Plan). The Committee feels there is need to check the non-plan expenditure same is the case 
in respect of operational expenses of Electronics and Test and Development Centres. The 
Committee feels that there is need to make such laboratories and test centres self supporting. 
They should provide ·test facilities on commercial basis instead of depending on budgetary 
support. The reduced allocation of Rs. 21.80 crores in the BE for 1996-97 in comparison to 
Rs. 25.53 crores in the Revised Estimates for 1995-96 suggests that the Special Manpower 
Development Programme is not being taken up with the enthusiasm it deserves. Nor does 
there seem to be much intake of trained manpower. Perhaps the computer courses have 
been rendered obsolete in the face of fast changing technology. In these circumstances, the 

Committee fails to understand how the DoE with reduced allocations would manage to 
update the computer courses and achieve results in the Special Manpower Development 
Programme. 
The Committee expresses its concern at another area of reduced allocation of Rs. 3.10 
crores in the BE for 1996-97 in comparison to Rs. 6.19 crores in the Revised Estimates of 
1995-96 in respect of Industrial Electronics Promotion Programmes. The details given in this 
regard in the Performance Budget in respect of individual programmes such as Appropriate 
Automation Promotion Programme (AAPP), Microprocessor Application Engineering 
Programme (MAEP), Electronics for Power Sector, Energy Conservation through Industrial 
Electronics show that the programmes are like a drop in the ocean. The Indian economy 
needs radical changes. Unless these activities having a bearing at one or the other aspect of 
the industrial development are not taken up at appropriate scale, their effect in the eccnomy 
would be marginal. 
The Committee feels that the Rural Electronics Programme with an allocation of Rs. 1 
crore in the BE for 1996-97 needs to be restructured with higher allocations as large chunks 
of population are in the countryside and the agricultural operations as also the output in 
agriculture is the backbone of the industrial development. ' 
The Committee observes that the reduction of about 8% in budgetary support in the 
field of Electronics where the BE for 1996-97 provide Rs. 109.69 crores (Plan) as compared 
to Rs. 118.97 crores in the Revised Estimates for 1995-96 is not a welcome· sign for the 
development of the economy. 
The Committee therefore reiterates that the DoE needs to find for itself a suitable 
direction in the context of requirements of a developing economy. It is a well known 
economic principle that the reduced budgetary support is not a happy scenario for a 
developing economy like ours. 
The attention of the Committee has also been drawn to the following observations 
appearing in the Report of the ComptJoller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 
31st March, 1993 (No. 6 of 1994). 
There was no specific strategy/mechanism for R&D funding till March, 1992. DoE 
streamlined guidelines for R&D funding in electronics in March, 1992. Even then, 
the financial control system actually followed was not adequate. Lack of coordination 
and inadequate planning and monitoring had resulted in lack of follow up in thrust 
areas under the Plan and non-availability· of composite financial data. 
DoE had sanctioned a total of 683 projects till March, 1993 of which 475 projects 
were completed. However, during 1985-93 a total of 222 projects were completed, in 
which time overrun in 104 projects and cost overrun in 34 projects were noticed. 
Assets worth Rs. 42.79 crores were lying with different executing agencies but their 
status was not known to DoE. 

Out of the ongoing projects seven ptojects with a total value of Rs. 5.24 crores were in 
operation for three to five years beyond their projected dates of completion. Four projects 
were delayed by more than two to three years whereas funds amounting toRs. 44.34 crores 
m nine projects did not render productive/fruitful results. 
Although Plan allocation of Rs. 407 crores in Seventh Plan was made under seven 
categories, DoE could not make available the information relating to projects under thrust 
areas. (Para 4.1.8) 
Shortfall in electronic production and electronics exports in different sectors ranged 
from 9.6 percent to 36.1 percent and 17.7 percent to 41.1 percent respectively against targets 
during 1985-93. DoE could transfer know-how/technology in respect of only 76 cases out 
of 222 projects involving technology development; thus technology transfer in 146 cases was 
still pending. Further, in three projects, the technology generated was pending commercial­
isation. (Para 4.1.9) 
Inadequate and improper exercise of financial control resulted in idle investment in 
three public sector undertakings. There were defaults in repayment of loans amounting to 
Rs. 34.81 crores by 17 parties, delay in receipt of 2879 utilisation certificates for grants 
totalling Rs. 384.06 crores and heavy outstanding balances of advances worth Rs. 27.07 
crores. (Para 4.1.10) 
Equipment costing Rs. 0.42 crore were lying unserviceable. Further, under different 
laboratories/centres of Quality Control Directorate, 83 items of equipment were lying 
unserviceable/surplus or idle for long periods, while at a laboratory a sophisticated computer 
system worth Rs. 8 lakhs was inoperative since July 1991 and at a centre at Aurangabad , a 
Soviet computer system has not been installed since October 1990. (Para 4.1.11) 
The software technology parks did not show healthy financial or commercial status by 
which they could become self-sustaining. 
Substantial funds not immediately required by Regional Computer Centre (RCC) 
Chandigarh and Calcutta and Electronics Research and Development Centre (ER&DC) 
Trivandrum were released indiscriminately. 
Two units viz. Building Division and Centre for Advanced study had considerable 
technical and administrative manpower but insufficient activity. (Para 4.1.12) 
The above list of audit observations is only illustrative and not exhaustive. The thrust of 
these observations, inter alia, is that in the absence of an apex monitoring mechanism, macro 
data or costs, duration and output ·.of a project or group of projects could not be ascertained 
and used by DOE to improve overall performance because there was no coordination 
between planning, monitoring and implementation. 
Besides, there was time overrun in 104 projects ranging from three months -to-over two 
years, which was mainly attr ibuted to delay in procurement of equipment and inadequate 
manpower which escalated the cost of 34 projects by Rs. 653.35 lakhs in addition to non­
availability of project know-how in time. 

17 
The Committee sincerely hopes that the DoE will take steps to restructure itselfltake 
corrective action in light of the aforesaid audit observations. The Committee should be 
apprised of the action taken by Department of Electronics. 
After making a detailed scrutiny of the Demands for Grants of the Department of 
Electronics and assessing the progress of various important programmes and projects 
administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs. 156.20 
crores, as sought by the Department of Electronics for the year 1996-97, under Demand No. 
89, may be approved. 
NEW DELHI; 
August 23, 1996 
V. NARAYANASAMY 
Chairman 
Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment and Forests 

ANNEXURE 

SUMMARY OF FINANCIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR THE YEAR 1996-97 
(Provision in Crores) 
S.No. Programme/Scheme 
Attached Office 
(A) 1. Standardisation Testing 
& Quality Certification 
Directorate (STQC) 
Public Sector Undertaking (PSUs) 
(B) 1. Semiconductor 
Complex Ltd. (SCL) 
2. Electronics Trade and 
Technology Develop­
ment Corporation Ltd. 
(ET&T) 
Societies 
(C) 1. Society for Applied 
Microwave Electronics 
Engineering & Re­
search (SAMEER) 
2. National 
Software 
(NCST) 
Centre for 
Technology 
3. Centres for Electronics 
Designs Technology of 
India (CEDTI) 
4. Centre for Develop-
ment of Advanced 
Computing (C-DAC) 
5. Electronics Research 
and Development Cen­
tres of India 
(ER&DCI) 
Plan Non-Plan 
14.00 
27.00 
0.10 
1.80 
0.01 
2.00 
8.00 
1.50 
2.29 
0.60 
2.30 
1.00 
2.35 
Total Purpose 
16.29 To improve quality & re­
liability of electronics pro­
ducts particularly impor­
tant for exports. 
27.00 For rebuilding the VLSI 
project. 
0.70 The provision is for meet­
ing wages & means of the 
ET &T as the Revival Plan 
is under the consideration 
of the Govt. of India. 
4.10 R&D .in the areas of mic­
rowave technology and 
electromagnatics, under­
takes development of com­
ponents, sub-systems sys­
tems and integrated large 
systems for meeting 
specific requirements in 
Defence, Space, Meteorology 
and Industrial Sectors. 
0.01 To provide R&D support 
and advanced training 
facilities to the Computer 
Software Industry. 
3.00 To build expertise in De­
sign Technology and fabri­
cation techniques in area 
of electronics and electro­
mechanical system. 
8.00 Premier institution for in­
itiating development prog­
rammes in areas of mas­
sively p~rallel computer & 
associated software, lan­
guage technology, VLSI 
design and technology. 
3.85 To undertake application 
oriented, region specific 
research, design & de­
v~lopment in state-of­
-the-art electronics 
technology so as to deliver 
know-how for production­
isation at various manufac­
turing units in the country. 

S.No. Programme/Scheme 
6. Centre for Materials 
for Electronics 
Technology (C-MET) 
7. Centre for Liquid Cry­
stal 
8. Software Technology 
Park of India (STPI) 
9. Society for Electronics 
Test Engineering 
(SETE) 
10. Department of Elec­
tronics Accrediated 
Computer Courses 
(DOEACC) Society 
Other Programmes 
1. (a) Sectt. (Admn.Exp) 
(b) Bldg. 
2. Exhibition/Export 
3. Technology Development 
Council (TDC) Prog-
ramme. 
4. Technology Development 
for Indian Languages 
(TDIL) 
5. National Radar Council 
(NRC) 
6. Micro Electronics De­
velopment Programme. 
7. Photonics 
Plan Non-Plan 
3.00 
1.00 
1.21 
0.04 
24.71 
1.50 
0.01 
4.30 
3.00 
Nil 
Nil 
Nil 
6.12 
0.64 
(Provision in Crores) 
Total Purpose 
3.00 To develop technologies 
for range of critical mate­
rials required for Elec­
tronics industry. 
1.00 R&D in Liquid Crystal 
Research and Technology 
for multiple application. 
The provision has been 
made under SEPP. 
The provision has been 
made under STQC. 
7.33 To meet administrative 
0.04 Expenses. 
0.64 To meet expenditure rela t­
ing to exhibitions of elec­
tronics for export promo­
tion. 
24.71 R&D programme in vari­
ous sectors inter discipli­
nary emergmg tech­
nologies and other new 
initiatives. 
1.50 To promote R&D in the 
area of Natural Language 
understanding, processing 
and generation. 
0.01 R&D programme in the 
areas of Radars Naviga­
tional Aids, Sonars etc. 
4.30 R&D programme in VLSI 
Design Development of 
discrete devices and Capi­
tal equipments for VLSI. 
3.00 R&D in Photonics/Op­
toelectronics!Fibreoptics 
- technologies and appli­
cations. 

S.No. Programme/Scheme 
16. Japanese Language 
17. Technology Mission 
18. Rural Electronics 
19. Electronics in Heal~h 
20. Capital Goods Develop­
ment Programme. 
21. Industrial Robots 
22. Other Schemes 
Notes: 
Book adjustment towards 
external assistance 
ToTAL: 
. -
Plan Non-Plan 
0.05 
3.25 
1.00 
0.10 
0.01 
0.01 
0.20 
8.20 
132.50 23.70 
(Provision in Crores) 
Total Purpose 
0.05 To import Japanese Lan­
guage Training specifically 
to professionals in the area 
of Computer Software. 
3.25 To develop National 
strength in a focussed 
manner in selected core 
electronics technology, 
systems and applications 
by implementing well-de­
fined time targeted pro­
jects on priority basis. 
1.00 To promote & develop ap­
propriate electronics tech­
nologies for rural applica­
tions and productionisa­
tion. 
0.10 For maintenance of medi­
cal equipment. 
0.01 Building infrastructure and 
indus,rial base for de­
velopment of much 
needed Capital Goods for 
electronics industry. 
0.01 Development of artifical 
intelligence & electronic 
interfaces for robots and 
to integrate them for ap­
plication m hazardous 
areas. 
0.20 
8.20 To adjust value of equip-
ments received from fore-
ign Govts. 
156.20 
1. Schedule showing the p'rovision for the payment of Grant-in-Aid to Non-Government Bodies at Pages 
41 to 46 of the Detailed Demands for Grants 1996-97 includes the above societies for ongoing projects/ 
activities. 
2. There is no new project/acti vity for which allocation has been made in the Detailed Demands for 
Grants. 

MINUTES 

IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met from 11.10 P.M. to 12.55 P.M. and again from 3.00 P.M. to 4.45 P.M. 
and from 5.10 P.M. to 5.50 P.M. on Tuesday, the 13th August, 1996 in Committee Room 'B', 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri V. Narayanasamy -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri N. Giri Prasad 
4. Shri Narendra Pradhan 
5. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar 
6. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma 
8. Shri Mohd. Ali Ashraaf Fatmi 
9. Dr. Ramkrishan Kusmaria 
10. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
11. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta 
12. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
13. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
14. Shri Kalpnath Rai 
15. Shri K.B. Raut 
16. Shri S. Ramachandra Reddy 
17. Shri Harivansh Sahai 
18. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
19. Kumari Selja 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretar~ 
Shri D.P. Ahuja , Committee Officer 

Representatives of the Department of Electronics 
Shri R. Basu, Secretary 
Dr. V .P. Kodali, Advisor 
Shri S.P. Oberio, Advisor 
Shri Gautam Soni, Advisor 
Shri J .S. Raju, Advisor/DO (STQC) 
Shri S. Mukhopadhyay, Advisor 
Shri S.W. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shri O.N. Vaid, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati P.M. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri S.C. Mehta, Senior Director 
Dr. Gulshan Rai, Director 
Shri B.B. Bahl, Dy. Director 
Shri M.J. Zarabi, CMD, SCL 
Shri J.K. Tyagi, AFA 
Shrimati J.A. Krishnan, S.O. 
• • * 
2. The Committee took up for consideration the Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the 
Department of Electronics. The Secretary in the Department briefly explained for the 
benefit of Members the budgetary allocations on different heads as also the functioning of 
the Department. The Members then sought clarifications on points relating to the Demands 
for Grants. 
3. • • * 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.50 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 22nd 
August, 1996. 
•• • Relates to other matters. 

VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met from 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 23rd August, 1996 in Committee 
Room 'Main', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri V. Narayanasamy -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri N. Giri Prasad 
4. Shri K.R. Jayadevappa 
5. Shri K. Karunakaran 
6. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
7. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
WK SABHA 
8. Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma 
9. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
10. Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta 
11. Shri Kalpnath Rai 
12. Shri K.B. Raut 
13. Shri S. Ramachandra Reddy 
14. Shri Harivansh Sahai 
15. Dr. Swami Sakshijj Maharaj 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee, took up consideration of the Draft Reports on Demands for Grants 
{1996-97) of (i) the Department of Science and Technology (ii) the Department of 
Electronics (iii) the Department of Space and (iv) the Department of Biotechnology. After 
some discussion, the Committee adopted the same with minor amendments. · 
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the date on which these reports 
may be presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha. The Committee 
authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Shri G. Swaminathan or Dr. Mahesh Chandra 
Sharma to present these Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta and in his 
absence Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj or Shri K.B. Raut to lay these Reports on the Table of 
the Lok Sabha. 

4. The Committee placed on record its appreciation for the excellent work done by the 
Secretariat in preparing the Draft Reports and circulating the same to the Members in a 
record time. 
5. The Committee adjourned at 12.20 P.M. 