PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
  
  
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-NINTH REPORT 
  
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-2005) 
OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SPACE 
(DEMAND NO. 89) 
  
  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 26TH AUGUST, 2004) 
(LAID IN THE LOK SABHA ON THE 26TH AUGUST, 2004) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2004/ BHADRAPADA, 1926  (SAKA) 
  
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
  
C O N T E N T S 
  
1.     COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                         
2.     INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                 
3.     REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE         
                                                                                                              
4.     SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS             
                                                                                        
5.     ANNEXURE
                                                                                                          
6.     MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                                            
  
  
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,  
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2004) 
  
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman  
  
Page 1 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz  
3. Dr.Prabha Thakur  
4. Shri Jaswant Singh  
5. Shri Dilip Singh Judev  
6. Dr Biplab Dasgupta  
7. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav  
8. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
9. Smt. Kum Kum Rai  
10. Shri Birabhadra Singh  
  
LOK
  SABHA 
  
11. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal  
12. Shri Jasubhai D. Barad              
13. Shri Sujan Chakraborty  
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhery  
15. Shri Mohan S. Delkar                
16. Shri Anantrao Gudhe  
17. Shri Babubhai Katara  
18. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik             
19. Shri Brahmananda Panda  
20. Smt. Neeta Pateriya  
21. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                          
22. Shri K.C.Singh Baba     
23. Smt. Jayaben  Thakkar  
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                                
25. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh                             
26. Shri D. Venugopal  
27. Shri Sita Ram Yadav  
28. Shri V.Aruna Kumar  
    *29. Shri Rakesh Singh          
    #30. Shri Shivajirao A.Patil 
  @31. Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT 
      Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
      Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary  
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
    * Nominated w.e.f. 13th August, 2004. 
    #  Nominated w.e.f. 20th August, 2004. 
   @ Shri Atma Singh Gill ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 20th August, 2004 consequent 
upon his nomination to the       
Page 2 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

       Committee on  Food, Consumer Affairs & Public Distribution. 
  
INTRODUCTION 
  
      I, the Chairman of the Department-rel ated Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this One Hundred Twenty-Ninth Report of the Committee.  This Report deals with the 
detailed Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Department of Space (Demand No.89). 
  
2.  In the meeting of the Committee held on the 9th  August, 2004 the Secretary and other Officers of the 
Department of Space gave an overv iew of the various activities of  the Department and the Members
sought clarifications on va rious aspects of the perfor mance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise
the Demands for Grants. 
  
3.  The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers  of the Department for re plying to the clarificati o
sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scruti n
the Demands for Grants of the Department of Space. 
  
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 24th August, 2004. 
  
  
REPORT 
  
 India has an impressive array of achievements in the scientif ic and technological fields afte r 
independence. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the arena of Space. India has effectively developed
space technology, applied it successfully for its rapid developments and is presently offering a variety of
space services globally. The Space Technology has allowe d the nation to move into the world of high
technology, a place previously occupied only by more developed nations.  
2.         The Indian space efforts started in th e sixties with the establis hment of Thumba Equatorial
Rocket Launching Station near Th iruvananthapuram for the scientific  investigation of the ionosphere
over the earth’s magnetic equator that passes over Thumba. During the formative decade of 1960’s 
space research was conducted by Indi a mainly with the help of s ounding rockets. The Indian Space
Research Organisation (ISRO) was formed in 1969. Space resear ch activities were provided an
additional fillip with the form ation of the Space Commission and the Department of Space by the
Government in 1972. In th e 70’s satellite programmes like Arya bhatta, Bhaskara, Rohini and APPLE
were conducted. The success of those programmes led to the era of operational satellite programmes like
INSAT and IRS came into being. In dia has come a long way in devel oping a multi fa ceted and multi-
dimensional space programme-which is indigenous, self-reliant and a pplications driven. India is now 
capable of building its own state of the art satellites. Now INSAT and IRS are the major programmes o f
ISRO. 
NEW DELHI; 
August 24, 2004 
P.G.NARAYANAN, 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on  
 Science & Technology, Environment & 
Forests
Page 3 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

3.         The Indian space programme has th e primary objective of deve loping space technology and 
application programmes to  meet the developmental needs of  the country. Towards meeting this
objective, two major operational spac e systems have been established — the Indian National Satellite 
(INSAT) for telecommunication, tele vision broadcasting and meteorolog ical services and the Indian
Remote Sensing Satellite (IRS) for resources monitoring and management . Two satellite launch
vehicles, the Polar Satellite Launc h Vehicle (PSLV) for launching remo te sensing satellites into the
required polar orbits and the Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) for launching
communication and meteorological satellites in to 36,000 km high Geosynchronous Transfer Orbit
(GTO) have been operationalised.  
4.         The application programmes cover te lecommunications, television broadcasting, tele-education, 
telemedicine, meteorology, disaster  management, resources survey and management. A new initiative
for the exploration of the solar system has been  taken up with the announcem ent of Chandrayaan-1, a 
scientific mission to moon.   
5.         The Committee was informed that dur ing the year 2004-05 the Depa rtment has targeted the 
following action plans: 
a)   Launch and Operationlisat ion of GSAT-3 (Edusat) on board th e third flight of India’s GSLV. 
Edusat is a satellite dedicated for the spreading education at all levels covering a large part of the
country including North Eastern region. 
b)   Launch and Operationlisation of IRS-P5  (Cartosat) on board India’s PSLV for mapping 
applications. 
c)   Launch and Operationalisat ion of INSAT-4A, the first satellite in f ourth generation INSAT 
services, to augment the INSAT system with additional C and Ku band transponders 
d)   Initiate work on ASTROSAT, INSAT-4D/GA|SAT-5 & Oceansat-2 satellite. 
e)   Progress in other ongoing pr ojects, viz., Cartosat-2, RISA T, CUSP, GSLV Mk-III, Space 
Capsule Recovery Experiment (SRE), GSAT-4, INSAT-4 and Chandrayaan-1. 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
6.         The Committee was informed that at th e plan outlay approved for th e Department of Space fo r
the Tenth Plan is Rs.13,250 crores.   The estimated Non-Plan outlay during the Tenth Plan is Rs. 2000 
crores.  Thus, the total outlay for 10th plan is estimated to be Rs.15, 250 crores. 
7.         The Budget Estimate for the year  2004-05 is Rs.2732.01 crores with a Plan component o f 
Rs.2400.70 crores and Non-Plan component of Rs.331.31 crores.  
The details of the non-plan and plan break-up of the provision for B.E 2004-05 is 
as follows;    
                                                                                                                      (Rupees in crores) 
The Detailed breakup of the budgetary allocation is given in Annexure 
8.         A provision of Rs.64.08 crores ha s been sought in B.E. 2004-05 under Direction & 
administration/other Programmes, which include speci al Indigenisation/Advance ordering, international
cooperation, Department of S pace Secretariat, ISRO head quarters, civil en gineering division & central
                         Non-Plan Plan Total
Budget Estimates 2004-05 (Gross) 331.29 2400.70 2732.01
Budget Estimates 2004-05 (Net) 331.29 2400.00 2731.29
Page 4 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

management. 
9.         The Committee was informed that the enhanced budgetary support  is mainly towards : 
•        Increased provision for GSLV Mk III (Increase: Rs. 240 crores), Chandrayaan (Increase: 
Rs. 70 crores), Radar Imaging Satellite (I ncrease: Rs. 90 crores) initiated during 10th five 
year plan period.  
•        Provision for new activities/programmes proposed to be taken up during 2004-05 which  
includes Oceansat-2 satellite (BE 2004-05: Rs. 20.00 crores), Resourcesat-2 satellite (BE 
2004-05: Rs. 5.00 crores) and Astrosat (BE 2004-05: Rs. 30.00 crores).  
INDIAN LUNAR MISSION-CHANDRAYAN-1 
10.       India has vast experience in developing and launching operational spacecrafts systems for survey 
and management of natural resour ces, meteorological services a nd satellite comm unication.  The 
technologies developed and availabl e now at ISRO can be fully expl oited for embarking on planetary
missions with well thought out scientific objec tives.  The Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) is 
capable of undertaking missions to moon and other terrestrial planets. 
11.       Chandrayaan-1, India’s first scientific mission to Moon is slated for launch during 2007.  The 
primary objectives of the mission are to expand the sc ientific knowledge about th e origin and evolution
of moon, upgrade India’s technologi cal capabilities and provide ch allenging opportunities to the young
scientists working in planetary sciences. 
12.       The Committee was informed that the  idea of undertaking a scie ntific mission to Moon was 
mooted by the Indian Academy of Sciences and it wa s further discussed by the Astronautical Society of
India.  Based on recommendations of  the scientific community and as a first major initiative, a National
Lunar Mission Task Force was consti tuted by ISRO with leading scient ists and technologists from all
over the country for considering a nd making an assessment of the possi ble configuration and feasibility
of taking up an Indian Moon Miss ion.  The task team conducted a feasibility study and recommende d
the Indian lunar mission detailing sc ientific objectives, instruments to  be flown, launch and spacecraft
technologies that are available and those to be de veloped, setting up of a Deep Space Network (DSN)
station for communication between lunar craft and earth and budgetary aspects.  
13.       The Study Report of the Task Team was reviewed in April 2003 by a peer group of about 100
eminent scientists from various re levant fields of planetary & space  physics, earth science, physics,
astronomy and cosmology and after detailed discussion, the participants unanimously recommended that
India should undertake the Moon Mission. 
14.       The recommendations of the task team were  as follows: 
•        The Indian Moon Mission assu mes significance in the context of the international 
scientific community consider ing several exciting missions in planetary exploration, in
the new millennium. 
•        ISRO has the necessary e xpertise to develop and launch the Moon Mission with
imaginative features and it would be different from the past missions.  Hence ISRO 
should go ahead with the project approval and implementation. 
•        Apart from technological and scientific gains, it would provide the needed thrust to basic 
science and engineering research in the country.  The pr oject would help return of young 
talents to the arena of fundamental research. 
•        The Academia, in particular, the university sc ientists would find part icipation in such a 
project intellectually rewarding.  In this c ontext, the scientific objectives would need 
further refinement to include  other innovative ideas from a broader scientific communit y
Page 5 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

through Announcement of Opportunity, etc. 
Subsequently, Government of India has approved ISRO’s propos al for the first Indian Moon 
Mission, called Chandrayaan-1. 
15.       The Committee was informed that the  Scientific Objectives of  Chandrayaan-1 aimed at 
chemical, mineralogical and photo- geologic mapping of the moon in visi ble, near infrared, low energy 
ad high energy X-rays with high spatial resolution.  Specifically, the objectives will be to carry out high-
resolution three-dimensional mapp ing of topographic features along with the simultaneous mapping o f 
distribution of minerals such as Si, Al, Mg, Ca, Ilmenites (FeTiO3, which may retain ³He) and elemental 
chemical species including radioactiv e nuclides.  This could unravel th e mysteries about the origin and 
evolution of the planetary system in general and moon-earth system in  particular. The instruments that 
will be used for the mapping are: 
•                    Terrain Mapping stereo Camera (TMC) 
•                    Hyper Spectral Imager (HySI) 
•                    Lunar Laser Ranging Instrument (LLRI) 
•                    Collimated Low Energy X-ray spectrometer (LEX) 
•                    Solar X-ray Monitor (SXM) 
•                    High Energy X-ray/γ-ray spectrometer (HEX) 
  
In addition to the above Indian payloads, a provi sion of 10 kg is made fo r international/national
proposals on new ideas and experiments. 
16.       The Committee was further informed that to provide continuous radio link with the 
Chandrayaan-1 spacecraft, a Deep Space network (DSN) st ation will be set up ne ar Bangalore and this
station would   track the spacecraft which will  be about 4,00,000 km away, communicate with it an d
send commands as well as receive the scientific data from its instruments. 
17.       The Committee is happy to note that blue print of India’s first scientific mission to moon, known 
as Chandrayaan-I has already been approved by the Government during 2003-2004.  The Committee has 
been given to understand that objectiv es of the Indian lunar mission has also been approved along with
the approval of the entire mission programme. 
18.       Although, the Committee is  happy with over all scientific objectives of the mission programme, 
it would also like to add from  research perspective,  the  following few  more objectives that should also 
be considered  and fulfilled by DOS for future  lunar explorations: 
1.                  Distribution and utilisation of the lunar energy resources; 
2.                  Distribution and utilisation of the lunar mineral resources; 
3.                  Utilisation  of the lunar unique environmen t i.e. high vacuum, no  atmospheric activity, 
no global magnetic field, stable geological structure, weak gravity, no pollution; 
19.       The Committee further feels that fo r better understanding of the moon’s resources, 
environmental characteristics and surface topogra phy, the Department may consider the following fo r
further  study:- 
1.                  Detection of  three dimensional imaging of lunar surface; 
2.                  Measurement of three dimensional imaging of lunar surface;
Page 6 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

3.                  Analysis of lunar structure and topography of shapes, sizes  distribution and density o f 
impact craters on lunar surface 
4.                  Study of the ages of the lunar surface with  a special evaluation of the evolutionary
history of moon and its structure; 
5.                  Determination of the contents  and distribution of  some basic and ke y elements on the 
lunar surface including chro mium, Manganese, Oxygen, Po tassium, Sodium, Thorium,
Uranium and Rare Earth Elem ents etc. in addition to  Magnesium, Aluminum, Silicon,
Calcium, Iron and Titanium which the Chandrayaan-I mission ha s already kept fo r 
chemical mapping  on   lunar surface as a part of its objectives by the Department.  
6.                    A study regarding chemical evolution of moons crust along with its geophysics; 
7.                  Measurement of thickness of lunar Regolith to determine abundance of noble gas on the 
satellite including Helium; 
8.                   Exploration of the environments of the moon with a deep study of irradiation history of
the satellite by obtaining useful data about the high energy particle flux and low energy
ion around the moon. 
20.       The Committee hope that these studies will ad equately help DOS  to acqui re sufficient scientific 
knowledge about this natural satelli te of the earth and will provid e challenging opportunities for further
planetary research for the younger generations. 
SPACE TRANSPORTATION 
21.       The Committee was informed that the sa tellite launch vehicle development programme is aimed 
at achieving self-reliance for launching Indian satellites fo r remote sensing, communication, 
meteorology and scientific missions as  well as to offer launch services  to international space agencies.
The commissioning of the Geo-sync hronous Satellite Launch Vehicle, GSLV, was the most significant 
event in space transportation progr amme during the year. The deve lopment of indigenous cryogenic
stage of GSLV has also made subs tantial progress with the testing of  its engine for long duration. The
Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle had yet another successful flight during the year when it placed the latest
Indian remote sensing sa tellite, RESOURCESAT-1, precisely into the specified polar Sun Synchronous 
Orbit on October 17, 2003.  
GEOSYNCHRONOUS SATELLITE LAUNCH VEHICLE (GSLV) 
22.       The Committee was informed that th e second developmental te st flight of India’s 
Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle, GSLV-D2, was successf ully carried out on May 8, 2003
from Satish Dhawan Space Centre SHAR, Sriharikota (SDSC SHAR). W ith this second successful test
flight, GSLV has been commissioned to launch 2000 kg class satellites into Geosynchronous Transfe r
Orbit. GSLV-D2 successfully placed  an experimental sa tellite, the 1820 kg GSAT-2, in an orbit of 180 
km perigee and 36,000 km apogee with an orbital inc lination of 19.2 degree with respect to the equator.
The Committee was further informed  that the GSLV project was ini tiated by ISRO in 1990 with the
objective of acquiring launch capability for Geosynchronous satellites. The first test flight of the vehicle,
GSLV-D1, was conducted on April 18, 2001 when the 1,540 kg experime ntal satellite, GSAT-1, was 
placed in a Geosynchronous Transfer Orbit (GTO). 
23.       In the second test flight, GSLV-D2, the higher payload capability was achieved by incorporating 
enhanced propellant loading in core  solid motor, high pressure engine  in liquid propellant strap-ons an d 
second stage and optimisati on of structural elements . In its present configur ation, GSLV is a 49 m tall
three-stage vehicle weighing about  414 tonne at lift-off. The first stage comprises a solid propellant 
motor (S139) and four li quid propellant stra p-on motors (L40H). It carries 138 tonne of H ydroxyl 
Page 7 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

Terminated Poly Butadiene (HTPB) based solid pr opellant. The stage develops about 4736 kilo Newton
thrust. Each of the four strap-on (L40H) motors are filled with 42 tonne of  hypergolic propellants 
(UH25) and Nitrogen Tetroxide (N2O 4). The second stage of GSLV  also uses UH25 and N2O 4. The 
third stage uses a Cryogenic Stage (CS). The stage burns for a durati on of about 705 seconds generating
a nominal thrust of 73.5 kilo Newton. The vehicle equipment ba y housing electronic systems like
processors, navigation system, control system, guidance system, telemetry system, telecommand system,
etc., is mounted above the cryogenic stage. The sp acecraft, which is mounted above the equipment bay
through a payload adapter, is separated by a Merman clamp- band joint and spring mechanism that 
provides the required separation velocity. Th e Redundant Strap Down Inertial Navigation
System/Inertial Guidance System (RESINS/(IGS), housed in the equipment bay guides the vehicle from
lift-off to spacecraft injection. A C- band transponder on the vehicle he lps in tracking it from groun d
based Radars. The complete telemetry and tracking of  GSLV from lift-off to satellite injection is 
supported by four gr ound stations located at SDSC SHAR , Sr iharikota and the down range stations at
Port Blair, Brunei and Biak in Indonesia. All th ese stations are networke d with SDSC SHAR during
launch.  
24.       The Committee is pleased to know  that the Department has achi eved self-reliance in space 
transportation and it has accepted all challenges which has come  before it with great passion and
achieved unprecedented success in it. 
CRYOGENIC UPPER STAGE PROJECT (CUSP) 
25.       The Committee was informed that Cryoge nic Upper Stage Project (C USP) envisages design and 
development of an indi genous  restartable cryoge nic upper stage employing liquid oxygen as oxidize r
and liquid hydrogen as fuel for upper stage of GSLV. The endurance test  for duration of more than 16
minutes on the Cryogenic Engine conducted in Dece mber, 2003, which was a si gnificant achievement.
The test involved the fi ring of the Cryogenic Main Engine wi th 7.1 tonne thrust for 1000 seconds,
simultaneously with two 200 kg thrust Cryogenic Steering Engines,  all mounted on a single block as
envisaged in the actual GSLV  flight stage. The steeri ng engines are used to c ontrol the flight path o f
GSLV during the third stage thrusting. The turbo- pump fed, regeneratively cooled engine for the 
cryogenic stage is required to burn fo r a duration of 720 seconds in actual  flight. Earlier, in November,
the engine had been tested for 200 seconds in this configuration. The long duration test conducted in
December marked the conclusion of  the qualification of the engine, which has been tested for a
cumulative duration of 6,000 seconds so far through three hard ware sets. First Cryo Upper Stage
(CUS1) integration has been comp leted during the year excluding th e engine. Two propellant expulsion
tests were carried out on LOX prope llant tank. Integration of CUS2 st age assembly was also initiated
during the year. 
26.       The Committee commends the De partment for achieving the feat  of developing an indigenous
cryogenic engine and hopes that this engine would help India in its lunar mission. 
  
 POLAR SATELLITE LAUNCH VEHICLE (PSLV) 
27.       The Committee was informed that Polar Satellite Launch Ve hicle, PSLV-C5, wa s successfully 
launched on October 17, 2003, from SD SC, SHAR and it placed the 1360 kg Indian remote sensing
satellite, RESOURCESAT-1 (IRS-P6) into a 821 km high po lar Sun Synchronous Orbit (SSO). This is 
the heaviest remote sensing satellite launched by ISRO so far. 
28.       PSLV was initially designed and deve loped to place 1,000 kg class Indian remote sensing
satellites into polar SSO. Since it s first successful flight in Oct ober 1994, the capability of PSLV has
been enhanced from 850 kg to the present 1,400 kg into 820 km SSO. PSLV has also demonstrated
multiple satellite launch capability. So far, it has launched seven Indian satellites as well as four small
satellites for international customers.  
Page 8 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

29.       The Committee was further informed that  the improvement in the payload capability of PSLV
over successive flights has been achieved through several means — increase in the propellant loading of 
the first stage solid propellant motor and second and fourth stag e liquid propellant motors, improvement
in the performance of the third stage motor by optim izing motor case and enha nced propellant loading
and employing a carbon compos ite payload adapter. The sequence of  firing of the strap-on motors has 
also been changed from two ground-l it and four air-lit to the pres ent four ground-lit and two air-lit 
sequence. In the PSLV-C5, the meta llic third stage adapter was repl aced by the one built with carbon 
composites. Also, the liquid prope llant second stage was operated at  a higher chamber pressure fo r
better performance. 
30.       In its present configuration, the 44.4 metre tall, 294 tonne PSLV has four stages using solid and 
liquid propulsion systems. The first st age is one of the largest solid pr opellant boosters in the world and
carries 138 tonne of Hydroxyl Term inated Poly Butadiene (HTPB) propellant. The booster develops a
maximum thrust of about 4,762 kN. Each of the si x strap-on solid propellan t motors carries nine 
tonne of solid propellant and produces 645 kN thrust. 
31.       The second stage employs indigenously built Vikas engine and ca rries 41.5 tonne  of liqui d
 propellant  — UH25 as fuel  and Nitrogen  tetroxide (N 2O4) as oxidiser. It gene rates a maximum thrust 
of about 800 kN.  
32.       The third stage uses 7.6 tonne of HTPB- based solid propellant and produces a maximum thrust 
of 246 kN. The fourth and the terminal stage of PS LV has a twin engine configuration using liquid
propellant. Each of these engines generates a maximum thrust of 7.3 kN. 
33.       The metallic bulbous payload fairing of PSLV protects the spacecr aft during the atmospheric
regime of the flight. PSLV employs a large numbe r of stage auxiliary systems for stage separation,
payload fairing separation and jettisoning, etc. 
34.       The Inertial Navigation System in the equipment bay guides the ve hicle from lift-off to 
spacecraft injection into orbit. Th e tracking system provide s real-time information for flight safety an d 
for preliminary orbit determination once the satellite is injected into orbit.  
35.       With seven successive successful launche s, PSLV has proved itself as a reliable vehicle fo r 
launching Indian remote sensing sa tellites. Besides, it has been used for launching a geosynchronous
satellite, KALPANA-1. ISRO has proposed to use PSLV for India’s first mission to moon, 
Chandrayaan-1. 
36.       The government has approved the PSLV Continuation (PSLV-C7 to  PSLV-C13) project. 
Procurement action has been initiate d for hardware and fabrication c ontracts were fina lised during the
year. Realisation of PSLV-C6 that will carry CARTOSAT-1 has commenced. 
EDUCATIONAL TV 
37.       The Committee was informed that INSA T is being used to prov ide Educational TV (ETV) 
service for primary school children in six States. A general enrichme nt programme on higher education
(college sector) is being  telecast on the National network.  
38.       These programmes were provided by the Un iversity Grants Commission (UGC), and are a part
of the countrywide classroom pr ogramme. The Indira Gandhi Nati onal Open University (IGNOU)
broadcasts curriculum-based lectures for students of  the Open University for half an hour daily via the 
national network. 
39.       Gyan Darshan is an exclusive Educatio nal TV channel of India started in January 2000 by
IGNOU, Ministry of Human Resource Development  and Prasar Bharti. At present, Gyan Darshan has 4 
channels namely; GD-1- Best of all GD channe ls, GD-2- Interactive di stance education, GD-3-
Ekalavya Technolo gy Channel and GD-4-GramBha rati. The Committee was in formed that with the 
Page 9 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

launch of EDUSAT, the educational programmes will get a fillip. 
EDUSAT PROGRAMME 
40.       The Committee was informed that the ED USAT programme is planned to provide a sustainable 
distance education service in Indi a using advanced space and ground- based technology. The system is 
primarily meant for school, college and highe r-level education and will  also support non-formal 
education. In the first phase, a pilot pr oject using INSAT-3A and INSAT-3B Ku- band transponders is 
under implementation in Maharashtra, Karnataka and Madhya Pradesh. In Maharashtra, the Y.B.
Chavan State Open University, Nashi k, will use it for distance educati on. In Karnataka, it will be used
by the State Education Department. In Madhya Pradesh, the Rajiv Ga ndhi Technical University will use
it for teaching support.  
41.       In the second phase, the exclusive satellite  EDUSAT, to be launched in  2004, will be used in a 
semi-operational project with one uplink in each beam and about 100 to 200 classrooms per beam. In 
addition to the three Stat es under first phase, two more States  and one national institution will be
covered in the second phase . It is anticipated that more users will fund the ground r eceiver network in
this phase and build it up to about 1000 classrooms per beam.  
42.       In the third phase, the EDUSAT network will be made operational. Manufacturers and service 
providers are expected to replicat e the systems with funding by the en d-users with technical and
managerial support from  DOS. Ground infrastructure to meet the educational requirements of the
country will be built in the opera tional phase. EDUSAT will be able  to support a total of 25 to 30
uplinks and about 5000 remote terminals per uplink. To  meet the full educati onal requirement of the
country, it may be necessary to assemble a constellation of satellites in a phased manner. 
43.       The Committee hopes that with the launch of  EDUSAT the Country will take a qualitative  leap 
in the formal and technical educ ation. The very purpose  of EDUSAT  should be focused on the 
connectivity among various universities , colleges  and schools and enhance the scope and quality of non
formal education.          The Committee hopes that the Educational TV w ould provide a sustainable
distance education service in the country particular ly in the remote and rural areas and help those
students who cannot join regular classroom education.  
REMOTE SENSING APPLICATIONS MISSION (RSAM) 
44.       The Committee was informed that  the ma in goals of the Remote Se nsing Applications Missions
(RSAM) {Earth Observation Applications Mission (EOAM)}  are to (i) evolve newer applications/R&D 
programmes based on techno logy trends leading to operational a pplications programmes; (ii) guiding
total remote sensing applications programmes  towards implementation of remote sensing- based 
solutions, and (iii) steering commer cial activities of remote sensi ng involving development of value-
added services.  Under RSAM (EOAM), various R&D and techno logy development studies like 
horticultural inventory, fluvial geomorphological mapping, snow and gl acier studies, precision farming,
water use in agriculture, surface deformation/ mapping using differenti al SAR interferometry,
desertification monitoring and assessment, geophysical investigations, etc., are being carried out. Apart
from the above, pre-project  studies of Cartosat are planned/taken up under RSAM (EOAM) include hot
spot mapping and monitoring, coal pitheads, riverine wetlands, forest ecosystem, working plan for forest
management, crop growth monitoring system, etc. 
45.       The remarkable developments in space borne  remote sensing technology and its various
applications during the last thr ee decades have firmly established in the mind of the Committee its
immense potential for mapping and monitoring various natural resources and natural disaster.  In the 
recent past, as the Committee has been given to understand that there has been tremendous development
in remote sensing Data collection an alysis and utilization.  The science of remote sensing is no more an 
art of map making from satellite images.  It has now evolved into  a form of information technology 
where real digital data are converted into information, which in turn aid to the knowledge base for sound
Page 10 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

decision making  
46.       The Committee is of the opinion that a nother significant development leading to wide use  o f 
remote sensing data has been the general advancem ent on computational capa bility.  Image processing 
facilities which was earlier restricted to selected  major research establishments have now become 
widely available with the advent of micro computers and low cost image processing equipments.  The 
digital data handling lead to the development of Geographic Information Syst em (GIS), followed by
another innovation of Global Positi oning System  (GPS).  The Committ ee has firm conviction in its 
mind that GIS  and GPS technique s combined with Remote Sensi ng Technology  ca n dramatically 
enhance human capability of re source exploration, mapping, weathe r forecasting and monitoring on
local as well as on global scale. 
47.       Although the Committee is satisfied w ith the progress achieved by Department in IRS 
technology it, however feels data  generated by IRS technology needs proper interpretation in view o f
recent failure in accurate prediction of the advancement of monsoon in northern India. 
48.       The Committee, therefore, is of the strong  opinion that in order to increase accuracy of IRS data
and also for more realistic interpretation of retrieved data, the DOS needs to the following:- 
(a)                Integration of GIS, GPS and IRS technology to enhance accuracy of derived data; 
(b)               Production and distribution of satellite data 
(c)                Design of different data base by taking the help of the latest technology; 
(d)               Processing of remote sensing data using func tional approach towards difficulties being 
faced by Department for  accurate interpretation of the data retrieved; 
(e)                Carrying out constant late st research on Remote Se nsing Technology facilities an d
equipment including sensors and ground stations; 
(f)                 Updating of technology at par with world standards; 
(g)                Promotion of remote sensing applications in co-ordination with universities and research 
centres; 
(h)                Holding adequate training courses for adva nced handling of da ta generation and 
interpretation; 
(i)                  On the  job training of DOS personnel to considerably enhance their scientific 
capabilities; 
(j)                 Co-operation and Co-ordination with internat ional society relating to space science an d
remote sensing technologies; 
(k)               Maintenance of national archive on remote sensing data with a view to preserve data and
also constantly up-dating it; 
(l)                  Planning research Programme s for processing, analyzing and production of remote
sensing data with a primary view to maintain accuracy and quality both in generation and
reading the data; and lastly 
(m)              Setting up of a National Remote Sensing Co -ordination Committee to give a holistic 
implementation of the above proposals. 
49.       The Committee further recommends that  remote sensing should al so be used widely fo r 
monitoring and prediction of El Nino/La Nina  phenomena through  data  on remotely sensed sea surface 
temperature in computer based gl obal climate models that  produce long-range fore cast of sea surface 
temperature and rainfall distribution particularly for assessing global warming and disaster preparedness
etc. 
Page 11 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

50.       The Committee also feels that remote sens ing may also be used to ge nerate accurate data and 
information on wet, wasteland and watershed development projects in various states in the country.  
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION 
51.       The Committee was informed that Intern ational cooperation is es sential for an effective
implementation of the space programme  in view of the global nature of Space systems operations.  The 
Department continued to emphasise cooperation with other countries a nd international bodies in
promoting the development and use of Space technology for different applicati ons.  The four majo r 
facets of international cooperation in which the Department takes part  are: (a) working together with
other Space agencies in programmes of mutual interest, (b) participating in international committees and
other for a dealing  
with Space policies and coordination of Space operations, (c) obtaini ng support from other countries fo r
India’s Space activities, and (d) pr oviding expertise and services to other developing counties in the
applications of Space Technology. 
52.       The Committee was informed that India play s an active role in several international bodies such 
as the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful  Uses of outer Space (UN-COPOUS), Unite d 
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UN-ES CAP), the international COSPAS-
SARSAT system for search and resc ue operations, the International As tronautical Federation (IAF), the
Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS) , the Committee on Space Research (COSPAR), the
Inter Agency Debris Coordination Committee (IADC), the Space Fre quency Coordination Group
(SFCG), the Coordinating Group on Meteorological Satellites (CGMS), the International Global
Observing Strategy (IGOS), the International Space University (ISU), the Asian Association for Remote
Sensing (AARS), the International Society for Photogr ammetry and Remote Sensing (ISPRS), etc. India
after  becoming a partner in the Intern ational Charter for Space and Ma jor disasters along with CNES,
ESA,  the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) and NOAA , DOS/ISRO is working together with the othe r
partners in planning to provide satellite data for the management  of natural disasters. Under the Sharing
of Experience in Space (SHARES) Programme of th e Department, training in different applications o f
space technology is being pr ovided to scientists from developing counties.  Accordi ng to the general
arrangement under this Programme, se lected candidates will be provide d with living expenditure and
allowances by the Department, while the international travel will be borne by the sponsoring country. 
53.       The Committee was further informed that ISRO has formal Me moranda of Understanding
(MOU) or Agreements with Aust ralia, Brazil, Brunei, Darussalam, Canada, China, EUMETSAT,
European Space agency (ESA), France, Germany, H ungary, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Mauritius, the
Netherlands, Norway, Peru, Russia, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, United Kingdom Ukraine and the U.S.A.   
A High Technology Co-operation Group be tween India and the U.S.A. has been set up as follow-up to 
the Indo-US joint statement in November 2001 on broadening the civil space cooperation and to
enhance the high technology trade between the two countries.  DOS/ISRO and the Russian Aviation and 
Space Agency (Rosaviakosmos) have agreed to explor e potential areas for co- operation.  At the India-
EU Summit in New Delhi, India e xpressed strong interest in worki ng with Europe in the Galileo
Navigation Satellite Programme.  DOS/ISRO and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA) have agreed to co-
operate in the development of the Ultraviolet Imaging Telescope (UVIT) planned on ISRO’s GSAT-4 to 
be launched by 2005.  DOS/ISRO and th e Canadian Space Agency (CSA)  have agreed to co-operate in 
the development of the Ultravio let Imaging Telescope (UVIT) pl anned on ISRO’s multi wavelength 
astronomy satellite, ASTROSAT, pl anned for launch by 2007.  The Indo- French joint satellite mission, 
Megha-tropiques, managed by ISRO and the Centre National d’Etudes Sp atiale (CNES) for study of the 
tropical atmosphere and cl imate related to aspects such as m onsoons, cyclones, etc., is continuing.  
ISRO and CNES have agreed to  join hands between Megha-Tropi ques and the Global Precipitation 
Mission (GPM) planned by th e National Aeronautics a nd Space Administration (NASA) of the U.S.A.
and the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) of Japan.
Page 12 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

54.       The Committee feels that there is a need to enhance the interaction with the countries which have 
achieved success in the Space technology for furt her strengthening and expa nding cooperation in areas
like telemedicine, Communications , Natural Hazards research a nd Disaster Management Support,
education, etc. 
TELEMEDICINE 
55.       Telemedicine is an emerging applicat ion of satellite communica tions wherein the remote
hospitals and health cent res located in rural and remote areas can be connected to super speciality
hospitals located in the cities. ISRO telemedicine pilot projec t was started in 2001 as technology
demonstration for providing telemedi cine facility to grassroots le vel population. Telemedicine system
consists of customized medical software integrated with com puter hardware, along with medical
diagnostic instruments, connected to the commerci al VSAT (Very Sm all Aperture Terminal) at each
location. The medical record/history of the patient is sent to the Sp ecialist Doctors, who in-turn study 
and provide diagnosis and treatment during video-conference with the patient’s end.  
56.       During the year, 23 additional hospitals we re brought into the telemedicine network bringing the 
total number of hospitals in the network to 50 hospi tals – 36 Remote/District/Medical/Mobile Hospitals 
connected to 14 Super Speciality Hospitals namely;  
•           Four  Islands of Lakshadweep, (Amini, Agatti, Andrott and Minicoy) are connected to
Amritha Institute of Medical Sciences, Kochi. 
•           Five Remote/field/base hospitals of  Indian army are connected to research and referral 
hospital at New Delhi. 
•           STNM Hospital Gangtok, Sikkim a nd Regional Institute of Medical Sciences, Imphal,
Manipur are connected to Asia Heart Foundation, Kolkata. 
•           Mobile Tele-opthalmology Unit fo r the Eye Care Camps with connectivity to Shankara 
Netralaya, Chennai and Bangalore. 
•           Tata Memorial Cancer Centre is connected to the Remote Cancer Centre at B B Barua 
Cancer Centre, Guwahati. 
57.       The Committee was also informed that a  temporary telemedicine facility was set up at Pampa at
the foothills of Sabarimala shrine for the benefit of pilgrims during December 2003 – January 2004. The 
telemedicine network has provided more than 12,500 tele-consultations to the beneficiaries. 
58.       Although the Committee commends the st eps taken by Department to  popularise telemedicine 
concept, it feels that the Department should be more  proactive in popularization of the concept in rural
areas. 
59.       The Committee feels that concept of teleme dicine could be made useful in remote areas only by 
setting up telemedicine centres at  Tehsil level which should be c onnected to hubs through telemedicine
networks. 
60.       Since, telemedicine is comparatively a new concept, the Committee f eels that initial teething 
trouble to ease the situation particularly in remote pa rts of the country will ta ke some more time before
the concept gets fully settled and popularised  and all associated problems are properly addressed. 
61.       The Committee, however would like to s uggest following few steps that would possibly ease the 
situation for effective implementation of ‘Telemedicine’ concept in rura l areas, particularly in remote 
districts of the country:- 
(a)                Develop a national  platform for exchange and warehousing of Health information and 
medical knowldege mainly in rural areas; 
(b)               Develop electronic forums for brin ging to gether the remote rural public and health  
Page 13 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

professionals; 
(c)                Facilitate electronic accesses to provide medical informa tion particularly for rural
consumers; 
(d)               Explore modalities  for provision of Tele Medicine, Tele-health to the rural/remote areas 
of the country; 
(e)                Establish moderate internet chat forums, to be chaired by health specialists professional
in villages and remote areas; 
(f)                 Assist rural public with First Aid and emergency information; 
(g)                Transform the Telemedicine we bsite into a comprehensive ‘health’ web-portal for the 
rural public, rural medical students and practitioners in remote areas; 
(h)                Establish distance learning faci lities for rural medical professions in collaboration with
renowned medical institutions within  the country and reputed international medical 
establishments abroad; 
(i)                  Demonstrate the  technical fe asibility of providing Telemedi cine access to villages in
India, through a pilot project; 
(j)                 Development of specialized software for Telemedicine  which will enable proper 
application of the concept in the remote areas; 
(k)               Details of all interested NGO’s in the rura l and remote areas of the country who are 
interested in remote rural health care facilities and its implemetations; 
(l)                  Telemedicine should also provide informat ion to remote rural public through on line
family planning clinic, mother  and child health clinic fo r solution of general problems
like:- 
•        Parental care 
•        Management of labour 
•        Pick up of high risk cases during parental and labour 
•        Post natal care 
•        Timely and proper referral to nearest well equipped hospital 
•        Breast feeding 
•        Advise on family planning 
•        Immnization of baby  
•        MCH (Contraceptive method and care during pregnency) 
•        Online Psychiatric clinic 
•        Training to paramedical staff  
•        Telemedicine should also be linked by e-mail facility 
n)        Developing virtual telemedicine which enhances telemedicine by super imposing data
that is patient specific  di rectly on to that patient.  This is known as data fusion.  
Transferring patient record from a doctor in  one place to a surgeon in another place fo r
providing expert patient care. 
o)                     Telemedicine can also popularize, particularly in remote rural areas Green 
Page 14 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

Telepresence  or Da Vinci Surgery system being operated through robotics. 
This telesurgery,  the Committee feels, holds the greatest potenti al for those who live in remote
areas. 
62.       The Committee feels that basic mission of the Telemedicine concept should be to contribute and 
improve health care system in Indi a, educate and promote the appli cation of information Technology by
building an electronic web-portal a nd developing a net work of Tele-health and Tele-media including 
Tele-surgery particularly for remote areas by setting up telemedicine centres at Tehsil level connected to
hubs through telemedicine networks. 
RAJIV GANDHI NATIONAL DRINKING WATER MISSION (RGNDWM) 
63.       The Committee was informed that Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission (RGNDWM)
is funded by the Department of Drinking Water Supply (DDWS) of the Ministry of Rural Development; 
the first phase of Groundwater Prospects Mappi ng was launched for six States (Andhra Pradesh,
Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Chhatisgarh and Rajasthan). It involved preparation of maps on
1:50,000 scale and generation of the digital database and so far about 1650 maps have been prepared. 
64.       The feedback received by the Department  in fi rst week of December 2003, the utility of these 
maps, a total of about 24,300 wells have been drilled using these ma ps, in Chhattisgarh, Karnataka,
Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, and Kerala out of which 22,000 wells have been
successful with a (success rate of around 90%). Thes e maps have also been  used to construct 3,450
recharge structures in Chhattisgarh, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Kerala.  
65.       The Department further informed the Comm ittee that under Phase-II of  the project, four more 
States - Jharkhand, Orissa, Gujarat and Himachal Pradesh are being c overed. All the maps of Jharkhand 
have been prepared. Work is in progress for other States. 
66.       The Committee appreciates the clai m of the Department that util ity of digital database has
resulted in wells having a success rate of around 90% in Rajasthan and sugge sts that such type o f
mapping may be carried out in all drought prone
areas.                                                                                          
HORTICULTURE MISSION IN NORTH-EASTERN STATES 
67.       The Committee was informed that this pr ogramme is funded by the De partment of Agriculture
and Co-operation; an integrated remote sensing based study has been taken up towards the generation of 
information for horticulture development in North Eastern States. Village level maps showing site
suitability for passion fruit in two ci rcles of Aizwal district in Mizoram were completed during the year.
Work is in progress to study the cashew plantations in East and Wes t Garo hills of Meghalaya. Pilot
study to assess the site suitabi lity for Sikkim Mandarin in East Di strict has been carried out. Site
suitability analysis for expansion of pineapple crop has been completed for West Tripura district. 
68.       The Committee hopes that through th is programme the farmers li ving in north-eastern region 
would acquaint with alternate crops and new farming practices for additional income.   
 POTENTIAL FISHERY ZONE (PFZ) FORECASTING 
69.       The Committee was informed that after demonstrating consistent results during two fishing 
seasons, the technique of integrated PFZ maps based on the chlorophyll information derived from Ocean
Colour Monitor (OCM) of OCEANSAT-1 and th e Sea Surface Temperature (SST) data, has been
transferred to the Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) of the Department of
Ocean Development for operational use. Under INCO IS, 225 nodes have been established where the
PFZ maps are distributed to us ers including fishery departments,  central government agencies,
corporates and fishermen groups. 
70.       The Committee recommends that the information on the fisheries zone should be made available
Page 15 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

to the fishing communities who are living in coastal areas to prevent them from venturing into foreign
fishing zones and limiting them to India’s economic zone.   
TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER 
71.       During the year, a significant number of tec hnologies were licensed to Indian industries, taking 
the total number of transfers to 261 covering the industries in small, medium and large- scale sectors. 
These technologies span a wide spectrum of areas ranging from electro-mechanical, chemical and optics 
hardware to specialised software in representing a range of applications for industrial and societal
purposes including several spin-offs. Prominent am ong the technologies licensed during the year are
know-how for 11 m diameter earth st ation antenna with mono-pulse tr acking feed and sub reflectors, 
Infrared antireflection coatings on Germanium base d optics, band pass optical filters, precision opto-
mechanical multi element refract ive optics lens assembly, rubber based adhesives and an emerging
technology for Molybdenum disulphide- based dry lubricant. The t echnology of a coaxial resonato r
oscillator developed for in-house applications has attracted further demand and has been licensed to
industry. Technology for a special type of polyurethane foot, which can be used as an artificial limb, was
transferred to a small-scale enterp rise that manufactures and markets various pros thetic devices. DOS 
also licenced, during the year, two of its manufacturing technologies to meet its demands.  
72.       Amongst Department’s earlier license s, the spin-off technol ogy of OLFEX, the fire 
extinguishing powder has been effective in wide ning its market. ISRO ’s Parallel Aerodynamic 
Simulator software is well accepted in the Computational Fluid Dynamics area.  
73.       In the space applications area, the Digital Sound and Data Broadcast (DSDB) Receivers, licensed
by Deapartment has been successful ly productionised by a private pa rty at Mumbai. More than 100
Mobile Satellite Service (MSS) Reporting Terminals were delivered by the industry to the users. 
74.       There are quite a few technologies that  are in the advanced st age of licensing. Technology 
transfer of a special high temperat ure resin, Angular Motion Simulator,  Samarium Cobalt Magnet, etc.,
are slated for immediate licensi ng. Besides these, the know-how of Erasable Programmable Logic 
Device (EPLD) based Scrambler an d Descrambler, Differential Encoder and Convolutional Encoder,
Instrumented Coin-Tap debond detect ion system, Ultrasonic  level sensor, Spacecr aft load simulator,
pressure transducers, etc., are in th e pipeline for transfer to suitable industries. It is also planned to
vigorously pursue licensing of a variety of software devel oped by ISRO. KSHAMTA (Reservoi r
Capacity Estimation Software) is licenced to private industry. Packages such as Finite Element Analysis
Software (FEAST), CAPE WORKS (Crop Acreage and Production Es timation), OCM Data Processing
(OCM DP), SAPHIRE (Stereo and DEM generati on for IRS) and PARIKRAMA (AM/FM software
package) have been offered for licensing.  
75.       The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department  in the field of technology
transfer especially the spin off technologies. The Committee reiterates that the technologies before being
transferred be patented so that commercial interests are taken care of. 
76.       The Committee feels that the benefits of space research should r each the billion population by
providing them with the unhindere d supply of safe dri nking water, shelter, food, health care and
education.  
77.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Space and assessing the progress
of various programmes and projec ts administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands
for Grants of Rs.2732.01crores, as sought by the Department of Space for the year 2004-2005, unde r 
Demand No.89, may be approved.   
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
Page 16 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

1.         The Committee is happy to note that blue print of India’s first scientific mission to moon, known 
as Chandrayaan-I has already been approved by the Government during 2003-2004.  The Committee has 
been given to understand that objectiv es of the Indian lunar mission has also been approved along with
the approval of the entire mission programme.                                 (Para 17) 
2.         Although, the Committee is happy with ov er all scientific objectives  of the mission programme, 
it would also like to add from  research perspective,  the  following few  more objectives that should also 
be considered  and fulfilled by DOS for future  lunar explorations: 
1. Distribution and utilisation of  the lunar energy resources;  
2. Distribution and utilisation of the lunar mineral resources;  
3. Utilisation  of the lunar uni que environment i.e. high vacuum , no atmospheric activity, no global
magnetic field, stable geologica l structure, week gravity, no 
pollution;                                                (Para 18)  
3.         The Committee further feels that for better understanding of the moon’s resources, 
environmental characteristics a nd surface topography, the Department may consider  the following fo r 
further study:- 
1.  Detection of  three dimensi onal imaging of lunar surface;  
2. Measurement of three dimensi onal imaging of lunar surface;  
3. Analysis of lunar structure a nd topography of shapes, sizes dist ribution and density of impact 
craters on lunar surface  
4. Study of the ages of the lunar surface with a special evaluation of the evolutionary history o f 
moon and its structure;  
5. Determination of the contents  and distribution of some basi c and key elements on the luna r 
surface including chromium, Manganese, Oxygen, Potassium, Sodium, Thorium, Uranium and 
Rare Earth Elements etc. in addition to Magnesium, Aluminum, Si licon, Calcium, Iron and 
Titanium which the Chandrayaan -I mission has already kept for chemical mapping  on   luna r 
surface as a part of its objectives by the Department .  
6.   A study regarding chemical evolution of moons crust along with its geophysics;  
7. Measurement of thickness of lunar Regolith to determine abundance of nobl e gas on the satellite 
including Helium;  
8.  Exploration of the environmen ts of the moon with a deep study of irradiation history of the 
satellite by obtaining useful da ta about the high energy partic le flux and low energy ion around 
the moon. (Para 19)  
4.         The Committee hope that these studies will adequately help DOS  to acquire sufficient scientific 
knowledge about this natural satelli te of the earth and will provid e challenging opportunities for further
planetary research for the younger generations.                                                                                   (Para 
20) 
5.         The Committee is pleased to know that  the Department has achiev ed self-reliance in space 
transportation and it has accepted all challenges which has come  before it with great passion and
achieved unprecedented success in
it.                                                                                                                           (Para 24) 
6.         The Committee commends the Departme nt for achieving the feat of developing an indigenous
cryogenic en gine and ho pes that this en gine would hel p India in its luna r
Page 17 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

mission.                                                                       (Para 26) 
7.         The Committee hopes that with the launch of EDUSAT the Country will  take a qualitative  leap 
in the formal and technical educ ation. The very purpose  of EDUSAT  should be focused on the 
connectivity among various universities , colleges  and schools and enhance the scope and quality of non
formal education.          The Committee hopes that the Educational TV w ould provide a sustainable
distance education service in the country particular ly in the remote and rural areas and help those
students who cannot join regular  classroom education.                                                  
                                       (Para 43) 
8.         The remarkable developments in  space borne remote sensi ng technology and its various
applications during the last thr ee decades have firmly established in the mind of the Committee its
immense potential for mapping and monitoring various natural resources and natural disaster.  In the 
recent past, as the Committee ha s been given to understand, there ha s been tremendous development in
remote sensing Data collection analysis and utilization.  The science of remote sensing is no more an art 
of map making from satelli te images.  It has now evolved into a form of information technology where
real digital data are converted into information, which in turn aid to the knowledge base for sound
decision making .                   (Para 45) 
9.         The Committee is of the opinion that another significant developmen t leading to wide use  o f 
remote sensing data has been the general advancem ent on computational capa bility.  Image processing 
facilities which earlier restri cted to selected  major research es tablishments have now become widely
available with the advent of micr o computers and low cost image processing equipments.  The digital 
data handling lead to the devel opment of Geographic Information Sy stem (GIS). Followed by anothe r
innovation of Global Positioning Syst em  (GPS).  The Committee has fi rm conviction in its mind that 
GIS  and GPS techniques combined with Remote Sensing Technology  can dramatically enhance human 
capability of resource explorati on, mapping, weather forecasting and m onitoring on local as well as on
global scale. 
                                                                                                 (Para 46)
10.       Although the Committee is satisfied w ith the progress achieved by Department in IRS 
technology it, however feels data  generated by IRS technology needs proper interpretation in view o f
recent failure in accurate prediction of the advancement of monsoon in northern India.    (Para 47) 
11.       The Committee, therefore, is of the st rong opinion that in order to  increasing accuracy of IRS
data and also for more realistic interpretation of retrieved data the DOS needs to the following:- 
(a)        Integratioon of GIS, GPS and IRS technology to enhance accuracy of derived data; 
(b)               Production and distribution of satellite data 
(c)       Design of different data base by taking the help of the latest technology; 
(d)        Processing of remote sensing data using functional approach to wards difficulties being 
faced by DOS  in accurate interpretation of the data retrieved; 
(e)        Carrying out constant latest re search on Remote Sensi ng Technology facilities an d
equipment including sensors and ground station; 
(f)         Updating of technology at Par with world standards; 
(g)                Promotion of remote sensing a pplication in co-ordination with universities and research 
centres; 
(h)                Holding adequate training courses for adva nced handling of da ta generation and 
interpretation; 
(i)                  On the job training of DO S personnel to considerably  enhance their scientific
capabilities; 
Page 18 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

(j)                 Co-operation and Co-ordination with international sciety relating to space science an d
remote sensing technologies; 
(k)               Maintenance of national archive on remote sens ing data with a view to reserve data and 
also constantly up-dating it; 
(l)                  Planning research Programmes for proce ssing analyzing and production of remote
sensing data with a Primary view to maintain accuracy and quality both in generation and
reading the data; and lastly 
(m)              Setting up of a National Remote Sensing Co -ordination Committee to give a holistic 
implementation of the above proposal. (Para 48) 
12.       The Committee further recommends that  remote sensing should al so be used widely fo r 
monitoring and prediction of El Nino/La Nina  phenomena through  data  on remotely sensed sea surface 
temperature in computer based gl obal climate models that  produce long-range fore cast of sea surface 
temperature and rainfall distribution particularly for assessing global warming and disaster preparedness
etc.                                     (Para 49) 
13.       The Committee also feels that remote sens ing may also be used to ge nerate accurate data and 
information on wet, wasteland and watershed development projects in various states in the country. 
                                                                                                                        (Para 50)     
14.       The Committee feels that there is a need to enhance the interaction with the countries which have 
achieved success in the Space technology for furt her strengthening and expa nding cooperation in areas
like telemedicine, Communications , Natural Hazards research a nd Disaster Management Support,
education, etc.                                                                                     (Para 54) 
15.       Although the Committee commends the st eps taken by Department to  popularise telemedicine 
concept, it feels that the Department should be more  proactive in popularization of the concept in rural
areas.                 
 (Para 58)
16.       The Committee feels that concept of teleme dicine could be made useful in remote areas only by 
setting up telemedicine centres at  Tehsil level which should be c onnected to hubs through telemedicine
networks.                (Para 59) 
17.       Since, telemedicine is comparatively a new concept, the Committee f eels that initial teething 
trouble to ease the situation particularly in remote pa rts of the country will ta ke some more time before
the concept gets fully settle d and popularised  and all asso ciated problems are properly 
addressed.                                                                                                                      (Para 60) 
18.       The Committee, however would like to s uggest following few steps that would possibly ease the 
situation for effective implementation of ‘Telemedicine’ concept in rura l areas, particularly in remote 
districts of the country:- 
(a)                Develop a national  platform  for exchange and warehousi ng of health information an d
medical knowldege mainly in rural areas; 
(b)               Develop electronic forums fo r bringing together the remo te rural public and health  
professionals; 
(c)                Facilitate electronic accesses to provide medical informa tion particularly for rural
consumers; 
(d)               Explore modalities  for provision of Tele Medicine, Tele-health to the rural/remote areas 
of the country; 
Page 19 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

(e)                Establish moderate internet chat forums, to be chaire d by health specialists and 
professionals in villages and remote areas; 
(f)                 Assist rural public with First Aid and Emergency information; 
(g)                Transform the Telemedicine we bsite into a comprehensive ‘health’ web-portal for the 
rural public, rural medical students and practitioners in remote areas; 
(h)                Establish distance learning faci lities for rural medical professions in collaboration with
renowned medical institutions within the country and reputed international medical
establishments abroad; 
(i)                  Demonstrate the  technical fe asibility of providing Telemedi cine access to villages in
India, through a pilot project; 
(j)                 Development of specialized software for Telemedicine  which will enable proper 
application of the concept in the remote areas; 
(k)               Details of all interested NGO’s in the rura l and remote areas of the country who are 
interested in remote rural health care facilities and its implemetations; 
(l)                  Telemedicine should also provide informat ion to remote rural public through on line
family planning clinic, mother  and child health clinic fo r solution of general problems
like:- 
•        Parental care 
•        Management of labour 
•        Pick up of high risk cases during parental and labour 
•        Post natal care 
•        Timely and proper referral to nearest well equipped hospital 
•        Breast feeding 
•        Advise on family planning 
•        Immnization of baby  
•        MCH (Contraceptive method and care during pregnency) 
•        Online Psychiatric clinic 
•        Training to paramedical staff  
•        Telemedicine should also be linked by e-mail facility 
m)       Developing virtual telemedicine wh ich enhances telemedicine  by super imposing data 
that is patient specific directly on to that  patient.  This is known as data fusion.  
Transferring patient record from a doctor in  one place to a surgeon in another place fo r
providing expert patient care. 
n)            Telemedicine can also popularize, partic ularly in remote rural areas  Green 
Telepresence  or Da Vinci Surgery system being operated through robotics. 
This telesurgery,  the Committee feels, holds the greatest potenti al for those who live in remote
areas.                                                                       (Para 61) 
19.       The Committee feels that basic mission of the Telemedicine concept should be to contribute and 
improve health care system in India, educate and promote the application of information Technology by
Page 20 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

building an electronic web-portal a nd developing a net work of Tele-health and Tele-media including 
Tele-surgery particularly for remote areas by setting up telemedicine centres at Tehsil level connected to
hubs through telemedicine
networks.                                                                                                              (Para 62) 
20.       The Committee appreciates the claim of th e Department that  utility of digital database has
resulted in wells having a success rate of around 90% in Rajasthan and sugge sts that such type o f
mapping may be carried out in all drought prone areas.      
                                                                                   (Para 66) 
21.       The Committee hopes that through this pr ogramme the farmers living in north-eastern region 
would acquaint with altern ate crops and new farming practices for additional
income.                                                                      (Para 68) 
22.       The Committee recommends that the informat ion on the fisheries zone should be made available
to the fishing communities who are living in coastal areas to prevent them from venturing into foreign
fishing zones and limiting them to India’s economic zone.                                                                       
(Para 70) 
23.       The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department in  the field of technology
transfer especially the spin off technologies. The Committee reiterates that the technologies before being
transferred be patented so that commercial interests are taken care of.                            (Para 75) 
24.       The Committee feels that the be nefits of space research should reach the  billion populations by 
providing them with the unhindere d supply of safe dri nking water, shelter, food, health care and
education.                         (Para 76) 
ANNEXURE 
  
REVISED ESTIMATES 2003-04 AND BUDGET ESTIMATES 2004-05 
Annexure 
Sl.no Programmes/projects/centres/units Budget 
2003-2004 
Revised 
2003-2004 
Budget 
2004-2005 
A 
I 
SPACE TECHNOLOGY 
Launch vehicle Technology 
      
1. Geo-synchronous Satellite launch Vehicle 
(GSLV) Project 
70.00 80.45 36.78 
2. Cryogenic Upper stage Project 16.70 16.38 10.92 
3. PSLV-Continuation Project 67.00 72.93 122.50 
4. GSLV Mk-III Development 280.00 250.00 490.00 
5. Space Capsule Recovery Experiment 31.43 16.00 20.90 
6. GSLV-Operational 100.00 80.00 150.00 
7. Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre 173.55 225.89 206.02 
8. ISRO Inertial Systems Unit 11.79 15.36 13.96 
9. Liquid Propulsion System Centre 78.99 81.20 100.43 
II Satellite Technology 
10. IRS-P5 (Cartosat) 10.41. 11.00 1.64 
11. IRS-P6 (Resourcesat) 10.43 17.00 0.96 
Page 21 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

12. Cartosat-2 76.49 75.00 40.90 
13. Oceansat-2 20.00 0.00 20.00 
14. Resourcesat-2 0.00 0.00 5.00 
15. G.SAT-2 10.00 13.95 0.00 
16. G.SAT-3 (Edusat) 75.00 45.00 20.00 
17. G.SAT-4 25.00 25.00 70.00 
18. Kalpana-1 (METSAT-1) 5.00 21.00 0.00 
19. RISAT-1 50.00 35.00 125.00 
20. ISRO Satellite Centre  152.35 121.35 157.14 
21. Laboratory for Electro-Optics System 10.44 10.78 11.13 
III. Launch Support, Tracking Network and Range Facilities 
22. Satish Dhawan Space Centre-SHAR 123.39 124.25 111.10 
23. Second Launch Pad & Common Facilities  20.47 72.39 8.40 
24. ISRO telemetry, Tracking and Command 
Network 
34.79 39.03 42.66 
25. Radar Development Cell 1.13 1.33 1.31 
TOTAL: A – SPACE TECHNOLOGY  1454.36 1450.29 1766.75 
B. SPACE APPLICATIONS 
1. Space Applications Centre 116.98 116.79 160.04 
2. Development & Educational 
Communication Unit 
37.73 38.10 34.72 
3. Remote Sensing Appl ications Mission 
(Earth Observation Applications Mission) 
8.00 6.00 6.67 
4. National Natural Res ources Management 
System 
54.80 46.72 45.36 
5. Regional Remote Sensing Service Centres 5.67 6.27 6.71 
6. National remote Sensing Agency including 
Aid Equipment 
9.02 9.14 14.02 
7. North eastern Space Applications centre 5.00 5.00 5.00 
8. Disaster Management System 10.00 13.50 15.30 
TOTAL: B – SPACE APPLICATIONS 247.20 241.52 287.82 
C SPACE SCIENCES 
1. Physical Research  Laboratory 29.91 30.37 32.50 
2. ISRO Geosphere-Biosphere Programme 3.90 4.91 12.46 
3. Sensor/Payload Development 28.15 21.97 5.42 
4. Megha-tropiques Project 5.20 3.20 5.08 
5. Indian Lunar Mission-Chandrayaan-I 0.00 0.00 70.00 
6. Astrosat 10.00 0.00 30.00 
7. National MST Radar Facility 3.50 3.50 4.00 
8. Sponsored Research (RESPOND) 10.00 10.50 12.00 
9. Other Schemes 4.31 4.05 4.11 
TOTAL: C- SPACE SCIENCES 94.97 78.50 175.57 
D DIRECTION & ADMINISTRATION/OTHER PROGRAMMES 
1. Department of Space Secretariat  4.15 4.15 4.27 
2. Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) 
Headquarters 
14.50 14.89 15.21 
3. Civil Engineering Division 14.16 14.46 1423 
4. International Co-operation 4.40 3.41 3.41 
5. Other Programmes 33.60 19.96 26.96 
Page 22 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

  
MINUTES 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Monday, the 9 th August, 2004 in Committee Room ‘D’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
  
PRESENT       
29. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
30. Dr.Prabha Thakur  
31. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
32. Smt. Kum Kum Rai  
  
LOK  SABHA 
  
33. Shri Sujan Chakraborty  
34. Shri Pankaj Chaudhery  
35. Shri Anantrao Gudhe  
36. Shri Babubhai Katara  
37. Shri Brahmananda Panda  
38. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                          
39. Shri K.C.Singh Baba     
40. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh                             
41. Shri V.Aruna Kumar  
SECRETARIAT
 
                        Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SPACE 
1.   Shri G. Madhavan Nair, Secretary 
2.      Shri S.K. Das, Addl. Secretary 
TOTAL: D DIRECTION & 
ADMINISTRATION/OTHER PROGRAMMES 
70.81 56.87 64.08 
E INSAT OPERATIONAL  
1. INSAT-3 Satellites (i ncluding leasing of 
transponders) 
175.00 172.31 90.00 
2. INSAT-3 Launch Services  100.00 62.00 2.00 
3. INSAT-4 Satellites  150.00 150.00 220.00 
4. INSAT-4A & 4B Launch Services  35.00 30.00 90.00 
5. Master Control Facility  41.55 34.21 35.79 
TOTAL: E - INSAT OPERATIONAL 501.55 448.52 437.79 
GRAND TOTAL : GROSS 2368.89 2275.70 2732.01 
Page 23 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

3.      Shri V. Sundararamaiah, Scientific Secretary 
4.      Shri A. Bhaskaranarayanan, Director, Satcom 
5.      Shri H.N. Madhusudhan, Director, BEA 
6.      Shri V.S. Hegde, Associate Programme Director 
7.      Shri K.R. Sridharamurthy, Executive Director, ACL 
8.      Shri K.S.Krishnan, Officer on Special Duty 
2.         At the outset the Chairman welcomed th e Secretary and other repres entatives of the Department
of Space and requested them to make a brief presentation on Demands  for Grants (2004-05) of the 
Department.  The Secretary made visual presentation of the activ ities and achievements of the 
Department of Space and explained the budgetary allo cations on different heads as also the functioning
of the Department.  The Members then sought clarifications and   the Secretary replied. 
3.         The Committee appreciated the Secretary and its team of Scientist for successfully carrying out
the activities in the field of Space Research .           
            The witnesses then withdrew.  
4.                     *                                              *                                                          * 
5.                     *                                              *                                                          * 
  
6.                     *                                              *                                                          * 
  
7.                     *                                              *                                                          * 
             
            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
8.         The Committee then adjourned at 06.15 P.M. to meet again on 10th August, 2004. 
  
  
*** Relates to other matters 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
      The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 24 th August, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi.  
            PRESENT 
1.   Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Prof. Saif-ud-din Soz  
3. Dr. Prabha Thakur  
4. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav  
5. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
6. Shrimati Kum Kum Rai  
LOK  SABHA 
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty  
8. Shri A.Vankatesh Naik  
9. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                          
10. Shri Sita Ram Yadav  
11. Shri V. Aruna Kumar  
Page 24 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm

SECRETARIAT 
                        Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration the Draft ***, 129 th, *** and *** Reports of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) pertai ning to ***, Department of Space, *** and ***,
respectively.  After discussion and suggesting some changes, the Committee considered and adopte d
each of the above reports.  
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairm an and in his absence Shri  Ravula Chandra Sekar Redd y
present the Reports in the Rajy a Sabha and Shri Bachi Singh Ra wat and in his absence Dr. Su j
Chakraborty to lay the Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha. 
4.                     *                                              *                                                          * 
5.   The Committee then adjourned at 10.50 A.M. 
  
  
*** Relates to other matters 
Page 25 of 25129threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/129threport.htm