Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
REPORT NO.
318
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on nd January, )2 2019
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on nd January, )2 2019
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH REPORT
January, 2019/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Three Hundred Tenth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2018-19) of the Department of
Science and Technology


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

19
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTEENTH REPORT
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Three Hundred Tenth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2018-19) of the Department of
Science and Technology
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd January, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd January, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2019/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-13
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Department............................. .................................................. 1-9
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Department’s replies........................... 10-11
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Department have not been accepted by the committee........................ 12
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Department are still awaited............................. ......................... 13
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT A G LANCE ................................................................ 14
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 15-17

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2018-19)
 ( Constituted on 1 st September , 2018)
1. Shri Anand Sharma   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri Anil Baluni
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
 6. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
     7. Dr. Raghunath Mohapatra
     8. Shri Parimal Nathwani
    9. Shri Sharad Pawar
    10. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
LOK  SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
  13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
  14. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
15. Kumari Sushmita Dev
16. Shri Ninong Ering
17. Shri Laxman Giluwa
18. Dr. K. Gopal
   19. Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar
20. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
21. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
22. Shri Daddan Mishra
23. Shri Chirag Paswan
24. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
25. Shri Hari Narayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Vikram Usendi
29. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
#30. Vacant
#31. Vacant
(i)
# Shri Raghu Sharma and Shri Nagendra Singh ceased to be  members of the Committee consequent upon their resignation from the
Lok Sabha w.e.f. 21 st December, 2018.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati  Sunita Sekaran, Joint  Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan,  Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin,  Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
Shri Shubham Bose,  Assistant Research Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present  the Report on
its behalf, present this Three Hundred Eighteenth Report on Action Taken by the Department of Science and
Technology on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred and Tenth Report of
the Committee on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Department of Science and Technology, which
was presented/laid in both the Houses of Parliament on 13th March, 2018.
2. There were 27 Recommendations/Observations in the  Three Hundred and Tenth Report of the
Committee. Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations  of the Committee were received
from the Department on 26
th July, 2018.
3. In the meeting held on 27 th December, 2018,  the Committee considered the draft Report and adopted
the same.
ANAND SHARMA
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
27th December,  2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Pausa 6 , 1940 ( Saka)  Science and Technology, Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

ACRONYMS
BRICS : Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa
CPS : Cyber-Physical Systems
DST : Department of Science and Technology
FAIR : Facility for Anti Proton & Ion Research Project
FIST : Fund for Improvements of  S&T Infrastructure in Higher Educational
Institutions
ICPS : Interdisciplinary Cyber Physical Systems
IIA : Indian Institute of Astrophysics
INSPIRE : Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research
ITDD : Innovation, Technology Development and Deployment
KIRAN : Knowledge Involvement in Research Advancement through Nurturing
OVDF : Overseas Visiting Doctoral Fellowship
PFC : Patent Facilitating Centre
PIC : Patent Information Centres
R&D : Research and Development
RE : Revised Estimate
SAIF : Sophisticated  Analytical Instrument Facilities
SERB : Science and Engineering Research Board
TDP : Technology Development Programmes
TIFAC : Technology Information Forecasting and Assessment Council
TOT : Training of Trainers
TRCs : Technical Research Centres
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Department of
Science and Technology on the recommendations/observations contained in Three Hundred Tenth Report
of the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2018-2019) of the ‘Department of Science and Technology’.
The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on the  13 th  March, 2018.
2. Action Taken Note (ATN) has been received from the Department of Science and Technology in
respect of all the twenty seven Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Tenth
Report. This has been categorized as follows:-
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
Para:- 5.3, 7.7, 7.8, 9.3, 10.3, 11.7, 12.14, 13.11, 13.12, 14.9, 14.10, 14.11, 15.9, 15.10,
15.11, 16.6, 16.7, 17.8, 18.7, 19.6  and 20.4.
(TOTAL – 21)
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies:
Para:- 8.7, 8.8, 11.12 and 20.5.
(TOTAL – 4)
The Committee is convinced with the replies furnished by the Ministry and, therefore, does not
want to pursue above-mentioned recommendations further.
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not
been accepted by the Committee:
Para:- 6.5 and 6.6.
(T
OTAL – 2)
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still
awaited:
Para:-  (TOTAL - Nil)
3. The Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed Action Taken Notes in
respect of  the  further Recommendations/Observations  made by the Committee in Chapter III of the
Report.
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the succeeding pages.

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS  WHICH  HA VE  BEEN  ACCEPTED
BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
FINANCIAL  PERFORMANCE  IN  THE  LAST  THREE  YEARS
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 The Committee observes that on the whole financial performance of the Department has been
satisfactory. The Committee finds that the Department has been able to utilise 95% of allocated RE funds,
in the years 2015-16 and 2016-17. However , when we compare performance of DST with other two
Departments of Ministry of Science & Technology, we find that there is still ample scope for improvement.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to further strengthen its monitoring mechanism so
that gainful utilisation of funds can be ensured. (Para 5.3)
Action Taken
1.2 The recommendation has been noted and accepted for further action. The Department utilised funds
to the tune of `4634.93 crores (97.64%) of the Revised Estimates of `4746.81 crores during 2017-18,
which is an improvement over previous years.
INNOV ATION,  TECHNOLOGY  DEVELOPMENT  AND  DEPLOYMENT
Recommendation/Observation
1.3 The Committee takes note of various initiatives undertaken by Innovation, Technology, Development
and Deployment Programme particularly initiatives to communicate Science & Technology to the masses
and inculcating scientific temper in the people through National Council of Science and Technology
Communication in interesting and innovative formats. (Para7.7)
1.4 The Committee hopes that initiatives like Augmenting Writing Skills for Articulating Research (AWSAR)
will encourage, empower and endow popular science writing through newspapers, magazines and social
media by young PhD Scholars and Post-doctoral fellows. The Committee is also optimistic that enhanced
allocation of 
` 50 crore under the ITDD Programme will be meaningfully utilised. (Para 7.8)
Action Taken
1.5 The observations of the Committee have been noted.
BUDGETARY  HEADS  IN  2018-19
Recommendation/Observation
1.6 The Committee takes note of rationalisation of schemes and output-outcome framework for schemes
in 2018-19 and hopes that the Department will be able to achieve the ‘Outcomes’ in the delivery of these
services. (Para 9.3)
Action Taken
1.7 The observations made by the Committee are noted and the Department will make sincere efforts to
achieve the Outcomes.
2

3
BUDGETARY  ALLOCATION  IN  2018-19
Recommendation/Observation
1.8 The Committee is of the opinion that curtailment of funds to the tune of Rs 1661.77 crore will hamper
setting up of basic infrastructure for some of flagship programmes of the Government of India and will be
detrimental to the growth of Science & Technology in the country in the long run. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department may take up the issue of disbursement of more funds strongly with the
Ministry of Finance at the Revised Estimate stage with adequate planning and implementing mechanism.
(Para 10.3)
Action Taken
1.9 The recommendation has been noted for further action during 2018-19.
NEW INITIATIVES  in  2018-19
Recommendation/Observation
1.10 The Com mittee welcomes big data initiative, advances made in deep learning, robotics, smart sensors
and quantum communications. The Committee hopes that with the help of partner countries such as Israel,
Japan and Korea, India will be able to seize the fourth industrial revolution and garner benefits from it.
(Para 11.7)
Action Taken
1.11 The observation of the Committee has been noted and will be taken care while implementing National
Mission on Inter-disciplinary Cyber Physical Systems.
NATIONAL  SUPERCOMPUTING  FACILITY  AND  CAPACITY  BUILDING
Recommendation/Observation
1.12 The Committee finds that National Supercomputing Mission is now gathering momentum and
hopes that it will realise the vision of High Performance Computing in near future. The Committee
finds that fund utilistion by the Department of Science & Technology in the last three years has improved
considerably and is now up-to-the-mark. The Committee recommends that the nodal Ministries namely
Department of Science & Technology and Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology must
implement this Programme in Mission mode with the aim to give a boost to Make-in-India Programme
as well. (Para 12.14)
Action Taken
1.13 The Department notes the recommendation of the Committee and will take all efforts to implement
the Programme in Mission mode.
INCREASING  R&D  EXPENDITURE
Recommendation/Observation
1.14 The Committee feels that in order to enhance investment in R&D activities, number of Full Time
Equivalents in science and contribution to R&D by both the government and private sectors needs to
be significantly augmented. The Committee acknowledges that the challenge faced by India is low

4
expenditure on R&D. Public investment on R&D was only ` 52788.00 crore in 2014-15 which is lower
than scientifically advanced countries. Even among the BRICS countries, India’ s expenditure on R&D
is the lowest. The Committee is of the view that public expenditure on R&D by the Government of India needs
to be enhanced significantly so that India can march ahead in science, technology and innovation.
(Para 13.11)
1.15 The Committee is also of the view that the Department should also take steps to enhance private
sector’ s contribution to R&D sector. This may be done in numerous ways. For instance, the Central and
State Governments may consider offering tax incentives for private sector companies investing in R&D
sector. Similarly, Government may also consider investing in start-ups in a big way, providing grants to the
budding scientists and recognition of R&D units. The Committee feels that it is only through the sustained
and joint efforts of both public and private sectors, Gross national expenditure on Research & Development
can be increased. (Para 13.12)
Action Taken
1.16 The De partment works in partnership with the private sector both in terms of raising financial resources
as well as knowledge resources for start-ups in the S&T Sector. Some of the examples of these successful
partnerships are partnership with Tata Trust, Lock Heed Corporation, Boeing, Intel, Texas Instruments, etc.
In most of these programmes private sector contributes 50% of the financial resources and also brings to
the commercial knowledge for commercialization of innovations in India.
1.17 Department is making conscious efforts to enhance public sector participation especially in the energy
and water sector. The intervention emanates from user need and industry is mandatorily involved in technology
development endeavours. This will be further strengthened in the coming year.
REBUILDING  RESEARCH  IN  THE  UNIVERSITIES
Recommendation/Observation
1.18 The Committee takes note of Department’s initiative for transformation of research undertaken in the
universities and improvement in performance based on the Hirsch index in their contribution to research and
publications. The Committee also notes the increase in funding by SERB and programmes like FIST, PURSE,
SAIF and INSPIRE which are helping in improvement of research in the universities.
(Para 14.9)
1.19 However , despite the achievements cited by the Department, the Committee finds that situation at
the ground level i.e. in underdeveloped States and backward areas of the country has not improved very
much. Most of the quality research is being done in Universities located in the major Centres of the
country. Our Universities and colleges should ideally do both teaching and research but unfortunately in
India the task of research has been handed over to the Research Institutions and National Laboratories
and number of such Research Institutes is increasing with every passing year. As per an estimate, only
15-20% of Indian universities and colleges are doing both research and teaching, remaining are doing
teaching only. (Para 14.10)
1.20 The Committee is, therefore, of the view that Department still have to put in tremendous efforts to
make the quality of teaching and research in our Universities at par with the best in the world. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should provide sustained focus on the quality of teaching and
research in our Universities and Higher educational Institutions. (Para 14.11)

5
Action Taken
1.21 The Department has noted the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee. There
is indeed transformation of research undertaken in the universities and improvement in performance
based on the Hirsch index in their contribution to research and publications an evidenced in the PURSE
Scheme.
1.22 “Promotion of University Research and Scientific Excellence” (PURSE) is a proactive initiative of the
Department, which has built significant scientific enthusiasm and healthy competitive spirit amongst
performing Universities in the Country. Six new Universities are brought under the ambit of PURSE starting
from the Financial Year 17-18.
1.23 Per formance for the period of 1996-2006 and 2000-2010 for Set of 14 Universities supported under
PURSE has also been compared. Publications of this group of 14 Universities have increased by nearly 34%
i.e. from 45421 to 60773 and Index increased from 540 to 881 in 4 years. Similarly, the increase in publications
is about 60% i.e. from 40036 to 63880 for the period of 1998-2008 and 2002-2012 for another set of 30
Universities and Index also increased from 970 to 1548 in that corresponding period of 4 years.
1.24 FIST, SAIF & INSPIRE Program through its various components has made a reasonable impact in
enriching the S&T knowledge base, apart from contribution in research publications and patents in the
overall publication pool of country.
1.25 These Scheme i.e. FIST, PURSE, SAIF and INSPIRE Schemes have now been approved by the
Government beyond 12
th Five Year Plan period for a period of 3 years from 1.04.2017 to 31.03.2020 based
on review of these schemes. It is therefore expected that the transformation momentum would be continued
in full swing.
1.26 Department has noted the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee. In FIST,
many Departments from Universities and PG Colleges in less endowed regions have also received support
based or their potential towards augmenting their research facilities for carrying out research and expected
that these Departments and college would now rejuvenate and start pursing research. During the financial
year 17-18, 46 Post Graduate Science /Engineering Colleges and around 120 less endowed University
departments have been supported for augmenting their research facilities for pursing research at these
places.
1.27 PURSE is a proactive initiative of the Department exclusively for nurturing the University sector. The
scheme has greatly helped many state funded Universities in augmenting high end research facilities, which
the Universities have not been able to acquire from other resources or projects.
1.28 Through the scheme SAIF, the services of high-end analytical equipment facilities are used by large
number researchers especially from colleges and less endowed University departments for pursuing their
research activities. Efforts in this direction are now focussed for strengthening these activities towards
facilitating research in the future.
INCREASING  THE  NUMBER  OF  PATENTS
Recommendation/Observation
1.29 The Committee takes note of the steps taken up by the Department for strengthening patent system
such as recruitment of patent examiners and training modules. The Committee feels that having addressed

6
issues on the patent filing side, addressing patent litigation issues will also be crucial to ensure that the
patent system effectively rewards innovation. The Committee finds that there is a lack of awareness about
patent filing and backlog in granting patents in India. Pendency rate in granting patent is also very high.
The Department needs to spread awareness about importance of patenting to secure knowledge in the
globalised world. (Para 15.9)
Action Taken
1.30 Patent Facilitating Centre (PFC), Technology Information Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC)
and Patent Information Centres (PIC) in states are doing large number of Patent awareness workshops in
the country every year. Besides, DST has given responsibility to PFC TIFAC to conduct 3 to 4 Training of
Trainers (TOT) programme for coordinators of PICs and University IPR Cells. One such Training of
Trainers (TOT) for southern region has already been conducted at Chennai from April 17 to May1, 2018,
Department will also conduct more such TOTs in future.
1.31 PFC, TIFAC also joined hands with Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion (DIPP) to participate
in awareness campaign under National IPR Policy and conducted a week long Training of Trainers (TOT)
programme involving Women Scientists.
Recommendation/Observation
1.32 The Committee expresses its concern about low number of patents filed within India and is of the
view that Department not only needs to spread awareness about patenting but also help create patent
professionals. The Committee also finds that there is a huge gap between the demand and supply of expert
human resource in the field of intellectual property management in India. (Para 15.10)
Action Taken
1.33 DST under its scheme Women Scientist Scheme (WOS-C) popularly known as KIRAN IPR which is
being implemented by PFC TIFAC has created a pool of about 600 Women Scientists who are trained on
IPR for one year. This pool of KIRAN IPR alumni consists of 10% of active registered patent agents in India
as well as 10% of patent facilitators registered under start-up facilitators. PFC TIFAC has selected 120
Women Scientists for one year training on IPR for 10th Batch of KIRAN IPR and training will start from
June 1, 2018. It is a regular annual programme having 120 seats.
Recommendation/Observation
1.34 The Committee, therefore, is of the view that setup like Technology Information, Forecasting
and Assessment Council (TIF AC) of the DST should be made “Centre of Excellence” and be provided
necessary infrastructure and support in providing specialised IPR training to staff of Patent offices.
The Committee commends efforts of the TIFAC for providing one year training on patent and IPR but
feels that there is still dearth of skilled manpower in the field of Intellectual Property Rights/Patents.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department not only to impart training to more people but
also encourage universities to introduce short and medium term courses for training in patenting
particularly in bio-sciences and biotechnology. (Para 15.11)
Action Taken
1.35 Department has reviewed the Patent Facilitation Programme consisting of PFC at TIFAC and PICs in
states and recommended strengthening them with enhancement of activities of awareness and facilitation.

7
With regards to training of Patent offices, Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion has designated
Rajiv Gandhi National Institute of IP Management at Nagpur as training centre hence DST may not have
direct role in this. It may be noted that in all courses particularly bio-sciences and biotechnology, universities
already have credit courses on IPR as part of their curriculum, however Department will further send a
request to UGC and AICTE to incorporate such courses through appropriate channel from time to time.
INDIAN  INSTITUTE  OF  ASTROPHYSICS
Recommendation/Observation
1.36 The Committee appreciates the efforts of research scholars, faculty and the other authorities of
Indian Institute of Astrophysics. The Committee also takes note of substantial progress in building of important
instruments of Aditya-L1 mission as lead institution. The Committee also recommends that IIA community
should leave no stone unturned to strengthen their efforts and capabilities to reach greater heights in the
frontier areas of Astrophysics and to initiate research in new areas of high energy physics and to reach the
next level of performance and excellence. (Para 16.6)
Action Taken
1.37 The Department is thankful to the Committee for the words of appreciation. The recommendations
made by the Committee have been communicated to the Indian Institute of Astrophysics (IIA), Bengaluru.
The Department would, however, like to submit that IIA will be realistically able to make forays into those
new areas of high energy physics which have connections with astrophysics.
Recommendation/Observation
1.38 The Committee is also happy to note that UV Imaging Telescope built by Indian Institute of
Astrophysics is functioning well two years after its launch with the ASTROSAT Satellite. The Committee
also takes note of excellent fund utilisation by the IIA in last three years and recommends that Department
of Science and Technology should make sure that the Institute does not face any financial hindrance in
undertaking its Research. (Para 16.7)
Action Taken
1.39 The Department will make every effort to make necessary financial resources available to IIA within
the Department’s allocations for maintaining its scientific excellence.
SURVEY  OF  INDIA
Recommendation/Observation
1.40 The Committee is aware that Survey of India had started the task of its modernisation in Twelfth Five
year Plan. However, it could not complete the same by 2017. The Committee while taking note of launching
of ‘Nakshe’ portal and Geo-portal initiative of Survey of India hopes that task of modernisation of India’ s
oldest organisation will be completed on priority basis. (Para 17.8)
Action Taken
1.41 Development of Geo-Portal for public has been completed by Survey of India and it has been launched
on 11.05.2018. Work on G2G Portal is at advanced state of security audit. Other modernization activities are
also being undertaken in a time bound manner.

8
EFFORTS  TO  ARREST  BRAIN-DRAIN
Recommendation/Observation
1.42 The Committee takes note of the schemes run by the Department that have resulted in arresting
brain-drain of accomplished scientists particularly National Post-doctoral Fellowship, INSPIRE and
Early Career Research Scheme. The Committee also notes that through Visiting Advanced Joint Research
Scheme, Overseas Visiting Doctoral Programme and Ramanujan fellowship the Department is trying to
bring our best minds back. The Committee hopes that these initiatives will create conducive environment
for doing research in the country at par with international standards and yield desired results.
(Para 18.7)
Action Taken
1.43 The observation of the Committee has been noted. The Department would also like to submit that
the call for applications from prospective Indian Doctoral students has been made open. A web portal for
Overseas Visiting Doctoral Fellowship (OVDF) Programme (http://www.serbonline.in/SERB/ovdf) to
facilitate submission of applications, status updation, peer review process, financial processing etc. has
been put in place.
KIRAN  PROGRAMME  FOR  WOMEN
Recommendation/Observation
1.44 The Committee notes that there is a very small share of the women in the scientific R&D in the
country. The Committee feels that the Department and various institutes under it should also be forthcoming
in recruiting more female researchers and scientists into their organisation. While taking note of steady
increase in number of women scientists being supported under different schemes, the Committee feels that
the number is still trifling. The Committee feels that the ‘KIRAN’ for women should not only iron out the
problems and difficulties but also empower women scientists to pursue a career in scientific research and
also augmenting the women pool of scientists in the country. The Committee also takes note of setting up
of Standing Committee for women in Science in the Department and hopes that its recommendations will
be executed in letter and spirit. (Para 19.6)
Action Taken
1.45 The recommendations of PSC are gratefully acknowledged. While taking cognizance of the same,
DST will further strengthen ‘KIRAN’ to not only substantially increase the participation of women from the
realm of Science & Technology but also empower them in FY2018-19. DST will also make efforts to
further implement the recommendations of Standing Committee for Promoting Women in Science.
NODAL  DEPARTMENT  FOR  DOING  SCIENCE,  TECHNOLOGY,  ENGINEERING,  MATHEMATICS
AND  MEDICINE  (STEMM)  RESEARCH
Recommendation/Observation
1.46 Another problem is that products/technologies developed by the Ministries/Departments are not getting
commercialised. There is a small number of scale up products available of the technologies developed in the
market. The Committee is of the view that technology lying in the labyrinth of the laboratories is malingerer
and its success lies in application for benefit of the humanity. (Para 20.4)

9
Action Taken
1.47 The Department has set up Technical Research Centres (TRCs) in five of its Autonomous Institutes
to promote translational research up to pre-commercialization stage and transfer of technologies so developed
to industry for commercialization.
1.48 T echnology Development Programmes (TDP) are designed to convert proof-of-concept for
technologies/techniques/processes/products into advanced protypes for validation and demonstration in
actual field settings. Applicants are encouraged to involve industry from the inception of the project wherever
possible.

CHAPTER – II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE
DOES  NOT  DESIRE  TO  PURSUE  IN  VIEW  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT’S
REPLIES
RESEARCH  &  DEVELOPMENT  SECTOR
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 The Committee finds that justification provided by the Department for underutilisation is
understandable in case of highly scientific collaborative efforts such as India-based Neutrino Observatory,
Thirty Metre Telescope & F AIR (Facility for Anti Proton & Ion Research Project). However, the reasoning
that the reduction at RE stage was due to overall reduction in allocation is hardly convincing. Surrendering
funds in R&D Sector, wherein India is already lagging behind countries like South Korea, Japan, Israel,
USA and China, even in R & D expenditure as percentage of GDP (GERD) reflects poorly on the
performance of the Department. (Para 8.7)
2.2 The Committee is of the firm view that surrender of funds in other schemes shows poor spendability
under the scheme. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department should try to be more realistic in
anticipating the outcome of the schemes in order to maximize fund utilisation in R&D Sector.
(Para 8.8)
Action Taken
2.3 Surrender of budget in capital asset at RE stage under International Cooperation Programme was due
to change in the strategy of BRICS R&D Programme. It was planned that support for equipment will be
provided for projects approved under this programme. While only an incremental support for equipment is
provided against the last call.
2.4 The Department is keeping a close watch on the progress made in the highly scientific
collaborative projects such as India-based Neutrino Observatory, Thirty Meter Telescope and Facility
for Antiproton and Ion Research etc., so that the funds allocated for these projects are optimally
utilized. During 2017-18, 97.81% of funds allocated under Mega Facilities programme at RE stage
were utilized.
NEW INITIATIVES  in  2018-19
Recommendation/Observation
2.5 The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Department such as Cyber-Physical- Systems
(CPS) and Quantum Information Science & Technology (QuST) and hopes that success in these initiatives
would give much needed boost to Cyber security and Quantum Information Science & Technology. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that adequate budgetary provisions should be made for these extremely
important initiatives to make India future ready. (Para 11.12)
Action Taken
2.6 Yes, the department will be making efforts for getting funds at RE Stage, once NM-ICPS is approved.
As of now, no specific funds are earmarked for ICPS programme.
10

11
NODAL  DEPARTMENT  FOR  DOING  SCIENCE,  TECHNOLOGY,  ENGINEERING,  MATHEMATICS
AND  MEDICINE  (STEMM)  RESEARCH
Recommendation/Observation
2.7 The Committee also feels that an effective Co-ordination mechanism amongst the Scientific Ministries/
Departments is needed in order to ensure that laboratories and Institutes are integrated seamlessly and
required facilities for commercialisation is provided. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Department
of Science & Technology may co-ordinate in formulating an action plan with the scientific Ministries/
Departments in this regard and the Department of Science & Technology, being the Department responsible
for science policy formulation in the Ministry of Science & Technology, may be made nodal department for
this purpose.                                                                                                                        (Para 20.5)
Action Taken
2.8 The thematic programmes of the department on air, water and energy are implemented in coordination
with concerned line ministries. Effective collaborative mechanism is available for energy programmes in
which all the scientific ministries participate. Department would involve concerned scientific ministries for
implementation of these programmes.

CHAPTER – III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  IN  RESPECT  OF  WHICH
REPLIES  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT  HAVE  NOT  BEEN  ACCEPTED  BY
THE  COMMITTEE
FUND  UTILISATION  IN  2017-18
Recommendation/Observation
3.1 The Committee notes that during the financial year 2017-18, total BE allocation of  
` 4837.37 cr.
was reduced to ` 4746.81 cr. at RE stage whereas the Department has been able to utilise ` 3655.71 cr . by
31st January, 2018 which implies that the Department is yet to utilise 25% of the Budgetary support with
two months left in the completion of financial year. (Para 6.5)
3.2 It is noteworthy, that Department’s under utilization of allocated funds in schemes such as R&D,
Science Counsellors schemes abroad does not present a healthy picture of the Department. The Department
has to prioritise the utilisation of funds in Research & Development programmes and also fill up the
vacancies in the Science Counsellors for optimal use of budgetary support. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should make all efforts to fill up the vacant posts of Science Counsellors
and concentrate on R&D schemes so that allocated resources are effectively utilised. (Para 6.6)
Action Taken
3.3 The recommendation has been noted for compliance. All efforts are being made to fill up the posts of
Scientific Attaché in Indian Mission abroad. The recruitment process for filling up the post of Scientific
Attaché in the Indian Mission at Washington and Moscow is at an advance stage. The posts at Tokyo and
Berlin shall be available with effect from 17/12/2018 respectively. The recruitment process for filling up
these posts has also been initiated.
Further Observation/Recommendation
3.4 The Committee observes that the Department  has  not responded the recommendation of
the Committee regarding underutilization of the Budgetary support as well as  concentrating upon
R&D schemes for effective utilization of the allocated resources.  The Committee recommends
that the Department should furnish their response to the above recommendation of the Committee.
12

CHAPTER – IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
Nil
13

RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
FUND  UTILISATION  IN  2017-18
The Committee observes that the Department  has  not responded the recommendation of
the Committee regarding underutilization of the Budgetary support as well as  concentrating upon
R&D schemes for effective utilization of the allocated resources.  The Committee recommends
that the Department should furnish their response to the above recommendation of the Committee.
(Para 3.4)
14

MINUTES

17
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 27th December, 2018 in Committee Room No. 4,
‘A’ Block, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma    —    Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri Anil Baluni
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK  SABHA
5. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar
8. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
9. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
10. Shri Daddan Mishra
11. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
12. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
13. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He informed
the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 317
th, 318th, 319th, 320th,
321st, 322nd and 323rd reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/
observations of the Committee contained in reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of
the Ministries/Departments of Biotechnology; Science and Technology; Scientific and Industrial Research;
Space; Environment, Forest and’ Climate Change; Atomic Energy; and Earth Sciences respectively. The
Committee, then, considered the draft 317th to 323 rd reports and adopted the same.
3. The Committee decided to present/lay its 317 th to 323rd reports in both the Houses of Parliament on
the 2nd January, 2019. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to decide the names of the Members for
presentation/laying of the reports in both the Houses of Parliament.
4. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3.25 P.M.