132nd Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/132ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:04]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY SECOND REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS
 CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED-EIGHTEENTH REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
 PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 ON THE CONSERVATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR DAL-NAGIN LAKE,
 SRINAGAR
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 17TH MARCH, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 17TH MARCH, 2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2005/PHALGUNA, 1926  (SAKA)
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Website : http://parliamentofindia.nic.in 
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
C O N T E N T S
        1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                         
        2.INTRODUCTION       
        3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                   
        4.MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                            
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2004)
 
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Dr.Prabha Thakur
4. Shri Jaswant Singh
5. Shri Dilip Singh Judev
6. Dr Biplab Dasgupta
7. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav
8. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
9. Smt. Kum Kum Rai
10. Shri Birabhadra Singh
 
LOK  SABHA
 
11. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
12. Shri Jasubhai D. Barad            

132nd Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/132ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:04]
13. Shri Sujan Chakraborty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhery
15. Shri Mohan S. Delkar              
16. Shri Anantrao Gudhe
17. Shri Babubhai Katara
18. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik           
19. Shri Brahmananda Panda
20. Smt. Neeta Pateriya
21. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                        
22. Shri K.C.Singh Baba   
23. Smt. Jayaben  Thakkar
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                              
25. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh                           
26. Shri D. Venugopal
27. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
28. Shri V.Aruna Kumar
    *29.Shri Rakesh Singh        
    #30.Shri Shivajirao A.Patil
   @31. Vacant
 
SECRETARIAT
      Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
      Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
      Shri C. B. Rai, Under Secretary
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
___________________________________________________________________
    * Nominated w.e.f. 13
th August, 2004.
    #  Nominated w.e.f. 20th August, 2004.
   @ Shri Atma Singh Gill ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 20th August, 2004 consequent upon his
 nomination to the     
       Committee on  Food, Consumer Affairs & Public Distribution.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
 Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One
 Hundred Thirty Second Report on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the recommendations
 contained in the One Hundred Eighteenth Report of the Committee. 
2.
                  This Report deals with the action taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the recommendations
 contained in the One Hundred Eighteenth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Conservation and Environmental Management Plan for Dal-
Nagin Lake, Srinagar that was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th December 2003.
3.            There were twenty-two recommendations contained in the One Hundred Eighteenth Report of the Committee.  The
 Action taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Ministry on   11th November 2004.
4.                  In the Meeting held on 14th March, 2005, the Committee considered the draft action taken Report and adopted the
 same.
 
NEW DELHI;  
March 14, 2005
P.G.NARAYANAN,
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
 & Technology, Environment & Forests.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REPORT

132nd Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/132ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:04]
The Report deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the Recommendations
 contained in the One Hundred-Eighteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Conservation & Environment Management Plan for Dal-Nagin
 Lake, Srinagar which was presented/laid on the Table of both Houses of Parliament on 19 th December, 2003.  The One
 Hundred-Eighteenth Report of the Committee on Dal Lake contains twenty-two recommendations and Action Taken
 notes on each of the Recommendations of the Committee have been received from the Ministry of Environment & Forests
 on 11th November, 2004.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the action taken by
 the Ministry of Environment & Forests are set out in the succeeding paras:-
 
LOADING OF POLLUTANTS
 
Recommendations
The Committee is of firm belief that Conservation of Dal Lake is a national issue. It forms the axis of life for the
 Kashmir valley, and therefore, it is not only important from the point of view of ecology, but also from the point of
 augmenting economy of the people and ensuring peace in the region. The Committee is therefore deeply worried about
 the deterioration of water quality and other associated problems arising out of development of eutrophic conditions, which
 have reduced the environmental, recreational and aesthetic value of this lake. The Committee therefore is strongly of the
 view that in order to formulate a plan of action to control pollution, the principal sources of these nutrients have to be
 identified and the rate of accumulation of these nutrients in the lake basin should be precisely
 known.                                                    (Para 24)
 
Action taken by the Ministry
The principal sources of nutrient inflow to the lake have been identified and the nutrient budget for the lake has
 been worked out in the Detailed Project Report (DPR) for Dal Lake Conservation Project (DLCP) prepared through M/s
 Alternate Hydro Energy Centre (AHEC), IIT, Roorkee. Dal Lake has been found to be receiving large quantity of nitrogen
 and phosphorous from point sources i.e. incoming nallah - (Telbal Bota Khul) and sewage drains as well as from non
 point sources like seepage and diffused run off. Fifteen drains along lake shore carrying significant quantity of sewage
 form major point source of nutrient ingress. The effect of nutrient contribution from a large population living on hamlets
 within the lake, houseboats and doonga boats has also been evaluated. According to information provided by the J&K
 Lakes and Waterways Development Authority, the total phosphorous inflow to the lake is of the order of 111 tonnes from
 all sources where as 220.80 tonnes of NO
3-N and 158.55tonnes of                 NH 4-N(corresponding to a flow of 237.13
 million m3/year-2003) flow to the lake. Similarly 4.50 tonnes of total phosphates and 18.14 tonnes of nitrogen are added
 to the lake from non-point sources.
Comments
            The Committee is distressed to know from the information provided by the J&K Lakes and Waterways
 Development Authority (J&KLWDA) that total phosphates inflow into the lake is of the order of 111 tonnes from all
 sources and 4.50 tonnes of total phosporous and 18.14 tonnes of nitrogen are added to the lake from non-point sources. 
 This apparently reflects the fact that the conservation effort by the Government is not at an advance stage and the quantum
 of discharge of effluents of such a scale is quite deplorable.  The Committee, therefore, feels   unless a meaningful
 comprehensive programme is undertaken to stop the inflow of unwanted effluents into the lake by involving all NGOs and
 other agencies for civil maintenance of the lake, no lake equilibrium can be sustained.  The Committee, therefore, urges
 that immediate action with a suitable action plan must be initiated to preserve the lake.
 
            The Committee would like to suggest the following comprehensive methods, which could be implemented for
 holistic preservation of the lake:
i)
                    It is necessary that water quality of Dal Lake in terms of physico-chemical parametes (pH temperature
 profile, secchis transparency, dissolved oxygen BOD, COD and nutrients), biological profile (density of
 population, biomass and species diversity of phyto, zoo plankton and macrobenthos)  needs to be assessed
 and subsequently monitored on a regular basis.
ii)                   It is necessary that long-term limnological changes also need to be assessed and anticipated with
 meaningful planning.

132nd Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/132ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:04]
iii)                 It is extremely necessary to reduce Eutrophic level of the lake.
 
The Committee feels that in addition to the above, the withdrawal of Hypolimnetic water of the Lake by siphoning,
 controlled aeration of hypolimnetic water, bioremediation, biomanipulation and shore line development are also
 necessary.
            The Committee feels if a comprehensive measure including all the above is implemented in a holistic manner, the
 basic objective of achieving the lake equilibrium in future will be possible.
 
Recommendations
The Committee was informed by the Vice Chairperson of the Jammu and Kashmir Lakes and Waterways
 Development Authority that the threat to the Dal Lake is not only posed by the encroachment problem but also by the silt
 within the nutrients which becomes a land mass over a period of years.
 Hence, the Committee strongly recommends the following of these procedures and suggests acquiring a precise
 knowledge about the rate of accumulation of these nutrients at the lake basin:
•  Removal of excessive bio-mass and diversion of pollutants both from point and non-point sources is needed on
 war footing basis; and
            •  Outright prevention of dumping of garbage in the lake should be accomplished without any further delay by
 effectively managing the solid waste.                        (Para 25 & 26)
Action Taken by the Ministry
From 1997-98 onwards, the Planning Commission has provided Rs. 102.42 crore to J&K Government as
 Additional Central Assistance (ACA) for conservation of Dal Lake, against which an expenditure of Rs. 88.97 crore has
 been reported by the J&K Lakes & Waterways Development Authority on various activities as per the break-up given in
 Annexure-I. As can be seen, the activities on which expenditure has been incurred by the J&K Lakes and Waterways
 Development Authority includes the measures recommended by the Committee above.
In continuation to the activities being implemented by the J&K Government from the ACA provided by the
 Planning Commission, the DPR for the Dal Lake Conservation Project has been prepared. The project was earlier being
 processed by the Government on 70:30 cost sharing basis between the Central and the State Government, the current
 funding pattem for National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) and National Lake Conservation Plan (NLCP). However,
 on receipt of the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee for 100% central funding for the project as a
 special case, the matter was taken up again with the Planning Commission. The matter was constantly pursued with them,
 as a result of which their 'in principle' approval for taking up the Dal Lake Conservation Project on 100% funding by
 Government of India was subsequently received. The draft EFC Memo for the project has since been circulated on
 29.9.2004 to all concerned ministries and the Planning Commission for their comments. On receipt of the comments, the
 project shall be put up to EFC for consideration. Since the cost of the project is more than Rs.100 crore, the case will be
 put up to the CCEA for final approval after is it cleared by the EFC.
The rate of accumulation of nutrients to the Dal Lake has been evaluated and reported in the DPR for the Dal Lake
 Conservation Project, which also provides for removal of excessive biomass and diversion of pollutants both from point
 and non point sources as well as prevention of dumping of garbage in the lake through solid waste management.
For removal of excessive biomass, yearly activity in two operationsi.e. spring and autumn is being conducted for
 selective manual de-weeding, mechanical harvesting and skimming of floating weed since the inception of J&K Lakes &
 Waterways Development Authority in 1997. The J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority has informed that
 selective manual and mechanical de-weeding of the lake has removed about 1,40,000 m
3 of wet weed consequently
 reducing the nutrient i.e. nitrogen by 109.30 tonnes and phosphorous by 11.40 tonnes on cumulative basis since 1997. The
 activity shall also be continued on approval of the DPR for the Dal Lake Conservation Project during the project
 implementation period of five years.
The solid waste management activity is presently being carried out through NGOs namely 'Green Kashmir' and
 ‘HOPE’, which are servicing 9600 structures, including houseboats, within the lake and its peripherals. The solid waste so
 collected on daily basis is brought to pre-identified dumping spots, wherefrom it is carried by Srinagar Municipal
 Corporation to its landfill site at Achan, Eidgah. The solid waste management programme is also envisaged in theDPR
 prepared for the project.
 
Comments
The Committee notes the action taken by J&K Lake and Waterways Development Authority.  However, the
 implementation measures as per its opinion for the removal of biomass and measures to prevent dumping of garbage in

132nd Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/132ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:04]
 the lake fails to explain logically the presence of the high level of organic pollutants in the lake.  The Committee,
 therefore, feels that besides in-situ conservation, the J&KLWDA should take comprehensive measures so that the
 quantum of discharge of organic pollutants into the lake could be minimized if an ideal place for dumping of wastes is
 earmarked combined with prevention of accidental spillage by identifying environment friendly appropriate disposal
 methods for wastes and effective monitoring mechanism which may be assessed and monitored strictly on quarterly basis.
 
Recommendations
The Committee expressed surprise that the Planning Commission did not have any control over the money released
 by it to the State Government to start the basic work and, therefore, recommends that central assistance must be backed by
 regular monitoring.     (Para 29)
 
Action Taken by the Ministry
The Ministry is regularly monitoring the projects for which funds are provided under the NRCP and NLCP.
 Similarly, regular monitoring will be carried out for the Dal Lake Conservation Project also after it is approved by the
 Government. As recommended by the Parliamentary Standing Committee, a Monitoring Committee, which also includes
 two experts, would also  be set up after the project is approved.
 
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that an effective monitoring committee must be ensured to be set
 up at  state level by introducing a two-tier mechanism for strict monitoring of Dal Lake Management Plan in
 collaboration  with the Central Government so that the Committee can function with the single objective of preserving Dal
 Lake from the clutches of pollution.
 
Recommendations
The Committee while examining the National Lake Conservation Plan (NLCP) of the Ministry of Environment &
 Forests observed that the NLCP was initiated in 1994 for cleaning important urban lakes infested with high levels of
 silting and pollution. Initially, ten lakes were identified for cleaning etc.- Ooty Kodaikkanal, Powai, Dal, Sukhana, Sagar,
 Nainital, Udaipur, Rabindra Sagar and Hussain Sagar. However, work has started only in one Lake and project reports for
 three lakes namely Ooty, Powai and Kodaikanal have been prepared and approved till date. The progress regarding other
 lakes is extremely slow because of persistent delays in the finalization of Detailed Project Reports (DPRs), tendering
 procedures and award of contracts.
(Para 30)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The National Lake Conservation Plan (NLCP) was conceptualized in 1994 and posed for approval of Government
 of India (CCEA) in December, 1997. However, only an 'in-principle' approval was accorded for Dal Lake Conservation
 Project while for other lakes, the Ministry was asked to seek external assistance. Since no, external agency evinced any
 interest in NLCP, the NLCP was finally initiated from June, 2001 after seeking waiver from CCEA. Since then the
 programme has gathered pace. Conservation Plans for 28 lakes have since been approved at a total estimated cost of about
 Rs. 145.60 crore. Out of these, works in respect of 3 lakes have been completed and others are in various stages of
 implementation. A Statement giving the details of the various projects approved under NLCP till date is enclosed as
 Annexure-II.
The Ministry had also instituted a study to National Institute of Ecology for identification of lakes for conservation
 under NLCP. The report of this study has been sent to all State Governments for prioritization of lakes in their State for
 inclusion of these under NLCP. This shall also enable the resource allocation for future projects under NLCP.
 
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.  However the better management of the lakes in the country could be achieved by
 involving strategic integrated management action plans.  The guidelines issued by the Ministry of Environment and
 Forests in this regard are a good beginning.  However, the Committee feels that the  same need to be pursued vigorously
 to ensure their effective implementation.
            As per the opinion of the Committee, the first step is to survey all water bodies with a view to categories them on
 the basis of their problems being faced by each of them, region-wise for enabling a critical analysis/assessment of the
 environmental impact on these water bodies and restoration works should be designed on the basis of the findings of such
 environmental impact audit.  The survey should cover Post Project Evaluation and Hydrological studies of the lakes.  The
 next step is to initiate action on Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) with specific emphasis on lakes
 reservoirs at the basin or sub-basin levels.  The Lake Management should be a subset of IWRM at the basin level. 

132nd Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/132ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:04]
 Permanent solution depends on institutional restructuring for effective governance.  The components, which the
 Committee feels needs to be addressed, are :
a)                  Enabling effective environmental management; and
b)                  Institutional reframing
The Enabling Environmental Management:  To deal with the problems of lakes and reservoirs and their
 restorations, the existing Acts, legislations and legal framework need to be integrated suitably to give it the  form
 of holistic single legislation appended with new amended legislation, if any.  There is need for a continued
 assessment of water quality and land use in catchments areas of lakes and reservoirs etc.  The national and state
 level policy in respect of water and environmental management too requires integration into one unit. Standards
 for the lake and reservoir management have to be framed in a functional manner so that by implementing the same
 with a meaningful objective for outright preservation of the water bodies which could be achieved.
The Institutional Reframing: The institutional reframing is the most important step towards the sustainable
 management of the lakes.  Their functions and responsibilities have been widely discussed.  They can be made to
 have specific emphasis on functional management of lakes and wetlands if an effective assessment of functions
 and responsibilities, which have been widely discussed, are given a meaningful shape for implementation.
            The Committee is of the view that as Dal Lake has a unique position in terms of high influx of tourist, thereby
 disturbing the biodiversity of flora and fauna, which thrive on Dal Lake; it is necessary to frame an environmental friendly
 tourist policy with a view to reducing the quantum of pollution level on this water body.  Therefore, the Committee is of
 the view that Dal Lake cleaning and management should be taken up on priority basis by the State Government jointly
 with the Central assistance.
 
MEASURES FOR IMPROVEMENT OF THE LAKE
 
Recommendations
     The Committee understands that the lake has reached a critical stage as the nutrients are deposited in the
 sediments, rather than in the lake water. Since macrophytes have an adaptive advantage to derive nutrients from lake
 sediments, the recurring growth of these weeds is obvious in the lake ecosystem. The macrophytes provide a biological
 sink to the nutrients, and thus, play a very important role in suppressing the plankton population. Continual expansion of
 macrophytes, have accelerated the process of eutrophication, as they have the capacity to translocate nutrients from the
 sediments into water thereby increasing nutrients available to the plankton and floating plants such as "Sylvinia-Lemna"
 complex. With the subsequent release of nutrients from sediments, growth of plankton will be accelerated. In conjunction
 with floating plants, such growth might cause anaerobic conditions which would make the lake unsuitable as a source of
 drinking water.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that any management programme  to be adopted for the conservation of
 the lake ecosystem should primarily aim at minimizing the inflow of nutrients into the lake. Some of the measures which
 the Committee strongly feels would be helpful in diversion of pollution and would reduce the inflow of pollutants to a
 great extent are:
(a)
                An extensive reafforestation programme is a must in the Dachigam-Telbal catchment area so as to
 minimize soil erosion from the area. Suitable steps are also needed for control of grazing on the steep
 slopes;
(b)
               To monitor the operation of the Telbal Nalla basin to find out the deposit of sediments;
(c)                To construct a settling basin prior to the entry of Telbal Nalla into the Dal lake, which will help to settle
 out the bulk of the sediment load and insoluble nutrients;
(d)               Construction of sewer system to carry the wastewater to the ring sewerage system and finally to the
 treatment plant has to be accorded priority;
(e)                 Forthwith stoppage of encroachment by hamlets and floating gardens through carefully woven ‘action
 plan’; and
(f)                 Immediate arrests of deforestation, quarrying, increased land use for unabated urbanization.                  
                                                              (Para 37& 38)
 
Action Taken  by the Ministry
Minimization of inflow of nutrients into the lake is one of the most important components of the  DPR prepared for
 the Dal Lake Conservation Project.
(i)                  The extensive re-afforestation programme in Dachigam-Telbal catchment so as to minimize soil erosion
 from the area and steps for controlling of grazing on steep slopes has been envisaged in the DPR under its

132nd Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/132ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:04]
 catchment management plan. A comprehensive detailed project on JFM Guidelines for catchment area
 treatment is being separately prepared by the State Government for submission to Government of India.
(ii)                The operation of the settling basin at Telbal Nalla is being constantly monitored by J&K Lakes and
 Waterways Development Authority to find out the deposit of sediments ever since, its commissioning in
 1997. In the 1st  two years 56000 m3 of silt was trapped which was desilted from the basin.
(iii)               The settling basin at the outflow of Telbal Nalla into Dal lakestands commissioned in 1997. However, the
 permanent diversion works for settling basin as envisaged in the DPR are being finalized by J&K Lakes
 and Waterways Development Authority for allotment of contract.
(iv)             Priority has been accorded to sewerage and sewage' treatment plants(STPs) envisaged in the DPR for the
 project. In the first instance, tenders for three STPs at Laam (4.5 mid), Habak (3.2 mid) and Hazratbal (7.5
 mid) have been finalized by the J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority and letter of intent for
 the contract has been issued. In addition, the sewerage works appurtenant to these STPs have been
 commenced wherein a total sewer length of 810m at Habak 1165m at Hazratbal & 320m at Nishat has
 already been lai~t. The balance sewerage work is under progress.
The J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority has .also informed that the peripheral sewerage
 scheme undertaken by the J&K Urban Environmental Engineering Department (UEED) for the eastern and
 western peripheral areas of the lake has been got accelerated and partially commissioned to provide interim
 benefits by treating the sewage in a 12 mld capacity UEED STP at Brari Numbal. The balance works of
 sewage and pumping stations relating to these areas are in progress by the UEED.
(v)
                The J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority is vigorously carrying out a programme of
 stoppage of encroachment in hamlets and floating gardens under the resettlement and rehabilitation part of
 the project which is funded by the State Government. Till now 38.35 Kanals of encroachments in the form
 of  land mass been removed within the lake and 608 illegal structures have been brought down in and
 around the lake. Further, 1381.50 Kanals of floating gardens have been removed to add to the lake water
 expanse.
The Division Bench of Hon'bnle High Court of J&K has also passed directions in a PIL titled "Syed Iqbal
 Tahir Geelani v/s State and Others" for control of encroachments in 200 meters wide area all along the lake
 shore. The encroachment control drive is being vigorously followed and periodic progress is being reported
 to the Hon'ble High Court.
(vi)
              The J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority has a Watershed Management Cell headed by
 Watershed Manager (DFO) which is enforcing measures to arrest deforestation, stop illegal quarrying and
 check unabated urbanization of land in the contributory catchment area of Dal-Nageen lake in coordination
 with the Enforcement Wing of the Authority.
Comments
The Committee appreciates the measures adopted by the J&K LAWDA in initiating steps towards construction of
 sewerage treatment plants on priority basis. It would also like to impress upon that appropriate ‘precautionary measures’
 should also be adopted to reduce soil erosion at the catchment area of the lake and the lake benthos which could be
 minimised by applying appropriate disposal methods of earth resources for preserving the natural landscape of this water
 body.  Application of ‘Fluidized Aerobic Bed technology’ for sewerage treatment is an ideal method and possibilities
 could be explored for using the treated effluent for use in small Hydropower Station with electricity generating capacity of
 150 KW.
 
Recommendations
The Committee is strongly of the view that provision of proper sewage disposal facilities will reduce the organic
 loading in the lake to a great extent. The Committee, therefore, recommends, that it is necessary to look into the
 possibilities such as a common sewerage system for a cluster of house boats, sanitary systems in individual units and
 devices for removal of the wastes in containers. The Committee notes with satisfaction that some NGOs are engaged in
 collecting the solid waste on a day-to-day basis from inside the lake. It will also be desirable to rearrange the mooring
 areas of the house boats so as to have them in an orderly manner instead of being located in an unplanned and random
 manner, as these are now. It will help in ensuring common service facilities including sewage disposal
 systems.                                      (Para 39)                                              
Action Taken by the Ministry
The DPR for the Dal Lake Conservation Project, besides the peripheral scheme of J&K UEED envisages six STPs
 all around the Iake with its appurtenant sewerage system. Work on three of the STPs has already been initiated as reported
 in the para above. The J&K Government has made it mandatory for the houseboats and doonga boats to have floating
 septic tanks. The supernatant liquidfrom these tanks is envisaged to be carried to low suction under-water sewer on the

132nd Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/132ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:04]
 lakebed for transmission to a terminal sump, wherefrom the same shall be pumped to STP. This will ensure proper
 management for houseboat sanitation. The houseboats are also required, to be re-aligned to facilitate implementation of
 the scheme with respect to their present mooring sites.
Comments
The Committee is strongly of the view that merely making the installation of floating septic tanks mandatory in all
 house boats in Dal Lake by the J&K Government will not totally ensure a proper management of the lake.  The lack of
 involvement of stakeholders in planning and implementation processes often makes the legislation ineffective.  During
 one of the interactions with the Houseboats Owner’s Association, it has come to light that most of the bio-toilets are non-
functional and agencies were not persistently checking the functioning of these toilets after they are installed.  The
 Committee would, therefore, recommend that the implementing agencies should ensure functional installation of these
 bio-toilets.
 
            The Committee would further like to recommend that efforts should also be made by both Central and State
 Governments to import lightweight portable toilet aided by hundred per cent  biodegradable toilet bag which is 
 compostable.  It is the opinion of the Committee that such toilet is not only environmental friendly but also user friendly.  
 With no need for a septic system, no chemicals, no odour and no hassles, a composting toilet is a great way to encourage
 disposal of human wastes in an environmental friendly manner.  Every living organism consumes nutrients and creates
 waste.  To transform this water back into nutrients, nature uses a process of decomposition and evaporation.  The bio-
toilets are mainly designed with a view to optimize and accelerate these natural processes.  The aerobic breakdown of
 human wastes in a bio-drum is the most advisable technique for preventing the inflow of human wastes into the lake eco-
system.  These bio-toilets, as what the Committee feels, is also suited for winter operation, particularly in a cold region
 like Jammu & Kashmir since it is often easier to keep the bathroom warm.   The Committee, therefore, feels that Rota
 Loo   toilets which is widely used in Australia could also be used on the houseboats in Dal Lake that would be
 environmental friendly.
 
Recommendations
The Committee recommends that following specific measures be adopted for restoring the health of the lake:
(i)
            Selective harvesting of macrophytes, particularly, emergent and submerged at the time of peak growth can
 substantially help removal of nutrients from the lake sediments;
(ii)     Increasing water circulation is also an effective method of diverting nutrients along with out flowing water;
(iii)    Sediment removal, in-situ manipulation of the bottom sediment and manipulation of the biological components in
 the lake ecosystem are among the various other measures which need to be considered for reducing the detrimental
 symptoms of the  eutrophication;
·
        Afforestation of degraded forest land through plantations, contour, hedgerows and in-situ moisture conservation.
·        Fuel, wood and fodder plantation of indigenous exotic species;
·        Drainage line treatment through properly designed structures such as check dams, RCC dropstructures, stone walls,
 trenching, fencing, water tanks and troughs and wetting;
·        Forage production through silvi-pasture development and on farm fodder development;
(iv)       Although the Ministry has apprised the Committee that infestation of the 'Euglena rubra' in the lake water has been
 declining persistently since 1997 thereby extensively thinning the emerging school of red algal bloom, it, however,
 apprehends that any element of complacency in the matter may help the problem to manifest in near future. Hence, as per
 the opinion of the Committee, on going monitoring of algal bloom should be carried on by preventing continuous outfall
 of wastewater, seepage of nutrients from the adjoining areas  along  the  lake shore   resulting in negative redox potential  
 of sediments in the area. The Committee, hence, advises the Ministry atleast to adopt the following temporary measures
 from time to time to check the menace:
(a)        Skimming, agitation of water, removal of scum; and
(b)        Aeration of stagnant pockets with anoxic sediments and oxygen depleted underwater and the construction of ring
 bounds to check ingress of solid waste/organic matter.
(v)        The Committee is happy to note that in pursuance of its recommendation made in its 112
th Report at para 64 of
 page 29, desilting and deepening of the bed of Dal Lake had been done by the State Government along its northern shore.
 Although, the project is still in progress, the Committee, however, feels that general tempo of activities is essentially
 sluggish and hence again suggests for enlisting the assistance of Army Engineering Corps in the matter as was earlier
 recommended by it in its aforesaid report so that the work would be speeded up.          (Para 40)                 

132nd Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/132ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:04]
Action Taken by the Ministry
(i)         As already mentioned in reply to Recommendation-2&3 above, Yearly activity in two operations i.e. spring and
 autumn is being conducted for selective manual de-weeding, mechanical harvesting and skimming of floating weed since
 the inception of J&K Lakes & Waterways Development Authority in 1997. The J&K Lakes and Waterways Development
 Authority has informed that selective manual and mechanical de-weeding of the lake has removed about 1,40,000 m 3 of
 wet weed consequently reducing the nutrient i.e. nitrogen by 109.30 tonnes and phosphorous by 11.40 tonnes on
 cumulative basis since 1997. The activity shall also be continued on approval of the DPR for the Dal Lake Conservation
 Project   during the project implementation period of five years.
(ii)        Hydraulic management for periodical flushing of lake is being ensured by the J&K Lakes and Waterways
 Development Authority.
(iii)       Marginal dredging through eco friendly Crawl Cat Cutter Suction Dredgers has been initiated by the J&K Lakes
 and Waterways Development Authority from 1997 onwards. This activity is also envisaged in the DPR prepared for the
 project. As per the J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority, in the Hazratbal Basin of Dal Lake 20.70 lakh m
3
 of land mass corresponding to 1450 kanal area has been dredged out till date from the lake yielding 0.85 m 2 of clear water
 expanse to the lake. This has consequently resulted in removal of 78.80 tonnes of phosphorous and 313 tonnes of nitrogen
 from lake nutrient deposits. Positive scientific indicators of dredging have shown 40% increase in Seechi transparency of
 water, 30%         reduction in nutrient build ups and 10% decrease in COD value.
Afforestation of degraded forest land through plantation, contour hedge rows, in-situ moisture conservation
 including fuel wood and fodder plantation of indigenous exotic species, drainage line treatment through check dams, RCC
 drop structures, stone walls, trenching, fencing, water tanks/troughs, foliage production through silvi-pasture development
 and on form fodder development have been envisaged in the DPR under the catchment management plan.
(iv)       The Research and Monitoring Wing of the J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority is carrying out
 regular monitoring of algal blooms in the affected areas of the lake. Measures for surface aeration, agitation of waters and
 skimming of algal scum are being adopted to check the euglenoid bloom and scientific monitoring has shown satisfactory
 response in checking the blooms. However; microcystic bloom has also been observed in the shoreline areas near Karpora
 - Laam belt. On the basis of radox test, the cause of the bloom was found out to be internal recycling of nutrients. The
 J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority studied the lake bed aeration system installed in Powai lake, Mumbai
 under NLCP. A pilot project of lake bed aeration in the affected areas on similar lines has been recommended, which is to
 be implemented shortly by the Authority.
(v)        The marginal dredging along NFR is almost complete. Further suggestions of bio-manipulations through microbes
 shall be guided by the outcome of pilot project studies of lake bed aeration.
Comments
The Committee would like the Ministry to keep it informed of the progress in the measures taken for restoring the
 health of the lake.
Recommendations
The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Environment & Forests may examine such
 mechanisms/processes developed by 'Clean-Flo Laboratories, Inc.', USA which was started in 1970 and operates with a
 special formulation, termed "C-FLO" by the company. Beneficial microbes, which feed on organic sediment, ooze and
 peat at the bottom, are introduced. These microbes convert the pollutants into carbon diozide and water. 'C-FLO' also adds
 organisms that are natural food for aquatic insects.                                                       (Para 44)
 
Action Taken by the Ministry
The Clean-Flo Laboratories, Inc., USA uses the bio-remediation technology for in-situ cleaning of lakes involving
 continuous laminar flow inversion and oxygenation technique along with consortium of bacteria, which in the presence of
 enzymes degrade the organic matter in the lake and its sediment. Though, Clean-Flo Laboratories were one of the first
 companies to have introduced the technologic, presently a significant a number of other companies in India have
 developed this capability indigenously or with foreign collaboration. Selection of the company for carrying out bio-
remediation of a lake is done through a process of open bidding by the concerned State Government agency.
Comments
The Committee feels that for the selection of Indian company for carrying out ‘bio-remediation of the lake’, an
 appropriate and transparent procedure, if adopted, with adequate protection of contractual clauses should also include
 applicable environmental precautionary measures for those having suitable technology and expertise in carrying out the
 desired tasks.  The Committee, therefore, urges that without  any further delay through the process of open bidding  the
 agencies of State Government with the help of the Centre should select an appropriate company for implementation of

132nd Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/132ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:04]
 clean flow techniques for in-situ cleaning of the lake.
 
Recommendations
The Committee notes that certain variety of exotic fishes introduced in some water bodies in West Bengal have
 been found to be acting as cleaning agents by eating away pollutants. The Committee suggests that such fishes may also
 be tried in Dal Lake so that pollution and contamination levels could be brought down in a natural way. Besides, the
 Committee suggests that both the Ministry of Environment & Forests and the J&K Government may explore the
 biotechnological options to address the issue of conservation of the lake. Further, the Committee feels that 'polluter must
 pay' principle may be applied to make the polluters responsible for their actions in spoiling the lake.
                                                                                           (Para 45)
Action taken by the Ministry
The J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority have informed that the Fisheries Department of the State
 Government is in the process of breeding a carp species, which shall be effective for weed control. They have also been
 asked to explore other appropriate bio-technological options for conservation of the lake.
The State Government/J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority have been asked to take necessary action for
 implementing the 'polluter pay' principle.
 
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee is of the view that mere implementation of “polluters pay”
 Principle, the problem cannot be tackled effectively. The Jammu & Kashmir Government should also abide by
 ‘Precautionary Principle’ which has been accepted as part of the law of the land. The “Precautionary Principle” makes it
 mandatory for the State Government to anticipate, prevent and attack the causes of environmental degradation to the Dal
 Lake in order to protect its pristine nature and restore its natural beauty. 
 
Recommendations
The Report of Prof. (Dr.) Helmut. Kroiss, which has been mentioned earlier, observed that "all actions within the
 lake such as deweeding, local aeration and skimming of algae help to fight the symptoms of the degradation process but
 will not be able to restore the desired water quality and sustainable, ecological development for the future". The same
 Kroiss report had also observed, "the actual population of about 50,000 people living in the lake area without proper
 sanitation will not allow sustainable development. It has to be doubted that there exists an economically feasible technical
 solution to restore the lake and to provide adequate social development of the people living in this area at the same time. It
 is, therefore, recommended to carefully consider the relocation of the majority of the population actually living within the
 lake to an area outside the lake".                                                                                          (Para 47)
Describing the relocation of the population as "the only economically feasible method to reduce pollution of the
 lake" the report however acknowledged that, "transfer of this population to new housing areas is a complex and sensitive
 process which will take time even if finances are available to make it acceptable for those people". Therefore, it
 recommended "to immediately start this process as each inhabitant leaving this area will reduce the pollution potential".
       (Para 48)
Action taken by the Ministry
The process of resettlement and relocation of lake dwellers is being done carefully, by the J&K Lakes and
 Waterways Development Authority taking into consideration the complex and sensitive nature of the issue. The State
 Government has appointed a Rehabilitation Committee to go into details of the Rehabilitation Plan and give their
 recommendations, which shall be studied minutely. In the meanwhile, 1200 families have been rehabilitated by the J&K
 Lakes and Waterways Development Authority in existing eight colonies since 1997 and 1300 developed plots have been
 allotted to the affected families. Two hamlets containing fishermen have been dredged out of the lake and the evacuated
 families have been rehabilitated in a new Fishermen Colony at Habak. The J&K Lakes and Waterways Development
 Authority is in the process of acquiring land for the balance Rehabilitation Plan.
Comments
The Committee, therefore, urges that measures for irreversible rehabilitation plan should be taken up by the State
 Government without further delay.
 
REHABILITATION & RESETTLEMENT PROGRAMME OF LAKE DWELLERS
 
Recommendations
The Committee notes with cautious optimism the observation of the Vice chairperson, J&K Lakes and Waterways
 Development Authority that State was committed to removing all encroachments from the lake area. The Committee,

132nd Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/132ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:04]
 therefore, recommends that every effort must be made to ensure economic opportunities to the people in the area where
 they are going to be rehabilitated, so that they do not return to the lake on one plea or the other. As is mentioned earlier,
 the office of the J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority has to be shifted soon from within the lake and
 relocated somewhere else so as to set an example before the people that the State Government is keen toconserve the lake
 by relocating those who are residing within the lake premises. A Member suggested the Committee that a blueprint in this
 regard may be prepared by fixing targets which could be achieved annually or on a short term basis. For instance in the
 first year some portions of the lake may be earmarked for cleaning by blocking the city waste flowing to the lake, treating
 it and separating the waste out of it before water is released to the lake and physically removing people residing inside the
 lake premises and rehabilitating them. After assessing the work done on a quarterly basis funds may be released for
 further utilization and the Union and State Governments must do the joint monitoring of the plan so that proper
 supervision and follow up is done for its implementation.
(Para 49)
Action Taken by the Ministry
The recommendations made by the Committee with regard to rehabilitation and affording economic opportunities
 to the people within the lake have been taken note off for incorporation in the Rehabilitation Plan of the State
 Government. Also, proper joint monitoring shall be carried out by the Central and the State Governments to ensure proper
 supervision and follow-up of the Plan.
The J&K Lakes & Waterways Development Authority has informed that their office is actually a temporary
 structure constructed in the Dockyard near Nishat from where the operations are being carried out by them. This office is
 to exist only till the completion of the project implementation, where after it will be removed and the appurtenant land
 dredged out
Comments
The Committee is not satisfied by the reply of the J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority and is of the
 view that it should reallocate its office from the Dal Lake at the earliest so that it acts as a model for others to follow.
Recommendation
The issue of conservation of Dal Lake and cleaning its water mass is a sensitive and complex issue. After all
 people's livelihood is integrally linked to it. Therefore, a coordinated approach harmonizing the interests of people and
 environment have to be adopted in a time bound manner.
(Para 50)
Action taken by the Ministry
The recommendations made by the Committee have been taken note off for compliance of the same during the
 implementation of the project.
Comments
The Committee believes that the implementation of any work of cleaning or reallocation should be preceded by an
 awareness campaign to get support and participation of the local population and to prevent any type of strain in the
 implementation of the Dal Lake management plan.
 
ASPECTS RELATED TO GENERATION OF PUBLIC AWARENESS FOR CONSERVING THE DAL LAKE
 
Recommendations
Agenda 21 of the Rio Summit of 1991 specifically devoted to the issue of public awareness to preserve sources of
 water which are getting increasingly depleted. Prof. (Dr.) Kroiss in his important Report observed "the whole process of
 lake restoration is linked to a common understanding of water protection. It needs a new behavior towards waste and
 waste handling".
        (Para 51)
Stating that ".... education does not interfere with any decision on the technical measures to be taken" he
 recommended that "educational part of the project should be started without any delay and schools and media must be
 involved in the whole process".                                (Para 52)
 
Action taken by the Ministry
Realizing that the Dal Lake Conservation Project has to be participatory in nature for it to succeed, involvement of
 the local population i.e. houseboat population dwellers within and on the periphery of the lake etcl has already been
 initiated by the J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority. Workshops and seminars are being conducted for
 awareness of the public involved directly or indirectly with the lake conservation. For this purpose, the NGOs namely,
 Green Kashmir and HOPE have been involved. Moreover, media is being utilized for educating the people on the subject
 of importance to conserve the Dal Lake. 5 short films (fillers) have also been recently telecast on Doordarshan in this

132nd Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/132ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:04]
 regard.
Environmental education to the people linked with lake conservation has also been initiated. Sign-boards and
 slogans have been formulated for dissemination of importance of saving this national heritage. An environmental
 education programme is being launched by the J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority through an NGO-
Global Green Peace for education of various groups/stakeholders of the lake. To begin with, workshops and cleanliness
 drives have been organized in schools located on the lake periphery.
Comments
The Committee notes with satisfaction the work being undertaken along with NGOs and local population and
 would like the Ministry to monitor the progress of the project for effective implementations of ongoing programmes.
 
Recommendations
The Committee, therefore, recommends that following steps must be taken to improve the project implementation.
(i)         Project implementation must be accompanied by close monitoring of the expenditure incurred and funds utilized
 for achieving the result;
(ii)        Funds must be released after evaluating the quality of work done;
(iii)       Setting up of Standing Committees in the Ministry of Environment & Forests to fix responsibility for time and cost
 over-runs;
(iv)      House boat owners must be motivated to extend support to the plan for the conservation of the lake;
(v)        The operation and maintenance of the sewerage system and sewage treatment plant must be carefully gone into at
 the time of construction of such systems. Mere constructions of such systems without properly operating and
 maintaining them will not serve the purpose;
(vi)       Provision of standby generators for the operation of treatment plants must be made mandatory; and
(vii)      A comprehensive training programme for people, who would be employed for operation and maintenance of the
 sewerage system, the ring sewerage system and the treatment plants, as a single unit, must be started at the state
 level.                                              (Para 55)
Action taken by the Ministry
 
(i)         The Ministry is regularly monitoring the projects for which funds are provided under the NRCP and NLCP.
 Similarly, regular monitoring will be carried out for the Dal lake Conservation Project also after the Government
 approves it. As recommended by the Parliamentary Standing Committee, a Monitoring Committee consisting of
 officers from various concerned ministries and Planning Commission as well as two experts would also be set up
 after the project is approved.
(ii)        The recommendation has been noted for compliance after the project is approved by the Government.
(iii)       The recommendation has been noted for compliance after the project is approved by the Government
(iv)       The aspect of motivation of the houseboat owners to extend support for conservation of lake is covered under the
 public awareness plan of the project. Also, the J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority has informed
 that it has been made mandatory for houseboat owners to install floating septic tanks for avoiding direct disposal
 into the lake.
(v)        The J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority have informed that the contracts awarded for the three
 STPs proposed to be constructed at Laam, Habak and Hazratbal provide for O&M by the constructing agency
 itself for the first two years after commissioning of these STPs. During this O&M period of two years, the
 constructing agency has also to train the local staff of J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority for
 running of the STPs subsequent to the initial O&M period.
(vi)       The J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority have informed that the contract for the STPs provides for
 standby generators for operation of STPs during power cuts.
(vii)      The State government have informed that they are committed to ensure proper operation and maintenance of the
 assets created under the project. Proper training for persons employed in O&M of the sewerage system and the
 STPs shall be carried out by J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority.  As also mentioned in para (v)
 above, the constructing agency for the STPs shall also train the local staff for running of the STPs during the initial
 period of two years when they maintain the STPs.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
 
Recommendations
From a series of interactions with the officials of the Environment Ministry and the State Administration the
 Committee has understood the enormity of the situation and, therefore, underlines that positive commitment and mindset

132nd Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/132ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:04]
 on the part of both the Central and the State Authorities must be developed to effectively implement the suggestions put
 forward by the Committee in its foregoing pages so that the eco-system of the lake is conserved for sustaining the
 environment and improving the social and economic situation of people.             (Para 56)
It appears that there is lamentable lack of commitment on the part of Central and State Governments to conserve
 the aesthetic and exotic elegance of the lake. This situation has to be reversed by implementing the above
 measures.                                                         (Para 57)
The Committee, therefore, strongly urges, both the Ministry and the State Authorities to rise from their slumber of
 inaction to preserve this magnificent fragment of paradise on earth from tentacles of pollution.                                        
                                              (Para 58)
 
 
Action Taken by the Ministry
From 1997-98 onwards, the Planning Commission has provided Rs. 102.42 crore to J&K Government as
 Additional Central Assistance (ACA) for conservation of Dal Lake, against which an expenditure of Rs. 88.97 crore has
 been reported by the J&K Lakes & Waterways Development Authority on various activities as per the break-up given in
 Annexure-I. As can be seen, the activities on which expenditure has been incurred by the J&K Lakes and Waterways
 Development Authority includes the measures recommended by the Committee in their Report.In continuation to the
 activities being implemented by the J&K Government from the ACA provided by the Planning Commission, the DPR for
 the Dal Lake Conservation Project has been prepared.
' The project was earlier being processed by the Government on
 70:30 cost sharing basis between the Central and the State Government, the current funding pattern for National River
 Conservation Plan (NRCP) and National Lake Conservation Plan (NLCP). However, on receipt of the recommendation of
 the Parliamentary Standing Committee for 100% central funding for the project as a special case, the matter was taken up
 again with the Planning. Commission. The matter was constantly pursued with them, as a result of which their 'in
 principle' approval for taking up the Dal Lake Conservation Project on 100% funding by Government of India was
 subsequently received. The draft EFC Memo for the project has since been circulated on 29.9.2004 to all concerned
 ministries and the Planning Commission for their comments. On receipt of the comments, the project shall be put up to
 EFC for consideration. Since the cost of the project is more than Rs.100 crore, the case will be put up to the CCEA for
 final approval after is it cleared by the EFC.
Comments
The Committee notes with satisfaction the 'in principle' approval for 100% funding by Government of India in
 taking up the Dal Lake Conservation Project and hopes that the necessary approvals by the various agencies are received
 promptly.
Recommendations
The Committee notes that the Dal Lake is a national lake and, therefore, it is the responsibility of the entire nation
 to address the issue of its conservation. It takes into account the special situation in the State and its unique position in our
 constitutional scheme. The Committee, has, however, no hesitation in recommending that the funding of the project may
 be done hundred percent by the Central Government provided;
(a)        an effective monitoring mechanism committee is constituted;
(b)        the monitoring committee should associate the services of at least two experts in the concerned field;
(c)        the monitoring committee should physically verify and evaluate the work done on a quarterly basis in connection
 with conservation of the lake and money spent in achieving the targets fixed; and
(d)        the monitoring committee should strictly follow a time bound programme to achieve the objectives mentioned in
 (a), (b) & (c) above .                                                              (Para 59)
 
Action taken by the Ministry
The recommendations have been noted for compliance after the project is approved by the Government.
Comments
The Committee express its optimism that the both the Government of India and J&K lakes and Waterways
 Development Authority would come up with an amicable solution with regard to funding of the project.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINUTES
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
      The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Monday, the 14 th March, 2005 in Committee Room ‘C’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

132nd Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/132ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:04]
            PRESENT
 
1.   Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Prof. Saif-ud-din Soz
3. Dr. Prabha Thakur
4. Shri Dilip Singh Judev
5. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav
6. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
7. Dr. Kum Kum Rai
 
LOK  SABHA
 
8. Shri Jaubhai D.Barad
9. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
10. Shri Anantrao Gudhe
11. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
12. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
13. Shri V. Aruna Kumar
14. Shri Rakesh Singh
15. Shri Shivajirao A.Patil
16. Shri Francis Fanthome
 
SECRETARIAT
           
            Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer
 
2.
      The Chairman welcomed Shri Francis Fanthome, a new Member nominated to the Committee with effect from
 25th February, 2005.
3.                  The Committee then took up consideration of draft 132nd , ***, ***, ***, ***, *** and ***Action Taken Reports
 of the Committee.  After some discussion and suggesting minor changes ***, the Committee adopted all the reports.
 
4.         The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Prof. Saif-ud-din Soz to present the Reports in the
 Rajya Sabha and Dr. Sujan Chakraborty and in his absence                     Shri Shivajirao A.Patil to lay the Reports on the
 table of the Lok Sabha on Thursday, the                  17th March, 2005.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 03.30 P.M.
___________________________________________________________
***Relates to other matters.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------