PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 'RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/58%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:09]
PARLIAMEN OF INDIA
 RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1998-99)
 
 
FIFTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON THE
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1998-99) OF THE
(DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS)
(DEMAND NO. 91)
(PRESENTED ON THE 10
TH  JULY,' 1998)
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
JULY, 1998/ASADHA, 1920 (SAKA)
CONTENTS
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE....................................................................
2.
   INTRODUCTION...........................................................................................................
3.   REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE.................................................................................
4.   MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE......................................
 
 
  COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 'RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/58%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:09]
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1998-99)
 
1.             Shri S. R. Bommai-Chairman
         RA.JYA SABRA
2.             Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3.             Shri Rahasbihari Barik
4.             Shri Debabrata Biswas
5.             Dr. D. Masthan
6.             Dr. Y.Radhakrishna Murty
7.             Shri Lachhman Singh
8.              Shri W. Angou Singh
9.        Shri Prakanta Warisa
              1O.    Vacant
11.       Vacant
12.       Vacant
13.       Vacant
14.       Vacant
LOK SABRA
15.
              Shri Indra Nath Bhagat
16.              Shri Ranjib Biswal
17.              Shri Chengara Surendran
18.              Shrimati Bhavana Chikhaliya
19.              Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix D'Souza
20.              Shri M.C. Dhamotharan
21.              Shri George Eden
22.              Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
23.              Shri K. Krishnamoorthy
24.              Shri Charan Das Mahant
25.              Shri Janardan Prasad Misra
26.              Shri Rupchand Murmu
27.              Captain Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad
28.              Shri Prakash Vishwanath Paranjpe
29.              Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
30.              Shri S. Vijaya Rama Raju
31.              Shri Inderjit Singh Rao
32.              Shri Madhavrao Scindia
33.              Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia
34.       Shri Maheshwar Singh
            35.       Shri Virendra Singh
36.              Prof. SaiftJddin Soz
37.          Shri Devji Bhai J. Tandel
38.       Shri Prasad Baburao Tanpure
39.       Dr. C.P. Thakur           .
40.       Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
            41.   Shri Suresh Warpudkar
42.       Shri Mukul Wasnik
        43.       Vacant
 44.       Vacant
 SECRETARIAT
 Shri Salish Kumar. Joint Secretary
 Shri N. C. Joshi. Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri M.L. Taneja, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
I. the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to
 present the Report on its behalf, present the Fifty-eighth Report on the Demands for Grants pertaining to the Department of
 Electronics for the year 1998-99 (Demand No. 91).
'2. In the meeting held on June 25, 1998 the Committee considered the Demands for Grants of the Depart­ment on the basis of the
 documents made available to it and the submissions made before it by the Secretary and other officers of the Department.
3. The Committee thanks the officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it
 the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on July 9. 1998.
 
New Delhi
 
S.R. BOMMAI
Chairman

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 'RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/58%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:09]
July 9, 1998 Committee on Science & Technology,Environment & forests
 
 
REPORT
The Department of Electronics (DOE) has been entrusted with the responsibility of formulation, implementation and review of various
 schemes/programmes in the field of electronics. The objectives of the Department are to provide a focal point of Government's
 attention to electronics sector and act as a coordinator within and outside the Government, to bring the benefit of electronics to every
 walk of life in India and to make the Indian Electronics Industry a global player.
2. The Secretary, DOE in his presentation gave an overview of the achievements of the Department during the Eighth Plan period, the
 areas which would be focused during the Ninth Plan period and the efforts intended to be made to pursue the set targets. The
 Committee was informed that the Department pursued policies leading to a commendable progress in the fields of electronics
 production and export, which achieved a cumulative annual growth of 20 per cent in production and 40 per cent in export. An export
 target of Rs. 48,930 crores has been set for the terminal year of the Ninth Plan with a growth rate of about 52 per cent. The policies of
 the Department have led to a tremendous progress in the field of software export. The software industry has emerged as one of the
 fastest growing sectors in the economy with a CAGR exceeding 50 per cent.
3. The Committee was informed that the Department has implemented a number of programmes/missions in specialised areas, such as
 Massive Parallel Processing (C-DAC); Future Air Navigations System (FANS); National HVDC Programme; Industrial Electronics
 Promotion Programme; Centre for Liquid Crystal Research:
Microprocessor Applications Engineering Programme; and Appropriate Automation Promotion Programme.
4. In order to promote international S&T Cooperation and evolve joint R&D projects in the area of Electronics and Information
 Technology with various countries. the Department of Electronics is also interacting with Department of Science & Technology
 (DST). The Programme of Cooperation includes exchange of scientists! experts, participation in conferences/workshops, training and
 evolving joint R&D projects in the areas of mutual interest.
5. The Committee was informed that during the Ninth Plan period the thrust areas under focus shall be export, employment and
 productivity led growth of Electronics and Information Technology as this sector has the propensity to increase the overall growth
 rate to a higher level. In the liberalised economic scenario, the Department aims at bringing the benefits of electronics to every walk
 of life and playing a catalytic role to make the Indian electronics industry a global player. These objectives would be achieved
 through a three pronged strategy of supporting technology development, setting up of critical infrastructure and formulating policies
 conducive to industrial growth .•
6. In order to achieve the above goals, the strategic imperatives being followed are production level at international cost and prices;
 market promotion and export thrust; quality of products at internationally competitive levels; rationalisation of procedures to ensure
 growth; identifying niche areas in the world market; strengthening R&D efforts; strengthening manpower base; computing in Indian
 languages; develop new applications of electronics relevant to India. etc. The penetration of computers in India, at present, is at two
 per thousand of the population. It is targeted to grow to ten per thousand by the year 200 1.
7. The Department has prepared a futuristic document 'India IT Vision 20W-Action Plan' covering important areas of Infrastructure,
 Skill Development & Education, Finance & Marketing, Promotion & Applications Development, Technology R&D, Policy Support,
 and Indigenous Manufacture for self-reliance to make India a glooal information technology power and one of the largest generator
 and exporters in the world within ten years.
8. Keeping in view the recommendations of the Ninth Plan (1997-2002) Working Group on Electronics Industry set-up by the
 Planning Commission, the Department formulated certain nationally co-ordinated initiatives in 1997 which are under various stages
 of implementation. These incude: National Information Infrastructure for National Development: NIl 2000 Action Plan; National
 Software capability Enhancement Programme: SoftCap; Expand High Speed Datacom Facilities to enhance: Software Exports STPI
 Vision 2000; National Institute of Advanced Software Education and Research (NISER); Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
 Promotion Programme, and Technology Information & Forecasting Support in IT (TechnolnFo).
9. Besides, pursuing the ongoing programmes, new programme proposed to be initiated by the Department durin, 1998-99 is,
 Technology Development Information Technology which aims at undertaking different Technology Development projects in
 information technology.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
10. After listening to the presentation made by the Secretary, DOE, the Committee examined the Demands for Grants of the
 Department for the year 1998-99 in the light of its mandate, objectives pursued by it and the targets achieved so far. 'The Budget
 provision for the Department of Electronics for the year 1998-99 is as under: Plan provision of Rs. 190 crores includes Rs. 7.75 crores
 towards book adjustment of external assistance being received under some programmes. 1be sector-wise break-up of allocation for
 attached offices, PSUs, Registered Societies, ongoing programmes/schemes and new schemes of DOE has been shown at Annexure.
11. The Committee wanted to know as to why there has been a substantial increase in the allocation on the plan side for the current
 financial year which is kept at Rs. 190.00 crores as against the B .E. of last year which was Rs. 135.60 crores. The Committee was
 informed that an additional amount of Rs. 50 crores has been allocated to fulfil the objectives of 1ndia IT Vision 201 O-Action Plan'.
 The Committee was further informed that the programmes which envisage substantial increase in the B.E. for 1998·99 compared to
 1997-98 are as follows:
 
The Committee examined the budgetary allocations made for different programmes of the DOE during the year 1998-99 and sought to
 know reasons for the variations wherever occured.
TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL PROJECTS
12. The Technology Development Council (TDC) looks at general application based R&D projects in various sectors, inter-

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 'RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/58%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:09]
disciplinary emerging technologies and other new initiatives. The allocation for the TDC projects during the current financial year has
 been reduced to Rs. 2.50 crores from Rs. 5.00 crores (R.E.) of 1997-98. The Committee wanted to know the reasons for this reduction
 in the outlay. The Committee was informed that the bulk of R&D funding comes through special Heads e.g., funding for Centre for
 Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC), Society for Applied Microwave Electronics Engineering and Research (SAMEER),
 Centre for Materials for Electronics Technology (CMET), Centre for Liquid Crystal Research (CLCR), National Centre for Software
 Technology (NCST) and Electronics Research & Development Centre (ER&DC). Further, IT related R&D funding would be coming
 through NIT Head Projects like ATM Test Bed, IDIL Programme, etc. Besides, a provision of Rs. 10 crores has also been made for a
 new Programme "Technology Development in Information Technology and Other Programmes". The Committee was also apprised
 that many of the old projects funded through TDC route have fructified.       
13. Apart from many sources for the funding of the Technology Development Council Projects, the Committee learnt that the Central
 Government Departments have· also been advised by the Planning Commission to allocate 2 to 3 per cent of their outlay to promote
 Information Technology. The Committee recommends that the Department should constantly interact with various Ministries
 Departments of the Government to monitor that the allocation made by them to promote information technology is being used in the
 right direction. The Committee feels that in the absence of such a monitoring agency no checks can be imposed on the diversification
 of these funds for other purposes.
SOFIWARFJHARDWARE EXPORT PROMOTION
14. The programme aims at the creation of basic facilities for development and exports of software to data links and contributes
 towards achieving export targets, both for software and hardware. The Committee noted that there has been a substantial hike in the
 B.E. of 1998-99 under the head Software/Hardware Export Promotion from Rs. 2 crores, as was in the R.E. for 1997-98 to Rs. 10
 crores in the B.E. of the current year. The Committee enquired from the Department about the various schemes proposed to be
 undertaken to promote the integrated development of software hardware in the country for domestic as well as export market The
 Committee was informed that the export target for the terminal year of the Ninth Plan is Rs. 48,930 crores. In order to achieve this
 target there is need to upgrade promotional efforts and Quality Enhancement Programme. The Department proposes to initiate certain
 schemes to achieve this goal like the Project Soft QC/QM meant to promote quality culture amongst the software units; the scheme
 for the accreditation of software units as per the international standards; promotion -of Software Technology Parks (STPs); promotion
 plug and play facilities in existing STPs to facilitate new entrepreneurs and supporting schemes for building capabilities in software
 products and packages. Most of the software today is customised. There is a need to move up the value chain and undertake market
 and feasibility studies and launch export promotion campaigns.
15. The Committee notes with satisfaction that due to the efforts of the Department Indian software export has made a tremendous
 progress and has jumped to a left) of US$ 1.6 billion in 1997-98  The Committee is, however, constrained to observe that the
 Department has made relatively less progress in the hardware sector and recommends that definite plans schemes be chalked out for
 steady promotion and integrated development of hardware in the country for domestic as well as export market.
MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT FOR SOFTWARE EXPORT
16. The Committee was informed that allocation for Manpower Development for Software Export has been increased from Rs. 5.00
 crores as was in ~.E. of 1997-98 to Rs. 12.00 crores during the current financial year to achieve the software export target.
 Approximately, 20,000 professionals are required for every billion dollar of export and for generating new professionals, there is also
 a need for re-training of existing professionals, to take care of the technological obsolescence. Certain programmes envisaged in this
 area are: SOFTCAP which will include increase of intake in IITs and Regional Engineering Colleges (RECs) in collaboration with the
 Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD) and establishment of National Institute for Advanced Software Education and
 research (NlSER); promotion of Indian Institute of Information Technology (IIIT) through State Governments; upgradation of the
 capabilities of NCST; and promotion of Distance Learning.
17. The Committee observes that the manpower development for software export should be considered a priority area. Everything
 possible must be done to launch comprehensive programmes for updating the technological skills and knowledge of our software
 professionals so that India could compete in imitational software market with other world leaders in the area.
NATIONAL INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE (NIl)
18. With the convergence of Intonation Technology, Telecommunication and Entertainment, new vistas in the life of a common man
 have been opened. This technology would help in storage of information both text and multi-media, present and analyse in different
 ways/formats suitable to the circumstances for different purposes simultaneously at a umber of places. The allocation for Nll during
 1997-98 was Rs. 4.00crores while it has been in to Rs. 24.00 crores during the current year. 1be Committee wanted to know the
 reasons for the substantial hike of Rs. 20 crores towards allocation for the Nll in the B .E. of current year. 1be Committee was
 informed that during 1997-98 a nominal provision of Rs. 4.00 crores was made for Nll with the proviso that Nll blueprint would be
 prepared and approved and some initial follow up action will be initiated during 1997-98. Nll vision document and Nil 2000 Action
 Plan were both approved by the Committee of Secretaries and some progress was made towards implementation of the plan.
 However, the original Ninth Plan document had envisaged a much larger DOE initiative in this area with an outlay of Rs. 80 crores
 for the entire plan period. The year 1998-99, as stated by the Department may be seen as the first major year in which Nll initiative
 will make a real headway. 1be ongoing activities of the project initiated during 1997-98 itself would demand about Rs. 9 crores in the
 current year leaving about Rs. 15 crores for new initiatives as envisaged in the Nll2000 Action Plan.
RURAL PROJECTS (ELECTRONICS FOR RURAL/SOCIAL/AGRICULTURE/WATER SECTOR
19. In the sector of Rural and Social Applications of Electronics, the Committee was informed that the Department of Electronics
 strives to develop and demonstrate cost- effective applications of electronics for rural and social development including agriculture,
 watershed development, adult literacy, etc. The projects are usually implemented by R&D institutions, NGOs and field groups. To
 promote the utilisation of computers at the panchayat and block level. the Department of Electronics is also launching a few projects
 for establishing Village Level Information Centres (SAMADHAN Centres) that will be repositories of information on a variety of
 topics of interest to the local population. In addition, these centres could also be used as training and educational centres. The first of
 such projects has been initiated during 1997-98 in the Ramanathapuram District in Tamil Nadu.
20. The Committee was told that this programme aims at promoting and developing appropriate technologies based primarily on

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 'RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/58%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:09]
 electronics which have variety of rural applications and help in production. The Committee wanted to know the reasons for
 practically no increase in the outlay for this sector, the allocation for which has been kept at Rs. 2.00 crores. The Committee wanted
 to know if the Department still considers this as one of its thrust areas. The Committee was informed that during the Eighth Plan,
 allocation for this sector averaged less than Rs. 50 lakhs. It was raised to Rs.2 crores last year and has been maintained at that level in
 the current financial year. The Committee was given to understand that through an allocation of 2-3 per cent outlay for Information
 Technology in all Central Government Departments which include the socio-economic Ministries and Departments there will be
 considerable additional resources for this Sector. During the last two years about 18 new projects have been initiated by the
 Department to promote electronics applications under this sector. One of the important areas that is being addressed is IT
 Applications for Watershed Development. Four projects have been sponsored in this area to develop software packages for the better
 implementation of watershed development projects.
21. While the Committee observes that the objectives of this programme are laudable, it however, fails to understand the reasons as to
 why the funds allocated under this Head during the year 1997-98 could not be fully utilised. The allocation for the programme during
 last year was kept at Rs. 2.00 crores while utilisation was Rs. 1.46 crores. The Committee recommends that all out efforts be made by
 the Department to see that the outlay earmarked this year for this important programme is fully utilised and the benefits of the
 schemes percolate down to a large segment of rural population.
UNDERUTILISATION OF FUNDS
22. The Committee has noted thai the allocations made for various schemes like Health, Electronics, Hi- Tech Power Electronics, lPR
 Promotion Programme and Environmental Management in Electronics during the last financial year (1997-98) were not used fully.
 The allocations for these schemes have either ~n increased or kept at the last year's B.E. level The Committee recommends that the
 Department should make concrete efforts for the utilisation of funds allocated for these schemes/programmes fully during the year
 1998-99.
OTHER PROGRAMMES
23. The Department has projected a demand of Rs. 22.37 crores (plan) in B.E. of current year for other programmes which include
 Foreign Trade, IPR promotion programme, etc. as against Rs. 12.70 crores in th.e B.E. of 1997-98 and Rs. 12.93 crores in R.E. of the
 same year. The Committee wanted to'know the reasons for this variation. The Committee was informed that a provision of Rs. 10.00
 crores has been earmarked for a new programme "Technology Development in Information Technology". The remaining provision of
 Rs. 12.37 crores is for the ongoing programmes which were initiated during the year 1997-98.
24. The Committee evinced a keen interest in the Supercomputer developed at the C-DAC and specifically enquired into the details of
 its economic aspects, particularly the savings it has led to. The Committee was informed that the C-DAC was established for strategic
 consideration, since the import of Supercomputer was hit by export Control mesures adopted by some developed countries. The C-
DAC has successfully developed Supercomputer through parallel processing technology and PARAM 1ססoo was unveiled in March,
 1998. Apart from Japan, no other country has this capability in Asia. Different configurations of the PARAM models have been
 supplied to various organisations mainly In Academic and R&D institutions in India. A few have been supplied to Russia, Canada
 and Germany. AII together 35 different systems have been supplied generating an income of Rs. 20 crores including Rs. 3 crores in
 foreign exchange. The Committee was further informed that under the Indo-Russian Technology Cooperation, an R&D collaboration
 by C-DAC with ICAD, Moscow has been established for development of new software for PARAM range of computers and this will
 enable greater use of the computers within India and abroad.
25. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department of Electronics has taken initiative and provided the needed. support to
 C-DAC which had successfully developed a supercomputer through parallel processing technology. The Committee would like to
 congratulate the scientists, engineers, technologists and others who were associated with this programme.
INDIA IT VISION 2010: ACTION PLAN
26. The Committee was given a brief outline of the programme 'India IT Vision 2010: Action Plan' which covers important areas of
 Infrastructure, Skill Development & Education, Finance & Marketing, Promotion & Application Development, Technology R&D,
 Policy Support, and Indigenous Manufacture for self-reliance to make India a global information technology power and one of the
 largest generators and exporters in the world within 10 years. The Committee was informed that in pursuance of the Prime Minister's
 Mission objective to make India an IT superpower and largest producer and exporter of software, the DOE IT Vision 201D-Action
 Plan was discussed in the Planning Commission and a tentative additional outlay of Rs. 50 crores has been allocated. The document
 has also been submitted to the National Task Force on Information Technology and Software Development This Task Force is
 required to submit a report on removal of bottlenecks to give a boost to Information Technology within 30 days and formulation of
 National Informatics Policy and Action Plan within 90 days. In the light of the recommendations of the National Task Force, the
 implementation of IT Vision 20JO will be undertaken.
27. Since the 'India IT Vision 2010: Action Plan' covers a wide range of activities which aim at making India a world leader in the
 software market and making India self-reliant in the field of information technology, the Committee would like the Plan to be
 implemented with focussed attention of the Department The Department may, therefore, consider appointing a high level Committee
 which should periodically review the progress of the projects initiated and target.;: achieved under the Plan.
COMPUTER EDUCATION
28. In the area of computer education the Committee was informed that in the non- formal sector (both private as well as public), the
 Department of Electronics has implemented a scheme viz., the Department of Electronics Accreditation of Computer Courses
 (DOEACC) under which the institutions/organisations in the non-formal sector meeting certain well-defined norms and criteria, in
 terms of faculty, software and hardware are given accreditation by the MHRD and AICTE, a Statutory Body, which provides
 accreditation to technical institutions. At present there are more than 600 institutions accredited under the scheme. Performance of the
 accredited institutes is monitored periodically. Besides, to ensure that the training under the DOEACC scheme is in keeping with the
 latest knowledge, the syllabuses of all the levels are revised periodically.
29. The Committee expresses its satisfaction that the Department has taken note of the prevailing obsolescence in the computer
 courses and has taken steps to update the computer education.
PHOTONICS

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 'RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/58%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:09]
30. Photonics deals with the technology of generating and harnessing light and other forms of radiant energy the quantum unit of
 which is a photon. The range of applications of photonics extends from energy generating to detection, communication and
 information processing. The objective of the photonics development programme, according to the Department, is to develop core
 technologies and applications which are of critical importance for the present and next generation of electronics, computer and
 communication systems.
31. The Department of Electronics has taken major initiatives during the Eighth Plan which include projects in the areas of
 optoelectronics devices, components and sub-systems, .high speed fiber optic data links and interconnects, broadband (SDH/SONET
 communication systems, photonics switching, etc. The Department has implemented the programmes relating to the Fiber Optics
 Systems and Products Project; Optoelectronics Technology Project (OTP); Photonics Switching Development Programme (FSDP);
 and National Photonics Project (NPP).
32. The Department has also identified some new areas for the Ninth Plan period. The Committee was informed that a new project on
 Silica-on-Silicon based Integrated Optic components is expected to be initiated shortly.
PUBLIC SEctOR ENTERPRISES
33. There are three public sector enterprises, namely, Semiconductor Complex Ltd. (SCL) Computer Maintenance Corporation Ltd.
 (CMC) and Electronics Trade and Technology Development Corporation Limited (ET &n which come under the Department of
 Electronics. The Committee examined the demands of these Public Sector Enterprises and noted that the allocations on the Plan side
 have been reduced to Rs. 17.25 crores as against Rs. 26.50 crores in the B.E. of 1997-98. The Committee wanted to know the reasons
 for this variation. The Committee was informed that the Budgetary a1~ocation towards Plan Investment in the SCL is Rs. 15.00
 crores by way of equity and in the ET&T is Rs. 2.25 crores by way of loans and advances.
34. In case of SCL, the Committee was told that the Revised Cost Estimate-IT approved by the Cabinet, an outlay of Rs. 332.56 crores
 was envisaged for rebuilding of VLSI facility which constituted Rs. 289.97 crores as budgetary support out of which Rs. 165.86
 crores is by way of equity and Rs. 124.11 crores is by way of Grant-in- ­aid. The Committee was informed that an amount of Rs.
 134.935 crores has already been released as equity to SCL and for the balance amount of Rs. 30.925 crores, a sum of Rs. 15 crores is
 proposed to be released in 1998-99 and hence there is no reduction in the plan outlay for SCL.
35. In case of Electronics Trade & Technology Development Corporation Limited (ET&T the Committee was informed that a token
 provision of Rs. 2.25 crores has been kept for it during the current financial year 1998-99 because the Disinvestment Commission in
 its Sixth Report submitted in December 1997 has recommended closure of the company and the recommendations are under
 consideration of the Core Committee of Secretaries. ET &T has prepared another rehabilitation proposal which has also been sent to
 the Core Committee for consideration.
36. The Committee would like the Department to f'inalise its future programme with regard to the ET &T. Either this venture be
 closed down as recommended by the I investment Commission or a well thought out diversification plan should be prepared for the
 revival or the company. Uncertainty with regard to its future would prove costly to the public exchequer.
37. The Committee wanted to know whether there is any move to privatise CMC. The Committee was informed that there is no such
 move with regard to CMC. The CMC has. however, submitted a proposal to the Government wherein it envisages to raise the equity
 within the authorised share capital through private placement with financial institutions and mutual funds. The Government has not
 yet taken any decision in this regard.
38. After making a detailed scrutiny or the Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics and assesing the progress of various
 important programmes and projects administrated by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs. 211.57
 crores, as sought by the Department or Electronics for the year 1998-99, under Demand No. 91 are in order and may be approved.
NEW DELHI S.R. BOMMAI
July 9, 1998 Chairman
Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 
 
___________________________________________________________________________
 
MINUTES
_____________________________________________
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on -Thursday, the 25th June, 1998 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1.    Shri S. R. Bommai - Chairman
RAJYA SABRA
2.    Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3.    Shri Debabrata Biswas
4.    Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty
5.    Shri Ram Ratan Ram
6.    Shri Lachhman Singh
LOK SABHA
7.    Shrimati Bhavana Chilchaliya
8.    Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix D'Souza
9.    Shri M.C. Dhamotbaran

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 'RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/58%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:09]
10.  Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
11.  Shri K. Krishnamoorthy
12.  Shri Charan Das Mahant
13.  Shri Janardan Prasad Misra
14.  Shri Prakash Vishwanath Paranjpe
15.  Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
16.  Prof. Saifuddin Soz
17.  Shri Devji Bhai J. Tandel
18.  Shri Suresh Warpudkar
SECRETARIAT
Shri N. C. Joshi, Director
Shri D. P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri M. L. Taneja, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS
Shri Ravindra Gupta, Secretary
Shri Subir Hari Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati P.M. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri J.S. Maini, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Mukhopadhyaya, Adviser
Dr. A.K. Chakravorty, Adviser
Shri M.K. Sharma, Dy. Financial Adviser
Shri Gulshan Rai, Director
Shri U.P. Phadke, Senior Director
Shri B.B. Bahl, Deputy Director
2. The Committee took up for consideration the Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Department of Electronics.
The Secretary in the Department briefly explained for the benefit of Members the budgetary allocations on different heads as also the
 functioning of the Department. The Members then sought clarifications on points relating to the Demands for Grants.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee then adjourned at 5.40 'P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 26th June, 1998.
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 9th July, 1998 in Room No. 67. Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1.    Shri S. R. Bommai - Chairman
RAJYASABHA
2.    Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3.    Shri Rahasbihari Barik
4.    Shri Lachhman Singh
5.    Shri W. Angou'Singh
LOKSABHA
6.    Shrimati Bhavana Chikhaliya
7.    Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix 0' Souza
8.    Shri K. KrishnaRlOorthy
9.    Shri Rupchand Munnu
10.  Captain Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad
11.  Shri Prakash Vishwanath Paranjpe
12.  Shri Maheshwar Singh
13.  Prof. Saifuddin Soz
14.  Dr. c.P. Thakur
15.  Shri RAvi Prakash Verma
SECRETARIAT
Shri N. C. Joshi. Director
Shri D. P. Ahuja. Under Secretary
Shri M. L. Taneja. Committee Officer
 
 
 
2. The Committee took up consideration of the draft 58th and* '" '" Reports on the Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Department
 of Electronics and'" '" '" , respectively. '" '" '" the reports were adopted.
3. The Committee appreciated the hard work done by the Secretariat in preparing the draft reports and desired th"t the appreciation of
 the Committee may be placed on record.
4. The Committee also authoriscd the Chainnan to carry out necessary corrections in the reports, if any factual inaccuracies are

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 'RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/58%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:09]
 required to be rectified.
5. The Committee also decided to meet shortly to decide its future programme relating to on-the-spot study . visits.
6. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri Lachhman Singh to present the reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri
 Mukul Wasnik and in his absence Shrimati Bhavana Chikhaliya to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 10.35 A.M.
• • • relates to other matters.
 
 