Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
  August, 2015/Sravana, 1937 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
268
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 12nd August, 2015)
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 12nd August, 2015)
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT
Environmental Issues of the Nilgiris

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT
Environmental Issues of The Nilgiris
((Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12th August, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12th August, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2015/ Sravana, 1937 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i) —(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT .......................................................................................................... 1—11
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS—AT A G LANCE ...................................................... 12—13
6. M INUTES    .................................................................................................... 15—18
7. A NNEXURES .......................................................................................................................... 19—22

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1 st September, 2014-15)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar  –– Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri Bhupinder Singh
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Beig
  13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
  15. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
  16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
  17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
  20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
22. Shri Nana Patole
23. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
24. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
25. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
27. Shri Nagendra Singh
28. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Smt. Vasanthi M.
 *31. Shri Chirag Paswan
*  Nominated w.e.f. 25th March, 2015.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
(ii)

INTRODUCTION
          I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to present the
report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred and Sixty-eighth Report on “Environmental issues
of the Nilgiris”.
2.     During its study visit to Udhagamandalam (Ooty) from 17 th to 19 th July, 2015, the
Committee heard the views of the officers of the Central Government and State Government
of Tamil Nadu and Experts and Civil Society Organisations/NGOs on ßEnvironmental issues of
Udhagamandalam (Ooty) Þ.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Central Government and State
Government of Tamil Nadu and Experts and Civil Society Organisations/NGOs for rendering their
valuable views/replies to clarifications sought by the Committee.
4.      In its meeting held on 11 th August, 2015, the Committee considered the draft report and
adopted the same . 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                  ASHWANI  KUMAR
11th August, 2015 Chairman
Sravana,20, 1937 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests
Rajya Sabha
(iii)

ACRONYMS
ALW AS : Adivasi Welfare Association
OSAI : Organisation for Social Action and Improvement
BOD : Biochemical Oxygen Demand
A TR : Annamalai Tiger Reserve
MTR : Mudumalai Tiger Reserve
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forest during its e xamination of The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015
decided to visit Udhagamandalam popularly known as Ooty.  During its visit to Ooty besides having
the views of officials of Government of Tamil Nadu and NGOs/Experts on the provisions of Bill,
the Committee also decided to apprise itself of the Environmental issues of Ooty.  Since the
Committee is submitting its report on the Bill separately, this report deals with only the environ-
mental issues of Ooty.
2. Udhagamandalam popularly called Ooty is the “Queen of Hill Stations” in India.
Udhagamandalam, the capital of the Nilgiris District, has once been the venue of Tamil Nadu
Legislative Assembly. The Nilgiris District situated in the Western Ghats is surrounded by the
Coimbatore District, Kerala and Karnataka States on the eastern, western and the northern side
respectively. It is a celebrated summer resort for the tourists from all over India. The
economic activities of this district are accelerated by the visit of tourists to considerable
extents which increase the income capacity of the people engaged in many fields.
3. Ooty besides being a hill station have Nilgiri forests and Mudumalai Tiger Reserve (MTR)
Forest has since time immemorial fascinated mankind by virtue of its serene, solitudinous, soothing
ambience, being home to flora and fauna and wildlife and treasure trove of precious minerals and
other resources.  Spiritual and material significance apart, forests support, sustain and enrich the
health and well being of living being so much so that it is regarded as synonymous to life.  But
the high esteem that forest once enjoyed, gradually lost much of its steam and now it is primarily
seen as source of natural resources, exploitation of which is sine-qua-non  for overall economic
development of the country.  Consequently, forest area in the country has been put under severe
stress.  However, efforts are being made to strike a balance between development and conservation
of forests.
4. The Committee started its business on 17 th July, 2015, by holding a meeting with NGOs/
Civil Society members/Experts on environmental issues of Ooty at Udhagamandalam.  As the
Chairman of the Committee could not attend the meeting due to his indisposition, the Committee
decided to choose Shri Bhupinder Singh, another Member of the Committee, to act as Chairman
of the Committee for the meeting, under Rule 73(3) read with Rule 275 of the Rules of procedure
and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha.
5. Members of the NGOs/Civil Society and experts raised a number of issues pertaining to
the environmental status of Udhagamandalam.  A list of NGOs/Experts and their representatives
who attended the meeting is at Annexure-I.  Some of the views expressed by the NGOs/Civil
Society and experts were as follows:-
(i) Representative of Keystone, Kotagiri informed that in Nilgiri region a lot of natural
plantations had been converted into industrial plantations which were harmful for

2
the environment. She therefore suggested that this trend of conversion of natural
plantation into industrial plantation needs to be stopped.
(ii) Consultant, Wildlife and Nature Conservation Trust was of the view that NGOs
should also be involved in the decision making process and should be consulted
at drafting stage of Bills/rules. He added that biodiversity of the region should
not be altered for developmental purposes.
(iii) Representative of Environment Conservation Group stated that tribals are the
worst sufferers of diversion of forests for non-forest purposes. Their interest,
therefore, needs to be taken care of. He was also of the view that dense/
pristine forest should not be allowed to be diverted. He also argued for
allocation of more funds for Non Governmental Organisations.
(iv) Representative of Nilgiri Wildlife and Environment Association suggested that to
facilitate flora & fauna to flourish, restoration of grassland and biosphere
system was necessary. According to him, Nilgiri eco-system had been spoiled
because of plantation of alien species. He suggested that only local plants and fruit
bearing trees should be planted. He also emphasised on the need for restoration of
elephant corridors even in the private land adjacent to the forest area by acquiring
the private land.
(v) Representative of Wildlife and Forest Research Trust stated that money collected
through CAMPA Fund should be utilised for undertaking artificial regeneration and
protection of forests and Government should not spend this amount for
administrative purposes/constructing Institutes from CAMPA Fund. He further
suggested that there was no need for setting up of a separate Compensatory
Afforestation Management and Planning Authority because this work could be
undertaken by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change itself.
(vi) Representative of T amil Nadu Green Movement stated that in Kudremukh National
Park and Wyanad sanctuary, a large number of families were ready for relocation
but could not do so. due to unavailability of enough funds. It was also added that
the amount of compensation to the victims of Man-elephant conflict should be
enhanced and be provided immediately after the incident.
(vii) President, Mudumalai Relocation Committee was of the view that tribals were
suffering for the past 40 years in the absence of relocation plan. He stated that a
PIL for relocation was filed but still no development had taken place. He apprised
that core area was about 600 acres where the tribals resided. He informed that
crops of the Tribals were destroyed by wild animals and they were affected by
causalities and hence ready to leave the core area if provided with alternatives. He
was of the view that CAMPA Fund might be utilized for relocation of villagers
living in core areas of Tiger Reserves.
(viii) Ex- Vice President, Mudumalai Panchayat, Tamil Nadu informed that though some
Tribal families were staying in the Nilgiri forest for three generations, due to man-

3
animal conflict they were ready to settle near Gudalur. He informed that 2 hamlets
of Bennai and Nellikarai located in the Mudumalai Tiger Reserve were ready to
move because of man-elephant conflict.  Residents of 7 villages were also ready
to move and other would agree if they were assured about rehabilitation package.
(ix) Representative of Nilgiri Adivasi Welfare Association (ALW AS) claimed that their
organisation, set up in 1958, was devoted for the welfare of 6 primitive tribal
groups of Nilgiris namely, Gotha, Irula, Gurumba, Toda and others.  He informed
the Committee that around forty thousand tribal people lived in the Nilgiris.  With
about eight lakh non-tribal people now settled in the Nilgiris, the livelihood of the
tribals have been put under severe pressure.  They cannot collect even firewood.
He also expressed his concern over growing exotic trees like Eucalyptus, Acacia
and Pine on around 40 thousand acres of grassland which had adversely affected
the ecology of the Nilgiri hills.  He strongly advocated for ban on plantation of
such alien species as it was essential to preserve the underground water level/
availability of water.  He made an appeal for restoration of the shola trees and
pristine grasslands.  He also demanded ban on chemical farming because excessive
use of fertilizers and pesticides, etc. was polluting water bodies. He suggested that
organic cultivation shall be promoted in the region.
He was of the view that CAMPA Fund should also be used for welfare of
tribals of the Nilgiri region.  Contrary to other representatives, he opined that
primitive groups of the Nilgiris had been living in harmony with the wild animals
since time immemorial and unlike non-tribals they did not want to move from the
forests.  He emphasised on the need for creating job opportunities for the tribals.
(x) Smt. Geetha Srinivasan, an environment expert informed that Nilgiri
Biosphere Reserve was declared the 1 st biosphere reserve of India in
September, 1978 and covered area of around 5500 square kms.  There were
6 sanctuaries in the area. She drew attention to the problem of invasive alien
weeds like congress grass, Lantana Camera and Parthenium Hysterophorus in
the Nilgiri forest area and suggested that CAMPA Fund should also be used
for eradicating these invasive alien weeds. To mitigate vehicular pollution
Mass Rapid Transit System needs to be developed and ‘No Vehicular Zone’
may be earmarked in peak season on the lines of Matheran and Manali. For
solid waste management land should be provided to the Department of
Atomic Energy for setting up ‘NISARGUNA’ plant for solid waste
management. She also suggested that local Panchayats should also be
involved in waste management of Ooty and plastic brought by tourists should
also be curbed.
(xi) Representative of World Wildlife Fund India, Regional office, Chennai suggested
that afforestation should be undertaken in the nearby area of the forest where
diversion of forest land had taken place.  He was optimistic that if area was
cordoned/weeds were removed, the forest cover would come up.

4
(xii) Representative of Organisation for Social Action and Improvement (OSAI)
informed that disturbance in traditional migratory path of elephants had led to
man-animal conflict in Nilgiris.  While during the period of 1994 to 2004, 24
people had died due to man-elephant conflict, the figure rose to 100 during
2004-2014.  He stated that those conflicts had taken place because of
encroachment on the traditionally used corridors of elephants which now lie
outside forest land.  He suggested that CAMPA Funds should be used to
purchase the private land which falls in the corridor area and construction of
new roads in the wildlife area should be curbed.  In addition to this, he
suggested manual eradication of Lantana Camera. According to him claims made
by Forest Department about increase in the green cover of the country were
exaggerated. In fact, in reality quality of forest had degraded as major share of
increased green cover was due to growth of Lantana Camera and other invasive
weeds.
(xiii) The representative of Nilgiri Wildlife Trust informed that around 30,000 vehicles
enter into Ooty city in the summer season which causes air pollution. He suggested
that old Govt. vehicles which are more polluting should not be allowed to ply in
the Nilgiris. Improvement/ expansion/ modernization of the Nilgiri train and
development of Mass Rapid Transit System for Ooty, were some of the suggestions
aimed at improving the air quality of Ooty.  He also pointed out that 3 companies,
namely, Sterling Biotech, Good Shephard Farms and a Defence Establishment were
causing industrial pollution. They were discharging sewage in the nearby water
bodies/ rivers in utter violation of environmental norms.  He also highlighted the
issue of littering of plastic waste and polythene by tourists in Ooty and suggested
that some mechanism for solid waste management needs to be put in place. He also
emphasised on the need for preservation and conservation of wetlands and
highlighted that lack of coordination among various Govt. agencies was the main
reason for increase in level of pollution in Ooty.  He also underlined that Ooty has
already made its mark as a prominent tourist destination and hence there is a need
to reconsider the justification for organizing Nilgiri Festival as it add to the level
of pollution in the Nilgiris.
Yet another reason behind increasing level of pollution in the Nilgiris in
general and Ooty in particular was transportation of construction and building
material in the region.  It was, therefore, suggested that people may be allowed to
construct buildings from locally available wood products.
It was also brought to the notice of the Committee that fencing erected for
the purpose of driving away wild animals was being misused to kill animals by
using high voltage electricity and demanded that this matter needs to be seriously
looked into and checked.
6. The Committee in its next meeting decided to hear the representatives of Government of
Tamil Nadu. Principal Secretary, Environment and Forests Department; Govt. of Tamil Nadu;
District Collector, The Nilgiris; Commissioner, Municipal Corporation of Udhagamandalam;

5
representative of Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board, representatives of Union Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change and other officials.  A list of officers who attended the
meeting is at  Annexure-II.
7. The Chairman, while welcoming the officials highlighted the pitiable state of Ooty Lake and
increased level of air pollution in the Nilgiris. He further stated that the Committee had been
informed by civil society members/ NGOs that the main contributors of pollution in
Udhagamandalam were tourists, municipal solid waste, plastic waste, vehicular pollution, etc. He
asked the officials to apprise the Committee of the various steps taken by different agencies to
address these environmental issues.  He also asked the authorities to apprise the Committee on eco-
tourism, increased man-animal conflict in the Nilgiris and the manner in which the Committee could
help the authorities in their endeavours to improve the environmental parameters of the
Udhagamandalam.
8. The Principal Secretary, Environment and Forests, Government of Tamil Nadu in his
presentation gave an overview of the State of forest and wildlife in Tamil Nadu. He asserted
that forest in Tamil Nadu has been very well managed and well kept mainly because of
involvement of people and other stakeholders in the process of conservation of forest. Thirty-
three per cent of the forest area in the State form part of wildlife sanctuaries and National
Park. Diversion of forest land for non-forestry purposes has been very less as compared to
other States. Only about 5000 hectares of forest land has been divested so far. Cases of
poaching and illegal felling of trees are also very few in the State.
9. On the pollution of Ooty Lake, Principal Secretary was of the view that almost all the hill
stations in India had the problem because of excessive usage of water bodies by the people.
Pollution is mainly caused by old vehicles entering into the Nilgiris. He pointed out that the District
Collector, Nilgiris was taking care of in cooperation with the local people and the community to
conserve the lake. District Collector, Ooty, thereafter, apprised the Committee about measures taken
by the District administration to make the hill station clean and green.
10. After hearing both the civil society members and the officials of Tamil Nadu Government,
the Committee flagged the following environmental issues of Ooty:-
I. Pollution in Ooty Lake
11. On Ooty Lake, the District collector, Nilgiris pointed out that it is an artificial lake formed
during 1824 and had 23 hectares surroundings.  A number of Tea estates and 80 to 90 resorts/
hotels located in and around Ooty are major source of pollution in Nilgiris, many of which were
dumping untreated sewage into the lake. Industrial waste and chemical waste is also increasing day
by day. He further informed that `7 crores was allotted for restoration work of the lake and ` One
crore was given for desiltation of its source. Bio-remedial conservation aimed at increasing the
Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) level is also being undertaken.  Sewage Treatment Plant of
2 MLD capacity has also been established.  Toilet facilities have also been provided to the families
of tea plant workers.  All major discharge in the Kodappan Channel has been stopped.  He further
added that these efforts have made positive impact on the water quality of the lake and the odour
has gone down.

6
12. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by District administration, the Nilgiris
to control pollution of Ooty Lake and effects thereof but  feels that much more needs to
be done.  Since Ooty lake is a major tourist attraction, it is imperative that constant watch
is kept on the ecological health of the lake.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change may extend financial
assistance to the State authorities to rejuvenate all the lakes including prominent tourist
places under National Plan for Conservation of Aquatic Eco-systems.
II. Pollution in Ooty and Other Civic Issues
13. Ooty being a tourist attraction for tourists not only from various parts of India but even
from abroad.  This brings pressure on the pristine beauty of the hill station.  To maintain the
ecological balance of the Nilgiri hills, the Committee recommends that action on following points
should be taken:-
(i) The District Collector, Nilgiris should explore the viability of banning plastic
bags. Awareness campaign about environmental impact of throwing garbage/
plastic bags in lakes/water bodies and public places should be initiated.
(ii) Old and polluting Government vehicles major source of vehicular pollution in
Ooty, should not be allowed to ply on the roads of the Nilgiris.
(iii) To mitigate vehicular pollution Mass Rapid Transit System (MRTS) needs to
be developed.
(iv) ‘No vehicular zone’ may be earmarked during peak season when tourists
flood Ooty. For this purpose, efforts should also be made to improve the
network and speed of the Nilgiri Train Network.
(v) The pressure horn in automobiles should be banned to contain noise
pollution.
(vi) Solid Waste Management system of Ooty needs to be put in place.
(vii) A lot of construction material is transported to Ooty everyday from the
neighbouring cities which is a major contributor to pollution. Transportation
of construction and building materials may be regulated and people should be
encouraged to build homes with locally available wood products.
Forests and Wildlife issues
III. Man Animal Conflict
14. Human-wildlife conflict refers to the confrontation between wild animals and people.
This has caused negative impact on people or their resources, or wild animals or their habitat.
It occurs when growing human population overlaps with established wildlife territory, creating
reduction of resources or life to some people and/or wild animals. Nilgiri district being core
part of the Western Ghats is having more than 56% of area under forest cover. Therefore,
possibilities of man-animal conflicts are more common in the district.

7
15. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in its background note provided
to the Committee given following major causes of Man-Animal conflict:-
(i) Habitat fragmentation and shrinking of habitat give rise to shrinking of space, food
etc. in the forest which is required for the wild animals which result in animals
stray out of habitat in search of food, water or shelter.
(ii) Encroachment in the forest lands by local people has resulted in shrinkage of
wildlife habitats especially on the fringes which has increased the pressure on the
limited natural resources in the forest area.
(iii) Increased disturbance due to collection of fuel wood, fodder, NTFPs, water etc.
from the forests has also increased the incidences of man-animal conflict.
(iv) Increase in area under cultivation around wildlife habitats and changed cropping
pattern have also contributed to increased man-animal conflict. People have started
growing commercial crops like sugar cane and banana, which provide good hiding
place for the wild animals like wild boar, sloth bear and panther.
(v) In some forest areas, the numbers of wild animals especially prolific breeders like
wild pig have increased beyond the carrying capacity of the habitat concerned.
Hence, wild animals stray out of forests cause man-animal conflict.
(vi) Most incidences of man-animal conflicts are noticed during summer when water
becomes scarce. The livestock and wild animals have to share the limited water
sources on the fringes or inside forest. Human interference with the natural
drainage system in forest areas and diversion of water towards habitation has
further complicated the issue.
(vii) Infestation of wildlife habitat by the invasive exotic weeds like Lantana, Eupatorium
and Parthenium have resulted in decreased availability of edible grasses for the wild
herbivores. As a result, herbivores come out of forest area and cause depredation
of agricultural crops on the fringes.
16. In the context of Mudumalai National Park, the Committee was informed that 95 per
cent cases of man-animal conflict involved elephants and most of the victims are migrant labourers
who are ignorant about the animal behaviour and hence became easy prey of the wild animals.
Mudumalai is one of the highest tiger density parks in the country. The standard carrying capacity
of a tiger reserve is 18 tigers per hundred sq. km. and Mudumalai Tiger Reserve has about 19
tigers per hundred sq. kms.
17. Explaining the initiatives taken to tackle the problem of man animal conflict, the Field
Director, Annamalai Tiger Reserve (ATR) informed the Committee that early warning system/
surveillance systems had been put in place to alert the people about the movement of wild animals.
Tourists and plantation workers were also being educated about the behavior of the wild animals’
particularly wild elephants. One of the unique things initiated was introduction of surveillance
camera which helped in noticing the animal movement.

8
18. The Committee was also informed of the following measures taken by the Forest
Department, Government of Tamil Nadu:-
Anti-depredation teams involving local tribes had been deployed in all the conflict
areas to drive away the elephants straying into human habitation to nearby forest
area, then and there. Those teams along with forest staff were provided with
crackers, torches and other necessary equipments.
Awareness camps on man-animal conflicts were organized in all the conflict
areas to enlighten the public on the issue.
Elephant proof trenches, which would prevent entry of elephants into human
habitation, had been erected in the specified places. Solar fencing facilities were
provided at suitable places to prevent entry of wild animals into the agricultural
fields.
Water holes had been constructed inside the Reserve Forests to meet water
requirement of animals during summer besides making available necessary fodder
under various Schemes.
Village Elephant Depredation team involving local villagers and forest staff were
being formed to manage the man-animal conflict at all village levels.
Publicity Boards indicating the elephant crossing zones had been erected in all
the major National Highway and other roads to alert the passersby.
Hand bills and posters informing the public about Do’s & Don’ts had been
distributed/posted in all the public places.
Early Warning system which would send advance signals about elephant
movements to the public as well as the department had been installed in the
district. Installation of the same device in all other Ranges will be undertaken in
due course.
Further, the state authorities have been addressed regarding the measures to be
undertaken to curb the menace. They had been requested to provide toilet
facilities and other basic amenities, to check movement of labourers especially
during night hours, to deploy requisite number of watchers to monitor the
movement of animals and alert the labourers.
Public address system/Rapid Response Unit was in place round-the-clock in all
the Range Offices and the Divisional Officers to act upon the information
received in that regard.
Payment of compensation for loss of life/crop damage/property damage/loss of
life stock, etc. was being made immediately.
19. The Committee, while taking note of the steps taken for reduction of man-animal
conflict cases particularly with elephants, feels that there is a need not only to continue with
the said efforts/measures but some out of the box thinking is needed to obviate this problem.

9
The Committee recommends provision of adequate immediate compensation to the next of kin
of the victims of wild animals.
IV. Elephant Corridors
20. Protection and preservation of animal corridors particularly for elephants emerged as a
major issue during the interaction of the Committee with the NGOs/ experts.  Suggestions were
made to protect wild animal corridors not only in the forest but also in the private land adjacent
to the forest area.  On being enquired about the steps taken in this regard, Conservator of Forests,
Coimbatore informed that Tamil Nadu Government was taking proactive measures to manage animal
corridors.  Land measuring around 80 acres in Jhagganarai corridor was acquired for managing the
elephant corridor.  Still 600 hectares needed to be acquired near the forest for the corridor.  Japan
International Cooperation Agency was also funding the project for the establishment of barriers
along the corridors.
21. The Committee, while noting the need of wild animal corridors, especially elephant
corridors, feels that not only in the forest but also in the private land wherever necessary
near the forest, area may be acquired.  Government should encourage people to voluntary
donate the private land falling under the corridor.  The Committee also feels that the
Central Government may extend necessary financial assistance to the State Government for
this purpose.  The efficacy of such corridor needs to be monitored constantly.
V. Mudumalai Tiger Reserve (MTR)
22. Mudumalai Tiger Reserve (MTR) is situated at the tri- junction of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka
and Kerala states. It is contiguous with Wyanaad Wildlife Sanctuary on the west and Bandipur Tiger
Reserve on the north. The MTR also forms part of the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve. The core area
of the reserve is 321.00 km
2.  The area is an important and unique habitat known for varied flora
and fauna which provides an ecologically sustainable habitat for about 70 tigers, 800-1000 elephants
apart from other wild animals.
23. Relocation of villagers from the Mudumalai Tiger Reserve emerged as a major issue  during
the discussion with the Civil Society Organisations/NGOs and experts. Several NGOs flagged the
relocation issue.  During the discussion with the Tamil Nadu Government, the Committee sought
the response of the officers of Forests Department, Government of Tamil Nadu on the pressing
issue of relocation and enquired about the steps taken in that direction.
24. A brief background on the problem of relocation of villagers in MTR provided in the
background note furnished by the Tamil Nadu government to the Committee, is as follows:-
“The entire relocation process started long back during 1980’s voluntarily by the
people and the method of relocation has been formulated by the then Revenue
Divisional Officer, Gudalur during 1992 sent to the Collector of Nilgiris  vide  D.O.
letter No:A1/3920/1992, dated: 12.09.1992. The people had moved with a writ petition
filed by inhabitants living in 7 hamlets located within the Core area of MTR in
W .P.No.18531 of 1998 before the Hon’ble High Court of Madras requesting for their
relocation outside the Protected Areas.  This writ petition culminated in the order of
the Honorable High Court of Madras dated 19.02.2007 asking the authorities to relocate
the above villagers outside the Protected Area, preferably within a year.

10
After the implementation of Project Tiger the issue was resumed and speeded
up by following guidelines issued by NTCA for the successful implementation of
the programme and to ensure better living condition of the people to ensure
inviolate space for tigers and other wildlife. The reserve management was taking
all sorts of action in coordination with the District administration for successful
implementation of the programme.”
25. On issue of relocation of villagers from Mudumalai Tiger Reserve (MTR), the Field
Director, MTR  informed the Committee that a three-phase relocation plan had already been
prepared for which approximately an amount of R63.00 crores would be required. For the
implementation of the first phase approximately 24 crores was required.  An amount of R23.50
crores is to be borne by NTCA and the additional amount of R30.97 lakhs would be met from
State Government.  A detailed proposal for 1 st phase has been submitted to National Tiger
Conservation Authority and the relocation process would begin once the funds are received.
26. The Relocation Proposal Phase-1 proposes to relocate two villages, namely, Bennai and
Nellikarai, out of the 7 villages.  Relocation Proposal Phase-2 proposes to relocate 3 villages,
namely, Puliyalam, Mandakkarai and Nagampally.  In the 3rd and the last phase, Gudithal and
Mudukuli villages are proposed to be relocated.  It was informed that there were two options
available as per NTCA guidelines. Option-1 (Cash option) by payment of relocation package
@ R10.00 lakhs per family and the family relocated themselves and Option - 2 (Relocation by
the department) @ per family norms out of R10.00 lakhs as per NTCA guidelines. Initially
during 2010, 19 families were relocated under Option I (cash option) and one family was yet
to be relocated for want of authenticity of claim.
27. The Committee has been given to understand that people living in the core area of
the Mudumalai Tiger Reserve are voluntarily willing to be relocated and a relocation plan
has also been worked out by Tamil Nadu Government.  The proposal seeking financial
assistance for the first phase of relocation has been sent to National Tiger Conservation
Authority, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in April, 2015.  The
Committee also understands that relocation is pending due to delay in sanction of the
required Central assistance.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that necessary
financial assistance to the tune of R23.50 crores for relocation may be considered
expeditiously.  The Committee also recommends that the Central Government should also
ensure that the entire three phase-relocation programme in Mudumalai Tiger Reserve,
Udhagamandalam is implemented within the timeframe stipulated for the purpose.
VI. Weed Management
28. The Committee was informed that alien weeds particularly Lantana Camera, Eupatorium sp.,
and Parthenium have invaded the wildlife habitats and forest in the Nilgiris.  It was also informed
that the problem of weeds has acquired serious dimensions and needs to be addressed in right
earnest or else weeds are going to over shadow the forest area. Growth of weeds was adversely
affecting the quality of forest and the wildlife.
29. On the issue, the Director, Regional office of National Tiger Conservation Authority
admitted that management of weeds in fact posed a major challenge but it has to be done in
scientific manner. Opening the area suddenly may invite herbivores and increased conflicts will

11
happen so the weed has to be managed in a phased manner based on the carrying capacity of the
park/sanctuary.  Presently, manual removal of weeds is undertaken every year.
30. The Committee feels that the problem of weeds particularly parthenium is not
confined only to the Mudumalai Tiger Reserve but has spread to forest and even in agrarian
fields almost all over the country.   The Committee is therefore of the view that the Union
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should come up with the solution on
Invasive alien species considering its magnitude and its impact on environment.  The
necessary financial and scientific help in this regard should also be provided to the
Government of Tamil Nadu.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS—AT A GLANCE
The committee takes not of the steps taken by District administration, the Nilgiris
to control pollution of Ooty Lake and effects thereof but feels that much more needs to
be done. Since Ooty lake is a major tourist attraction, it is imperative that constant watch
is kept on the ecological health of the lake. The Committe, therefore, recommends that the
Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change may extends financial
assistance to the State authorities to rejuvenate all the lakes including prominent tourist
places under National Plan for Conservation  of  Aquatic Eco-systems.
  (Para 12)
(i) The District Collector, Nilgiris should explore the viability of banning plastic
bags. Awareness campaign about environmental impact of throwing garbage/
plastic bags in lakes/water bodies and public places should be initiated.
(ii) Old and polluting Government vehicles major source of vehicular pollution in
Ooty, should not be allowed to ply on the roads of the Nilgiris.
(iii) To mitigate vehicular pollution Mass Rapid Transit  System (MRTS) needs to
be developed.
       (iv) 'No vehicular zone' may be earmarked during peak season when tourists
flood Ooty. For this purpose, efforts should also be made to improve the
network and speed of the Nilgiri Train Network.
(v) The pressure horn in automobiles should be banned to contain  noise
pollution.
(vi) Solid Waste Management System of Ooty needs to be put in place.
(vii) A lot of construction material is transported to Ooty everyday from the
neighbouring cities which is a major contributor to pollution.  Transportation
of construction and building materials may be regulated and people should be
encouraged to build homes with locally available wood products.
  (Para 13)
The Committee, while taking note of the steps taken for reduction of man-animal
conflict case particulary with elephants, feels that there is a need not only to continue with
the said efforts/measures but some out of the box thinking is needed to obviate this
problem. The Committee recommends provision of adequate immediate compensation to the
next of kin of the victims of wild animals.                                   (Para 19)
The Committee, while noting the need of wild animal corridors, especially elephant
corridors, feels that not only in the forest but also in the private land wherever necessary
near the forest, area may be acquired. Government should encourage people to voluntary
donate the private land falling under the corridor. The Committee also feels that the
Central Government may extend necessary financial assistance to the State Government for
this purpose. The efficancy of such corridor needs to be monitored constantly.
`   (Para 21)

The Committee has been given to understand that people living in the core area of
the Mudumalai Tiger Reserve are voluntarily willing to be relocated and a relocation plan
has also been worked out by Tamil Nadu Government. The proposal seeking financial
assistance for the first phase of relocation has been sent to National Tiger Conservation
Authority, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in April, 2015. The
Committee also understands that relocation is pending due to delay in sanction of the
required Central assistance. The Committee, therefore, recommends that necessary
financial assistance to the tune of `23.50 crores for relocation may be considered
expeditiously. The Committee also recommends that the Central Government should also
ensure that the entire three phase-relocation programme in Mudumalai Tiger Reserve,
Udhagamandalam is implemented within the timeframe stipulated for the purpose.
  (Para 27)
The Committee feels that the problem of weeds particularly parthenium is not
confined only to the Mudumalai Tiger Reserve but has spread to forest and even in agrarian
fields almost all over the country. The Committee is therefore of the view that the Union
Ministry  of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should come up with the solution on
invasive alien species considering its magnitue and its impact on environment. The
necessary financial and scientific help in this regard should also be provided to the
Government of Tamil Nadu.                                                     (Para 30)

MINUTES

XXI
TWENTY FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 10.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 11th  August, 2015 in Room No. '67', First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
   MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Bhupinder Singh  –– In Chair
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri C.P. Narayanan
4. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
6. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
7. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
   8. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
   9. Shri Ninong Ering
   10. Dr. K. Gopal
   11. Shri Daddan Mishra
   12. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
   13. Shri Nana Patole
   14. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
   15. Shri Nagendra Singh
   16. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
   17. Shri Vikram Usendi
   18. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
17

18
2. As the Chairman of the Committee could not attend the meeting, the Committee decided
to choose Shri Bhupinder Singh, Member of the Committee, to act as Chairman of the Committee
for the meeting, under rule 73(3) read with Rule 275 of the Rule of procedure and Conduct of
Business in Rajya Sabha.
3. The Chairman welcomed the Member of the Committee and informed them that the
meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 268th report on 'Environmental
Issues of the Nilgiris.
4. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the draft 268th report. The Committee
also decided to present/lay its 268
th report to both the House of Parliament on 12 th August,
2015.
5. The meeting of the Committee, then adjourned at 10.55 A.M.
.

19
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
List of NGOs/ Civil Society and experts who participated in Parliamentary Committee
meeting on 17.07.2015 at Ooty
Sl. No. Name of Organization Names of Representative
1 Wildlife and Nature Conservation Trust  Mr. T.S. Vivek, Consultant
2 Environment Conservation Group  Mr. R. Mohammed Saleem
3 Nilgiri Wildlife and Environment Association  Mr. S. Kuppuraja
4 Key Stone Kotagiri  Ms. Anita V arghese
5 Wildlife and Forest Research Trust  Mr. M. Santhanu Ranas
6 Tamil Nadu Green Movement  Mr. Madhusudhanan
7 World Wildlife India  Mr. Bhoopinder
8 Organisation for Social Action and Improvement  Mr. Kalidas
9 World Wildlife Fund of India, Nilgiri Wildlife  Mr. Mohan Raj
10 Wildlife Institute  Ms. Tamilselvi
11 Federation of Tea Cultivators  Mrs. Kullani
12 Nilgiri Adivasi Welfare Association (ALW AS)  Mr. Alvas, Member Secretary
13 Mrs. Geetha Srinivassan  Environment Expert
21

ANNEXURE-II
List of officials of Tamil Nadu Government and Union Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change present on 18/7/15 at Ooty.
1. Shri Hans Raj V erma, Principal Secretary, Tamil Nadu  Environment & Forests
Department
2. Dr. P. Shankar, Collector, Nilgiris
3. Dr. S.S. Negi, ADG, MoEF & CC
4. Shri Amarnath Shetty, APCCF, NTCA, Bengaluru
5. Shri Somasekhar, APCCF, MoEF & CC Bengaluru
6. Dr. M.R.G. Reddy, APCCF, MoEF & CC (RO, Chennai)
7. Shri T.P. Ragunath, APCCF, CAMPA, TN Forest Department
8. Dr. P. Raghuram Singh, APCCF, Project Tiger, TN Forest Department
9. Shri Prashanth, APCCF, IFGTB, Coimbatore
10. Shri Srinivas R. Reddy, Field Director & CCF MTR, Project Director HADP
11. Dr. V .T. Kandasamy, Field Director & CCF ATR, Annamalai
12. Shri I. Anwardeen, CF, Coimbatore Circle
13. Shri Harish Choudhary, Director (HQ) MoEF & CC
14. Dr. K. Ganesh Kumar, DCF, MoEF & CC (RO, Chennai)
15. Shri S.N. Thejasvi, DFO, Gudalur
16. Shri Badrasamy, DFO, Nilgiri South
17. Shri D. Chandran, DD, MTR
18. Shri V . Swaminathan, AEE, Pollution Contorl Board, Ooty
19. Shri R. Rajmohan, ACF T raining, Coimbatore
20. Shri A. Pushpakaran, ACF, Gudalur.
22

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005