PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 188
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY , 
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009) 
OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(DEMAND NO. 29)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009)
OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(DEMAND NO. 29)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 TH APRIL, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 TH APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/V AISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—16
4S UMMARY OF R ECOMMENDATIONS .......................................................................................... 17—21
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................ 23—27

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2008)
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
**2. V acant
3. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
4. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
5. Shri Kamal Akhtar
6. Shri Saman Pathak
7. Shri Jabir Husain
**8. V acant
9. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
*10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Francis Fanthome
16. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
17. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
18. Shri Brahmananda Panda
19. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
20. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
21. Shri Pratik P. Patil
22. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
23. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
#25. V acant
26. Shri Rampal Singh
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
29. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
30. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
31. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
** Dr. Prabha Thakur and Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of
their term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2008.
* Nominated w.e.f. 28th August, 2007.
# Shri Rakesh Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 1st December, 2007 on his resignation from
the Membership of the Committee.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Eighty-eighth Report of the Committee. This Report
deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2008-2009) of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests (Demand No.29).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on the 24th March, 2008, the Secretary and other
Officers of the Ministry of Environment and Forests gave an overview of the various activities of
the  Ministry and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the
Ministry to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee express its thanks to the Officers of the Ministry for replying to the
clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 23rd April, 2008.
DR. V . MAITREYAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
April 23, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

1
REPORT
Over the past few decades, a major cause of concern for countries across the world has
been the rapid deterioration of the environment. The fast pace of development and industrial growth
has offset the delicate balance of nature. Environmental conservation has not kept pace with
environmental exploitation. Heeding to this wakeup call the Ministry of Environment and Forests
was created in 1985 as the nodal agency in the administrative structure of the Central Government.
The basic mandate of the Ministry is to plan, promote and coordinate environment and forestry
programmes. With the above overall objective, the Ministry carries out its activities which include
conservation and survey of flora, fauna, forests and wildlife; prevention and control of pollution,
afforestation and regeneration of the degraded areas; protection of the environment and welfare of
animals. These tasks are sought to be fulfilled through environment impact assessment, eco-
regeneration, assistance to organizations implementing environmental and forestry programmes,
enactment of environmental legislation, formulation of environmental policies, promotion of
environmental and forestry research, extension, education and training to augment the requisite
manpower, and dissemination of environmental awareness among all sections of the country’s
population.
2. The following is the list of attached/subordinate offices/Autonomous organizations, etc.
of the Ministry, for which provision has been made in the Demands for Grants for the year
2008-09:
• Botanical Survey of India, Kolkata
• Zoological Survey of India, Kolkata
• National Museum of Natural History, New Delhi
• Indira Gandhi National Forestry Academy, Dehradun
• State Forest Service and Rangers College, Dehradun
• Forest Survey of India, Dehradun
• National Zoological Park, New Delhi
• Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi
• G .B. Pant Himalayan Environment Evam Vikas Sansthan, Almora
• Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education, Dehradun
• Indian Institute of Forestry Management, Bhopal
• Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun
• Central Zoo Authority, New Delhi and
• Indian Plywood Industries Research Institute, Bangalore.
2.1 The detailed budget allocation of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year
2008-09 was considered by the Department-related Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the 24th March, 2008 and the Demands for Grants of the Ministry
has the following provisions:

2
3. ELEVENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN (2007-12) OUTLAYS
On the directions of the Finance Ministry and Planning Commission, an exercise towards
suitable clubbing/merger of a large number of its ongoing plan schemes into smaller number of
thematic schemes has been undertaken for the Eleventh Five Year Plan. Planning Commission has
approved such merger/clubbing of ongoing schemes into 22 thematic schemes. An allocation of
Rs. 10005 crores has been approved by the Planning Commission for the Eleventh Five Year Plan,
2007-12 of the Ministry, scheme-wise distribution of which is as follows:
Approved Plan Outlays - Eleventh Five Y ear Plan
Name of scheme Approved Outlay
(Rs. crores)
1. Environmental Monitoring and Governance 216.00
2. Pollution Abatement 235.00
3. Research and Development for Conservation and Development 300.00
4. Conservation of Natural Resources and Ecosystems 600.00
5. Environment Information, Education and Awareness 245.00
6. Environmental Management in Heritage, Pilgrimage and 0.01
Tourist Centres Including Taj Protection
7. International Co-operation Activities 80.00
8. National Coastal Management Programme 10.00
9. National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) 2100.00
10. Grants in aid to Forest and Wildlife Institutions 450.00
11. Capacity Building in Forestry Sector 110.00
12. Gregarious Flowering of Muli Bamboos 42.00
13. Intensification of Forest Management 600.00
14. Strengthening Forestry Divisions 100.00
15. Strengthening of Wildlife Divisions 150.00
16. Integrated Development of Wild Life Habitats 800.00
17. Project Tiger 615.00
18. Project Elephant 81.99
19. National Afforestation and Eco-development Board (NAEB) 250.00
20. National Afforestation Programme 2000.00
21. Social Forestry with Communities (Panchayat V an Yojana) 900.00
22. Animal Welfare 120.00
T
OTAL: 10005.00

3
3.1 The Committee notes that for some schemes like Environmental Management in
Heritage, Pilgrimage and Tourist Centres Including Taj Protection and National Coastal
Management Programme, which have engaged the attention of the country as a whole, not
much emphasis has been given, even though they demand priority. The Committee feels
that most of the Heritage, Tourist centres are facing a huge problem of pollution due to
increase in domestic and foreign tourist influx. The Committee fails to understand as to
how the Ministry will manage to tackle the problem, with such meager budgetary provisions
of Rs. 0.01 crore and hopes that in future the Ministry would take up such cases
emphatically with the Planning Commission.
4. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2008-2009
4.1 The overall budgetary allocations of the Ministry have been raised from Rs. 1539.00 crores
in 2007-08 (BE) to Rs. 1707.00 crores in 2008-09 (BE), implying an overall increase of
10.9 per cent. At this level, while non- plan budget is higher by 10.11 per cent, plan budget of
the Ministry, which accounts for around 88-90 per cent of total budgetary allocations, has
increased merely by 11.03 per cent in 2008-09.
Overall Budgetary Allocations 2008-09
(Rs. in crores)
Year Non-Plan Plan Total % Increase/Decrease
Non-Plan Plan Total
2007 -08 BE 188.00 1351.00 1539.00 3.75 0.90 1.24
2008-09 BE 207.00 1500.00 1707.00 10.11 1 1.03 10.92
5. SCHEMES WITH MAJOR INCREASES IN OUTLAYS
The main plan schemes showing significant rise in approved outlays in 2008-09 over the
approved outlays for 2007-08 are given in the Table below:—
(Rs. in crores)
Scheme 2007-08 2008-09 Difference
BE BE
1. Intensification of forest management 71.65  130.00 58.35
2. National Afforestation Programme, NAP 322.57 345.62 23.05
3. Panchayat Van Yojana-New scheme 0.10 15.00 14.99
4. Integrated development of WL Habitats 62.00 80.00 18.00
5. Project Tiger 65.00 77.00 12.00
6. Capacity building in forestry 0.00 8.00 8.00
(new components)
7. BSI (For NBGl, NOIDA) 10.00 18.00 8.00
8. ICFRE 59.00 66.65 7.65

4
6. REASONS FOR SHORTFALL IN UTILISATION OF OUTLAYS
6.1 The Committee was informed of the following comparative Sectoral Distribution of Plan
Outlays for the years 2007-08 and 2008-09:
(Rs. in crores)
Sector 2007-08 2008-09
Outlay (BE) Anticipated Outlay (BE)
Exp. (RE)
1. Environment 259.16 241.59 261.38
2. NRCD 340.00 326.91 340.00
3. Forests and Wildlife 371.61 380.39 475.00
4. NAEB 359.23 430.1 1 398.62
5. Animal Welfare 21.00 21.00 25.00
TOTAL: 1351.00 1400.00 1500.00
NRCD: National River Conservation Directorate.
NAEB: National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board.
6.2 As against an approved outlay of Rs. 1351.00 crores, the Revised Estimates of the Ministry
were placed at Rs. 1400.00 crores in the previous year. The Committee was assured that the
Revised outlays are likely to be utilized fully, provided timely approval is given to the Ministry’s
supplementary grants. When asked about the under utilization of funds in some sectors, the
Secretary replied that some of the reasons which had impact on the performance of schemes in-
general include:
• In many schemes, implementing agencies are State Governments/Forest
Departments, whose performance depends on timely release of matching grants.
Time lag in release of funds by the Ministry and actual availability of funds to the
implementing agencies impacts on the performance of these schemes.
• General procedural reasons impacting releases include procedural delays, including
delays in receipt of proposals, submission of Utilisation Certificate, revalidation of
unspent balances, completion of works etc.
• The merger/clubbing of ongoing schemes into thematic schemes is expected to
provide greater fundability and flexibility in resource use to various components
within a larger umbrella scheme during the Eleventh Plan.
6.3 The Committee notes that the Ministry has attributed the reasons for the shortfall
in utilization of outlays which are procedural, such as delay in release of matching grants
by the State Government/forest departments, time lag in release of funds by the Ministry
and actual availability of funds to the implementing agencies, delays in receipt of proposals,
submission of utilisation certificate, revalidation of unspent balances, completion of works
etc. The Committee notes that the aforesaid reasons stated by the Ministry are routine in
nature and mostly relate to procedural and administrative mechanisms, which need to be
overcome and avoided in future by fine-tuning the procedures involved.

5
7. NEW SCHEMES
The Ministry of Environment and Forests in its Annual Plan 2008-09 has proposed an outlay
of Rs. 236.14 crores for new schemes/new components in existing schemes. However, given the
resource constraint and priority accorded to completion of ongoing schemes, a lower provision of
Rs. 47.00 crores only have been approved for these schemes. Proposed and approved outlays for
these new schemes are shown in Table given below:
New plan scheme/components proposed in the Annual Plan 2008-09
(Rs. in crores)
Scheme Outlay Approved
Proposed by Outlay
MOEF
1. Afforestation through PRI—Panchayat Van Yojana 100.00 15.00
2. Capacity Building in Forestry Sector 15.14 8.00
(i) Training of personnel of other services 2.52 2.00
(ii) Foreign Training of Forestry personnel 10.88 5.00
(iii) Training of other stakeholders 1.74 1.00
3. Integrated development of wildlife Habitats 95.00 15.00
(i) Recovery programme for saving critically 35.00 5.00
endangered species and habitats
(ii) Protection of Wildlife outside Protected areas 60.00 10.00
4. Intensification of forest management 26.00 9.00
(i) Conservation and Restoration of unique 15.50 3.00
vegetation/Ecosystems
(ii) Protection of sacred groves 10.50 6.00
T
OTAL: 236.14 47.00
7.1 The Committee notes that priority in fund allocation has been accorded to ongoing
schemes, leading to lower allocation for new schemes. The Committee is aware that given
the resource constraint, the need to accord priority to ongoing schemes is genuine. However,
the Committee is constrained to observe that with such low allocations, it would not be
possible to pursue the new schemes with full strength. The new schemes which are proposed
by the Ministry are in keeping with the new demand for conservation of the environment/
wildlife in general and, therefore, should not lag behind due to paucity of funds. The
Committee feels that the Ministry should take up the issue of more fund allocation at R.E.
stage for new schemes, with the Planning Commission, in right earnest and impress upon
them the need for such higher allocation, indicating the seriousness of the Ministry to
achieve its new goals.
8. PREVENTION OF POLLUTION OF NATIONAL RIVERS
8.1 The scope of the erstwhile scheme ‘‘Prevention and control of pollution of River Ganga’’
has been widened to cover all national rivers and lakes and the scheme has been renamed

6
‘‘Prevention of Pollution of National Rivers and Lakes’’. An action plan has been drawn up for
cleaning the polluted stretches of National Rivers and to oversee its implementation. The major
work relates to diversion, sewer cleaning and renovation of pumping sets. The schemes proposed
to be taken up are (i) interception and diversion of waste water from flowing into rivers;
(ii) treatment of waste water for recovery of resources such as bioenergy; (iii) other sanitation
measures, such as low cost sanitation, biological conservation, etc. Under National Lake
Conservation Programme, 42 urban lakes have been identified for conservation to prevent their
further deterioration.
8.2 The broad head ‘‘Prevention of Pollution of National Rivers’’ has been divided into
(i) National River Conservation Directorate (NRCD), (ii) National River Conservation Programme
(NRCP) and (iii) National Lake Conservation Plan(NLCP). The total budgetary allocation of
Rs. 335.00 crores (B.E), for the year 2008-09, under the head has been divided into Rs.6.00 crores
for NRCD, Rs.249.00 crores for NRCP and Rs. 80.00 crores for NLCP.
8.3 The Committee was informed that the National River Conservation Directorate is presently
administering the Centrally Sponsored Schemes of National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) and
National Lake Conservation Plan (NLCP) to undertake pollution abatement works in major rivers
and lakes in the country. These works are implemented by the Implementing Agencies nominated
by the State Governments.
8.4 The Committee was further informed that an amount of Rs. 35.00 crore was re-
appropriated with the approval of the Ministry of Finance in June, 2007 for meeting the expenditure
of the Establishment related provisions under various other schemes of the Ministry including an
amount of Rs. 4.32 crore for the schemes operated by NRCD. The Ministry also informed that
due to slow progress of works in the Yamuna Action Plan-Phase-Il project, in the three States
of Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana, a reduction has been made. As regards the requirement for
2008-09, lesser projection of demand in the Budget Estimates is primarily because of NRCD
focusing on completion of the ongoing sanctioned works considering the availability of funds under
the Central Plans of Ministry of Urban Development for civic infrastructure projects hitherto funded
under NRCP.
8.5 The Committee was informed that besides the regular water quality monitoring carried out
in identified polluted stretches of the rivers by independent reputed institutions, monitoring is also
done by the Central Pollution Control Board. The Ministry has claimed that the water quality data
shows that despite a phenomenal increase in the urban population along the river banks, there has
been a discernible improvement in the water quality of river Ganga at major locations as compared
to its quality prior to the implementation of Ganga Action Plan. The Committee was informed that
a sewage treatment capacity of 869 mld. (million litres per day) under Phase-I has been created
under the programme and an amount of about Rs. 452.00 crores has been spent on this phase,
which was declared completed in March 2000. Works under Ganga Action Plan Phase-II (presently
part of National River Conservation Plan) have been taken up in 59 towns along the main stream
of the river Ganga at an approved cost of Rs. 663.00 crores. The Ministry further admitted that
while the water quality of river Yamuna is within the prescribed limits in the State of Haryana, it
has not shown the desired improvement in Delhi and some parts of Uttar Pradesh because of
phenomenal increase in population upstream of the river and lack of availability of fresh water for
ensuring minimum flow in the river.
8.6 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the fact that though from the
time of its initiation, crores have been spent on the Ganga Action Plan, there has not been
much improvement in water quality in reality, despite the claims of the Ministry. The
practice of dumping untreated sewage from cities on the banks of the Ganga and dead

7
bodies and carcasses in the river continues unabated causing pollution. The Committee feels
that the project has suffered due to apathy and lack of a suitable system in place to
monitor the implementation.
8.7 The Committee also expresses its concern at the fact that there has been marginal
reduction in allocation due to slow progress of works in the Yamuna Action Plan in the
three States of Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana, despite the fact that water quality
remains below the acceptable norms. Industrial and domestic sewage discharge and open
defecation continues, despite various legislations to control and stop the pollution levels.
The Committee also expresses its concern at the fact that though there has been no dearth
of funds for the Yamuna Action Plan, no satisfactory results have been achieved as regards
cleaning of the river, which provides drinking water to Delhi, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh
and the river has infact turned into a dirty drain.
8.8 The Committee also expresses its concern at the fact that no proper mechanism has
been created towards recharging the Yamuna river. The Committee recommends that a
proper system be set up for recharging the river by creating man-made water bodies like
reservoirs and catchment areas, which can store the monsoon water, which usually goes into
drains and then stored water can be released into the river during the lean season.
8.9 The Committee feels that there is a urgent need to pin-point the reasons for the
failure of such major projects and to take urgent steps towards rectifying the problem
areas. The Committee also recommends that to make the projects result oriented, the
Ministry should take stringent action against officials who are found lacking in terms of
deliverance and penal action be taken against the defaulters for violating of legislations.
8.10 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should develop a proper
coordination mechanism with the agencies/departments/ministries involved in cleaning up
the river Yamuna and Ganga to solve the problem. The research activities of the scientific
departments with regard to treatment and waste management may be put to optimum use
to prevent pollution of rivers and lakes in the country.
8.11 The Committee notes with concern that an amount of Rs. 35.00 crores has been
diverted from such a significant scheme like National River Conservation Programme
(NRCP), to an non-critical area viz. the expenditure on establishment related matters. This
points towards the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry towards the problem of river and
lake water pollution across the country, though the pollution levels continues to rise at an
alarming level.
9. FOREST CONSERV ATION, DEVELOPMENT AND REGENERATION
9.1 This is an on-going programme to check indiscriminate deforestation and diversion of forest
land for non-forest use, strengthening of forest protection force, control of grazing, restriction on
removal of fuelwood as head loads, and supply of alternate fuels. Intensification of Forest
Management is an important scheme under this programme.
9.2 The ‘‘Forest Conservation, Development and Regeneration’’ had been allocated
Rs. 76.28 crores and Rs. 82.96 crores at the B.E. and R.E. stages respectively in 2007-08. The
allocation has been substantially increased to Rs. 111.50 crores in 2008-09. The Committee was
informed that the allocation under the broad head forest conservation, development and regeneration
has been further divided into 7 subheads which are as follows:—
(i) Regeneration-Strengthening of Forest Divisions;

8
(ii) Integrated Forest Protection Scheme;
(iii) Intensification of Forest Management;
(iv) Gregarious Flowering of Muli Bamboos;
(v) National Forestry Information system;
(vi) National Coordinated Programme for Assessment of Non-Timber Forest Product
Resources and
(vii) Certification Programme for Wood and Non-Wood Forest Resources.
9.3 The Ministry informed the Committee that out of the above schemes, the major
allocation is under Intensification of Forest Management i.e. Rs. 87.00 crores. The main reason for
the increase is due to inclusion of two new components: (a) Conservation and Restoration of
Unique Vegetation and Ecosystems (b) Protection and Conservation of Sacred Groves under this
scheme and also due to demand from States for higher allocation. The Committee was also
informed that the Integrated Forest protection Scheme (IFPS), which was being implemented
during the Tenth Plan, has been renamed as ‘‘Intensification of Forest management’’ during the
Eleventh plan at the instance of the Planning Commission, as such it is not entirely a new
programme. However, two additional components have been added to make the scheme broad
based. Thus the scheme Intensification of Forest Management has following three components —
— Integrated Forest Protection (all activities as were being implemented during
Tenth Plan);
— Conservation and Restoration of Unique Vegetation and Ecosystems; and
— Protection and Conservation of Sacred Groves.
9.4 The Ministry informed that the reasons for the new additional components are as under :—
(i) Conservation and Restoration of Unique Vegetation and Ecosystems: Based on the
experience gained during the implementation of IFPS, it was observed that there are certain
forest areas representing unique ecosystems/ certain tree species having enormous economic
and/or ecological value. These areas require intensive protection and management with focus
on certain activities. However, such intense management is not always possible under the
existing scheme. Some of the examples include the areas of Red sanders, Sandalwood,
certain patches of good Sal teak forest, etc.
(ii) Protection and conservation of sacred groves: Sacred groves are patches of climax
vegetation existing in different parts of India, vestiges of an ancient practice in which
people protected forests to avoid the perceived wrath of its resident deity. Theses groves
play an important role as preservation plots and many of them harbor rare, endemic and
endangered plant species, because of the restraints exercised due to the fear of deity/deities/
spirits residing in these groves. Sacred groves where ever existing are important because
they are repository of the rare and endangered plant species which may have disappeared
from the region outside the groves. Thus these groves can act as indicator of forests that
might have flourished in these regions. Sacred groves represent community initiative
towards protection and conservation of natural resources and they must be protected at all
costs. The sacred groves are subject to various threats on account of increasing biotic
pressure.
9.5 In reply to a query regarding the total forest cover and the means for assessing it; the
ministry stated that under the Tenth Plan an area of about 8.2 million hectares, was brought under

9
forest cover. The Forest Survey of India does a satellite survey every two years and all the areas
covered under forest and tree cover which comes in the category of non-forest, whether on
government/private/community/agricultural land are reflected in the survey. As per the survey of the
country’s total geographical area done in the year 2005, 23.4% is under forest and tree cover.
9.6 The Committee notes that the name of the programme ‘Integrated Forest Protection
Scheme’ has been changed to ‘Intensification of Forest Management’, with broadly the
same objectives as the earlier programme with the addition of only two new components.
The Committee fails to decipher the logic behind simply changing the nomenclature of the
programme and feels that unless there is a will and resolve to do something concrete, mere
change in the name would not result in any substantial gain. The new components that have
been added now, could be accommodated even within the ambit of the earlier scheme, with
slight modifications/additions.
9.7 The Committee while noting that in the past, even sugarcane fields were counted as
forest cover, recommends that the methodology of assessing the green cover needs to be
modified and the latest satellite imaging techniques along with extensive ground truth cross
checking, should be used to distinguish the actual forest cover from other tall crops and to
correctly estimate the actual area under forest, since correct data assessment is essential
for proper policy formulation and follow up action.
10. NATIONAL AFFORESTATION AND ECO-DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
10.1 The National Afforestation and Eco-development Board was set up in 1992 with the
principal aim of promoting afforestation, tree planting, ecological restoration and eco-development
in the country. Special attention is being given to the regeneration of degraded forest areas and
lands adjoining forest areas, national parks, sanctuaries and other protected areas as well as the
ecologically fragile areas like the Western Himalayas, Aravallis, Western Ghats, etc. The increase
in the forest cover to 33% by 2012 is a thrust area for the Ministry. Main schemes under this
programme are National Afforestation Scheme, greening India and National Action Programme to
Combat Desertification. The implementation of the United Nations' Convention to Combat
Desertification and Social Forestry are also being covered under the ongoing schemes.
10.2 The allocation for this programme during the year 2007-08, was Rs. 330.70 crores at B.E.
stage which was increased to Rs. 372.52 crores at R.E. stage. The budgetary allocation for the
year 2008-09 has been reduced to Rs. 341.02 crores.
10.3 The Ministry informed the Committee that since the National Afforestation Programme
(NAP) Scheme is a demand driven scheme based on village-level microplanning, the allocation
would be sought to be revised at the RE Stage during 2008-09 depending upon the progress of
work undertaken by the implementing institutions, namely', the Forest Development Agencies
(FDAs) at the Forest Division level and the Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMCs) at the
village level.
10.4 The Committee was also informed that during 2006-07, fifteen new FDA projects were
approved raising the total number of operational FDA projects to 729 under the NAP scheme. In
addition to the new projects, assistance was also provided to the ongoing FDA projects during
2006-07. As on 31-03-2007, the total approved project area for treatment under the 729 FDA
projects was 9.36 lakh hectares through 24,215 JFMCs at a total cost of Rs.1658.09 crores,
against which total amount of Rs. 1180.64 crores was released till that date.
10.5 During 2007-08, twenty four new FDA projects have been approved raising the total
number of operational projects to 753 at a total cost of Rs. 2063.78 crores to treat a total project

10
area of 13.45 lakh hectares (including the Advance Work component of afforestation) through
26,772 JFMCs and a total amount of Rs.1461.10 crores was released under the scheme.
10.6 The Ministry has proposed to undertake the following tasks during the year 2008-09 under
the NAP Scheme:—
• Continue support to all FDA projects approved till 2007-08.
• Approve new project area of one lakh hectares
• Operationalise 2,350 new JFMCs.
10.7 The Committee was informed that a new programme, namely the ‘Panchayat Van Yojna’
(Social Forestry with Communities), a component of the 'National Afforestation and Eco-
development Programme' has been launched during the year and under this programme, funds
would be released directly to the Panchayats. But this programme has been allocated a meager
amount of Rs. 15.00 crores in the B.E. 2008-09, as against the Rs. 100.00 crores proposed by
the Ministry.
10.8 When asked about the lesser allocation under this programme, the ministry clarified that
since it is a new scheme, all the modalities have to be worked out with the Panchayats, to make
them ready to spend the allocated amount. Thereafter depending on the performance the Planning
Commision is expected to release a larger amount next year, which has been reduced this year
specially because of allocations in various priority sectors.
10.9 The Committee expresses its concern at the fact that even though the Ministry
intends to achieve the target of 33% of Forest cover by 2012, the only scheme that treats
afforestation in a holistic manner and seeks to involve the communities and the society in
general in the preservation and conservation of forests has been deprived of funds. The
Committee notes with concern that the modalities for the scheme-Panchayat Van Yojana,
are yet to be worked out with the Panchayats and feels that the Ministry should have done
the ground work for the scheme well before launching this programme so as to ensure
utilisation of funds and successful implementation of the scheme.
10.10 The Committee recommends that Ministry should formulate an effective strategy to
create mass awareness about afforestation among poor people and tribal communities, who
depend on forests in different ways as it may, in turn not only increase forest cover but
would also provide better opportunity, empowerment, livelihood and security to them.
11. ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION/TRAINING/EXTENSION
11.1 The Ministry has been according priority to environmental education to almost all age
groups of the country’s population through exhibitions and training programmes, etc. The Ministry
is also involved in promoting environmental education by imparting non-formal education at the
primary and secondary school level and in colleges and universities. The main activities under the
scheme are (a) National Environmental Awareness Campaign; (b) Eco-clubs (National Green Crops);
and (c) Mass Awareness.
11.2 Environmental Education/Training/Extension has been allocated Rs. 62.03 crores.
In 2008-09, whereas last year the allocation was Rs. 35.54 crores at B.E. stage, which was
enchanced to Rs. 46.58 crores at R.E. stage.
11.3 The Committee was informed that the National Green Corps (NGC) Programme is being
implemented all over the country since 2001-02, with the underlying objective of spreading

11
environmental awareness amongst school children. This goal is furthered by establishment of eco-
clubs in each district of the country, with a focus on action oriented environment programme
through the. active involvement of students. Though State Govts./UTs are at liberty to set up any
number of eco-clubs in a district, the financial assistance under the Programme is restricted to 250
eco-clubs per district. Apart from stimulating awareness among the school children through
physical programme of activities about the environmental conservation and protection issues the
programme visualizes the role of children as agent of change and for dissemination of
environmental information among public at large. This programme is being implemented in each
State/UT through the Nodal agency appointed by the State/UT Government with the following
objectives:
• To make children understand environment and environmental problems.
• To provide environmental education opportunities for school children.
• To utilise the unique position of school children as conduits for awareness of the
society at large.
• To facilitate children’s participation in decision making in areas related to
environment and development.
• To bring children into direct contact with the environmental problems facing the
society they live in and make them think of solutions.
• To involve children in action based programmes related to environment in their
surroundings.
11.4 A training programme for Master Trainer/Teacher-in-charges of Eco-clubs has been
formulated for the whole country with cost estimate of Rs. 10.90 crores as per details given
below:
(a) No. of Master Trainers to be trained: 2476
(b) No. of teacher-in-charges of Eco-clubs: 125333
Training of the Master Trainers has already been launched in current financial year.
Besides the above, number of Eco-clubs which are provided financial support by the
Ministry is also proposed to be increased from 87422 during 2007-08 to One Lakh in 2008-09. The
Ministry also proposes to enhance financial assistance to the States for training of schools teachers
for effective transaction of environment education curriculum in the school under the component
of strengthening environment education in school.
11.5 The Committee feels that to deal with the issue of conservation and preservation of
environment, in a broad perspective, the younger generation should be made fully aware of
the environmental concerns that are engaging the attention of the country and world at
large. Though the Ministry has been doing a commendable job in promoting environmental
education by imparting non-formal education at the primary and secondary school level and
in colleges and universities, the Committee, however, feels that there is a greater need to
stress upon the system of formal education, by including the environmental concepts in the
schools/colleges/universities curriculum itself. In this direction the Committee recommends
that the Ministry’s, proposal to enhance financial assistance to the States for training of
school teachers for effective transaction of environment education curriculum in the school
under the component of strengthening environment education in school, should be given top
priority. Effort should also be made to recognize schools that go green by banning use of
plastic bags, etc. thereby sensitizing children towards environment and environment issues.

12
12. PREVENTION OF AIR AND WATER POLLUTION
12.1 The provision covers Grants-in-aid to the Central Pollution Control Board, Assistance to
State Governments/Central Pollution Control Board and funding of relevant schemes. The Central
Pollution Control Board was set up in 1974. The Board is also responsible for the prevention and
control of air pollution. The provision covers grants given for the promotion of common effluent
treatment plants. During Tenth Plan two schemes viz. Environmental Audit Environmental Statistics
and Mapping and Clean Technologies by Small Scale industries were merged as industrial Pollution
Abatement through Preventive strategies.
12.2 The Committee was informed that the allocation under the ‘‘Prevention of Air and Water
Pollution’’ has shown a decreasing trend. In the year 2007-08 the allocation was Rs. 142.53 crores
(B.E.) which was reduced in the R.E. stage to Rs. 140.75 crores. This year it has been further
reduced to Rs. 137.54 crores (B.E.). The Ministry presented the following break-up of allocation
under the Major Head Prevention of Air & Water Pollution:
(Rs. in crores)
Sl. BE 2007-08 RE 2007-08 BE 2008-09
No.
Plan Non- Plan Non- Plan Non-
Plan Plan Plan
1. CPCB 45.00 10.2551 37.50 10.46 34.50 1 1.09
2. Water Cess - 80.3366 - 83.34 - 84.00
3. Promotion of 3.95 - 4.00 - 4.45 -
CETPs
4. Prevention of 0.98 - 1.00 - 1.50 -
pollution through
preventive strategies
5. Establishment of 2.00 - 4.45 - 2.00 -
Enviromental
Authorities
T
OTAL: 51.93 90.5917 46.95 93.80 42.45 95.09
GRAND T OTAL: 142.53 140.75 137.54
The Committee was also informed of the following reasons for the reduction in the budget
provision:
(i) As far schemes of Control of Pollution (CP) Divisions are concerned, the figures for
2007-08 and 2008-09 are indicated in the Table above. A perusal of Non-Plan figures
indicate the upward trend in RE Stage (2007-08) as well as in BE (2008-09) over the
BE (2007-08).
(ii) As far as Plan Expenditure is concerned, the reduction of Rs.7.50 crores at RE
(2007-08) and further decrease of Rs. 3.00 crores ( i.e. Rs.34.500 crores for BE 2008-09)
under the head CPCB is due to following explanation furnished by CPCB:—
(a) CPCB has proposed for setting up of demonstrating project in implementation of
the project ‘Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) 2000’ on cost sharing
basis in respect of one to two towns in each State of the country. However with the

13
introduction of scheme like Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
(JNNURM) and Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium
Towns (UIDSMT) by Ministry of Urban Development and to avoid duplication and
over lap, the budget estimates for 2007-08 and as envisaged for 2008-09 have been
accordingly revised.
(b) After detailed review of ongoing scheme on (eco-city), no new towns are proposed
and thrust has been laid on completion of the on-going schemes. However, unless the
Detailed Project Reports are received from new towns (like Chanderi in M.P. and
Swaimadhopur in Rajasthan) the outlays have been accordingly revised.
(c) The new Stations proposed under Water and Air Quality Monitoring Programmes are
in operation through State PoIlution Control Boards (SPCB) after December, 2007 and
therefore the revision in the concerned budgetary allocations has been made.
The Ministry has been advised to focus on completion of the ongoing sanctioned
works considering the huge availability of funds under the Central Plans of Ministry of Urban
Development for civic infrastructure projects hitherto funded under National River Conservation
Programme (NRCP). Accoringly, after Annual Plan Consultations, the Budget Estimates for the
schemes of NRCD were reduced to the present value of Rs. 340 crore.
12.3 The Committee notes with concern that the budgetary support for the Central
Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has been decreased substantially, despite the fact that it is
a premier central agency responsible for control and prevention of pollution, and pollution
continues to rise unabated across the country. The Committee is also constrained to note
that the responsibility and the funds for the civic infrastructure projects, for controlling
urban pollution, hitherto funded under  NRCP, has been transferred to the schemes like
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) and Urban Infrastructure
Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSMT) under the Ministry of Urban
Development and the funds under CPCB has been reduced.
12.4 The Committee also notes that the allocation under the Promotion of Central
Effluent Treatment Plants (CETP) has been only marginally increased from Rs. 4.00 crores
in R.E. 2007-08 to Rs. 4.45 crores in B.E. 2008-09 and expresses it concern that the CETPs
which are an essential component in the treatment of industrial and domestic sewage, has
been allocated lesser funds. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should
seriously look into the issue of polluting industries, which discharge their effluents directly
into river and lakes. It also recommends that the Ministry may think in terms of taking.
some harsh measures like imposing heavy penalties and issuing closure notices to such
Industrial setups, if they fail to install the requisite effluent treatment plants within a
specified time.
13. WILDLIFE PRESERV ATION
13.1 Under Wildlife Preservation, the Ministry provides financial and technical support to the
State Governments for the development of National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries under the
Centrally Sponsored Scheme ‘Assistance for Development of National Parks and Sanctuaries’.
Financial assistance is also provided for management and conservation of habitat of wildlife in
protected areas and grants for wildlife research to institutions, universities and NGOs. Grants are
also provided to strengthen four Regional Offices located at Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai
and three Sub-regional Offices located at Kochi, Guwahati and Amritsar which has been set up to
check illegal trade .in wildlife and wildlife products and for better enforcement of Wildlife
(Protection) Act, Convention on Trade in Endangered Species on Wild fauna and Flora (CITES),
etc.

14
13.2 Under the Wildlife Preservation Programme, the Centrally Sponsored Scheme Project Tiger,
was launched in April, 1973 with the objective of ensuring maintenance of a viable population of
Tigers in India for scientific, economic, aesthetic, cultural and ecological values, and to preserving
for all times, areas of biological importance as a national heritage for the benefit, education and
enjoyment of the people. The scheme is fulfilled by facilitating focused, concerted management of
ecotypical reserves in various states, constituted on a 'core-buffer' strategy through funding the
technical support, including site-specific inputs to elicit local community support for conservation.
13.3 The Committee was informed that the allocation for the ‘‘Wildlife Preservation’’ was
Rs. 188.64 crores and Rs. 191.50 crores in 2007-08, at RE. and R.E. stages respectively, in the
year 2007-08. For the RE. 2008-09 the allocation has been increased to Rs. 226.25 crores. This
enhancement is for continuation of the existing Centrally Sponsored Scheme viz. Development of
National Parks and Sanctuaries which has been in operation since 1972 for the protection and
effective management of Protected Areas (PAs) and which is proposed to be renamed as
‘‘Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats’’. It would support additional components viz.
protection of wildlife outside the PAs and also to initiate species/habitat recovery programme under
the scheme. Further it would provide support for habitat and strengthening anti-poaching
operations.
13.4 The increase in allocation would support the States for staff development and capacity
building, including specialized trainings in the use of Global Information system(GIS), Global
Positioning System (GPS), camera traps, anti-poaching operations, wildlife crime, habitat
enrichment techniques, eco-development initiatives, legal issues and wildlife forensics etc. It also
includes study tours for the appraisal of good practices in other Protected Areas, dissemination
workshops, specialized trainings in park interpretation, management planning, procurement of audio-
visual equipments, publication and procurement of study material, supporting identified state
institutions for the training of frontline staff etc.
13.5 As regards the method of estimation of tigers, the Committee was informed that since the
inception of Project Tiger way back in early 1970s, the Ministry has followed the ‘ pugmark
method’, i.e., collating the footprints of tigers and then tallying them and eliminating duplicates.
This methodology was found to be effective when the Projects Tiger was in formative years.
However, over a period of time, there were a lot of slippages and in 2001 and the Ministry
embarked on refining the entire process. The method was standardized, in collaboration with the
Wild Life Institute of India. The new methodology is not a new innovation, but just an combination
of all the peer reviewed techniques, which were already in place for estimating a carnivore
population like tiger. The methodology was tried in all the 17 tiger States and around 3728 breeds
were sampled throughout the country covering all the 17 tiger States and it was found that almost
93,000 square kilometers of the forest areas have occupancy of tigers. The actual number of tigers
using this method is 1411(mid-value), while the upper value figure is 1657 and the lower value
figure is the 1165. The Coefficient of Variation is around 17 per cent.
13.6 The Committee was also apprised that considering the urgency of the situation. Project
Tiger has been converted into a Statutory Authority, namely the National Tiger Conservation
Authority (NCTA), in September, 2006 by providing enabling provision in the Wildlife (Protection)
Act, 1972 through an amendment and forming a new Act, viz. W ild (Protection) Amendment
Act, 2006. This forms one of the urgent recommendations of the Tiger Task Force appointed by
the Prime Minister. The NTCA would address the ecological as well as administrative concerns for
conserving tigers, by providing a statutory basis for protection of tiger reserves, apart from
providing strengthened institutional mechanism for the protection of ecologically sensitive areas and
endangered species. The Authority would also ensure enforcing of guidelines for tiger conservation
and monitoring compliance of the same, apart from placement of motivated and trained officers

15
having good track record as Field Directors of tiger reserves. It would also facilitate capacity
building of officers and staff posted in tiger reserves, apart from a time bound staff development
plan.
The Ministry stated that the proposed enhancement in the fund allocation is justified though
not fully adequate to meet the challenges/threats in the wildlife conservation.
13.7 The Ministry also informed the Committee that it has been assured by the Planning
Commission that whatever funds are needed for relocating families from the critical tiger habitats
i.e. from inside the tiger reserves to the periphery would be provided. The funds for relocation has
been increased from Rs. l.00 lakh to Rs.10.00 lakhs per family, and depending on the performance
of the Ministry more funds would be released.
13.8 In clarification to a query of the Committee regarding filling up of vacancies of forest
wardens and forest gaurds, who are engaged in the protection of forests and animals; the
Committee was informed that as regards the filling of the Central Government posts, efforts have
been made to fill the posts and they will be filled up shortly. As regards the posts at the State
Government level, the Ministry can only request them to fill the posts but the posts have to be
filled up by the State governments. Presently some posts have been filled by the States on daily
wages, contractual basis etc, however regular appointments are yet to be made.
13.9 The Committee notes the constitution of the National Tiger Conservation Authority
(NCTA) for conservatio n of tigers in the country, the population of which is declining due
to unabated poaching. The Committee expresses its concern at the fact that though anti-
poaching legislations have been in force since 1972, the country has seen a steady decline
in the population of tigers, which lead to the intervention at the Prime Ministerial level.
These point towards the failure of the Ministry in ground implementation of existing
legislations. The Committee expresses its doubts as to whether the Ministry would be able
to check the decline in the number of tigers, just by renaming the already existing
schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that initiative for wildlife protection
should be taken up by the Ministry with full vigour and resolve, so that it does not remain
a mere legislation on paper.
13.10 The Committee expresses concern over the general apathy, that the Ministry has
shown towards implementation of legislations regarding forest conservation, protection of
wildlife etc. and recommends that the legislations may be forcefully enforced to prevent any
further degradation of environment. In this direction the Ministry should take into account
the man-animal conflict that the country is currently facing due to pressure of development
and encroachment of forest land. The Committee welcomes the increase of the funds for
relocation of families from the tiger habitat to the periphery, from Rs.l lakh to Rs. 10.00
lakhs and recommends that the Ministry make concerted efforts towards expediting the
relocation of families, and ensuring peaceful co-existence of both man and animals.
13.11 The Committee expresses its concern that a large number of vacancies, both in the
centre and states have yet not been filled up. The Committee had last year expressed its
concern over this matter. Filling of the vacancies in the posts of forests wardens and forest
guards are of prime importance for the implementation of the legislations regarding forest
conservation and animal protection; the State Governments are lagging behind in the filling
of a large number of vacancies at these levels. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should vigorously pursue the filling up of posts with the State Governments and
monitor the filling up of vacancies, besides filling up of vacancies at the Central Level.
13.12 The Committee further recommends that Ministry should adopt a strategy towards
controlling supply of wildlife and its products to both domestic as well as international

16
markets. The control would not only require strengthening human but also enhanced
technical surveillance; web patrolling; media watch; creation of crime data bank;
strengthening/capacity building of enforcement and prosecution process; life style/livelihood
issues of communities subsisting on wildlife, etc. The Ministry should also embark on a
strategy of creating awareness amongst the international buyers; using bilateral and
multilateral mechanisms in trade; international trade. regulatory mechanisms and other
foreign policy measures to reduce the demand.
14. URBAN WASTE MANAGEMENT
14.1 The Comm ittee has been informed by the Department of Atomic Energy that Bhabha Atomic
Research Centre has developed a technology-Sludge Hygenisation Research Irradiator for treatment
of municipal sewage with irradiation facility which is very suitable, effective and easy to integrate
with conventional process in the existing sewage treatment facility. One such plant is already
operational in collaboration with Vadodra Municipal Corporation and Government of Gujarat. The
Committee has also been informed that DAE has developed a kitchen waste (Biodegradable) based
bio-gas plant which would not only serve the purpose of environment friendly disposal of solid
waste but also generate fairly good amount of fuel gas to support the dwindling energy resources.
14.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment & Forests should
seriously pursue the stakeholders-municipalities, corporations, etc., to use these
technologies which besides being environment friendly have a number of advantages over
the conventional means like incinerations, landfills, dumping in the sea or other water-
bodies, composting, etc. The Ministry should ensure that such sewage treatment plants are
integrated/installed at least in Delhi, Kanpur and other cities along with the Y amuna and
the Ganga which have virtually turned the river into a nallah by dumping untreated sewage.
The Committee also recommends that action in this regard be taken on priority in a time-
bound manner.
15. After considering the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests and assessing the progress of various important programmes and projects
administered by it, the Committee recommends that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 1707.00
crores, as sought by the Ministry for the year 2008-09, under Demand No. 29, may be
approved.

17
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Committee notes that for some schemes like Environmental Management in
Heritage, Pilgrimage and Tourist Centres Including Taj Protection and National Coastal
Management Programme, which have engaged the attention of the country as a whole, not
much emphasis has been given, even though they demand priority. The Committee feels
that most of the Heritage, Tourist centres are facing a huge problem of pollution due to
increase in domestic and foreign tourist influx. The Committee fails to understand as to
how the Ministry will manage to tackle the problem, with such meager budgetary provisions
of Rs. 0.01 crore and hopes that in future the Ministry would take up such cases
emphatically with the Planning Commission. (Para 3.1)
2. The Committee notes that the Ministry has attributed the reasons for the shortfall
in utilization of outlays which are procedural, such as delay in release of matching grants
by the State Government /forest departments, time lag in release of funds by the Ministry
and actual availability of funds to the implementing agencies, delays in receipt of proposals,
submission of utilisation certificate, revalidation of unspent balances, completion of works
etc. The Committee notes that the aforesaid reasons stated by the Ministry are routine in
nature and mostly relate to procedural and administrative mechanisms, which need to be
overcome and avoided in future by fine-tuning the procedures involved. (Para 6.3)
3. The Committee notes that priority in fund allocation has been accorded to ongoing
schemes, leading to lower allocation for new schemes. The Committee is aware that given
the resource constraint, the need to accord priority to ongoing schemes is genuine. However,
the Committee is constrained to observe that with such low allocations, it would not be
possible to pursue the new schemes with full strength. The new schemes which are proposed
by the Ministry are in keeping with the new demand for conservation of the environment/
wildlife in general and, therefore, should not lag behind due to paucity of funds. The
Committee feels that the Ministry should take up the issue of more fund allocation at R.E.
stage for new schemes, with the Planning Commission, in right earnest and impress upon
them the need for such higher allocation, indicating the seriousness of the Ministry to
achieve its new goals. (Para 7.1)
4. The Committee expresses its serious concern over the fact that though from the
time of its initiation, crores have been spent on the Ganga Action Plan, there has not been
much improvement in water quality in reality, despite the claims of the Ministry. The
practice of dumping untreated sewage from cities on the banks of the Ganga and dead
bodies and carcasses in the river continues unabated causing pollution. The Committee feels
that the project has suffered due to apathy and lack of a suitable system in place to
monitor the implementation. (Para 8.6)
5. The Committee also expresses its concern at the fact that there has been marginal
reduction in allocation due to slow progress of works in the Yamuna Action Plan in the
three States of Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana, despite the fact that water quality
remains below the acceptable norms. Industrial and domestic sewage discharge and open
17

18
defecation continues, despite various legislations to control and stop the pollution levels.
The Committee also expresses its concern at the fact that though there has been no dearth
of funds for the Yamuna Action Plan, no satisfactory results have been achieved as regards
cleaning of the river, which provides drinking water to Delhi, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh
and the river has infact turned into a dirty drain. (Para 8.7)
6. The Committee also expresses its concern at the fact that no proper mechanism has
been created towards recharging the Yamuna river. The Committee recommends that a
proper system be set up for recharging the river by creating man-made water bodies like
reservoirs and catchment areas, which can store the monsoon water, which usually goes into
drains and then stored water can be released into the river during the lean season.
(Para 8.8)
7. The Committee feels that there is a urgent need to pin-point the reasons for the
failure of such major projects and to take urgent steps towards rectifying the problem
areas. The Committee also recommends that to make the projects result oriented, the
Ministry should take stringent action against officials who are found lacking in terms of
deliverance and penal action be taken against the defaulters for violating of legislations.
(Para 8.9)
8. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should develop a proper
coordination mechanism with the agencies/departments/Ministries involved in cleaning up
the river Yamuna and Ganga to solve the problem. The research activities of the scientific
departments with regard to treatment and waste management may be put to optimum use
to prevent pollution of rivers and lakes in the country. (Para 8.10)
9. The Committee notes with concern that an amount of Rs.35.00 crores has been
diverted from such a significant scheme like National River Conservation
Programme(NRCP), to an non-critical area viz. the expenditure on establishment related
matters. This points towards the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry towards the problem
of river and lake water pollution across the country, though the pollution levels continues
to rise at an alarming level. (Para 8.11)
10. The Committee notes that the name of the programme 'Integrated Forest Protection
Scheme' has been changed to 'Intensification of Forest Management' , with broadly the
same objectives as the earlier programme with the addition of only two new components.
The Committee fails to decipher the logic behind simply changing the nomenclature of the
programme and feels that unless there is a will and resolve to do something concrete, mere
change in the name would not result in any substantial gain. The new components that have
been added now, could be accommodated even within the ambit of the earlier scheme, with
slight modifications/additions. (Para 9.6)
11. The Committee while noting that in the past, even sugarcane fields were counted as
forest cover, recommends that the methodology of assessing the green cover needs to be
modified and the latest satellite imaging techniques along with extensive ground truth cross
checking, should be used to distinguish the actual forest cover from other tall crops and to
correctly estimate the actual area under forest, since correct data assessment is essential
for proper policy formulation and follow up action. (Para 9.7)

19
12. The Committee expresses its concern at the fact that even though the Ministry
intends to achieve the target of 33% of forest cover by 2012, the only scheme that treats
afforestation in a holistic manner and seeks to involve the communities and the society in
general in the preservation and conservation of forests has been deprived of funds. The
Committee notes with concern that the modalities for the scheme-Panchayat Van Yojana,
are yet to be worked out with the Panchayats and feels that the Ministry should have done
the ground work for the scheme well before launching this programme so as to ensure
utilisation of funds and successful implementation of the scheme. (Para 10.9)
13. The Committee recommends that Ministry should formulate an effective strategy to
create mass awareness about afforestation among poor people and tribal communities, who
depend on forests in different ways as it may, in turn not only increase forest cover but
would also provide better opportunity, empowerment, livelihood and security to them.
(Para 10.10)
14. The Committee feels that to deal with the issue of conservation and preservation of
environment, in a broad perspective, the younger generation should be made fully aware of
the environmental concerns that are engaging the attention of the country and world at
large. Though the Ministry has been doing a commendable job in promoting environmental
education by imparting non-formal education at the primary and secondary school level and
in colleges and universities, the Committee, however, feels that there is a greater need to
stress upon the system of formal education, by including the environmental concepts in the
schools/colleges/universities curriculum itself. In this direction the Committee recommends
that the Ministry’s proposal to enhance financial assistance to the States for training of
school teachers for effective transaction of environment education curriculum in the school
under the component of strengthening environment education in school, should be given top
priority. Effort should also be made to recognize schools that go green by banning use of
plastic bags, etc. thereby sensitizing children towards environment and environment issues.
(Para 11.5)
15. The Committee notes with concern that the budgetary support for the Central
Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has been decreased substantially, despite the fact that it is
a premier central agency responsible for control and prevention of pollution, and pollution
continues to rise unabated across the country. The Committee is also constrained to note
that the responsibility and the funds for the civic infrastructure projects, for controlling
urban pollution, hitherto funded under  NRCP, has been transferred to the schemes like
Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) and Urban Infrastructure
Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns (UIDSMT) under the Ministry of Urban
Development and the funds under CPCB has been reduced. (Para 12.3)
16. The Committee also notes that the allocation under the Promotion of Central
Effluent Treatment Plants (CETP) has been only marginally increased from Rs.4.00 crores
in R.E. 2007-08 to Rs.4.45 crores in B.E. 2008-09 and expresses it concern that the CETPs
which are an essential component in the treatment of industrial and domestic sewage, has
been allocated lesser funds. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should
seriously look into the issue of polluting industries, which discharge their effluents directly
into river and lakes. It also recommends that the Ministry may think in terms of taking
some harsh measures like imposing heavy penalties and issuing closure notices to such

20
Industrial setups, if they fail to install the requisite effluent treatment plants within a
specified time. (Para 12.4)
17. The Committee notes the constitution of the National Tiger Conservation
Authority (NCTA) for conservation of tigers in the country, the population of which is
declining due to unabated poaching. The Committee expresses its concern at the fact that
though anti-poaching legislations have been in force since 1972, the country has seen a
steady decline in the population of tigers, which lead to the intervention at the Prime
Ministerial level. These point towards the failure of the Ministry in ground implementation
of existing legislations. The Committee expresses its doubts as to whether the Ministry
would be able to check the decline in the number of tigers, just by renaming the already
existing schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that initiative for wildlife
protection should be taken up by the Ministry with full vigour and resolve, so that it does
not remain a mere legislation on paper. (Para 13.9)
18. The Committee expresses concern over the general apathy, that the Ministry has
shown towards implementation of legislations regarding forest conservation, protection of
wildlife etc. and recommends that the legislations may be forcefully enforced to prevent any
further degradation of environment. In this direction the Ministry should take into account
the man-animal conflict that the country is currently facing due to pressure of development
and encroachment of forest land. The Committee welcomes the increase of the funds for
relocation of families from the tiger habitat to the periphery, from Rs. l lakh to
Rs. 10.00 lakhs and recommends that the Ministry make concerted efforts towards
expediting the relocation of families, and ensuring peaceful co-existence of both man and
animals. (Para 13.10)
19. The Committee expresses its concern that a large number of vacancies, both in the
Centre and States have yet not been filled up. The Committee had last year expressed its
concern over this matter. Filling of the vacancies in the posts of forests wardens and forest
guards are of prime importance for the implementation of the legislations regarding forest
conservation and animal protection; the State governments are lagging behind in the filling
of a large number of vacancies at these levels. The Committee recommends that the
Ministry should vigorously pursue the fIlling up of posts with the State governments and
monitor the filling up of vacancies, besides filling up of vacancies at the Central Level.
(Para 13.11)
20. The Committee further recommends that Ministry should adopt a strategy towards
controlling supply of wildlife and its products to both domestic as well as international
markets. The control would not only require strengthening human but also enhanced
technical surveillance; web patrolling; media watch; creation of crime data bank;
strengthening/capacity building of enforcement and prosecution process; life style/livelihood
issues of communities subsisting on wildlife, etc. The Ministry should also embark on a
strategy of creating awareness amongst the international buyers; using bilateral and
multilateral mechanisms in trade; international trade regulatory mechanisms and other
foreign policy measures to reduce the demand. (Para 13.12)
21. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment and Forests should
seriously pursue the stakeholders-municipalities, corporations, etc., to use these
technologies which besides being environment friendly have a number of advantages over

21
the conventional means like incinerations, landfills, dumping in the sea or other water-
bodies, composting, etc. The Ministry should ensure that such sewage treatment plants are
integrated/installed at least in Delhi, Kanpur and other cities along with the Yamuna and
the Ganga which have virtually turned the river into a nallah by dumping untreated sewage.
The Committee also recommends that action in this regard be taken on priority in a time-
bound manner. (Para 14.2)
22. After considering the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment
and Forests and assessing the progress of various important programmes and
projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the budgetary allocation of
Rs. 1707.00 crores, as sought by the Ministry for the year 2008-09, under Demand No. 29,
may be approved. (Para 15)

MINUTES

24

25
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Monday, the 24th March, 2008 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Shri Jabir Husain
5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Shri Francis Fanthome
8. Shri Brahmananda Panda
9. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
10. Shri Pratik P. Patil
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES
1. Ms. Meena Gupta, Secretary (E&F)
2. Shri R.H. Khwaja, Additional Secretary
3. Shri J.M. Mauskar, Additional Secretary
4. Shri K.B. Thampi, Inspector General Forests
5. Shri A.N. Prasad, Inspector General Forests
6. Shri G.K. Prasad, Additional Director General of Forests
7. Shri B.P. Nilratna, Joint Secretary
8. Shri A.K. Goyal, Joint Secretary
9. Dr. B. Sengupta, Member Secretary, CPCB
10. Dr. Rajesh Gopal, Member Secretary (NTCA)
11. Dr. G.K. Pandey, Adviser
12. Dr. M. Sengupta, Adviser
13. Shri R.S. Ahlawat, Economic Adviser
25

26
14. Dr. Nalini Bhatt, Adviser
15. Dr. G.V . Subramaniam, Adviser
16. Shri Manoj Sethi, Controllor of Accounts
17. Shri R. Mehta, Adviser
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry
of Environment and Forests and requested the Secretary to make a presentation on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry. Thereafter, the Secretary made a visual presentation regarding the
major activities formulated for the year 2008-09 and achievements of the Ministry during the
year 2007-08. She also mentioned about the budgetary allocations under different heads as also the
functioning of the Ministry. Thereafter, Members sought clarifications on the points that emerged
out of the presentation. The Secretary replied to them.
The officials then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the
25th March, 2008.

27
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 23rd April, 2008 in Room No. ‘139’,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Saman Pathak
4. Shri Jabir Husain
5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK  SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
9. Shri Francis Fanthome
10. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
11. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
12. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
2. The Committee took-up for consideration its draft *** 188th, *** *** Reports on the
Demands for Grants (2008-2009) pertaining to the ***; *** Ministry of ***, Environment and
Forests, ***, ***, ***, respectively.
3. * * *
4. The Committee decided to present all the seven reports (185th to 191st) on 29th April, 2008
in both the Houses of Parliament. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence
Dr. Barun Mukherjee to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and to lay the copies of the reports
on the Table of Lok Sabha by Dr. Sujan Chakraborty and in his absence by Shri Francis Fanthome.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.
27

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.