PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & 
FORESTS 
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY-THIRD REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-2008) 
OF THE MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES 
(DEMAND NO. 29) 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 26th  APRIL, 2007) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 26th APRIL, 2007) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
APRIL, 2007/VAISAKHA, 1929 (SAKA) 
C O N T E N T S 
  
1.     COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                
2.     INTRODUCTION                                                                                                            
3.     REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                                            
4.     SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                                                                                                                     
5.     ANNEXURE                                                                                                                                                                
6.    MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                          
 
Page 1 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT &...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY,  
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
---------- 
1.      Shri P.G. Narayanan  –– Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.      Dr.Prabha Thakur 
#3. Vacant 
4.      Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya 
5.      Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
6.      Shri Kamal Akhtar 
7.      Shri Saman Pathak 
8.      Shri Jabir Husain 
9.      Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
10. Dr. Barun Mukherjee 
  
LOK  SABHA 
  
11. Shri Jashubhai Dhanabhai Barad 
12.
  Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
13.  Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
14.  Shri Pankaj Chaudhary 
15.  Shri Francis Fanthome 
16.  Shri Babubhai K. Katara     
17.  Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
18.  Shri Brahmananda Panda 
19.  Smt. Neeta Pateriya 
20.  Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil 
21.  Shri Pratik Prakashbapu Patil 
22.  Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat 
23.  Shri K.C. Singh “Baba” 
24.  Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
25.  Shri Rakesh Singh  
26.  Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli 
27.  Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar 
28.  Shri Akhilesh Yadav                        
29.  Shri Mitrasen Yadav 
30.  Shri Sita Ram Yadav  
*31.    Shri Rampal Singh  
      SECRETARIAT 
      Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
      Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary    
      Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Under Secretary  
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
INTRODUCTION 
  
      I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parlia mentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this
Page 2 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT &...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

One Hundred Seventy-third Report of the Committee.  Th is Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants
(2007-2008) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences (Demand No.29). 
  
2.  In the meeting of the Committee held on 3 rd April, 2007, the Secretary and other Officers of the Ministry o f
Earth Sciences gave an overview of the various activities of the Ministry  and the Members sought clarifications
on various aspects of the performance of the Ministry to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants. 
  
3.  The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministry for replying to the clarifications sought by
the Members and placing before it the required material  to enable the Committee to  scrutinise the Demands fo r
Grants of the Ministry of Earth Sciences. 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 20th  April, 2007. 
  
  
  
 
NEW DELHI;    
April 20, 2007   
P.G.NARAYANAN 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Science & 
Technology, Environment & Forests.
Page 3 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT &...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

REPORT 
            The Department of Ocean Developm ent was created in July 1981 as a part of the Cabinet
Secretariat directly under the ch arge of the Prime Minister. Fr om March 1982, it became a separate
Department. In February 2006, it wa s notified as the Ministry of O cean Development. The Ministry o f
Earth Sciences has been created in July 2006 after merger of India Meteorological Department (IMD);
National Centre for Medium Range Weather For ecasting (NCMRWF); Indian  Institute of Tropical
Meteorology (IITM) and Earth Risk  Evaluation Centre (EREC) with  the then Ministry of Ocean
Development. The Ministry’s mandate is to lo ok after Atmospheric Sciences, Ocean Science & 
Technology and Seismology in an integrated manner. Ministry of Earth Sciences has been functioning
as a nodal Ministry for organising, c oordinating and promoting related Ea rth Sciences activities in the
country.  
  
2.         OCEAN SCIENCE 
2.1       The programmes pursued by the Ministry ove r the years have also kept  pace with developments 
world over and addressed na tional needs and prioriti es, in line with the Ocean Policy Statement o f 
1982.   
2.2       The programmes of the Ministry in the field of Ocean Science are directed towards: 
•
      Technology Development Programmes for future applications with  strategic, industrial and 
economic significance. 
•        Societal Programmes with direct/indirect benefit for the comm unity by technology applications
and pilot project demons tration with the participation of  the community for their socio-
economic prosperity, and for coastal area devel opment/management through scientific tools and 
techniques 
•        Marine Resource Programmes fo r exploration of marine li ving and non-living resources, 
techno-economic studies to evolve strategies for sustainable explorat ion and utilisation, an d
resource enhancement. 
•        Multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary Polar Science Programmes and Antarctic Expeditions
with scientific and geo-political significance. 
•        Capacity Building Progr amme towards self-reliance through ba sic scientific re search in ocean 
sector, human resource develo pment and establishi ng Centres of Excel lence in academic 
institutions. 
•        Creation of public awareness of ocean, its potential and uses. 
  
3.         The scientific research and technol ogy development programmes are formulated, coordinate d
and executed through three autonomous institutions supported by the Ministry and two Attached offices
of the Ministry. These multi-disc iplinary and multi-institutional pr ogrammes are assisted by National
Research Laboratories, academic in stitutions and industries. Furthe r, Marine Research and Capacity
Building is one of the key programme areas of the Ministry to promote basic research in marine science
Page 4 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT &...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

and establish centres of excellence in academic institutions and for self-reliance.  
3.1              The oceanographic programmes have national, regional and global importance. With the
ratification of the UN C onvention on Law of the Sea,  a new international order has been established for
the oceans. India is represented in almost all the important  bodies on oceans. India will stand to benefit
enormously by provisions of  the convention, if we can build an integrated approa ch for scientific
planning, formulation, implementa tion and overall management  of the programmes with a
comprehensive organisational and institutional back up.  
3.2       The Ministry is the nodal agency for international programmes in  the ocean sector and 
representing the country in Inter-governmental  Oceanographic Commissi on (IOC) of UNESCO,
Regional Committee of IOC in Coastal Indian  Ocean (IOCINDIO), S outh Asian Regional Seas
Programme, Commission on th e Limits of Continental Shelf (CLC S), International Sea-Bed Authority 
(ISBA) and the State Parties of the United Nationa l Convention on the Law of the Seas (UNCLOS), the
Antarctic Treaty System (ATS) a nd its scientific and managerial organs – Commission on Conservation 
of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) , Council of Managers of National Antarctic
Programme (COMNAP), Scientific Committee on Anta rctic Research (SCAR), etc. These activities
have scientific, economic and geopol itical impacts. Hence, the activ ities of the Ministry address
Scientific Research and Technol ogy Development with or ientation towards a pplications, capacity
building and human resource development for self-re liance, and international programmes arising out of 
International obligations and bilateral and multilateral cooperative ventures. 
4.         ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCE  
4.1       The atmosphere plays a vital role in de fining the overall environmen t in which all organisms 
live. It impacts almost all kinds of human activities in a major way. Society has evolved in harmony
with the existing variability of weather and climate and needs the s upport of forecasts to manage many
of its critical functions.  Forecasting such a complex system as th e atmosphere is a growing science and
needs to be supported. Weather services in general have  very early origins in th is country and currently
engage the India Meteorological Department (IMD), the National Centre for Medium Range Weathe r
Forecasting (NCMRWF) which is a specialized agency for developing medium range forecast capability
in the country and the Indian In stitute of Tropical Meteorology (IIT M) which carries out research in
required areas.  
  
4.2       Advancement of the science in recent y ears indicate that a combined  approach involving land, 
oceanic and atmospheric processes holds the key to long and extende d range of forecasting which can
provide a credible policy tool. On the other hand, intensive monitoring and analysis of cloud systems
using Satellite and Radar technology can help us to accurately ga uge the severity of an immediately
impending calamity thereby prompting the selection of appropriate measures. Monitoring of earthquakes
issuing information about the location and intens ity of the earthquakes and hazard microzonation o f
Page 5 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT &...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

highly seismic areas of the country constitute important activities of IMD. 
4.3       Agro-meteorological advisories and moni toring of crop productivity in  coordination with the 
State agricultural departments and ag ricultural Universities in the c ountry is another important area o f
activity. The Ministry of Earth Sciences has ta ken positive steps to im plement a comprehensive
developmental programe in these areas involving all the three agencies. 
  
 
Page 6 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT &...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

5.         XIth Five Year Plan (2007-2012) 
5.1       The Ministry has stated that the total budgetary allocation for the XIth Five Year Plan has not yet 
been finalized though, it has project ed a requirement of Rs.12,009 cror es to the Planning Commission.  
There are 29 programmes proposed to  be carried out by the Minist ry, which include 18 continuing
programmes and 11 new programmes.  It has also informed that it has successfully completed the
programmes in the previous Five  Year Plan. The new schemes/ projects proposed for the XI th Five Year 
Plan are as follows: 
¾      Development of Manned submersible 
¾      Installation of Multi-Channel Seismic (MCS) System  
¾      Expedition to Arctic 
¾      Desalination Project 
¾      MLR: vessel requirement and Dedicated berthing and associated facilities  
¾      National Oceanarium  
¾      Demonstration of Shore Protection measures through Pilot project 
¾      Integrated Ocean Drilling Programme (IODP) 
¾      Ice class Research vessel 
¾      Headquarter Building 
¾      Modernisation of IMD (Communication, Ob servation, Cyclone warning, Forecasting,
Aviation Services, Instrumentation, Hydromet, infrastructural development) 
  
6.         TOTAL BUDGETARY DEMANDS FOR 2007-08 AND ALLOCATION OF FUNDS FOR
THRUST AREAS 
  
6.1       The total outlay for 2007- 08 has been fixed at Rs. 887 crores (Rs. 690 crores for Plan and Rs. 
197 crores for Non Plan expenditu re) which is 411.25 crores more th an the outlay for 2006-07.  This 
reflects that the budget allocation has almost doubled since last year. However, it may be mentioned that
“Meteorology” which has been tr ansferred from the Department of Science & Technology and “Othe r 
Scientific Research” are new programmes for the Ministry of Ea rth Sciences, for which an amount o f 
Rs. 213.75 crores and Rs. 38.45 crores respectively have been made at R.E. stage during the last year.  
The Ministry has informed that during the year 2007-08, th e actual increase in  outlay is of Rs. 144.70 
crores and percentage increase in B.E. 2007-08 from B.E. 2006-07, which was Rs. 742.30 crores (Plan -
Rs. 553.00 crores and Non Plan-R s.189.30 crores) is about 19.5 %, though, Plan outlay for 2007-08 fo r 
Oceanographic Research has been fixed at Rs. 365 crores, which is Rs. 73 crores less than the outlay for
2006-07.  Howsoever, the total allocation for the Ministry of Earth Sciences is not reduced since the sum 
of outlays for Oceanographic Research (Rs. 365 crores), Meteorology (Rs.301 crores) and Othe r
Scientific Research (Rs.24 crores), the actual out lay for the Ministry for 2007-08 is Rs.690 crores. Out 
of the allocation of Rs . 365 crores for Oceanographi c Research, Rs. 100 crores  has been earmarked fo r
Acquisition of New Research Vessel so as to support the changing needs of the technology development
Page 7 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT &...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

and related programmes while Rs. 10 crores is for Ministry’s campus in Central Delhi.  
  
6.2       The budgetary allocation for the year 2007-08in the tabular form is given at Annexure. 
  
6.3      It may be mentioned th at the Ministry initially projecte d a budget requirement of Rs.2055 crores 
for the year 2007-08.  Subsequently after having a se ries of meeting with the Planning Commission, an
assessment has been made for mi nimum critical requirement of Rs . 1050 crores to carry out the
continuing programmes and to initiate a certain new programmes. But the B.E. for the Ministry actually
agreed by the Finance Ministry/Planning Commis sion for the year 2007-08 is Rs.690 crores.  The 
Ministry of Earth Sciences is of the view that th is would be barely suffic ient to carry out its ongoing
activities envisaged fo r implementation during XI th  Plan period. The Committ ee has been given to 
understand that the Ministry is proposing to carry out  the essential ongoing scheme s.  With regard to 
new schemes, a token provisi on has been made with a view to just  initiate the activities.  However, 
efforts are underway to get the full allocation at the R.E stage to fill  the gap between projected deman d
and actual allocation. 
  
6.4       The head-wise quarterly statement as well  as total expenditure of the Ministry for 2006-07 can 
be seen from the table below. The Ministry informed  that the quarterly expendi ture of the Ministry, is
more or less uniform during this year, except for the first quarter which is due to carry forward o f
unspent balance available under some programmes to the current financial year. 
           
 
Page 8 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT &...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

(Rs. in crores)
  
6.5       While agreeing with the reasons furnished by the Ministry in respect of  less expenditure during 
the first quarter, the Committee feels that Ministry must plan its programmes in such a manner that it
may utilize maximum percentage of allocated budget in the financial year itself so that there should be
minimum carry forward of the unspe nt balance to the next financia l year. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that there should be regular infusion of funds in various schemes/projects in all the quarters
of the financial year and it should also evolve a suitable mechanism in this regard to avoid such situation
in the XIth Five Year Plan. 
  
7.         MAJOR DISPROPORTIONATE VARIATIONS AND REASONS 
7.1       The Ministry has informed that durin g the year 2006-07, the major variations, are  in the 
following programmes: 
Sl. 
No. 
Scheme Quarter-1 Quarter-2 Quarter-3 
1 Polar Science 5.24 0.00 28.36 
2 Polymetallic Nodules Programme 0.29 0.88 17.05 
3 Ocean Observations, and Information 
System OOIS) 
2.90 1.50 0.73 
4  Marine Research and Technology 
Development  
1.43 4.21 2.84 
5  National Institute of Ocean Technology 
(NIOT) 
0.00 16.76 0.00 
6 Coastal Research Vessels (CRV) 0.00 0.00 2.13 
7 Delineation of Outer Limits of 
Continental Shelf 
0.00 0.00 0.00 
8 Comprehensive Swath Bathymetry of 
Indian EEZ 
0.00 0.00 0.00 
9 Gas Hydrates Exploration & 
Technology Development  
0.00 0.00 0.00 
10  Acquisition and Operation of New 
Research Vessels 
0.00 35.00 0.00 
11  Geophysical Study of Laxmi Basin 0.00 0.00 0.00 
12 Information Technology 0.00 0.14 0.00 
13 Data Buoy Programme 0.00 12.89 3.60 
14 Early Tsunami Warning System 0.00 3.00 46.78 
15 Indian Institute of Tropical 
Meteorology 
4.00 2.15 2.00 
16 National Centre for Medium Range 
Weather Forecasting  
16.92 4.37 1.81 
17 India Meteorological Department 48.04 35.85 44.05 
  TOTAL 78.82 116.75 149.35 
Page 9 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT &...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

i)          Polymetallic Nodules Programme 
            BE  -  Rs. 19 crores                             RE  -  Rs. 14.85 crores 
            Due to non-availability of resear ch vessel for shallow bed mini ng demonstration and teething
problems at the ferro-silico manga nese demonstration pilot plant at  National Metallur gical Laboratory, 
Jamshedpur. 
ii)         Ocean Observation and Information Services 
            BE  -  Rs. 25 crores                             RE  -  Rs. 19 crores 
            The postponement of proposed proc urement of a High Performanc e Computing System due to 
time taken in finalizing the exact technical specifications resulted in savings. 
iii)        Marine Living Resources (MLR) and Fisheries Oceanographic Research Vessel (FORV) 
             
            BE  -  Rs. 8 crores                               RE  -  Rs. 6 crores 
            The variation was mainly due to reallocation of priorities among the programmes. 
  
iv)        Gas Hydrate Exploration and Technology Development for Exploitation 
            BE  -  Rs. 30 crores                             RE  -  Rs. 12 crores 
  
            Non-availabilty of suitable colla boration partner for technology development of coring system
and non-availability of seismic vessel in market due to sudden spurt in hydrocarbon exploration, resulted
in reduced expenditure. 
  
v)         Acquisition of new Research Vessel 
            BE  -  Rs. 70 crores                             RE  -  Rs. 55 crores 
            The savings is due to rescheduling of payment for acquiring the ve ssel in accordance with the 
finalized contract. 
 
Page 10 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

vi)        National Institute of Ocean technology (NIOT) 
            BE  -  Rs. 87 crores                             RE  -  Rs. 47 crores 
            The savings is due to delay in co mmissioning in operation of ba rge based desalination plant
owing to unforeseen rough sea weather and delay in obtaining clearances fo r advance action proposal
for acquisition of land towards development of sea front facilities. 
vii)       Comprehensive Swath Bathymetric Survey of Indian EEZ 
BE  -  Rs. 9 crores                               RE  -  Rs. 4 crores 
            Due to non-availab ility of Resear ch Vessel, ship days were reduced leading to the reduction in
anticipated expenditure. 
viii)      Ocean Data Buoy Programme 
            BE  -  Rs. 25 crores                             RE  -  Rs. 18 crores 
            The variation was mainly due to reallocation of priorites am ong the programmes necessitating
deferment of certain activities to the next financial year. 
ix)        IT and Computers 
            BE  -  Rs. 3 crores                               RE  -  Rs. 1.75 crores 
            The savings is due to reduced requir ement of grants for the IT component from the autonomous 
bodies of the Ministry. 
x)         Tsunami and Storm Surge Warning System 
            BE  -  Rs. 95 crores                             RE  -  Rs. 56 crores 
            The savings is due to delay in finalization of hardware/software required for the programme. 
xi)        India Meterological Department  
            BE – Rs. 105.00 crores                                                Actual – Rs. 85.54 crores 
  
7.2.      During the year expenditu re shortfall was due to delay in procurement of DCWDS, approval fo r 
procurement and installation of High Performan ce Computing System, de lay in procurement o f
Automatic Message Switching System (AMSS) system s and Telecom Facilities at field stations and
approval for procurement of Agromet Equipments. 
  
7.3       The Committee expresses its dissatisfac tion on the Ministry’s rep lies in providing same old 
excuses like delay in acquiring cl earances, procurement and installati on of technological systems, non-
availability of research vessel and other such procedural delays for di sproportionate va riations in the 
utilisation of alloca ted funds under various progra mmes. This reflects the serious instances of bad 
planning and management on the part of Ministry. The Committee is of  the view that Ministry should 
strategically plan all its act ivities to avoid such administrative dela ys in future as fa r as possible and 
should also aspire for timely implementation of all the major schemes/projects. 
  
8.         PHYSICAL AND FINANC IAL TARGETS AND ACHI EVEMENTS DURING X th FIVE 
YEAR PLAN 
  
8.1       The Planning Commission approve d an outlay of Rs. 1125 crores for the X th Five Year Plan 
programmes of Ministry of Earth Sciences. The programme s of the Ministry in X th  Five Year  Plan 
period were directed towards: 
  
Page 11 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

•        Technology Development Programmes for future a pplications with stra tegic, industrial and 
economic significance 
•        Societal Programmes with direct/indirect benefit for the commun ity by technology applications and 
pilot project demonstration with  the participation of the community for their socio-economic 
prosperity, and for coastal area development/ management through scientific tools and techniques 
•        Marine Resources Programmes for exploration of marine living a nd non-living resources, techno-
economic studies to evolve  strategies for sustainable explor ation and utilisation, and resource 
enhancement 
•        Multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary Polar Science Programmes and Antarctic Expeditions with 
scientific and geo-political significance 
•        Capacity Building Programme towa rds self-reliance through basic sc ientific research in ocean 
sector, human resource development and establishing Centres of Excellence in academic institutions 
•        Creation of public awareness of ocean, it’s potential and uses 
  
 
Page 12 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

8.2       The highlights of the achievements are as follows: 
•        A site in Larsemann Hills selected for 3rd Indian Antarctic station, 
•        Regular Indian Scientific Antarctic Expedition on yearly basis, 
•        Special expedition to Southern Oceans, 
•        An ice-core drilling laboratory established at NCAOR to conduct paleooceanographic study, 
•        Development and demonstration of desalination technology to cater to  the needs of freshwater in 
coastal states and island territories of India,  
•        The setting up of a desalination pl ant in Lakshadweep islands with a capacity of generating 1 lakh 
litre freshwater per day based on technologies developed has brought di rect benefits to the islander 
community and more than 1 crore litre of freshwater has been generated so far, 
•        Providing of Potential Fishing Advisories to fish erman, and Ocean State fore cast for various stake 
holders, benefiting 7 million fishing community of th e coastal states and island territories, by 
reducing search time and improving catch per unit effort up to 50 %  
•        Setting up an interim early tsunami & storm surge warning system,  
•        Strengthening of ocean observing network by deployment of state- of-the-art technology data buoys 
and Argo floats, to operational weather forecast and climate variability studies, 
•        Indigenous development of buoys, tide gauges to meet the requirement of ocean observations,  
•        Development and transfer of te chnology of lobster and crab fatte ning for the benefit of smaller 
fisherman community, 
•        Networking of institutions for conducting polar research,  
•        Completion of geophysical surveys for delineation of Continental Shelf 
•        Oceanographic surveys and analysis of data for claiming extended Legal Continental Shelf 
•        Close grid surveys in the allotted area in the Central Indian Ocean Basin under polymetallic nodule 
programme, 
•        Establishment of Extractive metallurgical pilot pl ant for validation of process package to extract 
Copper, nickel and cobalt from the nodules found at the seabed, 
•        Design development and demonstration of Remotely Operable Vehicle at 200m depth, 
•        Development and testing of shallow bed mining module at 451m depth, 
•        Construction of Dyke at Haldia port leading to reduced cost of dredging, consultancy services to 
Sethusamudram & Kalpasar projects, 
•        Launch of clinical trials two po tential drugs (antidiabetic and an tihyperlipedemic) from the marine 
organisms (Phase-I single dose clinical trials completed successfully), 
•        Conducting multi-disciplinary studies to assess the Ma rine Living Resources in the Indian seas, and 
to understand a large scale variation of fishery resources,   
•        Development of shoreline management plans in selected coastal sensitive areas and establishment of 
marine ecotoxicology labs and carrying out ecotoxicology study,  
•        Continued systematic monitoring of  coastal pollution to assess the health of the coastal seas of 
India, 
•        Strengthened basic research thr ough setting up of a network of O cean and Atmospheric Science & 
Technology Cells and 
•        Demonstration of leadership in the Indian Ocean region to address common i ssues of the countries 
in the region 
  
8.3       Regarding the mechanism that exist, in th e Ministry to monitor and review the progress of its
ongoing schemes/projects, the Commit tee was informed that the Mini stry had been adopting a three
level Monitoring Mechanism to oversee implementation of the programmes.  For the formulation of XIth
Five Year Plan the Ministry ha s taken an advanced action for setting up a Group of Experts with
members who are ex perts in Ocean Atmos pheric Science & Technolo gy prior to the constitution of a
Page 13 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

Working Group of the Planning Commission. The Group of Experts had a brai n storming session in
October 2005, to review the existing programme a nd formulation of programmes for the future.  
Subsequently, a Working Group was also constituted as per the instructions of the Planning Commission
which met a couple of times to discuss and finalise the report of the Group of Experts.   Accordingly, a 
Working Group Document has been prepared and submitted to the Steering Committee on Science &
Technology under the Chairmanship of Dr. R. Chidambaram.   
  
8.4       Towards monitoring the mission mode programme, like Tsunami project, two separate 
committees have been set up viz ., Project Management Board and Steering Committee for periodical
review and assessment of the programmes. Besides,  each programme of th e Ministry is having a
separate Monitoring Committee with Experts from the re levant specific evaluation of the projects.  With 
regard to R&D projects, an internal mechanism exis ts for periodical review and consideration.  The 
recommendations are put up to Steering Committee and Management Board for approval and
monitoring the projects.   
  
8.5       The autonomous bodies have a two-level of  separate monitoring mechan ism, in addition to the
Steering Committees for each of th e programme being implem ented with respect to the centre.  These 
are the Finance Committee under th e chairmanship of Fi nancial Adviser of the Ministry and the
Governing Council under the chairmanship of Secretar y, Ministry of Earth Scie nces (MoES).  The day-
to-day progress of the projects is also being reviewed through weekly meetings by the Secretary, MoES. 
It has been informed that on an half yearly basis, all the activities of the Mini stry are being reviewed by
the Member, Planning Commission besides the a nnual review conducted by the Secretary, Planning
Commission. Performance of the Ministry will also be apprised to the Earth Commission. 
  
8.6       The Ministry is going to abandon the pr oject “Geophysical Studies of Laxmi Basin” launche d 
during Xth Five Year Plan as work has been completed under the project .  Another activity, which has 
been abandoned for the time being, is Ocean Ther mal Energy Conversion, generating energy using
vertical temperature in the ocean, due to lack of technological infrastructure.   
  
8.7       The Committee has observed that alloca tion of funds under the “Manpower Training” is 
negligible, in spite of the fact that imparting training to its manpow er especially scientists/technologist
should be one of the major objectiv e of the Ministry as unskilled or  under-skilled man power could not 
result in the high quality performan ce.  A lot of strength in terms of manpower and the areas of strength 
are being slowly eroded.   Moreover, in most of  the institution, substitutions in terms of manpowe r
requirements are not there.  The Committee observes that there is a need to look at this aspect more so in
the context of the maintaining the classical stre ngth of the sciences.  Th e Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to evolve  a well-planned mechanism in this regard and make sure that funds
allocation must be made as per its requirements. 
  
8.8       The Committee during it s interaction with the Secretary, Ministry of  Earth Sciences had 
observed that there is stagnation in the scientific fi elds and there is lack of  promotional avenues. The
Committee strongly advocates the Ministry to initiate a comprehensive programme, which would have a
positive impact on scientific fraternity and will keep them motivated to aspire for higher achievements. 
  
9.         POLAR SCIENCE/ANTARTIC RESEARCH             
9.1       The Antartic Research programme has been  designed to take advant age of the unique location
and environment of the ic y continent for understanding the key gl obal processes, which are manifested
and controlled by this Polar cap. Th e Antarctic is a pristine and natural laboratory, which enables
scientists to study, detect and mo nitor global phenomena, such as th e atmospheric pa tterns and ocean
circulations. Glaciological and ge ophysical research provides clue  to the geological history and
evolution of the earth. In addi tion, Antarctica provides a singular platform for conducting studies on
solar terrestrial interaction, ada ptation of or ganisms, including human bein gs in the cold land isolated
Page 14 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

conditions, Antarctic /Polar Resear ch and Antarctic scientific expe ditions to Antarctica would be
continued during the year 2007-08. 
  
9.2       The Antarctic mission objectives of Minist ry is to plan, promote, co-ordinate and execute the 
polar science and logistic activities of the country, in order to ensure a perceptible and influential
presence of India in Antarc tica. It also upholds nati on’s strategic interests in the global framework o f 
nations in the Antarctic continent and the southern oceans expressed through our Consultative status in
the Antarctic treaty. As a treaty obligation to dem onstrate India’s sustained interest in Antarctica by 
conducting substantial scientific ac tivities such as the establishment of a scientific station and the
dispatch of annual scientific expe ditions. Accordingly, a scientific wo rk plan, which is dynamic and is
aimed towards addressing issues pertinent to our national needs and those that have global relevance and
is of international standard may be pursued.  
  
9.3       On the occasion of 25 th year of Indian presence in Anta rctica, a special expedition to the 
Southern Ocean and Larsemann Hi lls of East Antarctica was la unched onboard the Research Vessel
Akademik Boris Petrov on 25th January 2006 to carry out Swath Bathymetric Surveys in the approach to
the Larsemann Hills area where I ndia has proposed its new station. Indian Antarctic Programme was 
organized by NCAOR at Goa, on May, 2006 after the debriefing of the 25th Indian Antarctic Expedition 
team.  During the summer season of 2006-07, a team of  12 logistic and 13 scient ific personnel was sent 
by flight from Cape Town, South Africa to An tarctica availing the Dornning Maud Land Air Lin k
(DORMLAN) facilities, in November , 2006.  Ice-core drilling for more  than   70 m was done in the 
shelf in November-December, 2006.  The research work carried out as planned includes (i) Meteorology 
and Atmospheric Sciences, (ii) Earth Science and Glaciology (iii) Biology and Environmental Sciences: 
             
9.4       For Polar Science, the approved outlay is Rs . 20 crore, which would be given as Grants-in-aid to 
National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research (NCAOR) for launching the 27 th Scientific Expedition 
to Antarctica, carrying out scient ific experiments, initiating Sout hern Ocean cruise and project on
geological evolution of northern Indian Ocean; Rs. 1 crore towards collaborative research in Spitzbergen
(Arctic research), and Rs.15 crore to NCAOR for the institutional a nd logistic activities related to
establishment of the Third perman ent Indian Base in the Larsem ann Ranges, maintenance of the 
permanent research station “Maitri” at Antarctica and infrastructure  development, operation & manning 
of the NCAOR. This outlay is required to initiate  new research in the fields of Southern Ocean
Oceanography, Arctic studies, ice-co re drilling, Antarctic lake stud ies, Antarctic Global Change 
Research and Polar Environment & Ec ology. To venture into the frozen Antarctic an Ice-Class research 
vessel is needed for which an outla y of Rs. 1 crore is provided. To execute the seismic surveys there is
need to install a Multi-Channel Se ismic (MCS) system onboard any of the Ministry’s research vessels 
for which an outlay of Rs.5 crore is  provided. Also a provision of Rs. 4 crore is towards developing the
science plan for 3 significant site s, one each in Arab ian Sea, Bay of Benga l and western Andamans
under the Indian involvement in In tegrated Ocean Drilli ng Programme. In additi on to the two ongoing 
programmes, two new schemes i.e. Expedition to Arctic and Ice-cl ass Research Vessel have been 
proposed in the XI th Five Year Plan and a t oken amount of Rs.2.00 crores is  provided. The Ministry is 
of the view that the total allocation will be sufficient for the ongoing as well as new programmes. 
  
9.5       The Committee appreciates the research work  carried out by the Ministry  in the Antarctica. The
Committee feels that given the extrem ity of the prevailing situation in this continent, the Ministry has
taken the initiative for the scientific exploration in such extreme cold conditions. The Committee desires
that Ministry should undertake ev ery possible institutional and l ogistic activity in respect o f
establishment of the third permanen t Indian Base in the Larsemann Ranges and it may also aspire fo r
yielding positive results, as a substantial amount of fund has been approved towards National Centre for
Antarctic & Ocean Re search (NCAOR) for such activities. Ho wever, notwithstanding different surveys
involved, some target date should be fixed for com pleting the task undertaken, as  in the absence of an y
Page 15 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

time frame, the project may loose the importance and urgency that is called for. 
  
9.6       Environmental change and variability ar e part of the natural pa ttern on Earth. However, 
environmental changes currently witnessed in the polar region are in many ways more pronounced than
changes observed in the mid-latitude s or tropical regions. So me ice shelves in An tarctica are retreating 
and thinning, glaciers are shrinking and in turn it is bearing effect on ecosystems. The Committee would
like the Ministry to carry out re search and studies regarding impact  of such climatic changes on human
race. The Committee would al so like to know the Mini stry’s plans about partic ipation in International 
Polar Year (IPY) 2007-2008 as nations around the world are making plans to participate in it. 
  
9.7       The Committee recommends that two new schemes, viz Expedition to Arctic and Ice-class 
Research Vessel, which have  been proposed in the XI th  Five Year Plan, should be pursued in a well-
planned and strategic manner. 
  
10.       POLYMETALLIC NODULES PROGRAMME 
10.1     The Polymetallic Nodules Programme (P MN) is a national program me with international
commitments.  The programme consis ts of four components - Survey & Exploration of Polymetallic 
Nodules in the Central Indian Ocean Basin (CIOB), Environmental Impact Assessment studies at CIOB,
Technology Development for mining of nodules and Technology Developm ent for extraction of metals
from nodules.  The programme is guided and reviewed by the PMN Bo ard of Management.  The major 
effort during the Tenth Five Year Plan has been to optimally utilise the capabilities & infrastructure
already created at different National Laboratories for scientific and technol ogical development.  A 
sustained effort has been made to implement this  programme in a more fo cused and well-defined 
manner.  
  
10.2     In the case of Polymetallic Nodules Progr amme, an outlay of Rs. 15 crores has been provided. 
Under this programme, the activitie s planned include, continuation of  survey of nodules in the CIOB
first generation mine site along the selected profiles for identify ing and validating th e trends of highe r
abundance of nodules; continuation of Environmental Im pact Assessment of simulated sea bed
disturbance; research to upgrade existing mining system in a phased manner with a view to ultimately
mine the nodules at 6000m depth;  development and testing of unmanned submersible capable o f
operation upto water depth of 6000m;  and designing of a remotely Operated Vehicle for underwate r
examination; with continuation of  testing new process routes and undertaking techno-economic studies 
for extracting metals from the crust. 
  
10.3     During the year 2007-08, a provision of Rs. 2 crore has been made for the Ocean Awareness
programme towards organisation of Seminars, Symposia, Exhibitions, etc. Further a token provision o f
Rs.0.95 crore is made towards initia ting activities for establishing a Na tional Oceanarium by the end o f
XIth Five Year Plan. 
  
10.4     It has been noticed that the budgetary allocation has been decr eased as compared to last year’s 
B.E. allocation. During the year 2006-07, the B.E. allocation was Rs. 19.00 crores, which was reduced 
to Rs. 14.85 crores in R.E. stage and this year the al location is kept at Rs. 15.00 crores.  In response to 
this, the Ministry has informed that the lower RE  during 2006-07 is mainly due to non-availability o f 
research vessel for demonstrat ion of shallow bed mining sy stem and teething problems at
commissioning of Ferrow-Silico Manganese pilot plant at Nati onal Metallurgi cal Laboratory, 
Jamshedpur. The lower outlays duri ng 2007-08 are mainly due  to the fact that components such as 
Survey & Exploration and Envir onmental Impact Assessment (EIA ) study under Polymetallic Nodules
(PMN) programme are nearing co mpletion. Hence, the provision of  Rs. 15.00 crores made for 2007-08 
would be sufficient to meet the requirements of other components. 
  
10.5     The reason furnished by the Ministry for re duction of allocation during the year 2006-07 in R.E. 
stage is mainl y due to non-availabilit y of research vessel for demons tration of shallow bed minin g
Page 16 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

system and teething problems at commissioning of Ferrow-Silico Ma nganese pilot plant at National 
Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur. In the last year’s report on demands for grants the Committee 
had recommended the Ministry to avoid such procedural delays which result in non-utilisation of budget 
in fruitful manner.  Consequently, in its action taken notes on the abov e-mentioned report, the Ministry 
had stated that such delays would be avoided in fu ture. However, the same reasons have been furnished
this year also. This reflects the lackadaisical attitude adopted by the Mi nistry about fulfilling its
commitment. The Committee once again reiterates that Ministry must a pproach its projects in result-
oriented method and shoul d not rely on such excuses for non-per formance and giving stero-type reply 
every year on one issue or the other.   
  
11.       NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OCEAN TECHNOLOGY 
11.1     NIOT was established in 1993, as a society, under the Ministry, for development of ocean related 
technologies. The activities of NI OT cover five missions, viz. En ergy and Freshwater from the Sea,
Deep Sea Technology and Ocea n Mining, Coastal and Enviro nmental Engineering, Marine
Instrumentation and Ocean Scienc e and Technology for Islands. NIOT  is also the nodal agency fo
r
deploying floats under the Indian  ARGO programme, for implemen ting the National Data Buoy
programme, and for running and mainte nance of two Coastal Research Vessels. NIOT is entrusted with
implementing mining technology de velopment work under Polyme tallic Nodules programme,
development of Submersibles, and with part of the work under Drugs from Sea scheme. It has
commissioned on May 25, 2005 a one lakh litres of dr inking water/day capacit y desalination plant at
Kavaratti, Lakshadweep and a floating, barge- based 10 MLD demonstration plant off Chennai/ Ennore
is being designed for main land requirement. 
  
11.2     The main mission areas initially identified with the available expertise and facilities within NIOT
are as follows: 
•        Ocean Energy 
•        Deep Sea Technology and Ocean Mining 
•        Coastal and Environmental Engineering 
•        Marine Instrumentation 
•        Ocean Science and Technology for Islands 
  
11.3     For National Institute of Ocean Technol ogy (NIOT) an outlay of Rs. 20 crore including fo r
Island Development programme, is provided to carry out various R&D activities/programmes on sea bed
mining, coastal engineering, and marine instrumentat ion which will be conti nued during the year. The
Ministry entrusted the work to NIOT for development of seafront facilities & manned submersible and a
provision of Rs. 10 crores and Rs. 5 crores respectively have be en made. As an advance action for 10
MLD Desalination Plant project, a provision of Rs.10 crores has been  made. Also Rs. 1 crore is towards
Demonstration of Shore Pr otection Measures to tackle the mena ce of coastal erosion by taking up pilot
projects in selected areas of Indian coast. 
  
11.4     During the year 2006-07, th e allocation for the NIOT was Rs. 87.00 crores in B.E. stage, which w
significantly reduced to Rs . 47.00 crores in R.E. stage.  This ye ar also it has been reduced to Rs. 2 0
crores. The Ministry has stated that the f und provision was made toward s Mission Mode programme s
NIOT and an advance action proposal  for land acquisition towards cr eation of seafront facilities 
procurement of barge required for future offshore demonstration of desalination plant.  The savings w
due to delay in commissioning a nd operation of a barge mounted de salination plant off Chennai owin g
unforeseen rough weather as well as delay in obtaining  clearances for land acquisition for sea f r
facilities.  Due to budgetary c onstraints during 2007-08, a bare minimum fund has been kept for var i
activities of NIOT.   
11.5     The Ministry stated further that duri ng 2007-08, programmes like de velopment of seafront 
facility, desalination plant of hi gher capacity which were included in NIOT bud get, have been shown
Page 17 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

separately as continuing schemes during XI th Five Year  Plan and fund allocation have been made 
separately. 
  
11.6     The Committee commends the activities of th e Ministry in creating th e requisite infrastructure
for carrying out technology developm ent in the island for the benefi t of island community, monitoring
the health of seas and initiati on of programmes such as mud crab farming, open sea cage culture o f
lobsters and usage of fish aggreg ation devices which resulted in the overall economi c development o f
island and coastal community. It desires that Mini stry should strive for developing technologies to
facilitate the dissemination of data /data products to user communities. 
  
11.7     The Committee observes that developing  technology for mining of manganese nodules from 
Central Indian Ocean Basin (CIO B) from depth of 6000 m and devel opment and test of the underwate r
mining system for long-term opera tion by using Dynamic Positioning System are potential objectives 
for the Ministry under the National Institute of O cean Technology programme. The Committee is of the
view that the long-term planning a nd effective implementation methods may be devised by the Ministry 
in this direction and it must see that this should be one of the prioritized areas of the Ministry. 
  
11.8     The Committee also desires that the 10 MLD barge mounted  Desalination Plant of f 
Chennai/Ennore should be commi ssioned and operationalised at th e earliest for which a budgetary
allocation of Rs. 10 crores has been made in the year 2007-08. The Committee also recommends that the 
Ministry must work hard to make such plant cost ef fective so that more and more such plants could be
installed, since in the long run, it will be major source of providing safe drinking water to the
communities living around the coastal areas. 
  
12.       OCEAN OBSERVATION & INFORMATION SERVICES   
12.1     The Ocean Observation & Information Servic es Programme is designed  to acquire time-series 
data and develop a wide range of  ocean atmospheric models.  The data acquired through Argo floats, 
Drifters, XBTs, Current Meter Arra ys from the sea around India are be ing used for various operational
and research purposes including fo recasting of cyclones  and understanding the climate variability,
Besides, 122 ARGO profiling floats have also been deployed in the Indian Ocean so far, to acquire real-
time measurements of temperature and salinity profiles up to a depth of 2000 m with a view to improve
understanding the monsoon variability.  Besides real-time dissemination of data to various users, a set of 
12 Argo data products are being made available thr ough Indian National Centre for Ocean Information
Services (INCOIS) website. Th e ocean modeling and dynamics proj ects being carried out by reputed
national agencies would a ddress basic issues on the ocean dynami c, climate variability, ocean state
forecast, sea level variations, ocean flux studies etc.  Some models generated under the programme have 
already been made operational at INCOIS. 
  
12.2     For the Ocean Observation & Information Se rvices, an outlay of Rs. 15 crore has been provide d
to cater to the science program mes, viz,. the Argo programme, fi shing advisories, and developing
various forecast capabilities. The se parate provision of Rs.35 crore to I ndian National Centre for Ocean
Information Services (INCOIS) is mainly required fo r strengthening the IT infras tructure facilities such
as High Performance Computer facil ity at Hyderabad and for generati ng other end-user oriented data 
products and services.   However,  the Committee has been inform ed that during the year 2006-07 
reduction was made at R.E. stage due to proposal of postponement of  procurement of high Performance
Computing System for the next year. 
  
12.3     The Committee feels that the Ministry  did not put enough effo rts to procure the High
Performance Computing System as per schedule and its procur ement has been postponed. The
Committee also feels that Ministry should have planne d its actions well in advance so as to avoid this
non-utilsation of funds and it  must also be aware of the fact that delay in procurement of system coul d
lead to cost escalation and project could fall prey to cost overrun. 
  
12.4     The Committee has been informed b y the Ministr y that a substantial amount of Rs. 35 crores
Page 18 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

have been earmarked for the Indi an National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS). The
Committee recommends that services from INCO IS may be optimally us ed to provide ocean
information and advisory services  to society, industry, government agencies and scientific community
through sustained ocean observations, information management, modeling and constant improvements
through systematic and focussed research.  
  
13.       TSUNAMI AND STORM SURGE WARNING SYSTEM 
13.1     The objective of the project is to establish a warning system for the oceanogenic disasters caused
by tsunami and storm surges.  The project is being carried out with  participation of other concerne d
departments such as Science and Technology (DST), Scientific and Industrial Research, Space over a
period of 30 months.  The project is expected to strengt hen the 7 seismic obser vation station of DST,
establishment of 8-10 DART Observ ation Network, Instillation of real time tide gauge monitoring 
stations, 24 hours monitoring of the systems for generation of timely warning, etc.  An interim tsunami 
warning center has been set up  at INCOIS Hyderabad and 17 tide gauges and 3 bottom pressure
recorders have been installed as a part of this programme. 
  
13.2     An allocation of Rs. 35 crore has been earmarked for Tsunami and Storm Surge Warning System
mainly for indigenous development of Deep Ocean Assessment and Reporting systems and setting up o f 
INSAT DART & INSAT Met data Reception system at INCOIS.  
  
13.3     The commissioning and operation of the Nationa l Early Warning System   to take  care of any  
exigencies  an Interim Tsunami Warning Centre (ITWC)  has been established at Indian National Centre 
for Ocean Information Services (I NCOIS), Hyderabad. This  is operational round-t he-clock with active 
support of India Meteorological De partment (IMD), Japan Meteorological Agency and Pacific Tsunami
Warning Centre, using the inform ation from Japan Meteorological  Agency and Pacific Tsunami
Warning Centre within 30 minutes after the earthquake in Indian Ocean. 
  
13.4     A set of 20 acoustic tide gauges have been  installed with GSM link and ISRO, with a two way 
communication. Two Coastal Radars have been installe d off Chennai.  Data from two Bottom Pressure 
Recorders out of about 12 envisaged to be placed in the Indian Ocea n (Bay of Bengal & Arabian Sea),  
is being received.  Implementation is underway for strengthening of seismic network by establishing 17
broadband inter connected seismic stat ions for near  real time  m onitoring of Earthquakes  A Central 
Receiving Station will be  established at India Meteorological De partment at New Delhi with parallel
connectivity at INCOIS, Hyderabad.  Established V-SAT Communication at IN COIS for receiving real
time data from NIOT.  At pr esent real-time data is being received at INCO IS through V-SAT 
connectivity from tide gauges and Bottom pressure recorders.  
  
13.5     The Committee would like th e Ministry to put every possible efforts to see that the National
Early Warning System for tsunami and storm surge should be installed at I ndian National Centre fo r 
Ocean Information Services  (INCOIS), in Hyderabad, as per its schedule i.e. September, 2007, since
there is enough time to achieve the stipulated target  and Ministry would be able to make use of this
system to disseminate data to the concerned authorities as early as possible.   
  
14.       GAS HYDRATES & TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT FOR EXPLOITATION 
             
14.1     During the year 2007-08, activities relating to the Exploration of Gas H ydrates with the aim o f
identification of areas in the seas around India and for coring system development with a budget
allocation of Rs.10 crore will be carried out .  A programme of Comprehensive Swath Bathymetric 
survey with an allocation of Rs. 5 crore will be carried out with the aim to survey the Exclusive
Economic Zone to support the activities relating to exploration of non-living resources in this area.  
14.2     Last year the outlay was Rs. 30.00 crores. The Committee was given to understand that the lower 
outlay during 2007-08 is mainly due to  non-availability of a specialized seismic vessel for chartering 
owing to unforeseen global s purt in hydrocarbon exploration. Under technology development
component, a Remotel y Operated Submersible   (ROSUB-2500) was develo ped.  The s ystem would be 
Page 19 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

qualified upto   2500 m water de pths in phases. As a first phase, the system has been first tested at 250
m water depth off Mangalore.  A joint cruise was organized in November, 2006 on “Investigation of Gas 
Hydrates fields in Indian Ocean ” between Russian Academy of Sc iences, Russia and India. An Indo 
Russian seminar on gas hydrates was also organized at Chennai in February, 2007 to discuss the various
issues. 
14.3     Efforts have been renewed for chartering su itable research vessel. Te nder floated for chartering
suitable vessel for Gas hydrates consid ering high cost of   charter hi re.  The Ministry is exploring 
possibilities to install MCS system  on its research vessel for doing this  job and overcome this difficulty
in future.  
  
14.4     Objectives of the programme for this year are as follows: 
•        Identification of favourable areas for Gas Hydrates occurrences. Selection of 3-4 suitable areas. 
•        Application of state of art processing/modeling for resource evaluation. 
•        Quantification of gas reserves through rock physics based modeling 
•        To understand the genesis of hydrate formation 
•        To ascertain the nature and distribution of gas hydrates 
•        Recommendation of suitable sites for drilling; and 
z Ground truth validation (core drilling/logging) and technology development  
  
14.5     The Committee is of the view that gas hydrates have the potential of providing total energy
security to our nation. The Ministry in association with Centre for Scientific and Industrial Research and
other laboratories, should fo cus on scientific research with special  emphasis on resour ce evaluation and
environmental impacts and development of technology for detection and qualification of gas hydrates in
sediments. 
  
15.       NEW RESEARCH VESSEL  
15.1     During the year 2007-08, the allocation has been hiked to Rs. 10 0.00 crores as compared to last 
year’s Rs. 70.00 crores in B.E. stag e, which was significantly reduced to Rs. 55.00 crores in R.E. stage.
In response to a query  ra ised in this regard, the Ministry has stated that the savi ngs during the year 
2006-07 is mainly due to reduced rescheduling of payment for ac quiring the research vessel in
accordance with the finalized contract. The total fu nd requirement for acquisition of new vessel being
the same, the allocation during 2007-08 has been enhanced to Rs. 100.00 crores to meet the 
commitment. The outlay during 2007-08 would be required for completion of the project as per schedule
by the end of 2007. 
15.2     The Committee has been given to understand that the tota l fund requirement for acquisition o f 
new research vessel has remained same as last year’s and the reasons  furnished for the reduction in R.E.
stage has been attributed to resc heduling of payment for acquisition of research vessel in accordance
with the finalized contract. In view of the above, the Committee would like the Ministry to state reasons
for allocation of enhanced amount of Rs. 30 crores in place of Rs. 15 crores. The Committee would like
the Ministry to provide details in this regard.  The Committee recommends that Ministry may work hard
to launch the new research vessel in its stipulated time schedule i.e. by the end September, 2007 to avoid
project cost overrun. 
  
16.       MARINE RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT 
16.1     The objectives of the pr ogramme are to foster the concep t of stewardship through education,
training and human resource development and increasing awareness at all levels. The activities proposed
in the programme include promotion of research under the basic categories of marine ecology, marine
biology, marine microbiology, ma rine benthos, coastal marine  culture systems, marine
geology/geophysics and ocean engine ering & underwater robotics.  Besides the ongoing programme o f
award of fellowships to students  for pursuing higher studies in a cademic/educational institutions in
various disciplines of ocean science and technology, organizing exhibitions and fairs to create awareness
among the public on the oceans would continue. 
Page 20 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

  
16.2     The Scientific Research and Tec hnology Development program mes for exploration an d
sustainable use of the marine resources are multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional.  Basic research and 
developments are required in a wide spectrum of areas to gain adequate knowledge and expertise. 
Required infrastructure and trained personnel are essential for successfully  implementing different
programmes.  There is need for effective interaction between R&D institutions, academicians and
industries.  The sub-programmes under this programme are as under : 
(i)         Assessment of Marine Living Resources and FORV  
            (ii)        Drugs from Sea 
            (iii)       Assistance for Research Projects and Manpower Training 
            (iv)       Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS) 
            (v)        Ocean Awareness (Exhibitions & Fairs, Seminars/Symposia) 
(vi)       Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM) 
(vii)      Deep Sea Mineral Exploration 
            (viii)      BENFAN – project related to Bay of Bengal 
(ix)              Comprehensive Swath Bathymetry of Indian EEZ 
(x)                Gas Hydrates Exploration & Technology Development for Exploitation 
  
16.3     Under “Oceanographic Survey and Marine Living Resources”, the budget provisions are mainly 
for running operational and maintenance of Research Vessels- Fisheries Oceanographic Research Vessel 
(FORV) and Oceanographic Resear ch Vessel (ORV) and Marine Li ving Resources programmes. The
reason for decline in B.E. in 2007-08 compared to  2006-07 is mainly due to additional expenditure 
incurred for ORV Sagar Kanya, which had undergone a major retrof itting/ dry-docking during the yea r 
2005-06. Besides, due to reduced allocation for Ocean  Development activities, the budget size of ML R
programme has also been reduced.  The Ministry has taken steps to  expand further it s MLR activities
with more institutional participat ions during XI Plan period.   Howe ver, during the First Supplementary 
stage efforts would be made for the additional fund requirement to meet the gap.  
  
16.4     The FORV - Sagar Sampad a has been exclusively used to  meet the requirements towards 
implementation of Marine Living Resources progr amme. The vessel undert ook 14 cruises including 2
short calibration cruise, covering the Bay of Bengal (BOB), Arabian sea and Andaman waters, sailing a
total distance of 28,809 nm in 281 days of streaming and collecting data from 296  stations. 
  
16.5     Trawl surveys were conducted in the depth range 200 - 1000 m at 41 sta tions covering the east 
and south west coast of India and recorded a tota l of 77 species of deep-s ea fishes belonging to 51 
families of shrimp, deep-sea lobsters. The private trawlers based at Mangalo re have already starte d
exploiting these resources; 
  
16.6     Towards the development of indigenous electr onic tags for tracking tuna species, two tags with 
micro controller 16F88 containing speci al features such as low power consumption, built-in oscillator, 
low pin count, more program memory, etc. have been developed. These tags were fitted with light and
pressure sensors and were experimentally tested for its performance in air. 
16.7     The occurrences of algal blooms in the I ndian EEZ were monitored. Benthic productivity studies
were carried out at 30 stations al ong 5 transects each in the continental slope of BOB region and the
Arabian Sea.  
  
16.8     More than 500 oysters were collected unde r “Farming and Pearl Production in the Blacklip Pearl
Oyster project, for brood stock de velopment, nucleus implantation a nd studies on growth and fouling.
Surgical implantation trials were  carried out in more than 100 oysters. Presently 33 implanted oysters
are in stock.  
  
16.9     In addition, the Ministry has set up a Data and Referral Cent er at Centre for Marine Living 
Resources and Ecology (CMLRE) in Kochi. Phytop lankton, zooplankton, benthic organisms and deep-
sea fish samples collected during FORV cruises 165-243 were sorted to genus level and preserved at the
Page 21 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

Center in separate vials.  
  
16.10   The Committee notes with sa tisfaction that Fishery Oceanogr aphic Research Vessel (FORV)
Sagar Sampada had been extensively used last year to meet the re quirements of the Marine Living  
Resources programmes and undertook fourteen cruise s  and collected data from a large number o f 
stations. The Committee, however, feels that scientific facilities on board FORV Sagar Sampada may be
upgraded to international standards and must also be  used to promote mass aw areness of ocean related
activities. 
  
16.11   The Committee observes that the Ministry in accordance with the Ocean Policy statement 
enunciated by the Government of India during 1982, must lay emphasis on training of skilled manpower
in the ocean sector for creating self-reliant technologi cal base and encourag ing participation o f
scientists/technologists an d engineers in the program mes of ocean developmen t. It also feels that
Ministry should keep promoting basic and applied research in the area of o cean science and technology,
in academic institutions as well as national research institutes/organizations. 
  
17.       Three meteorological institutions ma inly devoted to Weathe r Modelling, viz India 
Meteorological Department (IM D), National Centre for Medi um Range Weather Forecasting 
(NCMRWF) and Indian Institute of  Tropical Meteorology (IITM) have been transferred to the newly
created Ministry of Earth Sciences since June, 2006. 
  
18.       INDIA METEOROLOGICAL DEPARTMENT 
18.1     India Meteorological Department (IMD) is one of the oldest scientific institutions of the country. 
It is the national agency for providing weather foreca st & cyclone warnings. It is also the nodal agency
for monitoring seismic activities in the country.  The main objectives of the Department lie in: 
Forecasting and provision of climatological statisti cs for operational planning in various field o f
Agriculture, Aviation, Water Cons ervation, Oceanography, Industries, Astronomy etc. It maintains a
network of large number of obser vatories for acquisition of surf ace and upper air weather data. It
specifically issues weather forecast and ti mely disaster warning of severe weathe r
conditions/phenomena including cycl ones; provides adequate aviati on meteorological services fo r
efficient air navigation as per mandatory requirements; provides inputs to Flood Forecasts and
advisories to Agricultural Planners, Fishermen, Mountaineers etc.  
  
18.2     The IMD has a network for monitoring Seismic activity over th e territory of India for locating 
intensity and centers of earthquakes and to understa nd their processes & mechanisms.  It has a networ k 
for monitoring ozone, acid precipitation, atmospheri c aerosol and Radiation which are all important
environmental indicators.  
  
18.3     It has its own workshop for manufacturi ng equipments that are deployed in the basic
observational network and procures  specialized equipment required for sophisticated monitoring and
analysis. It is the nodal agency in the country fo r calibration and standardiz ing of several types o f
meteorological equipment. It carri es out and promotes research and development work in Atmospheric
and Meteorological Sciences and im parts meteorological training to  persons of developing countries
under WMO programmes and to Departmental, State Government and Defense services personnel. 
  
18.4     The total outlay for 2007-08 has been fixed at Rs 453.67 crores.  Since India Meteorological
Department (IMD) being the nodal Government agency in the country responsible for making 
systematic observations of weathe r and climate and providing weather related warnings/forecasts to all
sectors of activity, it is proposed to upgrade/modernize th e observational netw ork and modeling
capability.  
   
18.5     IMD prepared detailed Preliminary Fe asibility Report which wa s submitted to Planning
Commission in August, 04.  Planning Commission ga ve guide-lines for mode rnization of IMD and 
advised the newly created Ministry of Earth Sciences in May’ 2006 to review the w hole proposal and 
take a holistic view of the plan by integrating the observational re quirements for oceans  as well. The 
Page 22 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

essential elements of the project are to. 
z Replacement of old manual observation equipments.  
z Networking of various observation systems to a Central Data Processing  
and Information System. 
z Integration of entire infrastructure & decision support system merging model output with synoptic 
reasoning  
z Visualization & dissemination of processed information in real time to users.  
z To undertake the above it is requi red to have the Super computi ng facility and continuous Human 
resource development.  
  
18.6     The Committee feels that on one side the occurren ce of cyclones is very frequent in coastal
regions of India and on the othe r monsoon is not regular.  Besi des, monsoon droughts over the Indian
subcontinent produce calamitous impacts on agriculture  and industry that cu t across all sectors o f
society. This requires setting up of  a network of Doppler Weather Ra dars and upgradation of computer
system along the coasts for accurate weather and rainfall prediction. The Committee would appreciate if
this is taken up on priority  and is linked with  the tsunami prediction mechan ism, which is likely to be
put in place in the near future. Th is would prove to be an effectiv e solution to problems faced due to
erratic weather phenomena.  
  
18.7     The Committee desires that the assurances  made by the Ministry of Earth Sciences, during
interaction with the Committee re garding bringing India Meteorologica l Department (IMD) at par with
world-class weather forecasting network in next two-  three years should be realized and not just remain 
an assurance.  
  
 
Page 23 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

19.       INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TROPICAL METEOROLOGY 
19.1     The Indian Institute of Tropical Mete orology (IITM), Pune esta blished in 1962 has been 
functioning as a national centre for basic and applied research in m onsoon meteorology of the tropics in
general and with special referen ce to India and neighbourhood. Its br oad objective is to enhance the
knowledge in atmospheric sciences  by identifying, planning and c onducting research programmes on
problems of national and in ternational importance. Th e Institute has made signi ficant contributions in
the challenging areas of the Atmospheric Sc iences like weather forecasting, climatology,
hydrometeorology, monsoon, climate mo delling, climate change, cloud ph ysics, weather modification,
atmospheric chemistry, atmospheric electricity, instrumentation for the observational studies and studies
relating to land surface processes. The IITM provides its input to th e India Meteorological Department
for the national forecast of seasonal monsoon rain fall of the country. Th e Institute has built up
importance and expertise for the st udy of atmospheric sciences in In dia and for application of the
knowledge as a national resource in terms of weather, climate and related atmospheric processes. 
  
19.2     An important national need is to have re liable extended range predic tion of the monsoon and to 
establish India’s stand on a variet y of issues related to global wa rming and climat e change. While 
recognizing this need, it is  also recognized that basic research is crucial for improving any prediction
capability. Keeping this national n eed in mind while nurturing some of the existing projects on basic
research, a new programme on “Cli mate Dynamics and Extended Range Prediction of Monsoon” has 
been proposed in the   XI th Five Plan of the Institute. Total Al locations for all schemes of IITM , Pune
during 2007-08 is Rs. 17 crores. 
  
19.3 Proposed areas of research and schemes  
z A system for long range prediction of seasona l mean monsoon and extended range prediction o f 
active/break spells is proposed to be developed.  
•        Estimation of monsoon climate under different climate change scenarios is proposed. 
z A focused observational and modeling effort to improve understandi ng of clouds and its 
interaction with environment leading to precipitation is proposed.  
z A large pool of trained manpower  on specialized area is requi red for success of the above 
programmes. A multi pronged approach to build this manpower is proposed.  
z An appropriate computing system with very high number of crunching capability and having large 
memory, automatic data storage and retrieval system with sufficient storage capacity is proposed.  
  
19.4     The Committee observes that prediction of duration of Indian summer monsoon breaks is highly 
desirable. It is required by fa rming communities to plan water resource ma nagement, sowing and
harvesting activities. It recommends  that Indian Institute of Tropica l Meteorology (IITM)  has to widen
its objectives and scope of research  activities to meet th e critical challenges a nd the national needs fo r
providing information relating to various aspects of atmosphere a nd the increasing concern among the
Government and general public about a variety of environmental issues. 
  
20.       NATIONAL CENTRE FOR MEDIUM RANGE FORECASTING 
20.1     The National Centre For Medium Range Forecasting (NCMRWF) wa s created as a mission 
mode project of the Government in 1988 and conti nues to function in the sa me mode. The mandate o f
the Centre was to provide medium range location specific forecasts to farm ers through development o f
Agro-Advisory Service for the 127 Agro-climatic zones(ACZ) of th e country. In this regard the
NCMRWF has established links with different Agri cultural Universities and Indian Council o f
Agricultural Research (ICAR) research centres spread across the country. 
  
20.2     Noting the complex nature of the problem, to provide forecasts beyond a couple of days, an end-
to-end Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) system based on a global Atmospheric General Circulation 
Model (AGCM) was implemented and made operational in June 1994. This involved use of voluminous
global meteorological and oceanographic data, their assimilation to provide initial conditions, numerical
models, and high end com puting resources. The atmos pheric data for the modelin g activity is provided
Page 24 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

by IMD, which it gets through the Global Tele communication Hub of the World Meteorological
Organization. The NWP system  generates forecasts up to seven days in advance. Over a period of time
Agromet Advisory Service (AAS) Units were started and until March 2006, 107 units have been opened.
Presently forecasts in respect of meteorological parameters relevant for planning agricultural operations
are provided up to 4 days  in advance twice a week to these uni ts which formulate Agromet Advisories
based on these forecasts. Only 20 units remain to be opened for which sites have already been identified
and efforts are on to make them f unctional. Forecasts over the country up to a week in advance are also
being provided to Crop Weather Watch Group in the Mini stry of Agriculture. Th e project has fulfilled
the given mandate.  
  
20.3     The Committee feels that the thrust of w eather forecasting should be  on its accuracy and there 
is a need to ensure higher degree of precision in our  weather       foreca sting system. The Ministry 
should consider enhanci ng the accuracy of the forecasts by c onstantly upgrading the techniques and 
models of prediction with the use of available, reliable and accurate satellite data and techniques.  
  
21.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Earth Sciences and assessing the 
progress of various important programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends 
that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 887 crores, as  sought by the Ministry for the year 2007-08, under 
Demand No. 29, may be approved. 
SUMMERY OF RECOMMENDATIONS 
  
1.         While agreeing with the reasons furnishe d by the Ministry in respec t of less expenditure during 
the first quarter, the Committee feels that Ministry must plan its programmes in such a manner that it
may utilize maximum percentage of allocated budget in the financial year itself so that there should be
minimum carry forward of the unspe nt balance to the next financia l year. Therefore, the Committee
recommends that there should be regular infusion of funds in various schemes/projects in all the quarters
of the financial year and it should also evolve a suitable mechanism in this regard to avoid such situation
in the XIth Five Year Plan.(Para 6.5) 
2.         The Committee expresses its dissatisf action on the Ministry’s rep lies in providing same old 
excuses like delay in acquiring cl earances, procurement and installati on of technological systems, non-
availability of research vessel and other such procedural delays for di sproportionate va riations in the 
utilisation of alloca ted funds under various progra mmes. This reflects the serious instances of bad 
planning and management on the part of Ministry. The Committee is of  the view that Ministry should 
strategically plan all its act ivities to avoid such administrative dela ys in future as fa r as possible and 
should also aspire for timely implementation of all the major schemes/projects.                      
                                                   (Para  7.3) 
3.         The Committee has observed that allo cation of funds under the “Manpower Training” is 
negligible, in spite of the fact that imparting training to its manpow er especially scientists/technologist
should be one of the major objectiv e of the Ministry as unskilled or  under-skilled man power could not 
result in the high quality performan ce.  A lot of strength in terms of manpower and the areas of strength 
are being slowly eroded.   Moreover, in most of  the institution, substitutions in terms of manpowe
r
requirements are not there.  The Committee observes that there is a need to look at this aspect more so in
the context of the maintaining the classical stre ngth of the sciences.  Th e Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to evolve  a well-planned mechanism in this regard and make sure that funds
allocation must be made as per it s requirements.                                                                             (P ara  
8.7) 
  
4.         The Committee during its interaction w ith the Secretary, Ministry  of Earth Sciences had 
observed that there is stagnation in the scientific fi elds and there is lack of  promotional avenues. The
Committee strongly advocates the Ministry to initiate a comprehensive programme, which would have a
positive impact on scientific fraternity and will keep them motivated to aspire for higher achievements. 
      (Para 8.8) 
Page 25 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

5.         The Committee appreciates the research wo rk carried out by the Minist ry in the Antarctica. The
Committee feels that given the extrem ity of the prevailing situation in this continent, the Ministry has
taken the initiative for the scientific exploration in such extreme cold conditions. The Committee desires
that Ministry should undertake ev ery possible institutional and l ogistic activity in respect o f
establishment of the third permanen t Indian Base in the Larsemann Ranges and it may also aspire fo r
yielding positive results, as a substantial amount of fund has been approved towards National Centre for
Antarctic & Ocean Re search (NCAOR) for such activities. Ho wever, notwithstanding different surveys
involved, some target date should be  fixed for completing the task undert aken, as in the absence of any
time frame, the project may loose the importance and urgency that is called for. 
(Para 9.5)
6.         Environmental change and variability are part of the natural pa ttern on Earth. However, 
environmental changes currently witnessed in the polar region are in many ways more pronounced than
changes observed in the mid-latitude s or tropical regions. So me ice shelves in An tarctica are retreating 
and thinning, glaciers are shrinking and in turn it is bearing effect on ecosystems. The Committee would
like the Ministry to carry out re search and studies regarding impact  of such climatic changes on human
race. The Committee would al so like to know the Mini stry’s plans about partic ipation in International 
Polar Year (IPY) 2007-2008 as na tions around the world are making plans to participate in it.  
                                          (Para 9.6) 
7.         The Committee recommends that two new schemes, viz Expedition to Arctic and Ice-class 
Research Vessel, which have  been proposed in the XI th Five Year Plan, shoul d be pursued in a well-
planned and strategic manner.                           (Para 9.7) 
  
  
8.         The reason furnished by the Ministry fo r reduction of allocation during the year 2006-07 in R.E. 
stage is mainly due to non-availa bility of research vessel for de monstration of shallow bed mining
system and teething problems at commissioning of Ferrow-Silico Ma nganese pilot plant at National 
Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur. In the last year’s report on demands for grants the Committee 
had recommended the Ministry to avoid such procedural delays which result in non-utilisation of budget 
in fruitful manner.  Consequently, in its action taken notes on the abov e-mentioned report, the Ministry 
had stated that such delays would be avoided in fu ture. However, the same reasons have been furnished
this year also. This reflects the lackadaisical attitude adopted by the Mi nistry about fulfilling its
commitment. The Committee once again reiterates that Ministry must a pproach its projects in result-
oriented method and shoul d not rely on such excuses for non-per formance and giving stero-type reply 
every year on one issue or the
other.                                                                                                                   (Para 10.5) 
9.         The Committee commends the activities of  the Ministry in creating the requisite infrastructure
for carrying out technology developm ent in the island for the benefi t of island community, monitoring
the health of seas and initiati on of programmes such as mud crab farming, open sea cage culture o
f
lobsters and usage of fish aggreg ation devices which resulted in the overall economi c development o f
island and coastal community. It desires that Mini stry should strive for developing technologies to
facilitate the dissemination of data /dat a products to user communities.       
                                                                                                (Para 11.6)        
10.       The Committee observes that developi ng technology for mining of  manganese nodules from 
Central Indian Ocean Basin (CIO B) from depth of 6000 m and devel opment and test of the underwate r
mining system for long-term opera tion by using Dynamic Positioning System are potential objectives 
for the Ministry under the National Institute of O cean Technology programme. The Committee is of the
view that the long-term planning a nd effective implementation methods may be devised by the Ministry 
in this direction and it must see that this should be one of the pr ioritized areas of the
Ministry.                                                                (Para 11.7) 
  
11.       The Committee also desires that  the 10 MLD barge mounted Desalination Plant of f 
Chennai/Ennore should be  commissioned and o perationalised at the earliest for which a bud getary
Page 26 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

allocation of Rs. 10 crores has been made in the year 2007-08. The Committee also recommends that the 
Ministry must work hard to make such plant cost ef fective so that more and more such plants could be
installed, since in the long run, it will be major source of providing safe drinking water to the
communities living around the coastal areas.                                                  (Para 11.8) 
12.       The Committee feels that the Minist ry did not put enough effo rts to procure the High
Performance Computing System as per schedule and its procur ement has been postponed. The
Committee also feels that Ministry should have planne d its actions well in advance so as to avoid this
non-utilsation of funds and it  must also be aware of the fact that delay in procurement of system coul d
lead to cost escalation and project could fa ll prey to cost overrun.                                                    (Para 
12.3) 
13.       The Committee has been informed by the Ministry that a substant ial amount of Rs. 35 crores
have been earmarked for the Indi an National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS). The
Committee recommends that services from INCO IS may be optimally us ed to provide ocean
information and advisory services  to society, industry, government agencies and scientific community
through sustained ocean observations, information management, modeling and constant improvements
through systematic and focussed research.                          (Para 12.4) 
14.       The Committee would like the Ministry to put every possible efforts to see that the National
Early Warning System for tsunami and storm surge should be installed at I ndian National Centre fo
r 
Ocean Information Services  (INCOIS), in Hyderabad, as per its schedule i.e. September, 2007, since
there is enough time to achieve the stipulated target  and Ministry would be able to make use of this
system to disseminate data to the concerned authorities as early as possible.       (Para 13.5) 
15.       The Committee is of the view that gas hydrat es have the potential of providing total energy
security to our nation. The Ministry in association with Centre for Scientific and Industrial Research and
other laboratories, should fo cus on scientific research with special  emphasis on resour ce evaluation and
environmental impacts and development of technology for detection and qualification of gas hydrates in
sediments.                                                          (Para 14.5) 
  
16.       The Committee has been given to understa nd that the total fund re quirement for acquisition o f 
new research vessel has remained same as last year’s and the reasons  furnished for the reduction in R.E.
stage has been attributed to resc heduling of payment for acquisition of research vessel in accordance
with the finalized contract. In view of the above, the Committee would like the Ministry to state reasons
for allocation of enhanced amount of Rs. 30 crores in place of Rs. 15 crores. The Committee would like
the Ministry to provide details in this regard.  The Committee recommends that Ministry may work hard
to launch the new research vessel in its stipulated time schedule i.e. by the end September, 2007 to avoid
project cost overrun.                                                                                (Para 15.2) 
17.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that Fishery Oceanographic Research Vessel (FORV)
Sagar Sampada had been extensively used last year to meet the re quirements of the Marine Living  
Resources programmes and undertook fourteen cruise s  and collected data from a large number o f 
stations. The Committee, however, feels that scientific facilities on board FORV Sagar Sampada may be
upgraded to international standards and must also be  used to promote mass aw areness of ocean related
activities.                                                             (Para 16.10) 
18.       The Committee observes that the Minist ry in accordance with the Ocean Policy statement 
enunciated by the Government of India during 1982, must lay emphasis on training of skilled manpower
in the ocean sector for creating self-reliant technologi cal base and encourag ing participation o f
scientists/technologists an d engineers in the program mes of ocean developmen t. It also feels that
Ministry should keep promoting basic and applied research in the area of o cean science and technology,
in academic institutions as well as national research institutes/organizations.                   (Para 16.11) 
19.       The Committee feels that  on one side the occurren ce of cyclones is very frequent in coastal
regions of India and on the othe r monsoon is not regular.  Besi des, monsoon droughts over the Indian
subcontinent produce calamitous impacts on agriculture  and industry that cu t across all sectors o f
society. This requires setting up of a network of Do ppler Weather Radars and u pgradation of computer
Page 27 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

system along the coasts for accurate weather and rainfall prediction. The Committee would appreciate if
this is taken up on priority  and is linked with  the tsunami prediction mechan ism, which is likely to be
put in place in the near future. Th is would prove to be an effectiv e solution to problems faced due to
erratic weather phenomena.                                                                                       (Para 18.6) 
20.       The Committee desires that the assuranc es made by the Ministry of Earth Sciences, during
interaction with the Committee re garding bringing India Meteorologica l Department (IMD) at par with
world-class weather forecasting network in next tw o- three years should be realized and not just remain 
an assurance.                                                                                                               (Para 18.7) 
21.       The Committee observes that prediction of  duration of Indian summer monsoon breaks is highly 
desirable. It is required by fa rming communities to plan water resource ma nagement, sowing and
harvesting activities. It recommends  that Indian Institute of Tropica l Meteorology (IITM)  has to widen
its objectives and scope of research  activities to meet th e critical challenges a nd the national needs fo r
providing information relating to various aspects of atmosphere a nd the increasing concern among the
Government and general public a bout a variety of environmental issues.                                           
                                         (Para 19.4) 
22.       The Committee feels that the thrust of weather forecasting should be  on its accuracy and there 
is a need to ensure higher degree of precision in our  weather       foreca sting system. The Ministry 
should consider enhanci ng the accuracy of the forecasts by c onstantly upgrading the techniques and 
models of prediction with th e use of available, reliable and accurate satellite data and 
techniques.                                                                                                         (Para 20.3) 
23.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Earth Sciences and assessing the 
progress of various important programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends 
that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 887 crores, as  sought by the Ministry for the year 2007-08, under 
Demand No. 29, may be approved.       (Para 21) 
MINUTES 
XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 3rd April, 2007 in Room No. 139, First
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
  
PRESENT       
  
1.   Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Dr. Prabha Thakur  
3. Shri Suryakanthbhai Acharya  
4. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi  
5. Shri Saman Pathak  
6. Shri Jabir Husain  
7. Dr. Barun Mukherjee  
  
LOK  SABHA 
  
8. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty  
9. Shri Thupstan Chhewang  
10. Shri Francis Fanthome  
11. Shri Babubhai K. Katara  
Page 28 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

12. Shri Brahmananda Panda  
13. Smt. Neeta Pateriya  
14. Shri Pratik Prakashbapu Patil  
15. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat    
16. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”  
17. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar  
18. Shri Mitrasen Yadav  
19. Shri Sita Ram Yadav  
   
             
            Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
  
            Representatives of the Ministry of Earth Sciences 
  
1.      Dr. P.S. Goel, Secretary, 
2.      Shri Prakash Kumar, Joint Secretary (Admn.) 
3.      Shri S.K. Das, Scientist ‘G’ 
4.      Dr. B.R. Subramaniam, Scientist ‘G’ 
5.   Shri Rasik Ravindra, Director, NCAOR, Goa 
6.   Prof. B.N. Goswami, Director, IITM 
7.      Shri Dinesh Kumar, Director (F) 
8.      Shri R.C. Bhatia, DG, IMD 
9.      Shri Dr. S. Kathiroli, Director, NIOT, Chennai 
10.  Dr. Shailesh Nayak, Director, INCOIS, Hyderabad 
11.  Shri A.K. Bhatnagar, Addl. DG, IMD 
12.  Dr. A.K.Bohra, Director, NCMRWF 
13.  Dr. Swati Basu, Scientist ‘G’ 
  
*                                                           *                                               *            
2.         The Chairman welc omed the Secretar y and other official s of the Ministr y of Earth
Sciences and requested the Secretary to ma ke a presentation on Demands for Grants   (2007-08)
of the Ministry.   Thereafter, the Secretary made a 
visual presentation regarding the major ac tivities formulated for the year 2007-08 and
achievements of the Ministry during the year 2006-07.  He also mentioned about the budgetary
allocations under different heads as also the functioning of the Ministry.  Thereafter, Members
sought clarifications on the points that emer ged out of the presen tation. The Secretary replied
to them. 
            The officials then withdrew.  
3.         *                                               *                                               * 
4.         *                                               *                                               *   
             A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 05.30 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday,
the 4th April, 2007. 
_______________________________________________________________________ 
*** Relate to other matters
SECRETARIAT 
Page 29 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm

XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
            The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Friday, the 20 th April, 2007 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
            PRESENT 
1. Shri P.G. Narayanan  -----    Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Kamal Akhtar  
3. Shri Jabir Husain  
4. Dr. Barun Mukherjee  
  
LOK SABHA 
5. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty  
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang  
7. Shri Francis Fanthome  
8. Shri Brahmananda Panda  
9. Shri Pratik Prakashbapu Patil  
10. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat  
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli  
12. Shri Mitrasen Yadav  
  
SECRETARIAT 
  
Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
  
2.         The Committee took-up for consideration its draft ***, ***, ***, 173 rd, ***, *** and *** Reports on
the Demands for Grants (2007-2008) pertainin g to the ***, ***, ***, Ministries of Earth Sciences, ***, ***
and *** respectively. The Committee adopted all the reports with some minor changes.   
3.         *                                                           *                                                           * 
  
4.         The Committee also decided to present all the seven reports (170 th to 176 th) on 26 th
April, 2007 in both the Houses of Parliament. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in
his absence Dr. Barun Mukherjee to present the reports in Ra jya Sabha and to lay the copies of
the reports on the table of Lok Sabha b y Dr. Su jan Chakrabort y and in his absence b y Shri
Thupstan Chhewang. 
  
5.         *                                                           *                                                           * 
  
6.         The Committee then adjourned at 12.05 p.m.  
  
________________________________________________________________________ 
*** Relate to other matters. 
 
# Smt.Viplove Thakur ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 30th November, 2006 
* Shri Rampal Singh Nominated  to the Committee w.e.f. 8th  December, 2006. 
Page 30 of 30173rd Report Of COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT ...
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/173rdreport.htm