PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
  
ONE HUNDRED THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORTS 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT ON 
 THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED  
TWENTY-EIGHTH REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE 
AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS ON THE 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-2005) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT  
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 17TH MARCH, 2005) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 17TH MARCH, 2005) 
  
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MARCH, 2005/PHALGUNA, 1926 (SAKA) 
____________________________________________________________________________________________________ _
Page 1 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

CONTENTS 
  
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2004) 
     1.   Shri P.G. Narayanan  — Chairman 
           RAJYA SABHA 
     2.   Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
     3.   Dr. Prabha Thakur 
     4.   Shri Jaswant Singh 
     5.   Shri Dilip Singh Judev 
     6.   Dr. Biplab Dasgupta 
     7.   Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
     8.   Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
     9.   Shrimati Kum Kum Rai 
   10.   Shri Birabhadra Singh 
           LOK SABHA 
   11.   Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal 
   12.   Shri Jasubhai D. Barad 
   13.   Shri Sujan Chakraborty 
   14.   Shri Pankaj Chaudhery 
   15.   Shri Mohan S. Delkar 
   16.   Shri Anantrao Gudhe 
   17.   Shri Babubhai Katara 
   18.   Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
   19.   Shri Brahmananda Panda 
   20.   Shrimati Neeta Pateriya 
   21.   Shri Bachi Singh Rawat 
   22.   Shri K.C.Singh Baba 
   23.   Shrimati Jayaben Thakkar 
   24.   Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
   25.   Dr. Ramlakhan Singh 
   26.   Shri D. Venugopal 
   27.   Shri Sita Ram Yadav 
   28.   Shri V. Aruna Kumar 
*29.   Shri Rakesh Singh  
#30.   Shri Shivajirao A. Patil  
@31.  Shri Francis Fanthome 
           SECRETARIAT 
           Shri N.C. Joshi. Additional Secretary 
           Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
           Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
           Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
           Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
           Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
2. INTRODUCTION 
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
4. MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
Page 2 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

* Nominated w.e.f. 13th August, 2004. 
 
# Nominated w.e.f. 20th August, 2004.  
@ Nominated w.e.f. 25th February, 2005. 
____________________________________________________________________________________
INTRODUCTION 
         I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on Science and 
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been au thorised by the Committe e to present the Report
on its behalf, present this One H undred Thirty-eighth Report on the Action Taken by the Department o f
Ocean Development on the recommenda tions contained in One Hundred  Twenty-eighth Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Ocean Development. 
2.      The Report of the Committee deals with  the Action Taken by th e Department of Ocean
Development on the recommendations  contained in the One Hundred Twenty-e ighth Report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and 
Forests on the Demands for Gr ants (2004-05) of the Depart ment of Ocean Development 
which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th August, 2004. 
3.      There are twenty-two recommandations c ontained in the One Hundred  Twenty-eighth Report o f 
the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the
Department on 27th December, 2004. 
4.    In the meeting held on 14th March,  2005 the Committee considered the draft Action
Taken Report and adopted the same. 
 
____________________________________________________________________________________
REPORT 
        The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by th e Department of Ocean
Development on the recommendations  contained in the One Hundred Twenty-e ighth Report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Co mmittee on Science & T echnology, Environment &
Forests on the Demands for Grants  (2004-05) of the Department of Ocean Development which was
presented/laid to/in Parliament on 26th August, 2004. There were twenty-two recommendations 
contained in the Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the
Committee were received from the Department of Ocean Development on 27thDecember, 2004 
        The Committee’s recommendations, Action Taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the
Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development are set out in the succeeding paragraphs:— 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2004-05  
Recommendation 
        The Committee observes that ther e were major variations in th e budgetary allocations and thei r
utilization. The non-utilisation of the allocation meant less or reduced activities of the Department. The 
Committee feels that the Departme nt should have foreseen the re asons advanced by it for the non-
utilisation of funds befo re asking for budgetary allocation and s hould have evolved suitable mechanism
to monitor the budgetary proposal and its allocations.               (Para 8) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        The Bud get Estimates of the Depa rtment are prepared b y the Inte grated Finance Division on the
NEW DELHI;  
March, 14th2005 
P.G. NARAYANAN,
 Chairman,
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.. 
Page 3 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

basis of input received from the Programme Divisions/O fficers and then submit ted to Ministry o f
Finance for taking approval from competent authority. The estimates are revised at RE stage by Ministry
of Finance as an executive ex ercise every year holding discus sions on the expenditure trend vis-s-vis
requirement projected. 
Comments 
        The Committee observes that th e Department should review the whole planning and budgetary
process by keeping in mind the long te rm policy perspective so that an y reduction at R.E. stage can be
avoided. 
POLAR SCIENCE (ANTARCTIC RESEARCH) PROGRAMME 
Recommendation 
        Exploration of the icy continent is a challenging task before the Department. The Committee feels 
given the extremity of the prevailing situation in this continent of ice, Department has taken the real pain
to embark upon a formidable task of initiating scientific experi ments in extreme conditions. Although
the Committee is fully convinced about the quality of  the research work undertaken till date in this
uninhabited and inhospitable mass of ice land, it feels the following areas of research should be given
more attention due to their global, social, medical, scientific and economic importance: 
           (a)    Studies on evolution of Antarctic Glaciology; 
           (b)   Studies on ozone hole issues; 
           (c)    Studies in geological and geophysical investigation of the Schirmacher Oasis 
and Orwin and Wolhthat mountains; 
           (d)   Studies about Antarctic microbe s specially cynobacteria with  special reference to thei r
survivality rate in extreme co ld situation so that any ne w knowledge about the process o f 
biological withstanding of extreme low temperat ure could be utilized for Indian defence 
personnel staying in Siachen Glacier; 
           (e)    Studies in Antarctic pollution; 
           (f)    Studies in Krill biology; and 
           (g)    Studies in auroral phenomenon. 
        The Committee while strongly recommending basic and in depth research es in these fields urges
the Department to uphold its commitment to pr otect the pristine nature of the Continent.
                                                               (Para 17) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        The Indian Research Station is bei ng maintained according to protocol on Environmental
Protection to Antarctic Treaty, wh ich states that the waste management strategy is worked out in
accordance with the various recommendations of An tarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting (ATCMs) and
also on the principles as agreed by the Consultativ e Parties. The station is equipped with a treatment
plant and incinerator. 
        Further, regular cleaning in and around Mait ri is carried out under the supervision of Leader and
designated Environmental Officer. The solid waste collected is segregated and brought back for prope r
disposal and recycling as applicab le. The station is regularly insp ected by a team of  international
inspectors and the last repo rt of the inspection in January, 2001 stat ed that the site had a very orderly
appearance and the personnel showed dedication and commitment. 
        Research in the areas/fields suggested by the Hon’ ble Committee has al ready been/is being 
conducted as per the mandated/approved Antarctic programme. 
Page 4 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

Comments 
        The Committee finds the reply of the Department evasive, as nothi ng in detail has been mentione d
about the areas of research suggested by it. The Committee would, therefore, like to know the views o f
the Department on its suggestions. 
Recommendation 
        The Committee hopes that sustained efforts of the Department in the direction of setting up new
station will yield positive results. However, notwithstanding different surveys involved, some target date
should be fixed for comple ting the task undertaken. In the absence of any time frame, it may lose the
importance and urgency that is called for.              (Para 18) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        The location of new site as proposed af ter preliminary survey carri ed out during XXIII Indian
Antarctic Expedition in early 2004 is near Latitude 69° South and Longitude 76°  East. The Department 
is in the initial stages of survey of the selected site, which is required to be  assessed for environmental
parameters as mandated under the Envi ronmental Protocol of the Antarcti c Treaty and also for logistics
and scientific considerations. The Department is working in a planned way, keeping in view the logistics
constraints and pre-requis ite of Environmental Imp act Assessment (EIA) etc.  for obtaining necessary 
approvals of the ATCMfor establishing the new station. 
Comments 
        The Committee notes the reply. 
POLYMETALLIC NODULES (PMN) PROGRAMME  
Recommendation 
        Although, the Committee is ha ppy with the contents and performance of projects unde r 
Polymetallic Nodules Programme of Department, it is, however, s ceptical about the Department’s 
assessment about the preservation of environmental norms for optimal sea ecology at the mining site. 
        The Committee is of the opinion that be fore a comprehensive planni ng is undertaken for on-site 
mining of nodule, the Department should prepare an experimental chart about the precise disturbance of
the sea floor at the mining area to  assess its geological and ecologi cal conditions. The Committee feels
that while organisms would be de stroyed in the mined area undisturbe d areas would remain because o f
the complex terrain of sea bed which could serve as  biological reservoir for recolonizing the destroyed
section.                                                                                                        (Para 22) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        Noted. The Department is undertaki ng a well-defined component on Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) pertaining to th e mining of polymetallic nodules from seabed. The experiment o f
precise disturbance on the sea fl oor has been conducted in a si mulated environment and various
geological, ecological and biologica l parameters are being monitored vis-a-vis the pre disturbance 
environment. A chart for monitori ng the parameters has been prepar ed and recolonisation studies are
also being carried out as a part  of EIA study. The study is being c onducted by scientists from National
Institute of Oceanography, Goa. Furthe r, there is an identified refere nce area which is not disturbed to
monitor the natural conditions. 
Comments 
        The Committee notes the reply and is  of the view that efforts to  extract polymetallic manganese 
nodules from deep sea bed be assessed from the point of view of  its impact on the ocean environment.
Besides, the Department should ensure that all guidelines for envir onmental improvement as
recommended in Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) are strictly implemented. 
Recommendation 
Page 5 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

        The Committee is of the opinion that dangers arising from the re lease of underlying heavy metals 
when the upper sediment layer is removed, could change or disrupt geochemical systems that has been
stabilized over geological time, possibly creating zones of reduce d oxygen where life would become
impossible. 
        The Committee, therefore, feels that before mining is initiated, Department must examine the effect
of mining on local animals at the site caused by dragging of plough acr oss the bottom to stimulate the
effects of nodule mining on the sea bed, including the rates at which animals of the same species
returned to the disturbed area. The study should be done in this respect on mega fauna animals large
enough to be seen at th e ocean bottom. The Committee is of the opinion that the effe cts of mining will
be greatest on the sea sponges that liv ed directly on the nodules because their habitat will be completely
destroyed. Other free swimming spec ies will suffer a considerable re duction in numbers due to serious
disruption in food supply. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that from emerging picture above the
evaluation of bio-threat exposed by sea bed mining is indispensable to  be addressed thoroughly before 
venturing into mining operation and the Committee feels that any such  evaluation is difficult without
better knowledge of the organisms living at the mining site and the eco-system in which they function. It 
is quite apparent that animals at the site area would be killed by the impact of the mining vehicle and by
resettlement of the sediment cloud that impact of the mining vehicle will raise from the sea floor. 
        Another potential effect of mining on th e ocean floor is the bringi ng up of unwanted materials
during a mining operation i.e. sediments, trace metals from nodul e waste and cold and nutrient rich
bottom water into the upper ocean. Owing to this probl em, the Committee feels that deep or mid ocean
level will be most desirable area for discharging of  miners waste as it would not be harmful to the
environment.   
                                                                                                                                               (Para 23) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        Noted. Comprehensive study on biodivers ity of meiofuna, macrofauna, megafauna has been
undertaken in the entire nodule area in the Central Indi an Ocean Basin to assess their distribution and
their association with the nodules. This will help in  predicting the potential impact and in devising
methods for their conservation a nd recolonisation. Also, the studies  on environmental variability
associated with nodules deposits are being undertaken to address the problem of heavy metals, dissolved
oxygen etc. 
Comments 
        While the Committee notes the reply, it would appreciate sustained ef forts on the part of the
Department to review the performance of studies being undertaken by the Department. 
Recommendation 
        The Committee further feels th at burial sensitivity of sea bed organisms i.e. the consequences o f 
dumping a layer of sediment on t op of them as a direct reperc ussion of mining should be studied
thoroughly by Department as lesson for Environmental Im pact Assessment of sea- bed mining. The 
Committee feels such studies c ould be undertaken by the Depart ment through Remotely Operated
Vehicle (ROV). 
        The Committee, ther efore recommends that Department should undertake cr itical assessment o f
different mining technique s and their subsequent effects on Geochemistry  and Ocean Biology and
Department should generate reliable data fo r determining the optimal mining techniques i.e. ideal 
extractive metallurgy to minimize environmental impacts. 
        The Committee, therefore strongly reco mmends for constant assessm ent of environmental impact
of deep sea-mining by Department before venturing into actual mi ning operation keeping the following 
into consideration for a meaningful assessment of the impact:- 
           (a)    Biodiversity, species ranges and rates of gene flow in the nodule areas; 
           (b)   Burial sensitivit y of dee p-sea animals and their res ponse to the t ype of disturbance cause d
Page 6 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

when nodules are scrapped from the sea floor, as well as  recovery of marine organisms in space and
time; 
           (c)    Impact on ocean column by rising unwanted materials from mining operation located above
a mine site; 
           (d)   Natural variability in deep ocean ecosystems over space and time; 
           (e)    Access to sea bed data wh ich may be generated by Cent ral Data Repository under the
control of Department for accurate assessmen t of environment for determining the choice o f 
correct mining technique; and 
           (f)    Month to month, year to year and place to place ch anges to be invest igated as a furthe r
means of understanding the environmen t in which deep sea mining will 
operate.                                                        (Para 24) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        Yearly monitoring of the site which wa s experimentally disturbed is underway of which three
observations have been completed and further observations are propos ed to be carried out in the
forthcoming year at the disturban ce as well as at the reference si te to evaluate the processes o f
restoration and recolonisation of the seafloor environment and also the natural changes. This is projected
as a part of 10th Plan. Further studies will be planned on the basis of data collected and the observations,
if required. This data will be made available for designing the mining system and deciding the
operations. 
Comments 
        The Committee notes the reply.  
Recommendation 
        The Committee also recommends that apart fr om the mining of Polymetallic Nodules, the 
Department should also thoroughly assess the potentials of mining Hydrothermal Polymetallic Sulphides
and Cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts from the Ocean bed keeping in view the export potentials of such
metals in the international market.  (Para 25) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        Noted. A project has been initiated for the study of Cobalt-rich crusted seamounts in the northern 
Indian Ocean. 
Comments 
        The Committee notes the reply and desires that the project should be regularly monitored. 
DRUGS FROM SEA  
Recommendation 
        The Committee notes with sati sfaction that under the Drugs from the Sea Programme, the
Department is in the process of doing a commenda ble work. The Committee is happy with the fact that
various steps have been taken by the Department for identificati on of numerous marine organisms
showing enormous potential for extraction of such drugs as are anti-diabetic, anti-viral, anti-fungal, anti-
cholesterol and spermicidal agents for developing new drugs.                   (Para 28) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        Two marine compounds are in advanced  stage of drug development with special emphasis on
safety pharmacology and toxicologi cal studies. An anti-diabetic co mpound has already entered into 
phase-I clinical tr ial in two hospitals under the coordinati on of Central Drug Research Institute, 
Lucknow after necessary approval of  DCGI. The coordinator and Dire ctor, CDRI, Lucknow is working
for involving pharmaceutical industry in the venture for successful foll ow-up and transfer of technology 
for commercialization of drugs from the marine resources with the assi stance of Department of Ocean
Development. 
Page 7 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

        The Committee for the Purpose of Cont rol and Supervision of Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA)
has now given clearance for conducting chronic toxicity  studies in monkeys for the anti-hyperlipidemic 
compound. The study is in progress as per the schedul e and expected to be completed in March, 2005.
The safety toxicity study would provide another drug from the marine resources. 
Comments 
        The Committee appreciates the efforts being made by the Department in a ugmenting its efforts in
collection, identification and bio-evaluation of marine flora and fauna from Indian Coast. 
Recommendation 
        The Committee, however, feels that despite these initiatives by the Department, there is still enough
scope left for extraction of potentially anti-cancerous drugs from the depth of the ocean. The Committee
is of the opinion that pharmaceutical uses of mic ro-algae which are a grea t source of unexplored 
chemical compounds, are ex tremely beneficial for a possible s ource of noble drugs. Micro-algae are 
primitive single celled organisms th at live in a variety of environm ents and have a high potential fo r
producing noble chemical structures . The Committee is given to und erstand that bulbous yellow soft
coral that disrupts erratic cell divi sions in cancer cells and ocean mo lds that live in sea grasses also
contains sufficient virus killing proteins. Apart from this, the sea sponges are also a real source fo r
extraction of anti cancer drugs. Other cancer drugs like Didemnin -B isolated from Sea squint, 
Bryostatin-1 that could be isolated from Bugula, Dolestatin-10 that could be de rived from Indian Ocean 
Mollusk and Dolabella, a Sea hare, are also sources of potential drugs  for the treatment of cancer and
other incurable diseases. Apart from this, severa l pain killer compounds could be extracted from
horseshoe crabs from the depth of the Ocean. The Commit tee feels that if the department takes
comprehensive action to study the extraction of these drugs, the entire system of curative medicine could
be revolutionized on its path of treating and curing life threatening ailments like cancer and AIDS. The
Committee would, however, like to lay down that during the extraction of these drugs particularly from
the sea coral enough precaution shoul d be taken by the Department so  that ecological and biological
damages done to such coral surroundings should be reduced to the minimum so that scientific researches
in the field may not stand on the way of preserva tion of holistic sea-ecol ogy with a preposterous 
consequences.                                    (Para 29) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        Participation of few more institutions unde r the “Drugs from Sea” progr amme is being worked out 
for extraction of potentially anti-cancerous drugs from the depth of the ocean including micro-algae. It is 
of further interest that 14 new marine extracts  have been identified for follow-up work. Thei r 
bioactivities, namely, antidiabetis, dyslipidemia, antifungal etc. have been reconfirmed and bioactivity is
being localized in the fractions and pure substances. 
        Further, the sea moulds are being st udied under this programme along with seaweeds, sponges,
corals for extraction of various bi oactivities. The details of Didemn in B - Sea Squint, Bryostatin-1, 
Bugula, Dolestatin-10-Indian Ocean Mollusk & Dola bella, Seabella, Sea ha re present a source fo r 
potential drugs for treatment of cancer and other incurable diseases. The focus from the year 2005-06 
would be strengthened to take comprehensive action to study the extraction of drugs for cancer, pain etc.
As recommended, the Department is concerned to preserve the marine biodiversity for sustainable use of
marine organism including coral reefs and its ecology. 
Comments 
        The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
COASTAL OCEAN MONITORING AND PREDICTION SYSTEM (COMAPS) 
Recommendation 
        The Committee observes that the efforts of the Department to monitor pollution in the coastal areas 
need to be continued vigorously. The Department should identify lo cations for periodical monitoring
alongwith sti pulated parameters for diffusion and dis persion characteristics. Be sides, the stations fo r
Page 8 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

collection of nea r-shore samples must be planne d with a view to reflect th e pollution load that was
occurring there and the data collected should be pr ocessed and forwarded to State Pollution Control
Boards for taking remedial measures.                                                                                       (Para 32)  
Action Taken by the Department 
        The Department is monitoring the health  of coastal waters of India under COMAPS programme by
collecting data systematically on 25 parameters related to physical, chemical, biological, microbiological
characteristics of water and sediments including pe sticide residue from the marine organisms. The
programme is in operation at 82 locations along the east and west co asts of India including islands. As
observed above, the Department has identified 13 hotspots for intensive monitoring. Besides, models are
being developed for the evaluation of assimilative capacities of coasta l marine areas for mitigating the
adverse impact of pollution on marine environment so as to enable  the coastal State Pollution Control
Boards to prescribe appropriate disposal standards, water quality criteria, etc. 
Comments 
        The Committee observes that ther e is a need for greater coordi nation between the Department an d
respective State Pollution Control Boards for a continued monitoring of marine pollution levels and data
generated through Geographical Inform ation System (GIS) must be util ized to the fullest extent to
achieve desired results. 
Recommendation 
        The Committee also observes that the land- based pollutants effect the marine and coastal 
environment, including estuaries and inshore coas tal waters, which are th e most productive areas.
Therefore, it recommends that  a well-planned and we ll-managed marine wate r quality monitoring 
system is required to predict change s of trends in the qua lity of a particular marine water body so that
curative or preventive measures can be taken to restore and mainta in ecological balance in the wate r
body. Monitoring is needed to ensure that standards and criteria set by the regulatory agencies are met
for the protection of marine wate r
quality.                                                                                                                           (Para 33)  
Action Taken by the Department 
        The COMAPS programme has been collect ing data on 25 pollution para meter at 82 locations (72
since 1990, which was enhanced to 82  since 2002-03). The data collected are regularly forwarded to the
State Pollution Control Boards for taking remedial action. The programme also includes a component on
prediction of changes in seawater quality trend of particular water body/sea area. Integrated Coastal and
Marine Area Management Project Directorate of Department of Ocean Development is engaged at
present in this task and a decadal database fo r this purpose for all locat ions monitored under the
COMAPS programme is being developed. During the current year, the trend of changes in water quality
will be determined at least for 4 priority locations. For remaining locations, the efforts will be continued
during the 10thand 11th Five Year Plans. 
Comments 
        The Committee notes the reply. 
MARINE RESEARCH AND CAPACITY BUILDING  
Recommendation 
        The Committee feels that for strengthening ocean research centers, the Department should focus its 
efforts in assisting Universities  to create infrastruct ure facilities and build ing up a skilled human
resource base in marine sciences. Moreover, marine  science teaching on the su stainability of ocean
space and its resources should be strengthened at all levels, from primary to adult education; in curricula
at university level; in adult e ducation programmes for ocean users (fishermen, seamen, workers in oil
industry, coastal engineers) and for managers of ocean affairs.                                           (Para 36) 
Action Taken by the Department 
Page 9 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

        The Department has esta blished basic centralized facilities viz. instruments and equipment, and 
requisite infrastructure for ma rine science under 9 Ocean Scienc e and Technology Cells (OSTCs) in
various universities/institutes by pr oviding funding support to 87 research  projects in last 5 years, in
various disciplines of marine scie nce and technology. These OSTCs are encouraged to initiate special
academic and technical course a nd Andhra University and Annamalai University have already started
such courses in Coastal Aquaculture and ‘Ocean Scie nce and Technology’. This is in addition to those 
universities, under University Gran ts Commission, which are having re gular marine sc ience courses.
Also the Department has its own institutes — the National Institute of Ocean Technology (Chennai), the 
National Centre for Antartic and Ocean Research (Goa) a nd the Indian Centre for Ocean Information
Services (Hyderabad) where studies on the ocean science and technologies are pursued. A new M. Tech.
Programme in Ocean Information Technology is being initiated at IIT Madras, Chennai in collaboration
with NIOT, Chennai. 
        Department has take n initiative by holding wo rkshops amongst local fishermen for making use o f
Potential Fishing Zone advisories; training officials of coastal Stat es in the development and use o f
model Integrated Coastal and Ma rine Area Management Plans; et c. Development of curricula at
University level, which are very specialized for sp ecific Universities considering local expertise and
industry needs, will be taken up in consultation with University Grants Commission, State Governments
and Universities in coastal States, since a great deal of collaboration with academia is required for these
projects.  
Comments 
        The Committee has noted the efforts being ma de by the Department in achieving programme
objectives and hopes that de sired results would be ach ieved. It also hopes that necessary action will be
initiated for the development of curricula at University level in consultation with all concerned. 
Recommendation 
        The Committee would like to define the term Bio-Technology as reference to a range of techniques 
for identifying, developing and using the properties of living things to make  products or services, it
selects natural strains of organi sms that carry desirable traits  makes hybrids by fusing cells from
different parental source s, uses chemicals and radiation to cr eate mutant strain s or genetically
engineered plants, animals and micro-organisms to produce specific phenotypic characteristics. 
        The Committee by keeping in light th e crux of the above compre hensive definition of Bio-
Technology, is of the firm opinion th at any oceanographic research remains incomplete unless emphasis
is given for a deep study in Marine Bio-Technology for better aquaculture and improved sea food supply 
and increased potential for commercial and Industrial productions of Marine substances through Marine
Scientific Research having potential market value. The Committee also advocates for encouragement o f
advanced studies in the field of Marine Scientific Research through indepth emphasis on Marine Bio-
Technology Research. 
                                                                                                                                               (Para 37) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        The Department has established a Ocean Science and Technology Cell (OSTC) on 'Marine Biology'
at the Annamalai University, Parangipettai (T N) under which funding support has been provided to
about 20 research projects in va rious areas of marine biology. Depa rtment has taken initiative by
promoting Marine Biotechnology work at this centre and is examining the upgradation of the OSTC into
a Centre of Excellence. Significant contributions have been made by the Cell in the rearing of sea-
horses, captive breeding of clownfish, molecular ta xonomy of sea-fans assessment of snail toxins along 
East coast, bio-fouling and anti-fouling in marine  organisms, nutritional evaluation and popularization
of sea-foods, etc. which have substantially fulfille d the originally envisage d objectives of the Cell.
Development of bio-reactors for methane production and bio-ma nuring by employing halophytes; and 
Bioactive substances from cephalopods and other mollusks are some of the marine biotechnology
products being proposed to be developed by this OSTC. 
Page 10 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

        Similarly the OSTC at Goa University is working in the field of  Marine Microbiology and have
taken up research projects in developing substances from marine, microbes, such as marine bacteria as
source of linoleic acid, agricultural fungicides from marine actionmycetes, microbial sensors, etc. 
Comments 
        The Committee notes the reply. 
COASTAL RESEARCH VESSELS 
        The Committee is also happy to not e that two other ocea n coastal research vessels namely Saga r
Purvi and Sagar Pashimi are main ly being used by the Department  of Ocean Development for the
assessment of sea pollution within the Exclusive Economic Zone of India. 
        The Committee would like to suggest that  since the assessment of th e sea pollution and subsequent
action plan for dealing with the de nsity of pollution is extremely impor tant from the point of view o f
maintaining an optimal sea ecology, it is necessary  that indepth research through these two vessels
should be undertaken for a complete monitoring of the ocean pollution and initiating subsequent steps to
control them. The Committee acco rdingly, would like to advise th e Department that biogeochemical
pump, which are micro-organisms at the sea surface and which take CO 2 from the atmosphere an d 
convert it via photosynthesis into the organic carbon of  their cells should be st udied in minute details.
When these Micro-organisms die s ubsequently or consumed and excr eted, some portion of that carbon 
sinks to these floors where it is buried. As the entire world is conf ronting the threat of the global
warming, understanding this concept of biogeochemical pump is essential because  it could extract huge
amount of excess heat trapping CO2 from our atmosphere. A key clue lies in the tiny interface where sea
water meets sea floor and this cr itical chemical reaction determin es how much car bon dissolves bac k
into the water and how much remains in the sediments. This is known as carbon flux. 
                                                                                                                                               (Para 41) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        The Committee has suggested that since th e assessment of the sea-pollution and subsequent action 
plan for dealing with the density of pollution is extremely important for maintaining optimal sea-
ecology, indepth research through th e two coastal vessels (Sagar P oorvi & Sagar Pa schimi) should be
undertaken for complete monitoring of the pollution a nd initiating subsequent steps to control them. In
this connection, the Committee point s out the use of biogeochemical pumps which are micro-organisms 
at the sea surface water important indicators. The study of carbon flux which is the dissolution of CO2 in 
water and sediments is also an important factor. 
        In this regard, under the COMAPS program me of the Department, enti re east and west coast is
being monitored for effects of pollution. Though the biological pump and the carbon flux studies have
been carried out in several places in  the western continental margin a nd also on the east coast, the same
has not been part of the COMA PS programme. Efforts will be ma de by the Department through the
COMAPS programme to conduct thes e studies regularly under th e COMAPS programme. The two
coastal research vessels are well equipped to conduct these investigations. 
Comments 
        The Committee notes the reply of the Department.  
Recommendation 
        The Committee feels that if De partment undertakes a detailed study on this phenomena of carbon 
flux, particularly within the Ex clusive Economic Zone of the I ndian Ocean, comprehensive knowledge
and essential data could be made  available in establishing the role of the oceans in governing
atmospheric CO2 content and also the quantum of sink of CO 2 and other green house gases on the sea 
floor. 
Page 11 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

        Accordingly, the Committee feels that th e aforesaid entire  programme could be made a success
only if the following primary objectives are kept before it by the Department:- 
           (1)   Applying the knowledge and experience gained through o cean research to develop
technology in specific fields like studies in carbon flux through biog eochemical pump, sea 
bed mining, ocean energy etc; 
           (2)   To assist the ocean scientists in  the development of suitable engineering and instrumentation
system of effective study of ocean pollution; 
           (3)   To develop technology for emerging concept of coastal zone management; 
           (4)   To effectively coordinate with various technical institutes a nd other R&D institutes in the
country for monitoring the entire concep t of ocean pollution through an effective 
technological programme; and 
           (5)   And to utilize energy from the ocean waves for producing electricity through power plants as
analternative to the conventional sources. 
        The Committee therefore strongly advocat es the Department to initi ate comprehensive programme
to fulfill these objectives as a part of their ocean pollution studies and control. 
                                                                                                                                               (Para 42) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        With regard to a detailed study on the phenomena of carbon flux with in the EEZ of India, the
Department implemented the programmes as a part of Jo int Global Ocean Flux St udies (JGOFS) during
8th and 9th plan periods. These pr ogrammes specifically addressed va rious elemental fluxes in the
Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal including car bon which was carried out  by number of repute
research institutes in India as a work of multi-disciplinary nature . The results obtained from these
investigations have been publis hed in a number of international reputed journals. Similarly, carbon
fluxes were also measured at select ed locations on the east and west coasts of India to assess the land-
ocean interactions in the coastal zone. In addition, Department has been mon itoring pollutant levels in
the coastal waters of India syst ematically for more than a de cade under the COMAPS Programme. As
suggested, the Department would initiate a study to integrate th e data generated under the various
programmes to assess the role of the oceans in governing atmospheric CO 2 content and also the 
quantum of sink of CO2 and other green house gases on the sea floor. 
Comments 
        The Committee notes the reply. However, it is of the view that the Department should immediately
initiate the study to integrate the data generated under the various programmes to assess the role of the
oceans in governing atmospheric CO2 content. 
INTEGRATED COASTAL AND MARINE AREA MANAGEMENT (ICMAM)  
Recommendation 
        The Committee is of the view that the collection  and analysis of primary and secondary
data/information for the locations identified along the coast for zona tion of coastal waters should be
carried out as zonation of coastal waters will be useful in sust ainable management and effective
planning for future developmental activities without jeopardizing coastal habitats.   (Para 46) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        In this regard, it is stated that the ICMAM programme for the 9th pl an has already completed the
task on determination of zonation of coastal waters for 18 locati ons (Daman, Ratnagiri, Honavar,
Calicut, Nagapattinam, Krishnapatnam, Konark, Pu ri, Digha, Porbandar, Ha zira, Gopalpur, Veraval,
Mangalore, Veli, Tuticorin, Pondich erry, Vishakhapatnam). During th e 10th Five Year Plan, the same
task will be carried out for 10 more locations. These locati ons include Ennore, Arumuganeri,
Kanyakumari, Kalin gapatnam, Chandi pur, Cannanore, Ponnani, Quilon. Mandovi and Port Blair. The
Page 12 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

task will be continued during the 11th Five Year Plan by ad ding new locations which are o f
environmental/ecological and economical importance. 
Comments 
        While the Committee notes the re ply, it is of the view that th e Department s hould establish 
adequate infrastructure at all stations to train co astal states about the adva nced tools and techniques fo r
planning coastal zone management sy stems. Besides, modern tools su ch as GIS, Remote Sensing and
Mathematical Modelling should be fr equently used to predict the cro ss-impact of various activities 
under the programme. 
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
Recommendation 
        The Committee would like the De partment to actively participat e in international events and 
expositions so that our scientists get exposure to the developments and innovations taking place in other
countries. It will also help in exchanging knowledge about th e scientific deve lopments of othe r
nations.                                                                (Para 48) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        The Department have participated in following international fairs in the current year : (i) 37th 
Algeria International Trad e Fair from 2-10 June, 20 04 (ii) 51st Damascus Inte rnational Fair from 3-12 
September, 2004. 
        The Department would continue to partic ipate in important national an d international events and
expositions to enable its scientists to get necessary exposure. 
Comments 
        The Committee notes the reply of the Department.  
OCEAN OBSERVATION & INFORMATION SERVICES (OOIS)  
Recommendation 
        The Committee commends the activities being pur sued by the Indian Nati onal Centre for Ocean
Information Services (INCOIS) in the field of Ocean info rmation and observations. However, being the
nodal agency for providing coastal and ocean data  and value added products to the users, the
Department should monitor the performance a nd work-mechanism of the INCOIS to process an d 
disseminate ocean data and data pr oducts to user communities like fi sheries, weather, climate, ports,
shipping etc. on a regular basis so that ocean weather forecasting is precise. 
(Para 54)
Action Taken by the Department 
        The activities of INCOIS are being m onitored periodically by the Governing Council under the
chairmanship of Secretary, DOD, which consists of 15 members incl uding Heads of institutions of 11
national agencies pertaining to Science & Technology and 2 expert s who would provide advice on
generation and dissemination of coastal and ocean data products and value added services to a variety of
user community. The recently cons tituted Research Advisory Commi ttee (RAC) of the Department is
also monitoring the performance of INCOIS. In add ition, the progress of various activities of INCOIS is
also being reported on quarterly  basis to the Planning Commissi on by quarterly pe rformance review
under the chairmanship of the Member (S&T). Signi ficant achievements are also reported on monthly
basis to the Cabinet Secretary. Thus the achievements  of INCOIS are effectivel y monitored to make the
advisory services of INCOIS as a part of value added chain among the potential user communities. 
Comments 
        The Committee expresses its satisf action on the mechanism evolve d by the Department to monito r
the performance of INCOIS and observes that IN COIS, being nodal agency for providing coastal and
ocean data and value added products, should play a leadin g role in better co ordination with use r
Page 13 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

agencies so as to achieve optimum results. 
OCEANOGRAPHIC RESEARCH 
        The Committee is pleased to not e that the Department is mainly using two Ocean Research
Vessels, namely, Sagar Sampada and Sagar Kanya for deep sea re search. These vessels are using
Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV ) and Autonomous Underwater Vehi cle (AUV) to study about deep
sea life forms at considerable depth. However, the Committee feels that scope of deep sea research could
be more challenging and informative if machiner ies could dive beyond a de pth of 6000 metres. The
Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that for a real deep sea study Advanced Tethered Vehicle (ATV)
is needed by Department, which is an unmanned ve hicle equipped with latest  advanced technology and
which can easily undertake researches beyond a de pth of 6 thousand metres. The most striking
advantage for using the ATV for underwater research is that it is extremely helpful to make researches at
extreme depth where it is dangerous  for divers to venture. The Co mmittee is given to understand that
such vehicles are cost affective and can be used in ocean abyss with much flexibility. It is observed that
the vast majority of the ocean depths are bone chilling cold, completely dark and have ambient pressures
equivalent to the weight of the hundreds of atmosphe res. The exploration of th e deep sea is, therefore,
impossible without a substantial i nvestment on latest te chnology. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that the Department may use Advanced Tethered Vehi cle (ATV) for the purpose of deep
sea research in view of its deep sea advantages a nd cost effective applicati ons. This vehicle will be
extremely helpful for researches at  ocean benthos where gr eater variety of biotic  and abiotic elements
are available and a study of which could add consid erably to the store house of human knowledge about
ocean depth.                                                                                                                                      (Para
58) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        The Department is already pursui ng the design and developm ent of Unmanned Tethered
Submersible, upto a water depth of  6000m. This programme has been en trusted to National Institute of
Ocean Technology (NIOT), Chennai fo r implementation. NIOT is in the process of designing and
developing such deep sea unmanned tethered submer sible with the help of a Russian Institute EDBOE,
RAS, MOSCOW. The system is likely to be ready by May, 2005 for demonstration. 
Comments 
        Keeping in view its deep  sea advantages and cost  effective applications, the Committee hopes that 
sustained efforts would be made to develop Advanced Tethered Su bmersible. The Department should
devise better ways and means to achieve the objective. 
ACQUISITION OF NEW RESEARCH VESSEL  
Recommendation 
        The Committee has been recommendi ng for a Research Vessel for th e Department and therefore
notes with satisfaction that the sustained efforts of the Department  helped the project approved. The
Committee recommends that this project to procure new research vesse l will be implemented as soon as
possible to enable the Department to do its important work for ocean
development.                                                                                                                 (Para 61) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        The honorable Commi ttee has recommended th at the new Technology Demonstartion Vessel be
procured immediately. The project for procuring the new state-of-art technology demonstration vessel is 
progressing satisfactorily. The desi gn consultant has completed the design of the new vessel and the
model tests for the new vessel ba sed on the design have been completed during the month of May,2004.
A one ton model to scale was made and tested. The tender for awarding the contract to the ship yards for
construction is already out and the ship yard for cons truction will be identified by the end of December,
2004. The ship will be operational by 2006 end or early 2007. 
Comments 
Page 14 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

        The Committee notes the reply and would like th e Department to see that the process for the 
acquisition of a new research vessel is completed within a stipulated time to avoid project cost overrun. 
GAS HYDRATES 
Recommendation 
        The Committee feels that Gas Hydr ates have the potential of pr oviding energy security to the
country. Therefore, the Department  should encourage excellence in national laboratories to focus on
niche areas of hydrate research with special emphasis on resource ex tent evaluation and environmental
impacts and development of tec hnology for detection and qualification of gas hydr ates in sediments.
                                                                                             (Para 63) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        The Honourable Committee observes that the Gas Hydrates have the potential for providing energy
security to the country and hence the Department should encourage excellence in national laboratories to
focus on nice areas of Hydrate research with special emphasis on Environmental impacts and technology
development. 
        The Gas Hydrate programme is progressing at brisk pace and considerable progress has already
been made. The programme is being implemented through active participation of 3 of the major national
laboratories - National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIO T), National Geophysical Research Institute 
(NGRI) and National Institute of Oceanography (NIO). The emphasis is on basic and applied research in
this field. NIOT is developing tw o technologies for underwater auto mated coring system (capable o f
coring up to 150m at depths 2500m) and underwater support submersi ble. These equipments will be
extremely useful in exploration of  the gas hydrates. Also NIO is wo rking on the possible environmental
impact of Gas Hydrate exploitati on. Some of other niche areas be ing covered under the programme are
physical properties of Gas Hydrates, advanced multi channel seismic data processing, economics of Gas
Hydrates, Ocean Bottom Seismometer etc. 
Comments 
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.  
PERSISTENT ORGANIC POLLUTANTS  
Recommendation 
        The Committee feels that Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) are the most common sea pollutants
which are constantly affecting the Ocean environm ent and optimal marine ecology. The POPs usually
gets generated in the deep sea envi ronment from the dead biotic orga nisms. When the particles of this
organisms get sink in the sea bed, a degradation of organic matrix occurs a nd consequently POPs get
released in the surrounding water. Under anoxic conditions, sediments containing organic carbon
releases contaminants into the surrounding water. POPs not only aff ect microbial food chain but also
coastal environments which are the most productive  areas of the sea. PO Ps are also ubiquitous.
Accordingly, it is an extreme th reat towards maintenance of opt imal sea ecology and it has high
exposure to humans also. Keeping the gravity of the situati on into active consideration, the Committee
feels that Sagar Purvi and Sagar Paschimi, two ocean research vessels, which are monitoring research on
ocean pollution may also direct a major chunk of their study towards the understanding of POPs
behaviour and subsequent control of the same from spreading on the sea benthos so that the entire biotic
community of ocean flora and fauna could be effectively preserved from environmental pollution. 
        The Committee also feels that two of th e main POP group namely dioxi n and furans which are the
principal threat to humanity should also be studied as a part of th e pollution control programme by the
Department. 
                                                                                                                                               (Para 63) 
Action Taken by the Department 
        The honourable Committee has raised concerns over the Persistent Or ganic Pollutants (POPs) 
Page 15 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

which are constantly affecting th e Ocean Environment. POPs are ubiquitous and are extreme threat
towards maintenace of optimal sea ecology and it has high exposure to humans also. The Committee
recommends study of POPs behaviour and subsequent  control of the same fr om spreading on the sea
benthos so that the entire biotic community of ocean flora and fauna could be effectively preserved. 
        A few researchers in some national in stitutes are already carr ying out these studies. Though
COMAPS programme is alr eady underway for organi c pollutant studies through the Anna University,
Chennai, Department will ensure regional and large scale investigations into POP in the near future. 
Comments 
        The Committee while noting the repl y of the Department  is of the opinion that the Department
should chalk out a time-bound action plan in this regard as, in its view, the present studies/researches are
not sufficient. 
____________________________________________________________________________________
  
XI 
ELEVENTH MEETING 
        The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 14 th March, 2005 in Committee Room 'C', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
        PRESENT 
   1.  Shri P.G. Narayanan — Chairman 
        RAJYA SABHA 
   2.  Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
   3.  Dr. Prabha Thakur 
   4.  Shri Dilip Singh Judev 
   5.  Shri Nand Kishore Yadav 
   6.  Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
   7.  Shrimati Kum Kum Rai 
        LOK SABHA 
   8.  Shri Jasubhai D. Barad 
   9.  Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
10.  Shri Anantrao Gudhe 
11.  Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
12.  Shri Sita Ram Yadav 
13.  Shri V. Aruna Kumar 
14.  Shri Rakesh Singh 
15.  Shri Shivajirao A. Patil 
16.  Shri Francis Fanthome 
        SECRETARIAT 
        Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
        Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
        Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary 
        Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
        Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer 
2.     The Chairman welcomed Shri Francis Fa nthome, a new Member nominated to the Committee
w.e.f. 25th February, 2005. 
3.     The Committee then took u p consideration of draft *** , ***, ***, ***, ***, *** and 138 th Action 
  
MINUTES 
Page 16 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm

Taken Reports of the Committe e. After some discussion and suggesting minor changes *** the
Committee adopted all the reports. 
4.     The Committee authorised th e Chairman and in his absence Prof . Saif-ud-Din Soz to present the 
Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Sujan Chakraborty and his absence Shri Shivajirao A. Patil to lay
the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 17th March, 2005. 
5.     The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 P.M. 
 
  
*** Relates to other matter. 
Page 17 of 17138th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/138threport.htm