PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED SIXTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Two Hundred and Ninety Eighth Report of the
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on
the Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the
Department of Space
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th January, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)
306
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED SIXTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Two Hundred and Ninety Eighth Report of the
Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on
the Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the
Department of Space
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th January, 2018 )
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-23
5. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 25-28

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
(Constituted on 1st September , 2017)
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
6. Shri C.P. Narayanan
7. Shri Parimal Nathwani
8. Shri Sharad Pawar
9. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri P .P . Chauhan
16. Kumari Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20 Shrimati V asanthi M.
21. Shri Daddan Mishra
22. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
23. Shri Chirag Paswan

(ii)
24. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
130. Vacant
231. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
1 Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan ceased to be a member of the Committee  w.e.f. 12th December, 2017.
2 Shri Nana Patole ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from the Lok Sabha w.e.f.
 14th December, 2017

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report
on its behalf, present this Three Hundred sixth Report on Action Taken by the Department of Space on
the recommendations/observations contained in the Two Hundred Ninety-eighth Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Department of Space, which was presented/laid in both the
Houses of Parliament on 31st March, 2017.
2. There were 40 recommendations/observations in the Two Hundred Ninety-eighth Report of the
Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of the Committee were received
from the Department on 31st July, 2017.
3. In the meeting held on 1st January, 2018 the Committee considered the draft Report and adopted
the same.
  N
EW D ELHI; ANAND SHARMA
1 January, 2018 Chairman,
Pausa 11, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
CUSP : Cryogenic Upper Stage Project
CSSTE-AP : Centre for Space Science and Technology Education in Asia
and the Pacific
C&AG : Comptroller and Auditor General
DMS : Disaster Management Support
DWR : Doppler Weather Radar
EOAM : Earth Observation Applications Mission
IIST : Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology
JEWS : Japanese Encephalitis Early Warning System
NE-SAC : North Eastern Space Applications Centre
NER : North Eastern Region
NER-DRR : North Eastern Regional Node for Disaster Risk Reduction
NEC : North Eastern Council
PRL : Physical Research Laboratory
SAC : Space Applications Centre
SCL : Semi-Conductor Laboratory
SV AB : Second Vehicle Assembly Building
XPOSAT : X-Ray Polarimeter Satellite
(iv)

REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Space on the
recommendations/observations contained in the Two Hundred and Ninety eighth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Department of Space, which was presented to both the Houses
of Parliament on 31st March, 2017. There were forty recommendations/observations in the Report of
the Committee. Action Taken Note on the recommendations of the Committee was received from the
Department on 31st July, 2017. The Committee, on examination of Action Taken Notes, is not satisfied
with action taken by the Department in respect of one recommendation (para 5.3) and would like the
Department to take further action thereon as indicated in the Report.
The Committee's recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the
action taken by the Department of Space are set out in the succeeding paragraphs:-
ANALYSIS OF THE PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT DURING THE 12TH FIVE YEAR
PLAN PERIOD:
Recommendation
The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the capacity of the Department to utilise the funds
made available for the whole of 12th Five Year Plan period. The financial performance of the Department
also indicates that had the Department been given the full amount of 
` 39750.00 crore as projected by
the Department in its Indicative Plan Outlay for the 12th Five Year Plan period, the Department would
not only have utilised the fund fully but made most out of it also. (Para 3.4)
Action Taken
The observation of the Committee are Noted. The Department will strive to continue the good
financial performance in coming years too.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
COMMUNICATION SATELLITE:
Recommendation
The Committee notes that against a target of 14 communication satellites as planned by the
Department to be realised during the 12th Plan period, the Department could manage to launch only
7 communication satellites viz., GSAT-10, GSAT-14, GSAT-16, GSAT-7, GSAT-6, GSAT-15 and GSAT-
18 during the 12th Plan period. The Committee feels that the Department could have done better to
realise its fixed targets of 14 communication satellites. The Committee is of the considered opinion that
keeping the increasing demand of the transponders for meeting requirements of the country, it is imperative
that the Department should accordingly strategise its action plan so as to keep pace with the increasing
demand and achieve the targets set for the purpose in a timeframe manner. (Para 4.4)

2
Action Taken
During 12th Five Year Plan period, 14 communication satellites were planned by the Department of
which 7 were realised. In addition, ISRO has realised 3 more communication satellites off late viz. GSAT-
9 (South Asia Satellite), GSAT-17 and GSAT-19 (High throughput satellite). Further, ISRO has worked
on realisation of GSAT-6A satellite which is getting ready for launch. The Department will make all
efforts to meet the specific target and has already accelerated its plan to realise more number of
communication satellites, thereby narrowing the demand-supply gap for communication transponders.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department. However, the Committee feels that the
Department needs to further strengthen its action and work in tandem with the other concerned
stake holders, so as to cater to the increasing demand of the communication transponders in the
country.
Recommendation
The Committee further notes that four more communication satellites (GSAT-9/South Asia Satellite,
GSAT-17, GSAT-19 and GSAT-11) are in advance stage of realisation and are planned to be launched
during 2017 by the Department. The Committee hopes that the task undertaken by the Department of
launching these four communication satellites will be achieved within the stipulated time. The Committee
hopes that the launch of these four communication satellites will further help the Department to bridge
the gap between demand and supply of the transponders in the country. (Para 4.5)
Action Taken
Out of the four communication satellites mentioned above, three satellites viz GSAT-9/South Asia
Satellite, GSAT-19 and GSAT-17 have been launched during the first quarter of 2017-18. Realisation of
GSAT-11 communication satellite is under assembly, integration and testing. The satellite is targeted for
launch by end of 2017 and efforts to secure the launch slot from M/s. Arianespace are under progress.
GSA T-11 & GSA T-19 together will provide more than 20 Gbps throughput capacity for interactive
telecommunications services.
In addition, GSAT-6A communication satellite carrying S-band transponders is planned to be launched
during second half of 2017-18.
Comments
The Committee accepts the reply of the Department and is hopeful that all the related work
in respect of GSAT-11 and GSAT-6A will be completed within the stipulated time and these
communication satellites will be launched as per their time schedule.
SATELLITE BASED NA VIGATION:
Recommendation
The Committee notes the achievements of the Department in satellite based navigation during the
12th Plan period. The Committee, however, is surprised that the Department has not mentioned anything
about the progress made in the formulation of Indian Satellite Navigation Policy as envisioned by the

3
Department during the 12th Plan period. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should furnish a current status note in this connection at the earliest for the consideration of the
Committee. (Para 5.3)
Action Taken
Deliberations on the utilisation of the NavIC for civil as well as strategic services and production
of the user receivers & devices are under progress. All the relevant Government Departments and
Ministries like Ministry of Communications, Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology, Ministry
of Defence, and Department of Space etc. are engaged in the discussions. The activity is expected to
be concluded shortly. Department plans to bring up the draft Satellite Navigation Policy for discussions
and approval by end 2017.
Comments
The Committee finds the reply of the Department intangible as the Department appears to
have been failed in completing the primary work i.e. consultation process with the relevant stake
holders during the last five years. The Committee, therefore, would like to be informed of the
progress in a matter.
Recommendation
The Committee observes that against the budgetary allocation of 
` 90.00 crore in RE 2016-17 under
the component 'National Navigation System (NSS)', the Department could only utilise ` 67.18 crore upto
January, 2017 which is 74.64 percent of the total allocation. The Committee expresses its concerns about
this underutilisation of the funds. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
exercise financial prudence and make sure that the allocation made on account of NSS is utilised fully
and optimally. (Para 5.4)
Action Taken
As on January 2017, the expenditure under the component 'Navigation Satellite System (NSS)' was
Rs 67.18 Crore. However, at the end of March 2017, the expenditure under the programme was Rs 81.73
Crore which is about 91% of the RE allocations. The marginal under-utilisation was due to phasing out
of expenditure towards major civil works for ground segment realisation to next financial year. The
Department shall exercise caution and optimally utilise the funds allocated in 2017-18.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
EARTH OBSERV ATION AND ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES PROGRAMME
Recommendation
The Committee, while noting the targets achieved by the Department under the Earth Observation
and Atmospheric Sciences Programme during the 12th Plan period, expresses its dissatisfaction over the
fact that against the allocated amount of 
` 50.00 crore in RE 2016-17 under the component 'Resourcesat-

4
2A', the Department could actually utilise ` 38.03 crore only which is just 76.06 percent of the allocated
amount. Since the underutilisation of funds adversely impacts the overall growth of any Programme, the
Committee recommends that the Department should exercise more caution and vigil while utilising the
budgetary support and ensure optimum utilisation of the budgetary allocation. (Para 6.3)
Action Taken
As noted by the committee, during January 2017, the actual expenditure was ` 38.03 Crore i.e.,
76.06 percent of the RE allocations under 'Resourcesat-2A'. Subsequently, the total expenditure was
improved to ` 45.27 Crore i.e., 90.54 percent of the allocated amount by March, 2017. As suggested
by the committee, Department took extensive project appraisal reviews to identify specific issues and
underutilisation of budgetary allocations in order to accomplish the scheduled activities as envisaged.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
DISASTER MANAGEMENT SUPPORT (DMS) PROGRAMME:
Recommendation
The Committee expresses satisfaction on the success achieved by the Department on account of its
Disaster Management Support (DMS) Programme during the 12th Plan period. The Committee, however,
is constrained to note that the Department could only utilise 
` 11.96 crore out of ` 20.00 crore (RE 2016-
17) earmarked for this programme which is just 59.8 percent till January, 2017. The Committee recommends
that the Department should revisit its fund utilisation capacity for the purpose and take necessary
corrective steps so as to ensure that the funds are utilised optimally and fully. (Para 7.3)
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. At the end of Financial Year 2016-17, the
Department could utilise funds to the tune ` 16.22 Crore which is about 81% of RE allocations. The
marginal underutilisation of funds was due to phasing out of part of the expenditure towards establishment
and commissioning of Doppler Weather Radars to the next financial year. The Department would take
appropriate steps to ensure that allocations made in 2017-18 will be fully utilised.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
SPACE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS:
Recommendation
The Committee notes achievements of the Department in the field of Space Transportation. The
Committee, however, observes that in order to capture the global market, the Department further needs
to strengthen its spaceport infrastructure to meet the launch vehicle requirements. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should increase its production capabilities so as to make the launch
vehicles ready in larger number and capture the global market. (Para 8.3)

5
Action Taken
In view of the launch demand for national/user specific requirements along with the possibility of
increasing the commercial footprint in the global market, the Department has been making focused
efforts to increase the throughput of systems and stages for the launch vehicles from the industry and
increase the frequency of launches in a year. The annual launch frequency is steadily increasing and has
increased from 2-3 launches during the initial period of the 12th Five Year Plan to 6 launches by the end
of the Plan period. In the case of PSLV, during the 12th Five Year Plan period, 19 Missions have been
achieved against the projected target of 17 Missions. Considerable reduction in average launch campaign
duration has been achieved, which has also contributed to the increase in the launch frequency. Additional
industry participation is being identified/qualified and the capacity at the existing work centres is also
being augmented to further increase the PSLV launch frequency to eight per year. Department is also
planning to enhance the capacity within the country to produce operational flights of PSLVs through a
Joint Venture with Indian Industries. This will make available more vehicles as well as spare capacity
to establish a stronger presence in the global market.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and would like to be apprised of the
roadmap prepared by Department to enhance the capacity within the country to produce operational
flights of PSLVs through a Joint Venture with Indian Industries.
SPACE SCIENCES & PLANETARY EXPLORATION:
Recommendation
The Committee appreciates the achievements of the Department with regard to its Space Sciences
& Planetary Exploration programme during the 12th Plan period. The Committee hopes that the target
of the Department for launching Chandrayaan-2 mission in 2017-18 will be realised within the fixed
time. (Para 9.3)
Action Taken
CHANDRAYAAN-2, the second Indian Lunar mission, comprises of indigenous Lander, Rover and
Orbiter modules. The Orbiter development is progressing well with various subsystems of the module
in advanced phase of testing. Demonstration models of the indigenous Lander have been completed.
Mechanism elements of the Rover module are nearing completion. The Department is working towards
the launch of Chandrayaan-2 as per the targeted schedule in 2017-18.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation
The Committee further observes that the Aditya-L1 mission of the Department which was initially
set to be realised during the 12th Five Year Plan has not been realised till date. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should speed up the launch of Aditya-L1 mission within a
fixed time frame. (Para 9.4)

6
Action Taken
Aditya mission was envisaged to realise a polar orbiting satellite with Solar Coronagraph as its sole
payload to study the solar corona. With the recent understanding of solar exploratory missions, the scope
of Aditya mission have been expanded and renamed as Aditya - L1. The spacecraft is now mooted to
be placed in an orbit about 1.5 million kilometers from the Earth (three times farther than the moon)
known as the Lagrange point or the L1 point to ensure continuous observation of the Sun. Besides the
Solar Coronagraph, the mission will now carry 6 more scientific instruments on-board for observation
of solar corona, photo-sphere, chromo-sphere and solar wind. With its revised scope the launch of the
mission is now targeted in 2019-2020. (Para 9.4)
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
CAPACITY BUILD-UP
Recommendation
The Committee is not satisfied with the progress achieved by the Department during the 12th Five
Year Plan on account of capacity build-up. The Committee notes that the Department envisioned
establishment of Third Launch Pad at Sriharikota to support the increased launch frequency of PSLV
and GSLV during the 12th Plan period whereas no budgetary support has been sought by the Department
for the purpose during the years 2015-16 and 2016-17. The Committee fails to understand as to why
the Department did not seek any budgetary support for the purpose. The Committee strongly feels that
the Department has failed to lay due focus on the establishment of Third Launch Pad. The Committee,
therefore, recommends the Department to furnish the reasons for being so tardy on this count.
(Para 10.3)
Action Taken
With regard to the observation of the Committee on account of unsatisfactory progress on
establishment of Third Launch Pad at Sriharikota, the following points are brought to the notice of the
Committee:
• The Department had envisioned establishment of Third Launch Pad during 12th Plan period
to support the increased launch frequency of PSLV and GSLV . The Department had identified
the site and initiated action on preparation of the project report for the facility. However, due
to the two successive failures of two GSLV flights during 2010, the Department had to focus
on tiding over the technological bottlenecks related to cryogenic technology.
• The Department has now overcome the technological issues and has established GSLV as a
reliable launch vehicle for launching 2 Tonne class of satellites into Geo-synchronous Transfer
Orbit.
• During this period, the Department has worked around the existing two launch pads to support
the requirements by resorting to a series of measures like, (i) reducing the PSLV launch

7
campaign duration; (ii) reducing launch pad refurbishment time required between launches and
(iii) augmenting the second Launch Pad with Subsystem Assembly Building enabling simultaneous
integration of two vehicles.
• The Department has also taken up establishment of a Second Vehicle Assembly Building with
a total approved amount of ` 629.12 crore. The work on the facility is progressing well and
is expected to be ready by the end of 2017-18.
• With the above measures, the overall launch capacity is expected to increase to 12-14 launches
per year as compared to the current capacity of 8 launches per year.
• The Department will initiate action on setting up the Third Launch Pad, including obtaining
necessary approvals, once the enhanced capacity becomes fully operational.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and would like to be further informed
of the progress achieved in the matter.
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the Department has failed to furnish any information about the progress
achieved on account of setting up of Space Technology Parks at different locations to facilitate industry
participation in Indian Space Programme. The Committee would like to be informed of the progress
achieved in the matter. (Para 10.4)
Action Taken
During 12th Five Year Plan period, in order to enhance the participation of Indian industry in Space
programme, vendor complexes are built at various Centres/Units where qualified vendors realise different
subsystems/modules of space systems. This has provided the basic infrastructure built-up for the partner
industries to realise various hardware systems/sub-systems for the Indian space programme. Assembly,
Integration and Testing activities of two navigation satellites have been outsourced to a consortium of
Indian industries. Similarly, an outreach facility has been established at NRSC, Hyderabad to enable
vendors to participate in Indian Space Programme.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017-18
Recommendation
The Committee notes the action plan of the Department for the year 2017-18. The Committee is
hopeful that the Department with its increased allocation in BE 2017-18 would be able to achieve its
targets envisaged for the year and make best use of the budgetary allocation. (Para 11.3)

8
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. The Department shall take necessary steps to
achieve the targets envisaged during 2017-18 by optimally utilising the budgetary resources.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and would like to be informed about the
action taken in the matter.
SPACE TECHNOLOGY
Recommendation
The Committee notes the explanation furnished by the Department with regard to the BE, RE and
Actual expenditure under the Space Technology scheme of the Department in 2016-17. The Committee
also notes that the Department did not seek either any budgetary support or very negligible support for
its crucial programmes such as Cryogenic Upper Stage Project (CUSP); Semi-cryogenic Engine Clustering;
Semi-Cryogenic Stage Development; Advanced Launch Vehicle Development; Resourcesat-3 & 3A; Solid
Propellant Space Booster Plant (SPROB); High Resolution Satellite Constellation (HRSAT); Third
Launch Pad and Space Capsule Recovery Experiment (SRE-I&II) during the year 2015-16 and 2016-
17. The Committee is of the view that all these programmes/ projects are very crucial for the overall
growth of our space technology programme and would like to be informed of the reasons for not
allocating any funds for them in 2015-16 and 2016-17 and in some cases even in 2017-18.
(Para 12.5)
Action Taken
With regard to the observations of the Committee for not allocating funds for the above mentioned
schemes/projects/programmes during 2015-16 and 2016-17, the following points are brought to the
notice of the Committee:
• With the launch of four successful flight of GSLV with indigenous cryogenic stage, the overall
objectives of Cryogenic Upper Stage Project (CUSP) have been achieved. The Project has
been formally closed. Hence, separate budget was not sought.
• The objectives of Space Capsule Recovery Experiment has been achieved with the successful
launch and recovery of Crew Module Atmospheric Re-entry Experiment (CARE) during
December 2014 with this, the project has been formally closed. Hence, no projections were
made.
• While the Department has established Cryogenic technology with four successful launches of
GSLV , the work towards development of next generation Semi-cryogenic Engine is progressing
well and is expected to be ready by 2020-21. Based on the progress made so far on development
of the engine, activities towards Semi-cryogenic Stage Development is proposed to be taken
up.
• Activities like Semi-cryogenic Engine Clustering and Development of Advanced Launch Vehicle
are presently in discussion stage for arriving at suitable configurations. Once the detailed

9
project reports are finalized, the Department will take necessary approvals towards these
activities and suitable budget provisions will be made.
• Schemes/Project/Programmes like High Resolution Satellite Constellation (HRSA T); Resourcesat-
3 & 3A and Augmentation of Solid Propellant Space Booster Plant (SPROB) were approved
during the fag end of 2016-17. Hence, no cash-flow was envisaged during 2015-16 &
2016-17. Towards realisation of these programmes, the Department has made provisions in
BE 2017-18.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation
The Committee further observes that the fund utilisation capacity of the Department during the year
2016-17 (upto January, 2017) with regard to some of the important programmes/projects viz., Semi-
Cryogenic Engine Development; Geo-Imaging Satellite (GISAT); RISAT-1A; and Realisation of Second
Vehicle Assembly Building (SVAB) has been found to be unsatisfactory where the Department could only
utilise the allotted funds to the tune of 70.70 percent, 71.05 percent, 32.23 percent and 66.63 percent
respectively in 2016-17 (upto January, 2017). (Para 12.6)
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee are noted. At the end of Financial Year 2016-17, the Department
has improved the expenditure position under the above schemes/projects/programmes. The expenditure
on Semi-Cryogenic Engine Development; Geo-Imaging Satellite (GISAT); RISAT-1A; and realisation of
Second Vehicle Assembly Building (SVAB) were 107%, 86%, 92% and 87.5% respectively at the end of
financial year. The Department would take appropriate steps to ensure that allocations made in 2017-18
will be fully utilised.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the steps taken by the
Department would yield the desired results.
Recommendation
The Committee is also surprised to note that the Department failed to use even a single penny from
the allotted budgetary allocation of ` 10.00 lakh and ` 15.00 lakh in 2016-17 (upto January, 2017) on
account of its programmes/ projects like RISAT-3 and Resourcesat - 3S & 3SA respectively. The Committee
recommends that the Department should improve its performance with regards to fund utilisation capacity
and take necessary action in the matter to make best of the budgetary allocations made under the various
components of Space Technology. (Para 12.7)
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee are noted. At the end of Financial Year 2016-17, the expenditure
towards Resourcesat - 3S & 3SA was ` 14.32 lakhs against the RE allocation of ` 15 lakhs (95%). The

10
allocation made under RISAT-3 project could not be utilised as the approval of the project is yet to be
obtained. The Department shall take necessary steps to achieve the targets envisaged during 2017-18 by
optimally utilising the budgetary resources.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation
The Committee hopes that the Department would utilise the budgetary allocation of ` 5850.69 crore
made in BE 2017-18 under the Space Technology scheme and the targets set for the year 2017-18 would
be achieved with the help of earnest efforts of the Department. The Committee further appreciates the
efforts undertaken by the Department for the promotion of the space technology during the last three
years in the country and hopes that the people of the country would continue to reap the benefits of the
technological advancements in space technology. (Para 12.8)
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. The Department shall take necessary steps to
achieve the targets envisaged during 2017-18 by optimally utilising the budgetary resources.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
SPACE APPLICATIONS:
Recommendation
The Committee is satisfied with the overall utilisation (83.17 percent upto January, 2017) of the
budgetary allocation under the head 'Space Technology' for the year 2016-17 by the Department. The
Committee, however, observes that the Department has utilised the budgetary allocation to the tune of
54.13 percent and 59.8 percent only on account of Earth Observation Applications Mission (EOAM) and
Disaster Management Support (DMS) respectively upto January, 2017. The Committee is of the opinion
that both these components are essential in giving fillip to the overall growth of Space Applications in
the country. Thus, the Department should make earnest efforts to fully utilise the budgetary allocation
made for these two components. (Para 13.4)
Action Taken
Under Earth Observation Applications Mission (EOAM), budget is provided for Research &
Development (R&D) projects carried out at various ISRO/DOS Centres. EOAM mainly focuses on
application developments, which include proof of concept by carrying out pilot studies, addressing the
technical criticality and methodology reorientation of ongoing operational projects by taking up theme
specific studies, multidisciplinary projects with inter-institutional participation and capacity building for
project scientists. The expenditure incurred under EOAM is ` 2.65 crores out of ` 3.75 crores sanctioned
during RE 2016-17. The utilisation of the budgetary allocation only to the tune to 71% is due to reduction

11
in satellite data cost and late receipt of fund utilisation certificate from collaborating agencies, which
delayed transfer of grant-in-aid to these agencies.
The total expenditure for Disaster Management Support programme for the year 2016-17 is
16.22 crores (81.1% of ` 20 Crore allocated in RE 2016-17) till March 2017. The marginal underutilisation
of funds was due to phasing out of part of the expenditure towards establishment and commissioning
of Doppler Weather Radars to the next financial year. The Department would take appropriate steps to
ensure that appropriate allocations are made in 2017-18 will be fully utilised for the above components.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation
The Committee also hopes that the Department would make all corrective measures to improve its
fund utilisation capacities and the budgetary allocation of 
` 1767.01 crore in BE 2017-18 would be fully
utilised by the Department judiciously towards the realisation of the targets set for the year.
(Para 13.5)
Action Taken
The budgetary allocation of ` 1767.01 crore in BE 2017-18 has been earmarked for the activities
carried out by various ISRO Centres in the areas of Space Applications. Towards judicious utilisation of
allocated budget, Department has already set-up mechanisms for comprehensive budgetary review wherein
quarterly targets in terms of expenditures and assigned activities for each component are conducted
periodically. Further, through monthly expenditure review, monitoring of project expenditures are evaluated
and the budget utilisation issues are addressed for achieving the set targets.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation
The Committee appreciates the Department for the activities undertaken for helping the Government
in managing the natural resources of the country with the help of its space technologies. The Committee
hopes that the Department would continue providing the desired support to the Government in managing
our natural resources effectively and also provide solution to the other related issues. (Para 13.7)
Action Taken
Department of Space is carrying out a number of application projects in the areas of earth observation,
natural resource inventory & management, geospatial technologies, satellite communication, navigation,
meteorology, oceanic studies, technology diffusion and capacity building. As a follow-up to National
Meet, about 157 space application projects are being carried out across 58 Ministries/Departments.
ISRO has also embarked upon continuous development in Remote Sensing and Earth Observation
(EO) technologies with new sensors and innovative applications as well as imparting constant training

12
and enhancement of professional capacities of EO technology users in all sectors. At the same time,
emphasis has been given for institutionalisation of operational applications in the user Ministries.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
SPACE SCIENCES
Recommendation
The Committee notes the roadmap prepared by the Department for the year 2017-18. The Committee,
nonetheless, is constrained to note that the Department failed to utilise the funds made available on
account of Sensor Payload Development/Planetary Science Programme under the Space Sciences scheme
of the Department. It is observed that against the allocation of 
` 4.63 crore in RE 2016-17, the
Department could utilise ` 0.93 crore only upto January, 2017 which is just 20.08 percent utilisation of
the allocation. The Committee recommends the Department to take corrective measures to ensure that the
Space Sciences Programme does not suffer due to underutilisation of funds. (Para 14.5)
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. Against an allocation of Rs 4.63 crore in RE
2016-17, the Department could utilise funds to the tune Rs 0.93 Crore due to phasing of expenditure
towards navigational support for Deep Space missions to the next financial year. The department shall
exercise due care to ensure optimal allocation of funds for the activity in 2017-18.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and would like to know the action taken
in the matter.
Recommendation
Similarly, the utilisation under the component Climate & Atmospheric Programme and Aditya-L1
has not been very encouraging given the importance of these programmes. The Committee observes that
the Department could utilise 
`10.74 crore out of `19.00 crore and `17.92 crore out of `35.00 crore as
made available in RE 2016-17 on account of these two important programmes, respectively.   (Para 14.6)
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee are noted. At the end of Financial Year 2016-17, the expenditure
towards Climate & Atmospheric Programme and Aditya-L1 were improved to `14.56 crore (76.63%) and
`38.48 crore (110%) against the respective RE allocations. The Department shall take necessary steps
to achieve the targets envisaged during 2017-18 by optimally utilising the budgetary resources.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.

13
Recommendation
The Committee further notes that the Department just did not spend a single penny upto January,
2017 against the budgetary allocation of ` 4.54 crore on account of X-Ray Polarimeter Satellite
(XPOSAT) during RE 2016-17. The Committee expresses concern about the underutilisation of funds by
the Department in many of the Programmes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should take a financial scrutiny of its programmes/scheme on quarterly basis so as to identify the areas
where improvement is required and take action thereon accordingly. (Para 14.7)
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee are noted. The Department has already worked out the quarterly
plan for commitment and expenditure in 2017-18. As on June, 2017, the expenditure towards the Xposat
Project is ` 2.95 Crore which is about 29.50% of BE 2017-18 allocations. The Department shall take
necessary steps to achieve the targets envisaged during 2017-18 by optimally utilising the budgetary
resources.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
INSAT SATELLITE SYSTEMS
Recommendation
The Committee notes the reasons furnished by the Department with regard to reduction in the
budgetary allocation for INSAT Satellite Systems Programme in BE 2017-18. The Committee hopes that
the Department would be able to utilise the funds earmarked for INSAT Satellite Systems Programme
optimally and strive to realise the targets envisaged for the year 2017-18. (Para 15.5)
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. The Department shall take necessary steps to
utilise the funds earmarked for INSAT satellites systems programme and strive towards realising the
targets envisaged during 2017-18.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF SPACE SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (IIST):
Recommendation
The Committee is constrained to note that against the budgetary allocation of 
` 96.50 crore in RE
2016-17, the Department has managed to spend only ` 46.00 crore upto January, 2017 which is not even
50 per cent of the budgetary allocation provided for the Institution. There was underutilisation of funds
in 2015-16 too. The Committee takes serious note of the underutilisation of the budgetary allocation by
the Institution in the years 2015-16 and 2016-17. This gives rise to a feeling of inflated budgetary

14
demands. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that IIST should revisit its financial approach and
rationalise its demands and then take necessary corrective measures to ensure that the allocations are not
underutilized as a matter of routine. The Department of Space should also monitor the utilization of
funds by IIST and ensure that funds do not continue to be underutilised by IIST. (Para 16.5)
Action Taken
Against an allocation of ` 96.50 Crores in RE 2016-17, the expenditure under Indian Institute of
Space Science and Technology (IIST) was ` 46.00 Crore as on January 2017. However, at the end of
March 2017, the expenditure under the programme was ` 76.50 Crore which is about 80% of the RE
allocations. The under-utilisation was due to phasing out of part of the expenditure towards campus
development work at IIST to next financial year. The Department has initiated necessary actions to
monitor the quarterly spending by the institute to ensure that the allocations made in 2017-18 are fully
realized and the physical targets set for the Institute are met.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation
The Committee hopes that the Department would utilise the budgetary allocation of 
` 100.00 crore
in BE 2017-18 optimally by exercising earnest financial prudence. (Para 16.6)
Action Taken
The Department has already communicated the budgetary allocations and the quarterly targets for
expenditure for the year 2017-18 to IIST and the Autonomous Body had also started proactive actions
to ensure spendability of the allotted fund of ` 100.00 Crore which is being reviewed periodically.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
SEMI CONDUCTOR LABORATORY (SCL)
Recommendation
The Committee notes that Semi-Conductor Laboratory (SCL) could utilise only 
` 119.48 crore in
2016-17 (upto January 2017) out of the reduced RE allocation of ` 259.87 crore, which is not even 50
percent of the RE allocation. This effectively means that ` 140.39 crore is left to be spent in remaining
less than two months of the financial year. The Committee feels that if Department had proper planning
and periodic evaluation mechanism in place, such underutilisation of allocated funds could have been
avoided. The Committee, accordingly, recommends the Department to devise a robust internal financial
monitoring system to check underutilisation of funds and take corrective measures to ensure that the
allocation made is utilised judiciously and fully. (Para 17.4)
Action Taken
Against an allocation of Rs 259.87 Crores in RE 2016-17, the expenditure under Semi-Conductor
Laboratory (SCL) was Rs 119.48 Crore as on January 2017. However, at the end of March 2017, the

15
expenditure under the programme was ` 224.00 Crore which is about 86% of the RE allocations. The
funds could not be utilised fully as a key software required for design and development could not be
procured during the financial year. The Department has initiated necessary actions to monitor the
quarterly spending by the laboratory to ensure that the allocations made in 2017-18 are fully realized and
the physical targets set for the Institute are met.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
NORTH EASTERN - SPACE APPLICATIONS CENTRE (NE-SAC), SHILLONG:
Recommendation
The Committee is not happy with the trend of underutilisation of funds by NE-SAC. It is evident
from the data furnished by the Department that NE-SAC failed to utilise the budgetary allocation of
` 14.02 crore in the year 2015-16 fully and could only spent 9.21 crore in the year 2015-16 which was
just 65.59 percent of the total allocation. The recurrence of the underutilisation also gets reflected in the
figures furnished by the Department with regard to the actual expenditure of ` 14.35 crore (upto January,
2017) for the year 2016-17. (Para 18.4)
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee as regards the financial performance of NE-SAC for the year
2015-16 are taken note of. The sub-optimal financial performance of the Autonomous Body in the year
2015-16 was largely owing to the surrender of funds under 'Grants for creation of capital assets'
amounting to ` 1.63 Crore and that under 'Grant-in-Aid General' amounting to Rs 3.14 Crore ( w.r .t RE
2015-16). However, based on the progress of activities undertaken by the autonomous body, the Department
could expend the entire RE allocation for 2016-17 and the final expenditure position has improved to
` 17.24 Crore as on March 2017.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation
The Committee expresses its discontent over the failure of NE-SAC to utilise the budgetary allocation
fully. The data indicates that underutilisation has become a characteristic of NE-SAC. The Committee,
thus, recommends that the Department should take the desired corrective actions to keep a strong check
and balance over the methodology being opted by NE-SAC for utilising the budgetary allocation.
(Para 18.5)
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Committee are taken note of. The Department has already communicated
the budgetary allocations and the quarterly targets for expenditure for the year 2017-18 to NE-SAC and
the Autonomous Body had also started proactive actions to ensure optimum utilisation of the allotted fund
of ` 21.63 Crore in 2017-18.

16
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the steps taken by the
NE-SAC would yield the desired results.
Recommendation
The Committee hopes that the Department would monitor the budget utilisation of NE-SAC in
2017-18 and hopes that the targets set by NE-SAC for the year 2017-18 are realised within the stipulated
time as envisioned by NE-SAC. (Para 18.6)
Action Taken
The recommendations of PSC are taken note of. The Department has already communicated the
budgetary allocations and the quarterly targets for expenditure for the year 2017-18 to NE-SAC and the
Autonomous Body had also started proactive actions to ensure optimum utilisation of the allotted fund
of ` 21.63 Crore in 2017-18.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation
The Committee appreciates the activities undertaken by the Centre for the overall growth of our
North Eastern Region (NER) with the help of its expertise in space technologies. The Committee during
its study visit to NE-SAC observed that space technologies could be used in tackling vector borne
diseases like dengue and Chikungunya by right kind of advices to the locals for better protection. The
Committee, therefore, feels that in order to bring better awareness on even disease warning etc.,
NE-SAC can play an important role by effective use of its satellite based communication network.
(Para 18.8)
Action Taken
North Eastern Space Applications Centre (NESAC), Shillong in collaboration with Regional Medical
Research Centre (ICMR), Dibrugarh developed an early warning system for Japanese Encephalitis (JE)
disease for the endemic districts of Assam following an integrated approach using geospatial techniques,
meteorological data and data on disease epidemiology. The project, started in 2003, was validated for 5
years during the period 2008-2012 and now operationalised in three most JE prone districts in Assam,
viz., Dibrugarh, Tinsukia and Sivasagar. The project is now included as Programme of Translational
Research by ICMR and every year forecasting is issued to the concerned health authorities on disease
onset, disease intensity and disease prone villages of JE.
A user friendly open source GIS based software package named Japanese Encephalitis Early
Warning System (JEWS) has been developed for use of the concerned health authorities. The software
package has been formally handed over to the concerned health authorities in Assam during a workshop
organised in Guwahati, Assam in August 2014. Based on the forecast generated with the JEWS, Regional
Medical Research Centre (ICMR) issues advisories to the State Health department for taking various
control measures such as spraying of DDT, distribution of impregnated mosquito net, vaccination etc.

17
Under a EOAM funded project, NESAC has created digital database on six most important vector
borne diseases of NER viz., Malaria, JE, Chikungunya, Dengue, Filariasis and West Nine virus for all
the states of the region. Spatial and temporal distribution of disease cases has been mapped and disease
occurrence hotspots have been identified for suggesting intervention measures. Based on suggestions
given by the Honourable Parliamentarians, NESAC is planning to work towards developing early warning
system for diseases like Chikungunya and Dengue on a pilot mode in collaboration with ICMR and state
health departments.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation
The Committee is of the opinion that NER is a challenging area to work due to the inherent
complexity and topography of the Region making it all the more important and crucial to establish
backward and forward linkages at ground level for effective implementation of the space technology
inputs in the Region. The Committee believes that more interaction with the stakeholders on the issue
of disaster management in the Region can further enable the Centre to have better co-ordination with
them. The Committee also feels that the Centre should also impress upon the State Governments of the
Region for effective use of the information being generated by the Centre. (Para 18.9)
Action Taken
The suggestions offered by Hon'ble members of the Parliamentary Standing Committee are well
taken in the right spirit. North Eastern Regional Node for Disaster Risk Reduction (NER-DRR) has been
established at NESAC and is taking the lead role in generating space based inputs for disaster management
in the region. A number of activities have been taken up under the umbrella of NER-DRR, a few of which
are highlighted below:
• NESAC has been working closely with all the stakeholders in the region in the area of natural
resources management, satellite communication, disaster management etc. thereby supporting
in establishment of backward and forward linkages.
• An academic interface workshop organised during June, 2016 at NESAC provided the platform
for academic and R&D institutes in NER to collaborate with NESAC in initiating various
research and application projects including those from disaster management programmes.
• A one-day workshop on Forest Fire alerts and mitigation was organised at NESAC on Nov.
09, 2016. The workshop focused towards improving the space based inputs for forest alert
system, understanding field level requirements and to bring awareness at community level.
• A two days' workshop on "space technology inputs for Disaster Risk Reduction with special
emphasis on Early Warning, Preparedness and Mitigation" was organised jointly by North
Eastern Council (NEC) and NESAC during March 16-17, 2017 at NESAC. The workshop
covered all the natural hazards like floods, river bank erosion, landslides, earthquakes, cyclones,

18
thunderstorms, hailstorms, forest fires, disease epidemics etc. under the umbrella of North
Eastern Regional Node for Disaster Risk Reduction (NER-DRR).
• A daylong workshop on 'Recalling the Great Shillong Earthquake, 12th June 1897: Quest for
a Reliable & Effective Mitigation and Post Disaster Strategies' was organised by NESAC jointly
with NEC on June 12, 2017. The workshop facilitated more interaction with the stakeholders
on the issue of disaster preparedness and mitigation in NE region.
• Early warning on Thunderstorm and studies on earth quake precursors are the new areas of
research in the Centre. Doppler Weather Radar (DWR) established at Cherrapunjee is providing
a big fillip to the rainfall and thunderstorm related studies.
• NESAC has enhanced disaster related activities in providing the early warning services for
NER in (1) floods, (2) forest fire alerts, (3) thunderstorms, (4) JEWS and many other
disasters like landslides and sitcom based emergency response etc.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
PHYSICAL RESEARCH LABORATORY (PRL), AHMEDABAD
Recommendation
The Committee feels that creation of capital assets play a very important role in the overall
performance of any system. However, reduction in the allocation of funds towards creation of capital
assets is a matter of concern. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should sensitise
the concerned Ministry about the importance of capital assets in the overall performance of the Laboratory
and should seek higher allocation at RE stage so that no hindrance is caused for want of adequate funds
for the purpose. (Para 19.4)
Action Taken
When Grant-in-Aid Capital component of RE 2016-17 (Rs 67.00 Crore) is compared with Grant-
in-Aid capital component of BE 2017-18 (60.58 Crore), there appears to be a reduction of 6.42 Crore
in capital component. However, considering the time involved in purchasing the capital equipment, setting
up the laboratory infrastructure and operationalising the analytical facility, the capital component in the
actual grant required by the laboratory was only Rs 44.00 Crore. In the BE 2017-18, the capital
component is Rs 60.58 Crore which is Rs 16.58 Crore more than the actual grant released during
2016-17. The Department of Space has allocated the required budget for creation of capital assets in BE
2017-18 and any additional requirement of funds will be requested at RE stage.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation
The Committee expresses satisfaction on the activities carried out by the Udaipur Solar Observatory,
Mount Abu Infrared Observatory and Physical Research Laboratory. The Committee hopes that budget

19
allocation provided to PRL would be enhanced sufficiently to let it grow upto its full scope and potential
as a research and academic Institution. (Para 19.10)
Action Taken
The Department notes, with gratitude, the positive remarks of the Committee. An amount of
` 180.00 Crore has been allocated in BE 2017-18 for Physical Research Laboratory (PRL). The Department
will take due care to ensure that adequate funds are allocated to PRL at RE stage.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
SPACE APPLICATIONS CENTRE (SAC), AHMEDABAD
Recommendation
The Committee observes that the Space Applications Centre (SAC) is a major research and development
centre of ISRO and has played a key role in development in the field of Space Technologies. The
Committee appreciates the work done by SAC in the field of agriculture, climate change study/ monitoring,
biological atmosphere, etc which impact our citizens across the country. (Para 20.5)
Action Taken
The Department notes, with gratitude, the positive remarks of the Committee regarding the
achievements of Space Applications Centre (SAC).
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation
The Committee hopes that the Department would not only continue its efforts but also further
strengthen its research work in the areas of Theoretical Physics, Astronomy, Space & Atmospheric
Sciences and Planetary & Geo-Sciences with the help of increased allocation in BE 2017-18 and strive
to realise the targets envisaged for the year 2017-18. (Para 20.6)
Action Taken
The Department shall make focused efforts in its pursuit to strengthen Research and Development
activities in the areas of Space Science & Planetary Exploration, Satellite Technology, Space Transportation
Systems, Atmospheric Sciences etc. and strive towards achieving greater heights while optimally utilising
the budgetary resources.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that there would be no let up
in the efforts of the Department to achieve the desired results.

20
ISRO SATELLITE CENTRE (ISAC), BENGALURU
Recommendation
The Committee observes that ISAC is a premier institution of the country for design, development
& integration of Communication, Remote sensing, scientific and small satellites. The Committee commends
the Department of Space and ISAC for having successfully contributed towards research & development
in the area of advanced state of art technologies, total management of all satellite missions, creation
of vibrant space industry for realisation of space systems, technology transfer, academia interface etc.
and having made the country proud of its achievements. (Para 21.5)
Action Taken
The Department notes, with gratitude, the positive remarks of the Committee regarding the
achievements of ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC).
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
INTERNATIONAL CO-OPERATION
Recommendation
The Committee is surprised to note that the Department has not spent even a single penny from the
budgetary allocation of 
` 2.00 crore (RE) during 2016-17 meant for the purpose of International
Co-operation. The Committee is at a loss to figure out as to why the Department could not utilise a single
penny upto January, 2017 on account of International Co-operation. The Committee, however, hopes that
the funds earmarked under this head for the year 2017-18 will be utilised optimally. (Para 22.3)
Action Taken
The expenditure under International Co-operation consists of expenditure towards Centre for Space
Science and Technology Education in Asia and the Pacific (CSSTE-AP)/Other Programmes. Unlike the
expenditure towards other Programmes/Projects of DOS/ISRO which follows a regular pace, the expenditure
under 'CSSTE-AP/Other Programmes' follows an international calendar and falls due only towards the
end of the financial year. It may be noted that the final expenditure under International Co-operation as
on 31.03.2017 was ` 1.92 Crore and the Department could utilise its RE allocations for the Programme
to the extent of 96%.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
FINANCIAL FLEXIBILITY OF SCIENTIFIC MINISTRY/DEPARTMENT:
Recommendation
The Committee is of the opinion that the Government while allocating funds in favour of our
scientific Departments/Ministries should also consider invariably that these scientific agencies of the
Government deserve a lot more financial support of the Government to not only sustain their growth but
also to venture into new scientific assignment without having the fear of failure. The Committee strongly

21
feels that endeavours of our scientific agencies must be supported financially by the Government
wholeheartedly so as to enable them to carry out their mandate efficiently and for optimal utilisation
of the capacities in the direction of scientific advancement in the country. (Para 23.1)
Action Taken
The Department receives with gratitude the positive views of the Committee. The Department is
grateful to the financial support extended by the Government of India for space programme over the
years. It may be appropriate to mention here that during 2016-17, the Department was also made
available required funds in all the three batches of Supplementary Grants so as to honour various
commitments and additional requirements. However, the Department would be happy to harness additional
resources made available to it in its pursuit for national development.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation
During the meeting held on 16th February 2017, attention of the Committee was drawn towards
the audit paras contained in the Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) reports pertaining to the
Department of Space. The Committee, on perusal of the audit paras of C&AG , wonders whether audit
paras on the organisations falling under 'Strategic Sector' should be placed in public domain. Therefore,
the Committee urges the Government to take up the matter with C&AG and impress upon them to avoid
it otherwise the country might lose competitive advantage over other countries. Further, the Committee
is of the view that it will be in the fitness of things if our scientific agencies are given a bit more
financial flexibility in their financial scheme of things so as to enable them to carry out their mandate
smoothly and efficiently, and auditors should be sensitised in this context. (Para 23.2)
Action Taken
The R&D activities undertaken by the Department of Space involves experimenting on multiple
options as outcome from one option is not always guaranteed. Technologically challenging missions also
calls for certain amount of risk taking to achieve success. Considering the above, the Department is also
of the view echoed by the Committee that the Scientific Agencies are given fair amount of financial
flexibility to carry out their mandate smoothly and efficiently. It is requested that the Audit takes this
aspect into consideration while auditing the activities of Scientific Departments.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
OUTREACH PROGRAMME OF THE DEPARTMENT
Recommendation
The Committee during its meeting held on 16th February, 2017 had observed that people of the
country including elected representatives are not fully aware of the excellent work being done by the

22
Department of Space or much about the Department itself which may be beneficial for a very big
segment of the society like farmers, fishermen, students, research scholars, industries, etc. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should chalk out an interactive comprehensive awareness
programme with a calendar of events using social media platforms, radio, television etc. meant for
students and general public but most importantly for all the elected representatives right from district
level i.e. Member of Zilla Panchayats, Legislative Assemblies and Councils and Members of Parliament.
The Committee strongly feels that elected representatives can play an important role in making their
constituents aware of scientific development and ultimately developing scientific temperament in the
public at large. (Para 24)
Action Taken
India has made significant progress in the important areas of space science as well as technology
and space based services and touching all facets of human life in the country. Creating awareness among
the general public, especially students, about the benefits that have accrued from India's applications
driven space programme to the society and the significant progress made by the country in space science
and technology has been given utmost importance. Media campaigns on important events, campaign
through social media, webcasting of launches, organisation of exhibitions, educational activities like
lectures, interactive sessions with students, quiz programmes, water rocket making and launching events,
publications, video documentaries, an Augmented Reality Application 'SAKAAR' for Android devices, etc.,
have helped in not only keeping the public abreast of the latest developments in our space programme
but also to evoke interest in them on the nuances of space science and technology.
In order to effectively reach large student community and the general public across the country,
the department has been organising ISRO exhibitions in different parts of India at educational institutions.
Colourful exhibition panels highlighting the achievements of India in space and explaining the interesting
issues associated with space flight, scaled models of India's Launch Vehicles and Satellites including the
immensely successful Mars Orbiter spacecraft, are displayed in these exhibitions which are visited by
lakhs of students. These exhibitions also feature very popular video capsules on Indian Space Programme.
Lectures, interactive sessions with students and teachers, quiz programmes and the hugely popular Water
Rocket launches are part of ISRO's outreach programme which has captured the imagination of students.
Information about the Indian Space Programme is also disseminated through the print and electronic
media as well as social media and through internet by webcasting the launches of Indian satellites so that
they will have global outreach. Prominent stories written in English and vernacular news papers and
magazines have made ISRO a household name in India and familiar abroad. The special video programmes
produced by ISRO and telecasted by Doordarshan and the Independent video documentaries on Indian
Space Programme produced by national and international electronic media, interviews of Chairman, ISRO
broadcasted by TV and Radio in English and Vernacular, have further enhanced ISRO's visibility across
the globe.
Additionally, the department brings out colourful and informative brochures on various space missions
and colourful publications on important programs like Mars Orbiter Mission, about which the department
has brought out colourful book for students in English and ten Indian languages including Hindi. All the

23
ISRO publications are available on ISRO website which also features latest and detailed information in
the form of text, pictures, videos and animations and special publications. ISRO also has a presence in
Facebook as well as Twitter for quick dissemination of information to the world at large.
Enhanced efforts are being made to organise ISRO exhibitions in different parts of India by
presenting information in Hindi and much of the major information published by the department is
bilingual. Major exhibitions highlighting the achievements of India in space are being organised. The
department is actively and conspicuously participating in an exhibition being organised by the scientific
ministries/Departments under the purview of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests in the Parliament House Complex during
July 27 - August 11, 2017 to appraise the Parliamentarians about unique capability and potential of our
space based services. All these efforts have been pursued in earnest by the department, thereby increasing
the awareness of the common man about the nature, importance and significance of Indian Space
Programme and its contribution to the national development.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.

MINUTES

II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 1st January, 2018 in Room No. '63', First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
5. Kum. Sushmita Dev
6. Dr. K. Gopal
7. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
8. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
9. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
10. Shri Nagendra Singh
11. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and wished
them a happy and prosperous new year. He informed the Members that the meeting had been convened
to consider and adopt the draft 302nd to 308th reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in reports of the Committee on the Demands
for Grants (2017-18) pertaining to Ministry of Earth Sciences, Departments of Biotechnology, Science
& Technology, Scientific & Industrial Research, Space, Atomic Energy and Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change respectively. The Committee, then, considered the draft 302nd to 308th
Reports and adopted the same.
27

28
3. The Committee also decided to present/lay its 302nd to 308th reports to both the Houses of
Parliament on the 4th January, 2018. The Committee authorised the Chairman and, in his absence, Shri
S.R. Balasubramoniyan, M.P. and Shri Prasanna Acharya, M.P. respectively to present the reports in the
Rajya Sabha and Shri Shivaji A. Patil, M.P. and in his absence, Kumari Sushmita Dev, M.P. to lay the
reports on the Table of Lok Sabha.
4. ***   ***   ***
5. ***   ***   ***
6. ***   ***   ***
7. ***   ***   ***
8. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3.45 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.