PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS  
 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTIETH REPORT 
 
ON 
THE ACADEMY OF SCIENTIFIC AND INNOVATIVE RESEARCH BILL, 2010 
 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 13TH DECEMBER, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 13TH DECEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2010/ AGRAHAYANA, 1932 (SAKA) 
Email:  rsc-st@sansad.nic.in   
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
 
C O N T E N T S 
PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                             
2. PREFACE             
3. REPORT    
4.    ANNEXURE 
5. MINUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
    
 
      
 
        
  
  

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS (2010-11) 
---------- 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy  –– Chairman 
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shir Janardan Dwivedi 
3. Shri Anil H. Lad  
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
5. Dr. Chandan Mitra  
6. Shri Saman Pathak 
*7. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian 
*8. Shri Jabir Husain 
*9. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
*10. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
 LOK SABHA 
11. Shri K.C. Singh Baba    
   12. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg   
13. Shri Udayanraje Bhonsale  
14. Shri P.C. Chacko  
15. Shri Ninong Ering  
16. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi  
17. Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda  
18. Shrimati Kaisar Jahan  
19. Dr. Charan Das Mahant  
20. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal  
21. Shri Jayaram Pangi  
22. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi  
23. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu  
24. Shri Francisco Sardinha  
25. Shri Balakrishna K. Shukla  
26. Dr. Rajan Sushant  
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta  
28. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai  
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava  
30. Shri Akhilesh Yadav  
31. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav  
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. D.B. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Alok Chatterjee,  Director 
Shri V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
 
*    Nominated w.e.f. 21st  September,  2010 
   
            
    

  PREFACE 
 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-re lated Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests,  having been authorized by the Committee 
to present the Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Twentieth Report on "The 
Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Bill, 2010. 
2. In the meetings of the Committee held on 22 nd, 28 th, 29 th, October and 18 th 
November, 2010; the Secretaries of the Minist ries/Departments of Government of India 
viz. Department of Scientific and Industr ial Research and Legislative Department & 
Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice) and Department of Atomic 
Energy; besides various experts, organiza tion; tendered oral evidence on the various 
aspects related to "The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Bill, 2010". 
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministries/Departments of 
Government of India and experts/repres entatives for rendering their valuable 
views/clarifications sought by the Members of the Committee. 
4. In the meeting held on 8 th December, 2010 the Committee considered the draft 
report and adopted the same. 
 
 
NEW DELHI                DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY 
December 8, 2010                                CHAIRMAN 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing  
Committee  on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests 
 
REPORT 
Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Bill, 2010 
 
  The Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in cons ultation with the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok 
Sabha, referred* ‘The Academy of Scie ntific and Innovative Research Bill, 
2010’(Annexure-I) as introdu ced in Lok Sabha on 30 th July, 2010 and pending therein, to 
the Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests for 
examination and report. 
2.  The Committee held its first meeti ng with the Secretar y and other senior 
officials of the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research on the 22nd October, 2010, 
for a preliminary discussion on the various provisions of the Bill. In all, the Committee 
held four meetings to hear various experts, organizations and Secretaries of the concerned 
Ministries/Departments on the various  aspects of the Bill on the 22nd, 28th, 29th October 
and 18th November, 2010.  
3. Considering the significance of the B ill, the Committee also issued a Press 
Release in the national dailies and other re gional newspapers on the 23rd September, 2010, 
inviting memoranda containing  
____________________________________________________________ 
*Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II dated 15th September, 2010.

suggestions/ views/ comments of experts/ institutions/ organizations interested in the 
subject matter of the Bill. In response to the Press Release, the Committee received 13 
memoranda on the Bill, which were examined and out of these 8 memoranda were found to 
be substantive in nature, which were circul ated to the members for perusal and also 
forwarded to the Department of Scien tific & Industrial Research for their 
comments/observations. The comments of the De partment were also circulated to the 
Members of the Committee. 
4.  The Committee heard the views of a number of experts viz. Prof. V.S. 
Ramamurthy, Former Secretary, Department of Science & Technology, Prof. Deepak 
Pental, ex-Vice Chancellor, University of  Delhi; Prof. Sukhadeo Thorat, Chairman, 
University Grants Commission and Prof. Dine sh Singh, Vice-Chancellor, University of 
Delhi. The Committee also heard the represen tatives from the Confederation of Indian 
Industry(CII), to know about the views of the Indian in dustry towards the proposed 
legislation. 
5.  Since the proposed Bill is likely to have far reaching consequences on the 
scientific scenario, the Committee also heard the views of Secretaries of the 
Ministries/Departments of Government of India viz. Legislative Department & Department 
of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice) and desired to know from them the reasons 
for issuing a notification for  setting  up  an  interim  Academy even  though  the  Bill  was  
to  be  passed  by  the  Parliament.  The Committee also heard the views of the Department 
of Atomic Energy to elicit its opinion on the Bill.  
6.  The Committee took up clause-by-clause  consideration of th e draft report on 
the 8
th December, 2010.   Fourteen Members atte nded the meeting on that day and adopted 
the report by broad consensus.   
7. Background of the Bill  
7.1 The concept of what ultimately cons titutes economy or wealth in national 
perspective keeps on changing with the passage of time.  There was a time when resource – 
mineral, material, low cost la bour and technology, etc. were sine quo non  of a rich and 
thriving economy but today it is no more so.  Today knowledge is economy and it is said 
that the country’s prosperity can be measur ed by the number of Engineering PhDs it 
produces.  That also partly e xplains why small nations like Israel, Sweden, Japan, Korea 
etc. are doing so well in terms of economic advancement.   
7.2 The Committee was informed that prior to 1950’s, Universities of Calcutta, 
Madras and Bombay together with Indian In stitute of Sciences, The Bose Institute, The 
Indian Association for the Cultivation of Scie nce and after that a l ong line of Universities 
and Institutions provided fertile ground for nouris hing and developing science in India.  In 
1950’s, a chain of national laboratories came up to shape the future of science in the 
country.  When the nation wanted to achieve self-reliance in area of science & technology 
in the wake of denial of technology, Nationa l Laboratories became the major driving force 
in this endeavour between 1970’s and 1990’s and did a wonderful job in strategic sector.  
Till 1990, India produced more PhDs than China, Korea or other Asian countries.  But post 
1990, the scenario started changi ng and at present the position is that despite institutions 
like IITs and Indian Institute of Sciences (IISC), India has a severe shortage of PhDs in the 
field of Science and Engineering.  As per the data made available to the Committee, India 
produced around 8,420 PhDs in Science and Engineering combined, as compared to 22,953 
in China; 3,779 in South Korea; 9,961 in U. K. and 30,452 in U.S.A. in 2006.  In 

Engineering Science, India produced only 1,058 PhDs as against 12,130 in China; 2,267 in 
South Korea; 2,204 in U.K. and 7,402 in U.S.A. 
7.3 The Committee was informed as to why even developed countries were 
stressing on generating more and more PhDs but in India even, IITs were not able to attract 
a very large number engineering PhD students.   If such a shortage persists, it would 
seriously affect our global competitiveness and economic growth in the long run. 
7.4 The Committee was also informed that the turn around in nu mber of PhDs in 
China had been mainly because of Chines e Academy of Science which had 92 national 
laboratories and is structurally similar to CS IR which has 37 laboratories.  The Chinese 
Academy of Sciences carries out academic ac tivities and has produced a large number of 
PhDs through its Graduates University of Sciences and the University of Science & 
Technology of China.   
7.5 Keeping this background in view, the Academy of Scientific and Innovative 
Research Bill, 2010 has been formulated, mainly  to keep pace with  other countries in 
producing more PhDs in the field of integrativ e and inter-disciplinary areas of science and 
engineering.   
8. Need of the Bill
 
8.1 It is a well known fact that future l eadership in the area of science and 
engineering depends largely on the number of  educated and trained manpower in inter-
disciplinary and integrative areas of science and e ngineering.  It is also a fact that there is a 
serious shortage of workforce for the knowledge  based wealth generation in India and this 
is because of the fact there is a shortage of institutions which offer advanced courses in the 
field of inter-disciplinary study and resear ch.  When the Committee inquired from the 
Secretary, Department of Scien tific and Industrial Research, ‘W hat is the neces sity of this 
Bill and how is the situation going to change w ith the establishment of this Academy’, the 
Secretary replied that there was abundant availability of young students who were keen and 
eager to pursue higher studies in  frontier and trans-disciplinary areas.  He cited an example 
by saying that this year environmental engineering started a programme called 
‘Environmental Modeling and Optimization – a Post Graduate Programme’ and number of 
applications received for   B-Tech. was 852 for only 8 seats, which roughly works out to 
more than 100 applications per seat.  He added that this showed that if we were going to 
give a formal degree, there was a huge demand and this taking away 8 out of 800 available 
was a very small number and the country needed more.  He further added that to rejuvenate 
engineering laboratories in the CSIR system, there were not enough Ph Ds available.  We 
do not have PhDs, to meet our requirement, pr oduced and that is why the Post Graduate 
Research Training Programme was started all over the 10 engineering laboratories.  The 
students are so excited and so happy that they  have sent emails all over the country and 
their juniors have now rushed this year ra ising the number of applications to 26,600 for 
only 110 positions.   
8.2  Unless ample and adequate opportunities  are created indige nously, there is a 
possibility of India losing a large number of students interested in inter-disciplinary areas 
of science and engineering to other countries .  The Academy of Scie ntific and Innovative 
Research could be a world class institu tion of national importance for imparting 
instructions and awarding degrees in emer ging areas of science and technology.  The Bill 
aims to retain these students in the Indian education system and not allow them to move to 
greener pasture overseas, with its emphasis on awarding primarily Post Graduate and PhD. 
Degrees.   

8.3  Yet another advantage in establishing  the proposed academy lies in increasing 
number of researchers in a cost effective manner without the requirement of any significant 
gestation period.  CSIR with its existing academ ic resources available at its cluster 37 
laboratories covering seven varied areas of sciences is advantageously positioned to 
provide faculty out of its 5,000 scientists e ngaged in cutting edge research and innovative 
work, a large number of them being eminent sc holars and at least 50  per cent of them 
having the capability of teaching science and engineering.  Thus, they would provide a 
faculty strength of 2,500 with no new investment in terms of salary, etc.  Besides CSIR is 
already engaged in guiding and producing 450 Ph Ds. in Science and Engineering annually, 
the highest by any Indian entity, in collaboration with Universities/ Institutions.  In various 
areas of inter-disciplinary sciences, CSIR also hosts the largest number of Ph.D. students in 
its 37 constituents laboratories and pr oduces 3,311 Ph.Ds. annually.  Cluster-wise 
distribution of students enrolled for Ph.D. (as on 1st September, 2010) is as follows: 
Cluster Laboratory Total 
Chemical Sciences SLRI, CECRI, CSMCRI, CIMFR, IICT, IIP, NCL, 
NEIST, NIIST 
1570 
Biological Sciences CCMB, CDRI, CF TRI, CIMAP, IGIB, IHBT, IICB, 
IIIM, IMTECH, IITR, NBRI 
1209 
Physical Sciences CEERI, CSIO, NGRI, NIO, NPL 386 
Engineering 
Sciences 
AMPRI, CBRI, CGCRI, CMERI, CRRI, IMMT, 
NAL, NEERI, NML, SERC 
140 
Information 
Sciences 
C-MMACS, NISCAIR, NISTADS, URDIP 6 
Total 3311 
8.4  Through this Academy, the academic poten tial of CSIR is expected to go up 
and it is estimated to produce 1,000 PhDs. in  science & technology and about 120 PhDs. in 
engineering every year from the 5th the year onwards.   
8.5 The Kelkar Committee set up in 2003 to  review the activities of constituent 
laboratories of CSIR recommended that “CSIR laboratories should inter-alia strive towards 
creating an ambience of nurturing excellenc e and high quality human resources on 
sustainable basis by enlargin g upon the scope and features of the present programmes….  
CSIR laboratories should be encouraged to ta ke on the role of research universities and 
seek deemed university status”.  It is in conformity with the recommendations of the Kelkar 
Committee and also as an affirmation of the realization of CSIR that there was the need for 
high human resource development for India to lead in innovation driven world of tomorrow 
that the Academy has been conceived.   
8.6 Yet another advantage of th is Bill is that the Acad emy will indirectly help 
CSIR also.  Any organisation attains greate r heights and achieves excellence in its 
endeavours only if it has the best people to suppo rt and sustain it.  To fill-in the gap of 200 
individuals of its scientific  workforce caused due to su perannuation every year, is a 
formidable task for CSIR, due to non-availabi lity of high caliber people with the present 
system in the country.  It is expected that th e Academy will be in a position to cater to the 
high caliber manpower required in the CSIR in particular and the country, in general.   
9. Salient features of the Bill
 
9.1 The Academy to be called the “A cademy of Scientific and Innovative 
Research” shall be a body corporate;   
 

9.2 The Academy shall inter-alia dissemina te advanced knowledge in science & 
technology by providing teaching a nd research facilities in such branches of learning as it 
may deem fit, particularly, in emerging areas and such areas as may emerge in future and 
undertake inter-disciplinary studies and research; 
9.3  The Academy would establish linkages with industries in India and abroad for 
promotion of science & technol ogy and collaborate in appropr iate areas in the field of 
science & technology with reputed universities and institutions in India or outside India; 
9.4  The Academy shall primarily focus on research and imparting instruction in 
such areas as are not ordinarily taught in regular academic universities in India.  
9.5 The curricula, pedagogy and evaluation of the Academy sh all be innovative 
and directed towards creating highest quality  personnel with cross-disciplinary knowledge, 
aiming to provide leaders in the field of science and technology.   
9.6 The Academy shall use the infrastruc ture and scientific manpower of the 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research for teaching and research purposes for mutual 
benefit.  
9.7 The Academy shall be an institution of  national importance and shall functions 
as an autonomous institution; 
9.8 The Academy shall grant diplomas or cer tificates and confer degrees or other 
academic distinctions on the basis of eval uation and to hold its examinations, as the 
Academy, may, from time to time determine.  This clause also proposes to engage 
scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Rese arch as Faculty in imparting 
instruction and conducting research in the Academy.   
9.9 The Academy shall provide distance educ ation in such bran ches of learning 
and to such persons as it may determine; 
9.10 The authorities of the Academy shall be – The Board, Senate, Director, Board 
of Studies and such other authorities as may be declared by the statutes to be the authorities 
of the Academy. 
9.11 The Board of the Academy shall consis t of a Chairperson to be appointed by 
the President of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research on the recommendations 
of a selection committee.  Director-General CSIR shall be Ex-Officio Vice-Chairperson of 
the Academy.   
9.12 The President of the Indian National Science Academy; the Chairman, Atomic 
Energy Commission; the Chairman, Space Commissi on; the Chairman University Grants 
Commission and the Finance Secretary and the Director of the Academy shall be the Ex-
Officio members of the Board.  Besides, Heads of three premier institutions imparting 
education in science & technology; four disti nguished scientists or academicians of global 
eminence; three eminent industrialists or techno logists; four distingu ished or outstanding 
scientists or Directors of laboratories of CSIR shall be the nominated members of the 
Board; 
9.13 The Chairperson of the Board shall be the Chancellor of the Academy.   
9.14 The Academy shall maintain and retain a fund to which shall be credited (a) all 
fees (including tuition fees) and other charge s received by the Academy; (b) all monies 
received by the Academy by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefa ctions, bequests or 
transfers; (c) monies for projects undertaken  by the Academy; (d) income from investment 
made by the academy or from any other source; (e) the funds received from the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research, by way of lo an or otherwise; (f) a ll monies received by 
the Academy in any other manner or from any other source.   

 
9.15 The functioning of the Academy shall be  reviewed once in 4 years by persons 
of eminence to be appointed by the CSIR.  
10. Structure of the Academy 
10.1 The Academy shall have the structure of a multi-centric institution based on a 
“Hub and the Spokes” model.  CSIR Headquart ers, located at Anusandhan Bhawan, Rafi 
Marg, New Delhi acting as a hu b, shall be responsib le for centralized administrative 
functions.  It is connected with all the CSIR laboratories which are the spokes.  There 37 
laboratories of CSIR will act as actual campuses  or centres for different subjects or areas 
based on their respective specializations.  
11.  Observations/recommendations of the Committee  
11.1  The Committee is in broad agreemen t with the purpose and provisions of the 
Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Bill, 2010, but it has certain apprehensions, 
reservations/concerns that need to be addressed while making the Academy fully 
operational.   
11.2  The Committee finds that the Academ y on Scientific and Innovative Research 
Bill, 2010 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 30
th July, 2010, whereas the notification 
enabling operationalisation of certain essen tial features of the Bill was issued on 17 th July, 
2010, i.e., just 13 days before its introduction in the Lok Sabha.  The Committee wonders 
that when the Bill was to be introduced mere ly two weeks later in the Lok Sabha why was 
it that certain basic provisi ons of the Bill were actua lly operationaliz ed through a 
Government Notification.  The Committee feels th at it is a matter of concern that pending 
consideration and approval of the Parliament, certain major provisions of the proposed Bill 
were operationalized.  The Committee even felt th at this was an attempt on the part of the 
Government to take the Parliament for granted.   
11.3  Responding to the concerns expresse d by the Committee, Secretary, DSIR 
submitted that the Cabinet, while approving a Cabinet note and the Bill, took a Resolution 
based on the urgency of the matter that an  interim academy would get the preparatory 
positions created by the time the Parliament cleared it. He stated that the idea was to create 
an interim academy through a resolution and when it was approved by the Parliament it 
would be converted into a full-fledged academ y.  This has been done to facilitate the 
Academy to commence its Academic activities as early as possible so as to meet the 
heightened expectations creat ed about the Academy particul arly as around 1,380 research 
fellows in various CSIR laboratories were  awaiting registration for PhD. under the 
proposed Academy.  He further added that as S ecretary to the Govt. of India, he has an 
understanding, that there is an executive power vested in  the Government by which a 
resolution can be passed and hence technically speaking, there was no violation of any law 
in setting up the interim Academy.  He also cited an example of Indian Institute of Science 
Education Research (IISER) which has been functioning for the last 3 to 4 years awaiting 
approval of Parliament.  He, ho wever, suggested that the Law Secretary could be the best 
person to clarify the position in this regard.   
11.4  Secretary, Legislative Department, Mini stry of Law & Justice when confronted 
with the issue, submitted his reply in three parts: first, Constitutional position; second, 
Precedents and third the instant case.  Justif ying the establishment of an interim Academy 
through Gazette Notification, he referred to Ar ticle 73 of the Constitution of India which 
inter-alia provides that the executive power of  the Union extends to the matters with 
respect to which Parliament ha s power to make laws.  Sec ondly, there are instances like 

Pension Fund Regulatory and Developmen t Authority (PFRDA) which has been 
established even though the Bill  introduced to give it statutor y status has not been enacted 
till date.  Similarly, Securities and Excha nge Board of India (SEBI) and Insurance 
Regulatory Development Author ity (IRDA) before their en actment, functioned through a 
resolution of the Government of India.  And thirdly, coming to the instant case, there was a 
resolution of the cabinet passed for establishment of the interim academy and the same has 
been reflected in Clause 7 of the Bill.  Thus, this Bill contains provisions for harmonizing 
and merging the existing inst itution with th e proposed Academy as and when it gets 
statutory status after passage of this Bill by the Parliament.  However, when Secretary 
Legislative Department was confronted with the question of propriety and not of legality of 
the matter which has been placed before Parliament for its consideration and 
simultaneously operationalising it through a re solution of the Government, he submitted 
that it is for the administrative Ministry to explain the urgency behind this exercise.   
11.5  The Committee, further, asked the Secretary, Legislativ e Department: ‘…..If 
the Bill was passed with some amendments th at go contrary to the actions taken by the 
interim Committee what would happen?’  The S ecretary replied that the statute prevails 
over the executive action.  He was further asked that when the Bill was pending, can 
executive order override or go beyond this scope of the Bill.  The Secretary replied in the 
negative.  He submitted that Article 73 says that the executive actions are Pari-Materia 
with the legislative power of the Parliament.   
11.6  The Committee takes note of the argu ments advanced by the Secretaries, 
DSIR and Legislative Deptt., but is of the opinion that it would have been appropriate 
if the Academy had been set up only after the Parliament has passed the Bill.  
11.7  The Committee apprehended that setting up of an academy of this kind may 
affect the functioning of the existing 504 universities spread over the country.   
11.8  Secretary, DSIR stated that deve lopment of human resources and the 
university system is primarily the concern of Govt. of India.  But as Secretary, DSIR and 
D.G., CSIR his worry was to ca rry on industrial research.  If  CSIR laboratories do not get 
engineering PhDs, they will have to be closed down.  So the first point was that this was a 
case of mere survival of laboratories – to produce its own human resources so that it can fill 
in talent vacuum.  He further stated that th is is how the Department of Atomic Energy and 
the Department of Space had gone to produ ce their own human resources.  The way 
Atomic energy has produced its own Chairman after Chairman, in the same way one has to 
make sure that engineering laboratories can produce talented people and there was no need 
to bring IIT Professors as Directors of CSIR laboratories.   
11.9  Secondly, the Universities’ mandate across the world, is  to do basic and 
curiosity driven research.  No University offers a training programme in technology 
transfer from laboratory to the market place.  An expert who appeared before the 
Committee informed that one of th e serious criticisms of the Indi an system is that research 
done in laboratories does not get converted into t echnologies for commercialization.  The 
reason is that technology transfer from mind to market place is not a one step process.  This 
is like a chain.  One has to do basic research in the Universities, convert it into technology 
after assessing the need  of the industry, take it on a pilot basis, workout the economics of 
this and then finally transfer it to the indus try.  Universities are very strong in basic 
research, the first link, but the other links are totally unattended.  Further, we have a very 
large number of good quality publications, but  nothing results in a technology which is 
commercialized.  There are no Indian products anywhere in the inte rnational technology 

market.  In such a situation, one option is to  start new research uni versities which would, 
however, need major investment.  But, those i nvestments have already been made in CSIR.  
The facilities exist, the manpowe r exists, but there is no direct  connection with the student 
community and there is no formal system of training them not only in basic research, but 
also in technology transfer from laboratories to the market place.  That is why, it was 
thought to convert CSIR into a system which can train people in those areas in which we do 
not have an expertise today but  we need it in future.  Resp onding to the main apprehension 
of the Committee, i.e., the Academy competi ng with the Universities, Secretary, DSIR 
made it very clear with that this Academy will deal with subjects not ordinarily dealt with 
in any universities.  He further added – “o ur job is to produce something that is not 
produced anywhere”.  One of the experts who appeared before the Committee also 
supported the contention of the Secretary, DSIR  and stated that it was not competition, 
actually it was coexistence to strengthen both.   
11.10 The Committee was further informed that the strengthening of university 
system was a sort of an independent issue.  In the 11
th Five Year Plan, there has been a 
huge initiative to increase the number of Univ ersities, as well as, to  strengthen the existing 
institutions, as it was felt th at higher education had been neglected in the past.  The 
Committee was further informed that a Committ ee has been set up under the chairmanship 
of Prof. M.M. Sharma to revise science edu cation.  Presently, an amount of Rs. 600 Crores 
has been allocated to science education and every year, Rs. 200 Crores  are being spent for 
strengthening laboratories, instituting fellowshi p and for increase in the faculties.  Thus, 
science has been brought on a higher agenda in the UGC.  The Committee takes note of the 
assurance given by the Secretary, DSIR in this regard.   
11.11  Since, one of the main objectives of  establishing the Academy of Scientific 
and Innovative Research is to substantially increase the number of PhDs. in integrative and 
inter-disciplinary areas of science and e ngineering, the Committee inquired from the 
Secretary, DSIR if the index of  scientific progress is dependent on the number of PhDs. 
being produced and if any track record of PhD. candidates are maintained to see if they are 
productively engaged and applying their innovative  researches in their professional career.  
The Secretary DSIR replied that we were today as a nation because of the number of PhDs. 
we have produced, the number of IITs we produced, the number of institutions that we 
produced and the number of people we trained.  It is very difficult to  say if our products 
eventually worked or not, but all I can say is that something must be special which the 
country has done that many of us are back in the country in spite of the other opportunities 
available abroad. Even if some of the PhD. students left Science and became civil servants, 
it does not mean that the country has lost a nything.  Higher qualification always gives the 
nation some assets.  The performance of the laboratories and scientif ic institutions, is 
closely related to the number of both young and experienced scientists and PhDs. that the 
laboratory has.   
11.12  The  Committee  feels  that  while  we  must  strive  to  produce  more  and  
m o r e   P h D s . ,   w e   m u s t   a l s o  focus  our  attention  to  advance  the  frontiers  of  
production,  productivity  and  profitability  for  societal good.  It is further of the 
opinion that while degree programmes are important, non-degree programmes are 
equally important.  The Academy should , therefore, foster non-degree programmes 
also which will help upgrade the technical capability of small-scale, rural and food 
processing industries in the country.  In stitutions like the Khadi and Village 
Industries Commission are stagnating becaus e of lack of technological upgrading.  

The Committee is of the   view   that   this   is   an   area   where CSIR apart from 
working for big industries should focus and concentrate on.  Big industries can go 
anywhere in the world   and   get   technolo gy, but  for  the   sm all   and   medium-
scale    enterprises this Academy shou ld become a training and technological 
upgradation hub.  The Committee, therefore , recommends that the Academy should 
have two pronged strategy of advancing the frontiers of knowledge, advanced science 
and technology on the one hand and on the other advancing the frontiers of 
production and productivity, particularly of rural enterprises as the Chinese have 
successfully done through the concept of To wnship and Village Enterprises (TVEs).  
Unless, the Academy succeeds in adopting  the above strategy, the Committee feels 
that it will become one more Ph.D producing machine.   
11.13  The Committee notes that the mission of CSIR is to maximize economic and 
societal benefits for the people of India through scientific indu strial research and 
development.  Regional laboratories   were   set   up   primarily  to  convert   the  natural   
resources  of  that area  into  wealth  and   job.   But  that   objective   still   remains   to   be  
fully realized.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Academy should make 
all-out efforts   to   fulf ill   the   objective   of    improving    the    economic   well   
being   not   only   of   the   big   industries   but   also   of   the   small-scale,  rural and 
food processing industries   adding   value   to   the   raw   materials   in   the   villages 
creating more jobs and income.   
11.14  While the Committee broadly appreciat es the initiative of the Govt. to 
establish the Academy, it apprehends that in its pursuit of academic excellence and 
endeavour to make the Academy self-reliant, CSIR may lose sight of  its long cherished 
mission, i.e., to provide scientific industrial research and development that maximizes the 
economic, environmental and societal benefits fo r the people of India.  One of the experts 
who appeared before the Committee was also in agreement with the apprehension of the 
Committee.  He also opined that the academ ic function of the Academy should not take 
over functions of the research  and that both of the two wi ll have to be balanced.  The 
Committee would, therefore, like to caut ion CSIR against any such possibility of 
drifting away from its mission and recommends that  societal benefits for the people 
of India should always remain the moto and focus of CSIR and that it should not be 
allowed to be compromised at any cost.   
11.15  The Committee is of the opinion th at the main aim of the CSIR behind 
establishing the Academy is to maximize or optimize benefits of their vast infrastructure 
for creating a new breed of PhDs who are we ll versed in the interface of science and 
technology and who will be able to stimulate industrial growth.  But what the Committee 
finds in the Bill is that there is a scope fo r including and attaching other institutions of 
science and technology like those under De partment of Science and Technology and 
Department of Biotechnology, Mini stry of Earth Sciences, etc. with the Academy, so as to 
undertake inter-disciplinary research and conduct courses in , and integrate into its courses, 
more and more inter-disciplinary and multi-disciplinary areas.  There are so many 
institutions in the family of science and t echnology in our country with some wonderful 
laboratories, and if all of them could be br ought together, we will be able to develop 
powerful instruments of applied science and applied research.  The Committee, therefore, 
feels that Govt. should try to integrate as  many disciplines of science and as many 
laboratories as possible so as to make  the Academy truly integrative and multi-
disciplinary.  By doing this, it will become a national umbrella for getting the best out 

of the existing infrastructu re and developing a new class of PhDs.  The Committee is 
of the view that the Government should explore the possibiliti es of making the 
Academy more broad based so as to includ e other well established and outstanding 
scientific institutions under different scientific organisations, in order to derive the 
maximum benefit for the country.  
11.16  When the Committee sought the comm ents of the Secretary, DSIR on 
Committee’s views on the possibility of integrat ing other institutions with the Academy he 
stated that while CSIR was moving with this id ea for the last several years, the Department 
of Atomic Energy actually formed a university structure, a deemed university to give a 
degree and to create its own resources.  Depa rtment of Atomic Ener gy has also created its 
own system through Bhabha School.  Similarly,  the Department of Space has also created 
its own training centres at the university.  DRDO has also  done the same thing and they 
have formed their own resources.  In this  way, today India has the largest strategic 
scientists or manpower – some 20,000 odd scie ntists, under these agencies which are 
already having, the training component built into  their system.  Department of Science & 
Technology and Department of Biotechnology has a few scientis ts as compared to other 
institutions.  Now, all these Departments are independent societies and, therefore, 
integrating them into one would be a problem .  Yet another point that he emphasized on 
was that CSIR itself is so large and to manage  anything larger than th at and to bring other 
disciplines/departments of science under this umbrella is a pretty complex thing and would 
therefore be difficult.  The Secretary, however, did not preclude to the possibility of 
affiliation with this Academy of other institutions at a later stage.   
11.17  The Committee is of the opinion that the future leadership in the area of 
science and engineering depends largely on  its strength in integrated and inter-
disciplinary areas and as such it would be  in the interest of the Nation that the 
Academy is made sufficiently broad based so as to include and utilize all the national 
facilities and laboratories even  if they fall within jurisd iction of other scientific 
departments.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that DSIR should try to 
explore the possibility of doing this in consultation with the concerned Deptts.   
11.18  While the Committee appreciates the ob jective of the Bill, i.e., to produce 
more PhDs., but it feels that producing more and more number of PhDs is not enough.  The 
real challenge lies in the utilisation of those PhDs. or highly technically skilled personnel in 
industry or to retain them into the profession, they have been reared and nurtured and have 
gained expertise and excellence in.  The Co mmittee notes with dism ay that today a big 
section of students although trai ned in engineering and advan ce sciences finally opt for a 
career in commercial sector like bank or get drifted to software industry.  Majority of them 
do not get employment in the area of their spec ialization.  Drifting away from education or 
research to other branches where that specialized education or training is not of much use is 
also a kind of brain drain apart from the conve ntional brain drain of people going abroad.  
The Committee, therefore, recommends that while striving to produce more and more 
PhDs., the Academy or the CSIR should also side by side think of  creating sufficient 
opportunities for productively engaging  these PhDs in the areas of their 
specialization, so that the type of drifting  as pointed out above could be arrested to a 
large extent. 
11.19  The Committee feels that the administrative procedures to be adopted in 
the Academy should be kept simple as complex and complicated administrative 
procedures result in the administrative bureaucracy becoming predominant and those 

really doing science and technology, researc h and development taking back seat.  
Such a situation, therefore, needs to be avoi ded.  The Committee is , therefore, of the 
opinion that the administrative procedures to be adopted by the Academy should be 
such that the key persons facilitating and helping the Academy achieve its objectives 
get free and fair opportunity to contribute their level best and are not bogged down 
by bureaucratic hurdles.     
11.20  The Committee enquired from the S ecretary, DSIR as to how such a big 
Academy is proposed to be established without any Government grant, particularly when it 
has to be of international standards.  Secret ary, DSIR clarified that CSIR was built with 
public funding and today it has assets worth crores  of rupees.  The assets with CSIR are its 
5000 scientists, 37 central labor atories and their campuses besides equipment and other 
facilities existing in CSIR laboratories.  He further added that these are the components for 
which much of the money is required if a ne w Institution is to be established.  Moreover, 
more than money, the Academy needs autonomy  to realize its objective.  The Academy 
would arrange its resources thr ough tuition fee, consultancy, grants, apart from laboratory 
reserves of CSIR, etc.  Howeve r, it has nowhere b een stated in the Bi ll that Govt. funding 
will not be accepted.  What has been provided in  the Bill is that the Academy will not go 
with an independent budget to the Planning Commission.     
11.21 The Committee takes note of the views expressed by the Secretary, DSIR.  The 
Committee, however, suggests that in case the Academy needs funds, in future, the 
Ministry should ensure that requisite funds are made available to it.   
11.22  The Committee finds that there is ha rdly any reference of women scientists 
being given any representation on the Board of the proposed Academy.  The Committee 
observes that there are a number of young pr omising women scientists who have done 
exceedingly well in the field of research in science and tec hnology and have been able to 
get recognition in terms of awards from CS IR and other scientific institutions.  The 
Committee, however, feels that representation  of women in science and technology is 
still not satisfactory and hence they need to be encouraged for greater participation 
particularly in administrative and decision making bodies.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that Govt. must ensure adequate  representation of women scientists and 
technologists on the Board of the Academy.   
11.23 With the foregoing general observations/ recommendations, the 
Committee agrees with the provisions of th e Bill.  The Committee hopes that Govt. 
would pay due attention to its observatio ns/recommendations while operationalising 
the provisions of this Bill.   

 
ANNEXURES 
__________________________________________________________ 
THE ACADEMY OF SCIENTIFIC AND INNOVATIVE RESEARCH 
BILL, 2010 
———— 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
———— 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
3. Establishment of Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research. 
4. Objects of Academy. 
5. Relationship of Academy with Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
6. Declaration of Academy as an institution of national importance. 
7. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of existing Academy to Academy established under 
this Act and other provisions, etc. 
8. Functions and powers of Academy. 
9. Academies open to all castes, creed, race or class. 
10. Authorities of Academy. 
11. Composition of Board of Governors. 
12. Appointment of Chairperson. 
13. Nomination of distinguished scientists or  academicians of gl obal eminence, eminent 
industrialists or techno logists and heads of three premie r institutions in  the field of 
imparting education in science and technology. 
14. Nomination of distinguished scientists or out standing scientists of Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research or Directors of C ouncil of Scientific an d Industrial Research 
laboratories. 
15. Allowances payable to members of Board. 
16. Term of office of members of Board. 
17. Powers of Board. 
18. Senate. 
19. Powers of Senate. 
20. Chancellor of Academy. 
21. Director of Academy. 
22. Appointment and duty of Director of Academy, etc. 
23. Associate Directors. 
24. Powers of other authorities. 
25. Funds of Academy. 
26. Accounts. 
27. Audit of accounts and its publication. 
28. Statutes. 
29. Matters to be provided by Statutes. 
30. Ordinances. 

31. Review of functioning of Academy. 
32. Appointments. 
33. Conditions of service. 
34. Arbitration. 
35. Removal and suspension of Chairperson and other Members or Director. 
36. Meetings. 
37. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate acts or proceedings of Board, Academy or any other 
body. 
38. Power to remove difficulties. 
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 73 of 2010 
THE ACADEMY OF SCIENTIFIC AND INNOVATIVE RESEARCH 
BILL, 2010 
A 
BILL 
to establish an Academy for furtherance of the advancement of learning and prosecution of 
research in the field of science and technology in association with Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research and to de clare the institution known as th e Academy of Scientific and 
Innovative Research, to be an institution of national importance to provide for its 
incorporation and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Act, 
2010. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint and different da tes may be appointed for different provisions 
of this Act. 
Short title, 
extent and 
commencement. 
TO BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 73 of 2010 
2 
2. In this Act, and in all Statutes and Ordinances made thereunder, unless the context 
otherwise requires,— 
(a) “Academy” means the Academy of Scien tific and Innovative Research established 
under sub-section (1) of section 3; 
(b) “Board” means the Board of Governors of  the Academy of Scientific and Innovative 
Research referred to in section 10; 
(c) “Council of Scientific and I ndustrial Research” means a so ciety registered by the name 
of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Re search under the Socie ties Registration Act, 
1860; 
(d) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board appointed under section 
12; 
(e) “Chancellor” means the Chancellor of the Academy referred to in section 20; 
(f) “Director” means the Director of the Academy appointed under section 22; 
(g) “distinguished scientists” or “outstanding scientists” of the Council of 

Scientific and Industrial Research” means scie ntists of the Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research designated as such; 
(h) “existing Academy” means the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research 
established in pursuance of the Resolution of the Government of India in the Ministry of 
Science and Technology, Department of Scien tific and Industrial Research, Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Re search, having number No. 6/1/ CSIR-AcSIR/2010-PPD, dated 
the 1st July, 2010; 
(i) “Faculty of the Academy” means Academ y Professors, Professors of Eminence, 
Distinguished Professors, Outstanding Professo rs, Senior Professors, Emeritus Professors, 
Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Pr ofessors, visiting faculty, and such other 
persons as may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducti ng research in the 
Academy or institutions maintained by the A cademy and includes the sc ientists of Council 
of Scientific and Industrial Research assi gned for imparting inst ruction or conducting 
research; 
(j) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 
(k) “Statutes and Ordinances ” means the Statutes and the Ordinances of the Academy for 
the time being in force. 
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Ce ntral Government may, by notification, appoint 
in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of this Act an Academy to be 
called the “Academy of Scientific and Innova tive Research” as a body corporate by such 
name. 
(2) The headquarters of the Academy shall be at such place as the Central Government 
may, by notification, specify. 
(3) The Academy may have such number of regional centres and campuses, as it may deem 
fit. 
(4) The Academy shall have perpetual succes sion and a common seal, with power, subject 
to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hol d and dispose of property and to contract, and 
shall by that name, sue and be sued. 
4. (1) The objects of the Academy shall be to — 
(a) disseminate advanced knowledge in scienc e and technology, by providing teaching and 
research facilities in such bran ches of learning as it may deem fit, particularly in emerging 
areas and such areas as may emerge in future; 
Definitions. 
Establishment 
of Academy 
of Scientific 
and 
Innovative 
Research. 
Objects of 
Academy. 
21 of 1860. 
3 
(b) undertake inter-disciplinary studies and research; 
(c) conduct courses in, and integrate into its courses, inter-disciplinary and multi-
disciplinary areas covering natural sciences, lif e sciences, mathematical and computational 

sciences, medical sciences, en gineering, applied art, humanities, social sciences, law 
relating to these areas and interfaces thereof; 
(d) take appropriate measures for innovations in teaching and learning processes; 
(e) create an ambience for learning and scho larship in advanced science and technology 
instead of exclusively focusing on marks or grades; 
(f) educate and train manpower in scientific and technological fields; 
(g) establish linkages with industries in India and outside India for the promotion of science 
and technology; 
(h) collaborate, in appropr iate areas in the field of scie nce and technology, with reputed 
universities and institutions in India or outside India; 
(i) promote research in science and technol ogy having a bearing on social, economic, 
cultural, intellectual and academic welfare of the people. 
(2) The Academy shall primarily focus on research  and imparting instru ction in such areas 
as are not ordinarily taught in regular academic universities in India. 
(3) The curricula, pedagogy and evaluation of the Academy shall be innovative and 
directed towards creating highest quality personnel with cross-di sciplinary knowledge, 
aiming to provide leaders in the field of science and technology. 
5. (1) The Academy shall be, provided, or, allowed to use, the infrastructure and scientific 
manpower of the Council of Scientific and Indu strial Research for teaching and research 
purposes for mutual benefit. 
(2) The Academy, within two weeks of the commencement of this Act, shall, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other Act, rules, regulations or bye-laws for the 
time being in force, enter into a Memorandum of Unders tanding with the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research, for the pur poses of its affiliation with the Academy for 
the purposes of academics, teaching and award of degrees or diplomas, and, the persons 
pursuing the studies in the Council for award of  any degree or diploma, after entering of 
such Memorandum of Understanding, be awar ded degrees or diplomas by the said 
Academy: 
Provided that any person pursu ing any academic or research course, before the 
commencement of this Act, in the Council of Scient ific and Industrial Research for award 
of any degree or diploma and registered fo r the said purpose with any other university, 
may, with the approval of the university with wh ich such person is registered, migrate after 
such commencement to the Academy established under this Act and be registered with the 
said Academy for grant of the same degree or diploma by the Academy established under 
this Act and such person shall be deemed to  have migrated and registered with the 
Academy established under this Act at the same level of study in the university from which 
such person migrated. 
(3) Nothing contained in sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) shall be construed to affect the 
functions or powers of the Council of Scientif ic and Industrial Resear ch, being discharged 
or exercised, before the commencement of this  Act, by the Council or to affiliate with any 
other university or institution for the purposes of academics, teaching and award of degrees 
or diplomas or for any other purposes necessary for pursuing its objects. 
6. It is hereby declared that the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research shall 
be an institution of national importance. 
Relationship 
of Academy 
with Council 

of Scientific 
and Industrial 
Research. 
Declaration of 
Academy as 
an institution 
of national 
importance. 
4 
7. (1) On and from the date of establishment of the Academy,— 
(a) any reference to the existing Academy in any law other than this Ac t or in any contract 
or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the Academy; 
(b) all properties and assets, movable and im movable, of, or belonging to, the existing 
Academy, shall vest in the Academy; 
(c) all rights and liabilities of the existing Academy shall be transferred to, and be the rights 
and liabilities of, the Academy; 
(d) without prejudice to th e provisions of clause ( c), all debts, obligat ions and liabilities 
incurred, all contracts entered into and all ma tters and things engaged to be done by, with 
or for the existing Academy immediately before  that date, for or in connection with the 
purpose of the said existing Academy shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into 
or engaged to be done by, with or for, the Academy; 
(e) all sums of money due to th e existing Academy immediately before that date shall be 
deemed to be due to the Academy; 
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted  or which could have been instituted by or 
against the existing Academy immediately before  that date may be continued or may be 
instituted by or against the Academy; 
(g) every employee (including those appointed for imparting instruction or conducting 
research in the existing Academy) holding any office unde r the existing Academy or 
teaching therein immediately before that date  shall hold his office in the Academy or 
continue teaching therein by the same tenur e and upon the same terms and conditions of 
service as respects remuneration, leave, provi dent fund, retirement and other terminal 
benefits as he would have he ld such office if the Academy had not been established and 
shall continue to do so as an employee of th e Academy or until the expiry of the period of 
six months from that date if such employ ee opts not to be the employee of the Academy 
within such period. 
(2) Any person pursuing any academic or research course, before the commencement of 
this Act, in the existing Academy for award of any degree or diploma or certificate shall be 
entitled to pursue such academic or research course after the establishment of the Academy 
under this Act and be registered  with the said A cademy for grant of the same degree or 
diploma or certificate by the Academy establis hed under this Act and such person shall be 
deemed to have migrated and registered with the Academy established under this Act at the 
same level of study in the existing Academy from which such person migrated. 
(3) Any persons, who immediately before th e commencement of this Act, had been 
awarded a degree or diploma or certificate fo r having qualified any course by the existing 
Academy, shall be entitled to award of e quivalent degree or diploma by the Academy 
subject to approval by the Board of the Academy. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 or in any 

other law for the time being in force, absorption of any employee by the Academy in its 
regular service under this se ction shall not entitle such employee to any compensation 
under that Act or other law and no such claim sh all be entertained by any court, tribunal or 
other authority. 
Transfer of 
assets, 
liabilities, etc., 
of existing 
Academy to 
Academy 
established 
under this Act 
and other 
provisions, 
etc. 
14 of 1947. 
5 
8. (1) The Academy shall discharge its functi ons and exercise the following powers, 
namely:— 
(i) to provide for instructions and conduct research in such branches of learning like natural 
sciences, life sciences, mathematical and computational sciences, medical sciences, 
engineering, applied art, humanities, social sciences, law relating to these areas and 
interfaces thereof, and in particular, in inte r-disciplinary and multi-disciplinary areas of 
these branches, and in all such areas as may emerge in future and other emerging areas of 
knowledge, as the Academy may from time to  time determine and make provision for 
advancement and dissemination of knowledge; 
(ii) to lay administrative standard s and structures and decide on all matters of creation of 
posts, laying down standards for recruitment, determining compensation packages, and 
contractual arrangements; 
(iii) to design its curriculum and pedagogy for award of diplomas or certificates and confer 
degrees or other academic distinctions as it may deem fit; 
(iv) to grant, subject to such conditions as the Academ y may determine, diplomas or 
certificates and confer degrees or other academic  distinctions on the basis of such methods 
of evaluation and to hold its examinations , as the Academy may, from time to time, 
determine and to withdraw any such diplom as, certificates, degrees or other academic 
distinctions for good and sufficient cause; 
(v) to frame Statutes and Ordinances and to alter, modify or rescind the same; 
(vi) to organise and undertake extramural studies, training and extension services; 
(vii) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions; 
(viii) to provide distance education in such bran ches of learning and to  such persons as it 
may determine; 
(ix) to institute professorships, associate pr ofessorships and assistant professorships 
including Academy Professors, Professors of Eminence, Distinguished Professors, 
Outstanding Professors, Senior Professors, Em eritus Professors, or visiting positions and 
other teaching or academic or other positi ons, required by the Academy and to make 
appointments to such positions; 

(x) to appoint persons from any other universit y, or institution, or industry, or persons of 
eminence from appropriate fields of studies, including those outside the country, as Faculty 
of the Academy; 
(xi) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments thereto; 
(xii) to co-operate or co llaborate or associate with any body including, any university or 
institution, or industry, located in India or outside India; 
(xiii) to establish such centres and specialised laboratories or other units for research and 
instruction as may be required; 
(xiv) to set up schools,  centres and campuses and function therefrom or conduced  classes 
from any place of its choice, including the premis es of laboratories or other centres of the 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research; 
(xv) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes; 
(xvi) to conduct research, advisory and consultanc y services with or for any entity, public 
or private, whether in India or outside India,  which are in conformity with the spirit and 
object of the Academy; 
Functions and 
powers of 
Academy. 
6 
(xvii) to engage scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research as Faculty in 
imparting instruction and conducting research in the Academy; 
(xviii) to establish, maintain and manage institut ions and hostels for residence of students 
or establish and maintain such institutions through the Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research or any other body; 
(xix) to fix, demand and receive payment of fees and other charges; 
(xx) to determine the standards of admi ssion to the Academy, which may include 
examination, other innovative models of testing or evaluation; 
(xxi) to supervise the residences of the student s of the Academy and to make arrangements 
for promoting their health, general welfare, cultural and corporate life; 
(xxii) to lay down conditions of service for all categories of employees, including their code 
of conduct; 
(xxiii) to regulate and enforce discipline, among the students and employees and to take 
such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be necessary; 
(xxiv) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the 
employees; 
(xxv) to receive grants, benefactions, donations, gifts, bequests and transfer or acquire, hold 
and manage and dispose of any property mo vable or immovable, including trust and 
endowment properties for the purposes of the Academy: 
Provided that no such grants, benefactions, dona tions, gifts, bequests and transfer shall be 
accepted by the Academy which in the opini on of the Board involves conditions or 
obligations opposed to the spirit and object of this Act; 
(xxvi) to borrow, on the security of property of  the Academy or otherwise, money for the 
purposes of the Academy or utilise its property for such purposes as are in conformity with 
the spirit and object of this Act; 
(xxvii) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to 
the attainment of all or any of its objects. 

(2) In exercising its powers referred to in sub-section ( 1), it shall be the endeavour of the 
Academy to maintain an all India character and high standards of teaching and research, 
and, the Academy shall, among other measures which may be necessary for the said 
purpose, take, in particular, the following measures, namely:— 
(i) subject to the provisions of section 9, the admission of students shall be made on merit; 
(ii) continuous evaluation or other innovative methods of evaluation and choice based 
credit system may be introduced and the Acad emy may enter into agreements with other 
universities and academic institutions in India or  outside India for credit transfer and joint 
degree programmes; 
(iii) innovative courses and programmes of studies  shall be introduced with a provision for 
periodic review and restructuring; 
(iv) the imparting of instruction shall be, as  far as may be, through use of modern 
techniques or technologies; 
(v) the systems and structures of the Acad emy should be flexible to adapt to the 
requirements of multi-disciplinary and inter-disciplinary studies; 
(vi) active participation of stude nts may be ensured in governa nce of academic matters of 
the Academy. 
7 
9. (1) The Academy shall be open to all persons, of either sex, irrespective of caste, creed, 
race or class, and it shall not  be lawful for the Academy to  adopt or impose on any person, 
any test whatsoever of religious belief or prof ession in order to be en titled to be appointed 
as a Faculty of the Academy or to hold any other office therein, or to be employed therein 
or to be admitted as a student in the Academy or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise 
any privilege thereof. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the Academy from making special 
provision for the employment or admission of  women, persons with disabilities or of 
persons belonging to the weaker sections of th e society and, in particular, of the Scheduled 
Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and the other soci ally and educationally backward classes of 
citizens: 
Provided that no such special provision shall be made on the ground of domicile. 
10. The following shall be the authorities of the Academy, namely:— 
(a) The Board; 
(b) Senate; 
(c) Director; 
(d) Boards of Studies; 
(e) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities 
of the Academy. 
11. (1) The Board referred to in clause (a) of section 10 shall consist of the following, 
namely:— 
(a) the Chairperson of the Board, to be appointed under section 12; 
(b) the Director-Gener al of the Council of Scien tific and Industrial Research, 
ex officio 
Vice-Chairperson; 
(c) the President of the Indian National Science Academy, ex officio member; 
(d) the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, Government of India, ex officio member; 
(e) the Chairman, Space Commission, Government of India, ex officio member; 
(f) the Chairman, University Grants Commission, Government of India, ex officio member; 

(g) The Finance Secretary in the Ministry  of Finance, Government of India , ex officio 
member; 
(h) the heads of three premier institutions in  the field of imparting education in Science 
members to be and Technology, nominated under section 13; 
(i) four distinguished scientists or academic ians of global eminence, of which two should 
be from reputed institutions members to be outside India, nominated under section 13; 
(j) three eminent industrialists or members to be technologists, nominated under section 13; 
(k) four distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists or Directors of Academy open to 
all castes, creed, 
race or class. 
Authorities of 
Academy. 
Composition 
of Board of 
Governors. 
8 
laboratories of Council of Scientific member s to be and Industrial Research, nominated 
under section 14; 
(l) the Director of the Academy, ex officio member. 
(2) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside over the meetings of the Board. 
(3) The Board may evolve its own procedure fo r the purpose of conducting its meetings 
and transacting business therein. 
(4) The Associate Director in charge of ad ministration of the Academy shall be the 
Secretary of the Board 
12. (1) The Chairperson shall be appointed by the President of the Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, on the recommendation of  the selection committee constituted under 
sub-section (2): 
Provided that the Director-General of the C ouncil of Scientific a nd Industrial Research, 
being the ex officio Vice-Chairperson, as referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 
11, shall act as the Chairperson until the first Chairperson is selected and appointed in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act: 
Provided further that no person sh all be selected and appointed  as Chairperson unless such 
person is an Indian citizen. 
(2) The selection committee refe rred to in sub-section ( 1) shall consist of four eminent 
scientists or technologists of international repute, as may be nominated by the President of 
the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
(3) At least two eminent scientists or technolog ists of international repute nominated under 
sub-section (2) shall be from the heads of international societies, academies, or similar 
organisations in the field of science and technology. 
(4) The selection committee referred to in sub-section (2) shall— 
(a) be constituted within six months before the completion of tenure of the incumbent as 
the Chairperson of the Board; 
(b) submit its recommendation at least three months before the completion of the tenure of 
the incumbent Chairperson. 
(5) The selection committee may evolve its own procedure for the purposes of meetings 
and making recommendations under sub-section (1) including making recommendations in 

respect of a person who has not applied for the post of Chairperson. 
(6) Three members of the selection committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall form 
quorum for the meeting of the committee. 
(7) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as 
may be assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes 
13. The heads of three premier institutions in the field of imparting education in science 
and technology, referred to in clause ( h), the distinguished scient ists or academicians of 
global eminence referred to in clause ( i), and eminent industrialists or technologists 
referred 
to in clause (j), of sub-section (1) of section 11, shall be nominated, by the President of the 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
Appointment 
of 
Chairperson. 
Nomination of 
distinguished 
scientists or 
academicians of 
global 
eminence, 
eminent 
industrialists or 
technologists 
and heads of 
three premier 
institutions in 
the field of 
imparting 
education in 
science and 
technology. 
9 
14. The nomination of distinguishe d scientists or outstanding sc ientists of the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Resear ch or Directors of Council of  Scientific and Industrial 
Research laboratories, referred to in clause ( k) of sub-section ( 1) of section 11 shall be 
made by the Governing Body of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
15. The members of the Board sh all be entitled to such a llowances, if any, from the 
Academy, as may be provided for, in the Statutes but no member other than the Director of 
the Academy referred to in clause ( l) of sub-section ( 1) of section 11, shall be entitled to 
any salary by reason of this section. 
16. (1) Save as otherwise provided in this sectio n, term of office of the Chairperson or any 
other nominated member of the Board shall be four years, being one term of the Board and 
they shall not be eligible to be re-appointed as Chairperson or nominated as a member, as 
the case may be. 
Explanation I.— The period of term of office of th e Chairperson or any other nominated 
member of the Board [other than ex officio Vice-Chairperson and ex officio members and 

nominated members under clause ( k) of sub-section ( 1) of section 11] of the existing 
Academy shall be counted for the purposes of this sub-section: 
Explanation II.—For the removal of doubt it is hereby d eclared that a person who held the 
office of a member shall not be eligible to be re-appoint ed as a member but may be 
appointed as the Chairperson in accordance with provisions of this Act. 
Provided that an outgoing member of the Bo ard shall, unless or otherwise directed, 
continue in office until another person is appoi nted, or, as the case may be, nominated as a 
member in his place. 
(2) In the event of vacancy in the office of  the Chairperson, by reason of his death or 
resignation or otherwise, the Vice-Chairpers on shall act as the Chairperson until a new 
Chairperson is appointed in accordance with th e provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy 
and enter upon his office: 
Provided that a person appointed due to a v acancy in the office of Chairperson under sub-
section ( 2), shall be eligible to be appointed as Chairpers on in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act only for one term in  addition to the period for which he was 
appointed to fill the vacancy of Chairperson. 
(3) In the event of vacancy in the office of a nominated member under clauses (h), (i), 
(j) and ( k) of sub-section ( 1) of section 11 by reason of  his death or resignation or 
otherwise, 
the vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of this Act: 
Provided that a person nomi nated under sub-section ( 1) of section 11 due to a vacancy in 
the office of the member, such person shall be eligible to be nominated only for one term as 
member in accordance with the provisions of th is Act, in addition to the period for which 
he was nominated to fill the vacancy. 
(4) The term of office of an ex officio member shall continue as l ong as he holds the office 
by virtue of which he is a member. 
(5) One-fourth of the members, being distinguish ed scientists or outstanding scientists or 
Directors of laboratories of the Council of Scientific and Industria l Research nominated 
under clause ( k) of sub-section ( 1) of section 11 shall retire every year and new members 
shall be nominated in their place in accordance with the provisions of this Act: 
Nomination of 
distinguished 
scientists or 
outstanding 
scientists of 
Council of 
Scientific and 
Industrial 
Research or 
Directors of 
Council of 
Scientific and 
Industrial 
Research 
laboratories. 
Allowances 
payable to 

members of 
Board. 
Term of office 
of members of 
Board. 
10 
Provided that, notwithstanding a nything contained in this sub- section, the members, being 
distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists  of the Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research or Directors of the Council of Scientific  and Industrial Res earch laboratories 
nominated under clause ( k) of sub-section ( 1) of section 11, imme diately after the 
commencement of this Act for the first time, may hold office for such period, as may be 
specified in their nomination a nd provisions of this sub-secti on shall not be applicable to 
such nominated members. 
17. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, th e Board shall be responsible for the general 
superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the Academy and shall exercise all 
the powers of the Academy not otherwise provi ded for by this Act, the Statutes and the 
Ordinances, and shall have the power to review the acts of the Senate. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Board shall have the powers 
to— 
(a) take decisions on questions of policy relatin g to the administration and working of the 
Academy; 
(b) institute courses of study at the Academy; 
(c) make Statutes; 
(d) institute and appoint persons to academic as well as other posts in the Academy; 
(e) consider and modify or cancel or rescind Ordinances; 
(f) consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, the annual accounts and 
the budget estimates of the Academy for the next  financial year, togeth er with a statement 
of its development plans; 
(g) approve investments in infrastructure of the Academy in any land or building; 
(h) exercise such other powers and perform su ch other duties as may be conferred or 
imposed upon it by this Act or the Statutes. 
(3) The Board shall also have the power to appoint such committees of one or more persons 
as it considers necessary for exercise of its  powers and the performance of its duties and 
hold enquiries under this Act. 
18. (1) The Senate shall consist of the following, namely:— 
(a) the Director, ex officio, who shall be the Chairperson of the Senate; 
(b) all Associate Directors, ex officio members; 
(c) all Deans of the Academy, ex officio members; 
(d) two Professors from each area of study repr esented by the Boards of Studies of the 
Academy, as may be nominated by the Board, 
ex officio members; 
(e) two scientists of the Counc il of Scientific and Industr ial Research, who being the 
youngest in age; and recipien t of Shanti Swaroop Bhatnagar Award; and who are also 
Faculty of the Academy, as ma y be nominated by the Directo r-General of the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research; 
(f) two scientists of the Council of Scientif ic and Industrial Research, who being the 
youngest in age; and recipient of CSIR-Young Scientist Award; and who are Faculty of the 

Academy, as may be nominate d by the Director-General of the Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research; 
(g) three Directors or distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists of the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research laboratories, nominated by its Director General; 
(h) three persons, not being the employees of th e Academy or the Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, to be nominated by the Chancellor in consultation Powers of Board. 
Senate. 
11 
with the Director from amongst educationists of  repute, one being from each of the fields 
of science, engineering and social sciences; 
(i) such other members of the staff as may be laid down in the Statutes. 
(2) The tenure of the nomina ted members under clauses ( d) to ( h) of sub-section ( 1) shall 
be two years: 
Provided that the Senate shall not, at any time, have less than fifty per cent. of its members 
from the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research scientists teaching in the Academy. 
19. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the St atutes and the Ordinances, the Senate of the 
Academy shall have the control and genera l regulation, and be responsible for the 
maintenance, of standards of instruction, e ducation and examinations in the Academy and 
shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or 
imposed upon it by the Statutes and Ordinances. 
20. (1) The Chairperson of the Board shall be the Chancellor of the Academy. 
(2) The Chancellor shall ordinarily preside at the Convocations of the Academy. 
21. The Director shall be the principal academ ic and executive officer of the Academy and 
shall be responsible for the administration of the Academy and im parting instruction, 
research and maintenance of discipline. 
22. ( 1) The Director shall be appointed, by the President of Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, on the recommendation of  the selection committee constituted under 
sub-section (2). 
(2) The selection committee referred to in sub-section (1) shall consist of— 
(a) the Chairperson of the Board; 
(b) the Vice-Chairperson of the Board; 
(c) the President of the Indian National Science Academy; 
(d) the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, Government of India; 
(e) the Chairman, Space Commission, Government of India. 
(3) The selection committee referred to in sub-section (
2) shall— 
(a) be constituted within six months before the completion of tenure of the incumbent as 
the Director; 
(b) submit its recommendation at least three months before the completion of the tenure of 
the incumbent Director. 
(4) The selection committee may evolve its own procedure for the purposes of meetings 
and making recommendations under sub-section (1) including making recommendations in 
respect of a person who has not applied for the post of Director. 
(5) Three members of the selection co mmittee referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall form 
quorum for the meeting of the committee: 
Provided that no person shall be selected or nominated as Director unless such person is an 
Indian citizen. 

(6) It shall be the duty of the Director that the decisions taken by the Board are 
implemented. 
(7) The Director shall submit an annual report and accounts of the Academy to the Board. 
Powers of 
Senate. 
Chancellor of 
Academy. 
Director of 
Academy. 
Appointment 
and duty of 
Director of 
Academy, etc. 
12 
(8) The Director shall exercise such other pow ers and perform such other duties as may be 
assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes or the Ordinances. 
(9) The term of the Director shall be five years. 
23. (1) The Associate Directors of the Academy sh all, be appointed by the Director with 
the approval of the Board, from amongst Professo rs of the Academy or scientists of the 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research engaged in academic activity in the Academy, 
for such period, and on such terms and condi tions, as may be laid down by the Statutes, 
and, shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to them by this 
Act or the Statutes or by the Director. 
(2) The Board may assign any other designati on for the Associate Directors, for the 
purpose of administrative convenience or academic efficiency. 
24. (1) The constitution and powers of  Board of Studies shall be  such as may be provided 
in the Statutes. 
(2) The powers, including the financial powers and duties of authorities, officers and other 
functionaries of the Academy shall be as provided by the Statutes. 
25. (1) The Academy shall maintain and retain a fund to which shall be credited— 
(a) all fees (including tuition fees) and other charges received by the Academy; 
(b) all monies received by the Academy by way of  grants, gifts, donati ons, benefactions, 
bequests or transfers; 
(c) monies for projects undertaken by the Academy; 
(d) income from investment made by the Academy or from any other source; 
(e) the funds received from the Council of Sc ientific and Industrial Research, by way of 
loan or otherwise; 
(f) all monies received by the Academy in any other manner or from any other source. 
(2) All monies credited to the fund of the Academy shall be deposited in such banks or 
invested in such manner as the Academy may, with the approval of the Board, decide. 
(3) The fund shall be applied for meeting,— 
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remune ration of the Chairperson, members of the 
Board or Faculty, officers and other employees or members of the committees set up by the 
Academy; 
(b) the expenses of the Academy in the discharge of its functi ons or exercise of its powers 
under section 8; 
(c) the expenses on objects of, and for purposes authorised by, this Act. 

(4) All expenditure of the Academy shall be within the framework of a budget approved 
by the Board. 
26. (1) The Academy shall maintain proper and se parate accounts giving therein the details 
of all receipts in, and, expenditure from, such fund and other relevant particulars. 
(2) The accounts referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be prepared and got audited before the 
expiry of six months from the end of each financial year. 
(3) The Academy shall submit to the Board and the Council of Scien tific and Industrial 
Research, the accounts referre d to in sub-section ( 1) duly audited under section 27 and 
signed by the Director, Associate Director in ch arge of Finance and Associate Director in 
charge of Administration. 
Associate 
Directors. 
Powers of 
other 
authorities. 
Funds of 
Academy. 
Accounts. 
13 
(4) The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research refe rred to in sub-section ( 3), the 
Board and any other person appointed by them in connection with the audit of the accounts 
of the Academy shall have the right to  demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the 
Academy. 
27. (1) The accounts of the Academy shall, without prejudice to the provisions contained in 
the Comptroller and Auditor-General’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of Service) 
Act, 1971, be audited by auditors who may be appointed by the Board for the term of one 
year and such auditors shall be eligible for re-appointment. 
(2) No person shall be eligible to be appointed as an auditor under sub-section (1) 
unless he is a chartered accountant as defined in clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of 
the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949, and who has obtained a certificate of practice under 
sub-section (1) of section 6 of that Act. 
(3) The accounts of the Academy shall, after the completion of the audit under subsection 
(1) and submission thereof to the Board and the Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research be published on the website of the Academy. 
28. (1) The Statutes of the Academy shall be enacted by the Board. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provis ions contained in sub-section ( 1), the Senate may make 
recommendations for enactment of Statutes to the Board. 
(3) The Board may, from time to time, make ne w Statutes or may amend or repeal or 
rescind the Statutes with effect from such date as it may direct. 
29. Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide fo r all or any of the 
matters considered necessary by the Board for functioning of the Academy within the 
framework of this Act, including the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the conferment of degrees and diplomas; 
(b) the constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies; 
(c) the tuition fee and other fees to be charged; 
(d) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes; 

(e) the term of office and the method of appointment of officers of the Academy; 
(f) the qualification of Faculty of the Academy (other than the scientists of the 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research engaged in the service of the Academy), 
officers and other staff of Academy: 
Provided that the scientists of the the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research engaged 
in the service of the Academy shall be gove rned by the qualifications specified by the 
Council and nothing contained in  this Act shall be  construed to disq ualify them from 
undertaking the service of the Academy or engaging them as Faculty of the Academy; 
(g) the classification, the method of appointment and the determination of the terms and 
conditions of service of Faculty, officers and other staff of the Academy; 
(h) the provision of insurance fund, provident fund and other retirement benefits, for the 
benefit of the Faculty, officers and other staff of the Academy; 
(i) the constitution, powers and duties of authorities of the Academy; 
(j) the establishment and maintenance of hostels; 
(k) the conditions of residence of students of the Academy and the levying of 
fees for residence in the hostels and of other charges; 
Audit of 
accounts and 
its 
publication. 
Statutes. 
Matters to be 
provided by 
Statutes. 
56 of 1971. 
38 of 1949. 
14 
(l) the allowances to be paid to the Chairp erson and other members of the Board and any 
committee constituted by the Academy; 
(m) the meetings of the Board, the Senate, or any committee, the quorum at such meetings 
and the procedure to be followed in the conduct of their business; 
(n) any other matter which may be required or necessary for the purposes of this Act. 
30. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances of the 
Academy may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the admission of the students; 
(b) the courses of study; 
(c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted and shall be eligible 
for degrees, diplomas and certificates and to the examinations of the Academy, and shall be 
eligible for the degrees, diplomas and certificates; 
(d) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes; 
(e) the condition and mode of appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and 
moderators; 
(f) the conduct of examinations; 
(g) the maintenance of discipline among students of the Academy; 
(h
) any other matter which by this Act or the St atute, is to be, or, may be, provided for by 
the Ordinances. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinances shall be made by the Senate. 

(3) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have the effect from such date as it may direct, 
but every Ordinance so made shall be submitte d, as soon as may be, to the Board and shall 
be considered by the Board in its subsequent meeting. 
(4) The Board shall have the power by resolution to modify or cancel or rescind any of the 
Ordinances and such Ordinances shall, from the date of such resolution stand modified 
accordingly or cancelled or rescinded, as the case may be. 
31. (1) There shall be a review of the functioning  of the Academy once in every four years 
by persons of eminence to be appointed by  the Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research. 
(2) The Academy shall meet the expenses fo r conducting the review under sub-section (1) 
and upon receipt of the report of such review, the Board may take appropriate action. 
(3) In addition to the review under sub-section ( 1), the Board may conduct review of 
functioning of administrative and academic wings of the Academy, in such manner and at 
such intervals, as may be provided in the Statutes. 
32. All appointments of the staff of the Acad emy (except appointment of the Director), 
shall be made in accordance with the procedure laid down in the Statute, by– 
(a) the Board for the academic staff; 
(b) the Director, in any other case. 
33. (1) Every employee of the Academy shall be  appointed on contractual basis under a 
written contract, which shall be lodged with  the Academy and a copy  of which shall be 
furnished to the employee concerned: 
Ordinances. 
Review of 
functioning of 
Academy. 
Appointments. 
Conditions of 
service. 
15 
Provided that all scientists and other employees  of the Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research engaged in the service of the Academy shall be governed by the service 
conditions, 
rules and regulations of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
(2) The Academy shall have a flexible compensation system which recognizes 
performance, as laid down in the Statutes, to bring the best talent in the Academy: 
Provided that the scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research— 
(a) engaged in the service of the Academy; and 
(b) who draw their salary from the Council, 
shall be eligible for such allowances or honorarium, as may be determined by the Statute. 
34. (1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between th e Academy and any of its 
employees shall, at the request of the empl oyee concerned or at the instance of the 
Academy, be referred to a Tri bunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Director, one member nominated by the employee, and such two arbitrators shall 
appoint the third arbitrator who shall act as the presiding arbitrator. 
(2) The arbitration under sub-section ( 1
) shall be governed by the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996. 

35. (1) The Chairperson or any Member of the Board other than ex officio Members of the 
Board or Director may, by notice in writing und er his hand addressed to the President of 
the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, resign his office: 
Provided that the Chairperson or such Member or Director shall, unless he is permitted by 
the President of the Council of  Scientific and Industrial Res earch to relinquish his office 
sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of  three months from the date of receipt of 
such notice or until a person duly appointed as  his successor enters upon his office or until 
the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest. 
(2) The President of the Council of Scientific  and Industrial Research may remove from 
office the Chairperson or any Member of the Board or the Director, who— 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or 
(b) being the Director has engaged at any time,  during his term of office, in any paid 
employment; or 
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
involves moral turpitude; or 
(d) has become physically or mentally incapabl e of acting as such Chairperson or Member 
or Director; or 
(e) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or 
(f) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially 
the exercise of his functions as such Chairperson or Member or Director; or 
(g) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest; or 
(h) has been guilty of proved misbehaviour; or 
(i) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Chairperson or a Member of 
the Board or the Director shall not be rem oved from his office on the grounds specified in 
clause ( f) or clause ( g) or clause ( h) of sub-section ( 1), except by an order made by the 
President of the Council of Scie ntific and Industrial Research af ter an inquiry made in this 
behalf in which such Chairperson or Member or Director has been informed of the 
Arbitration. 
Resignation, 
Removal and 
suspension of 
Chairperson 
and other 
Members or 
Director. 
26 of 1996. 
16 
charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those 
charges. 
(4) In the event of inquiry instituted under sub-section (2), the President of the Council 
of Scientific and Industrial Research may suspend such Chairperson or Member or Director 
against whom inquiry has been instituted for a period not exceeding six months if it is 
considered necessary in public interest. 
(5) The President of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research may, by rules, 
regulate the procedure for the inquiry referred to in sub-section (2). 

(6) In case any nominated member under clause (k) of sub-section (1) of section 11 in 
the Board incurs any of the disqualifications under clauses (a) to (i) of sub-section (1), such 
nominated member shall not be eligible to be nominated as such and his nomination as 
nominated member shall be revoked by those who nominated such member. 
36. The meetings of the Board, Senate, or other committees constituted by the Academy 
may be held using contemporary tools of information and communication technologies 
(including video-conferencing) without the members necessarily having to be physically 
present. 
37. No act of the Board or the Academy or any other body set up under this Act or the 
Statutes, shall be invalid merely by reason of – 
(a) any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution thereof; or 
(b) any defect in the selection, nomination or appointment of a person acting as 
a member thereof; or 
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not affecting the merits of the case. 
38. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three 
years from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under sub-section (1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of Parliament, while it  is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days 
which may be comprised in one session or in  two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or both Houses agree 
that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that 
order. 
Meetings. 
Vacancies, 
etc., not to 
invalidate acts 
or proceedings 
of Board, 
Academy or 
any other 
body. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
STATEMENTS OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
India's leadership in science and engineering in future will, inter alia, depend on 
its advancement in integrative and inter-disciplinary areas of science and engineering. 

There is a shortage of institutions which offer PhD courses in the field of integrative 
and inter-disciplinary areas of science and engineering and other advanced courses in 
such areas. 
2. Since mid 1980s, India, whose relative position in respect of PhDs in science and 
engineering was substantially higher as compared to other Asian countries, has declined. 
There is an increasing trend amongst the de veloped countries for producing more PhDs. 
Unless India keeps pace with other countries  in producing more PhDs in the field of 
integrative and inter-disciplinary areas of sc ience and engineering, it may lag behind other 
nations which would adversely affect India's pace of economic development. 
3. It is proposed to set-up th e Academy of Scientific and In novative Research (Ac SIR) for 
substantially increasing the number of researchers in integrative and inter-disciplinary areas 
of science and engineering in a cost-eff ective manner without requirement of any 
significant gestation period and additional funds from the Government. The Academy 
would offer a one-stop solution to meet the above requirement in higher education by 
leveraging the strengths of Council of Sc ientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) 
comprising around 4500 scientists  in diverse branches of science and engineering and 
utilising its research and development infrastructure. 
4. The proposed legislation aims to establis h the Academy of Scie ntific and Innovative 
Research for the advancement of learning, and promotion of research in the field of science 
and technology in association with Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, and 
further to declare the institution known as the Academy of Scientific and Innovative 
Research, to be an instituti on of national importance, and to  provide for its incorporation 
and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
5. The proposed Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research shall, interalia,— 
(a) be governed, at the apex level by a Bo ard of Governors, consisting of highly 
distinguished and eminent persons in the fiel d of science and techno logy, Atomic Energy 
and Space and outstanding scientists; 
(b) use, the infrastructure and scientific manpower of the Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research for teaching and re search purposes for mutual benefit; ( c) primarily 
focus on research and imparting instruction in su ch areas as are not or dinarily taught in 
regular academic universities in India by disseminating advanced knowledge in science and 
technology, and by providing teaching and resear ch facilities in frontline branches of 
learning and also in emerging areas; 
(d) establish linkages with industries in India and outside for the promotion of science and 
technology by providing teaching and research facilities in frontline branches of learning; 
(e) conduct courses in inter-disciplinary and multi-disciplinary areas covering natural 
sciences, life sciences, mathematical and co mputational sciences, engineering, etc., and 
create an ambience for learning and scholarship in advanced science and technology; 
17 
18 
(f) function as an autonomous in stitution which would generate its own funds from monies 
received by it, inter alia, by way of all fess (including tu ition fees) and other charges 
received, grants, gifts, donations , benefactions, bequests or tran sfers, monies for projects 
undertaken, income from investment made by the Academy and the funds received from 
the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, by way of loan or otherwise. 
6. The establishment of the proposed Adadem y of Scientific a nd Innovative Research 
would substantially increase research in inter-disciplinary and transdisciplinary 

areas. It is expected that Academy would pr oduce from 5th year onwards 1000 PhDs in 
science and technology and 120 PhDs in engineering every year. 
7. The Notes on clauses explain the provisions of the Bill. 
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
NEW DELHI; PRITHVIRAJ CHAVAN. 
The 7th July, 2010. 
Notes on clauses 
Clause 2.—This clause seeks to define certain expressions used in the Bill. 
Clause 3.—This clause provides for the establishment of Academy of Scientific and 
Innovative Research which shall be a body corporate and having its headquarters at such 
place as the Central Government may, by notification, specify. The Academy can also have 
such number of regional centres and campuses, as it may deem fit. 
Clause 4.—This clause lays down the objects of the Academy of Scientific and 
Innovative Research. 
The Academy shall primarily focus on research and imparting instruction in such areas 
as are not ordinarily taught in regular academic universities in India. Besides, the curricula, 
pedagogy and evaluation of the Academy shall be innovative and directed towards creating 
highest quality personnel with cross-disciplinary knowledge, aiming to provide leaders in 
the field of science and technology. The objects of the Academy, inter alia, shall be to 
(i) disseminate advanced knowledge in science and technology, by providing teaching and 
research facilities in such branches of learning as it may deem fit, particularly in emerging 
areas and such areas as may emerge in future; (ii) undertake inter-disciplinary studies and 
research; ( iii) conduct courses in, and integrate into  its courses, inte r-disciplinary and 
multidisciplinary 
areas covering natural sciences, life sciences, mathematical and computational 
sciences, medical sciences, en gineering, applied art, humanities, social sciences, law 
relating 
to these areas and interfaces thereof; (iv) create an ambience for learning and scholarship in 
advanced science and technology instead of exclusively focusing on marks or grades; 
(v) educate and train manpower in scientific and technological fields, collaborate, in 
appropriate areas in the field of science and technology, with reputed universities and 
institutions in India or outside India; (vi) establish linkages with industries in India and 
outside India for the promotion of science and technology; (vii) promote research in science 
and technology having a bearing on social, economic, cultural, intellectual and academic 
welfare of the people. 
Clause 5. —This clause contains provisions relating to relationship of Academy with 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
It provides that the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, within two weeks 
of the commencement of the proposed legislation, shall, enter into a Memorandum of 
Understanding with the Council of  Scientific and Industrial Re search, for the purposes of 
its 
affiliation with the Academy for the purposes of academics, teaching and award of degrees 
or diplomas. The persons pursuing the studies in the Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research for award of any degree or dipl oma, be awarded after entering of such 
Memorandum 
of Understanding, degrees or diplomas by the said Academy. Any person pursuing any 
academic or research course, before the commencement of the proposed legislation, in the 

Council of Scientific and Indus trial Research for award of any degree or diploma and 
registered 
for the said purpose with any other university, may, with the approval of the university with 
which such person is registered, migrate after such commencement to the Academy of 
Scientific and Innovative Research and be regi stered with the said Academy for grant of 
the 
same degree or diploma by the Academy and such person shall be deemed to have migrated 
and registered with the Academy at the same  level of study in the university from which 
such 
person migrated. 
This clause further provides that the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research 
shall be, provided, or, allowed to use, the infrastructure and scientific manpower of the 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research for teaching and research purposes for mutual 
benefit. 
19 
20 
Clause 6. —This clause contains provisions for declaration of the Academy of Scientific 
and Innovative Research as an institution of national importance. 
Clause 7. — This clause contains provisions for transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of 
existing Academy to Academy established under this proposed legislation and other 
provisions, etc. 
It, inter alia, provides that every employee (including those appointed for imparting 
instruction or conducting research in the existing Academy) holding any office under the 
existing Academy or teaching therein immediatel y before that date shall hold his office in 
the 
Academy or continue teaching therein by the same tenure and upon the same terms and 
conditions of service as respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and other 
terminal benefits as he would have held  such office if the Academy had not been 
established 
and shall continue to do so as an employee of the Academy or until the expiry of the period 
of six months from that date if such employee opts not to be the employee of the Academy 
within such period. 
It further provides that any person pursuing any academic or research course, before 
the commencement of the proposed legislation, in the existing Academy for award of any 
degree or diploma or certificate shall be en titled to pursue such academic or research 
course 
after the establishment of the Academy under the proposed legislation, and be registered 
with the said Academy for grant of the sa me degree or diploma or certificate by the 
Academy 
established under the proposed legislation, an d such person shall be deemed to have 
migrated 
and registered with the Academy established under the proposed legislation, at the same 
level of study in the existing Academy from which such person migrated. 
It also provides that any person, who immediately before the commencement of the 
proposed legislation, had been awarded a degr ee or diploma or certificate for having 
qualified 

any course by the existing Academy, shall be entit led to the award of an  equivalent degree 
or 
diploma by the Academy subject to approval by the Board of the Academy. 
Clause 8.—This clause lays down the functions and powers of the Academy of Scientific 
and Innovative Research. 
It provides that the Academy shall, discharge its functions, and exercise powers, 
mentioned in that clause which, inter alia, include: to grant, subject to such conditions as 
the Academy may determine, diplomas or certificates and confer degrees or other academic 
distinctions on the basis of such methods of evaluation and to hold its examinations, as the 
Academy may, from time to time, determin e and to withdraw any such diplomas, 
certificates, 
degrees or other academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause; to frame Statutes and 
Ordinances and to alter, modify or rescind the same; to co-operate or collaborate or 
associate 
with any body including, any university or ins titution, or industry, located in India or 
outside 
India; to conduct research, advisory and consultancy services with or for any entity, to 
borrow, on the security of property of the A cademy or otherwise, money for the purposes 
of 
the Academy or utilise its property for such pur poses as are in conformity with the spirit 
and 
object of this proposed legislation; to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any body 
including, any university or institution, or industry, located in India or outside India; to 
engage scientists of the Counc il of Scientific and Industri al Research as Faculty in 
imparting 
instruction and conducting research in the A cademy; to fix, demand and receive payment 
of 
fees and other charges; to lay down conditions of service for all categories of employees, 
including their code of conduct, etc. 
It further provides that in exercising its powers it shall be the endeavour of the Academy 
to maintain an all India character and high standards of teaching and research. 
Clause 9.—This clause provides that the Academy of Scientific and Innovative 
Research shall be open to all castes, creed, race or class and it shall not be lawful for the 
Academy to adopt or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or 
profession in order to be entitled to be appoi nted as a Faculty of the Academy or to hold 
any 
21 
other office therein, or to be employed ther ein or to be admitted as a student in the 
Academy 
or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof. 
However, the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research can make special 
provision for the employment or admission of  women, persons with disabilities or of 
persons 
belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes, 
the Scheduled Tribes and the other socially and educationally backward classes of citizens 
but no such special provision can be made on the ground of domicile. 
Clause 10. —This clause provides that (a) Board of Governors; (b) Senate; (c) Director; 

(d) Boards of Studies; ( e) such other authorities, as may be  declared by the Statutes to be 
the 
authorities of the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research shall be the authorities of 
the Academy. 
Clause 11. —This clause provides for the Composition of Board of Governors which 
shall consist of: (i) the person to be appointed by the President of the Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research, on the recommendation of the selection Committee as Chairperson 
of the Board; ( ii) the Director-General of the Council of Scientific  and Industrial Research 
as 
Vice-Chairperson. 
The President of the Indian National Science Academy, the Chairman, Atomic Energy 
Commission, Government of India, the Ch airman, Space Commi ssion, Government of 
India, 
the Chairman, University Grants Commission, G overnment of India, the Finance Secretary 
in 
the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, and the Director of the Academy, shall be 
ex officio members of the Board of Governors. 
In addition to the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and five ex officio members, the 
Board of Governors shall consist of nominated members who shall be: (i) the heads of three 
premier institutions in the field of imparting education in Science and Technology; (ii) four 
distinguished scientists or academicians of global eminence, of which two should be from 
reputed institutions outside India; (iii) three eminent industrialists or technologists; (iv) four 
distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists or Directors of laboratories of Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Resear ch. The Associate Director in charge of administration of 
the 
Academy shall be the Secretary of the Board. 
Clause 12.—This clause contains provisions for appointment of Chairperson of the 
Board of Governors of the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research . 
It, inter alia, provides that the Chairperson of the Board of Governors of the Academy 
of Scientific and Innovative Research shall be appointed by the President of the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research, on the recommendation of the selection committee 
constituted under sub-clause (2) of this clause. No person can be selected and appointed as 
Chairperson of the Board of Governors of the Academy of Scientific and Innovative 
Research 
unless he is an Indian citizen. 
The Director-General of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, being the 
ex officio Vice-Chairperson of Board of Governor s of the Academy of Scientific and 
Innovative 
Research, shall act as the Chairperson of the said Board until the first Chairperson of the 
Board is selected and appointed in accordan ce with the provisions of this proposed 
legislation. 
The Chairperson of the Board of Governors of the Academy of Scientific and Innovative 
Research shall be appointed on the recommendations of the selection committee referred to 
in this clause. The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other 
functions as may be assigned to him by this Act or the Statutes. 
Clause 13. —This clause contains provisions for nomination of distinguished scientists 
or academicians of global eminence, eminent industrialists or technologists and heads of 

three premier institutions in the field of imparting education in science and technology. 
The heads of three premier institutions in the field of imparting education in science 
and technology, referred to in clause (h), the distinguished scientists or academicians of 
22 
global eminence referred to in clause ( i), and eminent industrialists or technologists 
referred 
to in clause (j) of sub-section (1) of section 11, shall be nominated, by the President of the 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
Clause 14.—This clause contains provisions relating to nomination of distinguished 
scientists or outstanding scient ists of Council of Scientific  and Industrial Research or 
Directors 
of Council of Scientific a nd Industrial Research laboratories.The nomination of 
distinguished 
scientists or outstanding scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research or 
Directors of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research laboratories, referred to in clause 
(k) of sub-section (1) of section 11 shall be made by the Governing Body of the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research. 
Clause 15.—This clause contains provisions for allowances payable to members of 
the Board of Governors of the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research. 
It provides that the members of the Board shall be entitled to such allowances, if any, 
from the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, as may be provided for, in its 
Statutes but no member other than the Di rector of the Academy referred to in item (l) of 
subclause 
(1) of clause 11 shall be entitled to any salary by reason of this section. 
Clause 16. —This clause contains provisions for the term of office of members of 
Board of Governors of the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research. 
The term of office of the Chairperson or any other nominated member of the Board 
shall, save as otherwise provided in this clause, be four years, being one term of the Board 
and they shall not be eligible to be re-appoint ed as Chairperson or nominated as a member, 
as 
the case may be. However, an outgoing member of the Board shall, unless or otherwise 
directed, continue in office until another person is appointed, or, as the case may be, 
nominated as a member in his pl ace. The term of office of an ex officio member shall 
continue 
as long as he holds the office by virtue of which he has been nominated as a member. 
Onefourth 
of the members, being distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists or Directors 
of laboratories of the Council of Scientific  and Industrial Research nominated under item 
(k) 
of sub-clause (1) of clause 11, shall reti re every year and new me mbers shall be nominated 
in 
their place in accordance with the provisions of proposed legislation. 
However, the members, being distinguished scientists or outstanding scientists of the 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research or Directors of the Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research laboratories nominated under item (k) of sub-clause (1) of clause 11, 
immediately after the commencement of proposed legislation for the first time, may hold 

office for such period, as may be specified in their nomination and provisions of this 
subsection 
shall not be applicable to such nominated member. The period of term of office of the 
Chairperson or any other nominated member of the Board [other than ex officio Vice- 
Chairperson and ex officio members and nominated members under item ( k) of sub-clause 
(1) 
of clause 11] of the existing Academy shall be counted for the purposes of this sub-section. 
Clause 17.—This clause contains provisions relating to powers of Board of the Academy 
of Scientific and Innovative Research. 
It provides that the Board of Governors shall be responsible for the general 
superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the Academy and shall exercise all 
the 
powers of the Academy not otherwise provided for by the proposed legislation, the Statutes 
and the Ordinances, and the Board shall have the power to review the acts of the Senate. 
The Board of Governors shall have the powers to: (i) take decisions on questions of 
policy relating to the administration and working of the Academy; (ii) institute courses of 
study at the Academy; (iii) make Statutes; (iv) institute and appoint persons to academic as 
well as other posts in the Academy; ( v) consider and modify or cancel or rescind 
Ordinances; 
(vi) consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, the annual accounts and the budget 
estimates of the Academy for the next financial year, together with a statement of its 
development plans; (vii) approve investments in infrastructure of the Academy in any land 
23 
or building; (viii) exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
conferred or imposed upon it by the proposed legislation or the Statutes. 
The Board shall also have the power to appoint such committees of one or more 
persons as it considers necessary for exerci se of its powers and th e performance of its 
duties 
and hold enquiries under the proposed legislation. 
Clause 18.—This clause contains provisions relating to composition of Senate of the 
Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research. 
It provides that the Senate shall consist (a) the Director, ex officio, who shall be the 
Chairperson of the Senate; ( b) all Associate Directors, ex officio members; (c) all Deans of 
the 
Academy, ex officio members; (d) two Professors from each area of study represented by 
the 
Boards of Studies of the Academy, as may be nominated by the Board, ex officio members; 
(e) two scientists of the Counc il of Scientific and Industr ial Research, who being the 
youngest 
in age; and recipient of Shanti Swaroop Bhatnagar Award; and who are also Faculty of the 
Academy, as may be nominated by the the Dir ector-General of the Council of Scientific 
and 
Industrial Research; (f) two scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 
who being the youngest in age; and recipient of CSIR-Young Scientist Award; and who are 
Faculty of the Academy, as may be nominated by the Director-General of the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research; ( g) three Directors or dist inguished scientists or 
outstanding 

scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research laboratories, nominated by its 
Director-General; ( h) three persons, not being the em ployees of the Academy or the 
Council 
of Scientific and Industrial Research, to be nominated by the Chancellor in consultation 
with 
the Director from amongst educationists of repute, one being from each of the fields of 
science, engineering and social sciences; (i) such other members of the staff as may be laid 
down in the Statutes. 
The tenure of the nominated members of the Senate shall be two years. The Senate 
shall not, at any time, have less than fifty per cent. of its members from the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research scientists teaching in the Academy. 
Clause 19.—This clause contains provisions relating to powers of Senate of the 
Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research. 
It provides that the Senate of the Academy shall, subject to the provisions of the 
proposed legislation, the Stat utes and the Ordinances, ha ve the control and general 
regulation, 
and be responsible for the maintenance of standards of instruction, education and 
examinations in the Academy and exercise such other powers and perform such other 
duties 
as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes and Ordinances. 
Clause 20.—This clause contains provisions relating to Chancellor of the Academy of 
Scientific and Innovative Research. 
It provides that the Chairperson of the Board shall be the Chancellor of the Academy. 
The Chancellor shall ordinarily preside at the Convocation of the Academy. 
Clause 21.—This clause contains provisions relating to Director of the Academy of 
Scientific and Innovative Research. 
It provides that the Director shall be the principal academic and executive officer of the 
Academy and shall be responsible for the administration of the Academy and imparting 
instruction, research and maintenance of discipline. 
Clause 22.—This clause contains provisions for appointment and duty of Director of 
Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, etc. 
It provides that the Director shall be appointed, by the President of Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research, on the recommendation of the selection committee which shall 
consist of : (a) the Chairperson of the Board; (b) the Vice-Chairperson of the Board; (c) the 
President of the Indian National Science Academy; (d) the Chairman, Atomic Energy 
24 
Commission, Government of India; (e) the Chairman, Space Commission, Government of 
India. It shall be the duty of the Director that the decisions taken by the Board of Governors 
are implemented. The Director shall submit an annual report and accounts of the Academy 
to 
the Board. The Director shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as 
may be assigned to him by the proposed legislation or the Statutes or the Ordinances. The 
term of the Director shall be five years. 
Clause 23.—This clause contains provisions for Associate Directors of the Academy 
of Scientific and Innovative Research, etc. 
It provides that the Associate Directors of the Academy shall, be appointed by the 
Director, with the approval of the Board of Governors from amongst Professors of the 

Academy or scientists of the Council of Scientific a nd Industrial Research engaged in 
academic 
activity in the Academy, for such period, and on such terms and conditions, as may be laid 
down by the Statutes, and, shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
assigned to them by the proposed legislation or the Statutes or by the Director. The Board 
may assign any other designation for the A ssociate Directors, for the purpose of 
administrative 
convenience or academic efficiency. 
Clause 24.—This clause contains provisions relating powers of other Authorities of 
the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research, etc. 
It provides that the constitution and powers of Boards of Studies shall be such as may 
be provided in the Statutes. The powers, including the financial powers and duties of 
authorities, officers and other functionaries of the Academy shall be as provided by the 
Statutes. 
Clause 25.—This clause contains provisions for maintenance and retention of Funds 
of the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research. 
It provides that the Academy shall maintain and retain a fund to which shall be credited 
(a) all fees (including tuition fees) and other charges r eceived by the Academy; ( b) all 
monies 
received by the Academy by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or 
transfers; (c) monies for projects undertaken by the Academy; (d) income from investment 
made by the Academy or from any other source; (e) the funds received from the Council of 
Scientific and Industrial Research, by way of loan or otherwise; ( f) all monies received by 
the 
Academy in any other manner or from any other source. All monies credited to the fund of 
the Academy shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as the Academy 
may, with the approval of the Board of Governors, decide. 
The fund shall be applied for meeting: (a) the salaries, allowances and other 
remuneration of the Chairperson, members of Board or Facult y, officers and other 
employees 
or members of the committee set up by the Academy of the Academy; ( b) the expenses of 
the 
Academy in the discharge of its functions or exercise of its powers under clause 8; (c) the 
expenses on objects of and for the purposes authorised by this Act. All expenditure of the 
Academy shall be within the framework of a budget approved by the Board. 
Clause 26.—This clause relates to maintenance of accounts of the Academy of Scientific 
and Innovative Research. 
It provides that the Academy shall maintain proper and separate accounts giving 
therein the details of all receipts in, and, expenditure from, such fund and other relevant 
particulars. The accounts shall be prepared and got audited before the expiry of six months 
from the end of each financial year. The Acad emy shall submit to its Board of Governors 
and 
the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, the accounts duly audited and signed by 
all the Director, and Associate Director in charge of Finance and Associate Director in 
charge of Administration. The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research and the Board 
and any other person appointed by them in connection with the audit of the accounts of the 
Academy shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected 

vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Academy. 
25 
Clause 27. —This clause relates to audit of accounts of the Academy of Scientific and 
Innovative Research and its publication. 
It provides that the accounts of the Academy shall, without prejudice to the provisions 
contained in the Comptroller and Auditor-Gen eral’s (Duties, Powers and Conditions of 
Service) 
Act, 1971, be audited by auditors who may be appointed by the Board for the term of one 
year and such auditors shall be  eligible for re-appointment. No  person shall be eligible to 
be 
appointed as an auditor unless he is a chartered accountant and who has obtained a 
certificate 
of practice. The accounts of the Academy shall, after the completion of the audit and 
submission thereof to the Board and the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, be 
published on the website of the Academy. 
Clause 28.—This clause contains provisions relating to Statutes of the Academy of 
Scientific and Innovative Research. 
It provides that the Statutes of the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research 
shall be enacted by its Board of Governors. The Senate may make recommendations for 
enactment of Statutes to the the Board of Governors of the Academy. The Board can, from 
time to time, make new Statutes or may amend or repeal or rescind the Statutes with effect 
from such date as it may direct. 
Clause 29.—This clause contains provisions relating to matters to be provided by the 
Statutes of the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research. 
It provides that the Statutes may provide for all or any of the matters considered 
necessary by its Board of Governors for functioning of the Academy within the framework 
of the proposed legislation including: (a) the conferment of degrees and diplomas; (b) the 
constitution, powers and functions of Boards of Studies; (c) the tuition fee and other fees to 
be charged; (d) the institution of fellowships, sc holarships, medals and prizes; ( e) the term 
of 
office and the method of appointment of officers of the Academy; (f) the qualification of 
Faculty of the Academy, (other than the scientists of the the Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research engaged in the service of the Academy) officers and other staff of 
Academy; (g) the classification, the method of appointment and the determination of the 
terms and conditions of service of Faculty, officers and other staff of the Academy; (h) the 
provision of insurance fund, provident fund and other retirement benefits, for the benefit of 
the Faculty, officers and other staff of the Academy; (i) the constitution, powers and duties 
of authorities of the Academy; (j) the establishment and maintenance of hostels; (k) the 
conditions of residence of students of the Academy and the levying of fees for residence in 
the hostels and of other charges; (l) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and other 
members of the Board and any committee constituted by the Academy; (m) the meetings of 
the Board, the Senate, or any committee, the quorum at such meetings and the procedure to 
be followed in the conduct of their business. 
However, the scientists of the the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research engaged 
in the service of the Academy shall be governed by the qualifications specified by the 
Council and nothing contained in this Act shall be construed to disqualify them from 
undertaking the service of the Academy or engaging them as Faculty of the Academy. 

Clause 30.—This clause contains provisions relating to Ordinances of the Academy 
of Scientific and Innovative Research. 
It provides that the Ordinances of the Academy may, provide for all or any of the 
matters specified in this clause. These matters, inter alia, relate to, (a) the admission of the 
students; (b) the courses of study; (c) the conditions under which students shall be admitted 
and shall be eligible for degrees, diplomas and certificates and to the examinations of the 
Academy, and shall be eligible for the degrees, diplomas and certificates; (d) the conditions 
of award of the fellowships, scholarships, medals and prizes; (e) the condition and mode of 
appointment and duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators; (f) the conduct of 
examinations; (g) the maintenance of discipline among students of the Academy. The 
26 
Ordinances shall be made by the Senate. All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have the 
effect from such date as it may direct, but every Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as 
soon as may be, to the Board of Governors and shall be considered by the Board in its 
subsequent meeting. The Board shall have the power, by resolution, to modify or cancel or 
rescind any of its Ordinances and such Ordinances shall, from the date of such resolution 
stand modified accordingly or cancelled or rescinded, as the case may be. 
Clause 31.—This clause contains provisions for review of functioning of the Academy 
of Scientific and Innovative Research. 
It provides that there shall be a review of the functioning of the Academy once in every 
four years by persons of eminence to be a ppointed by the Council of Scientific and 
Industrial 
Research. The Academy shall meet the expenses for conducting the review. Upon receipt 
of 
the report of such review, the Board may take appropriate action. In addition to the review, 
the Board may conduct review of functioning of administrative and academic wings of the 
Academy, in such manner and at such intervals, as may be provided in the Statutes. 
Clause 32.—This clause relates to appointments of the staff of the the Academy of 
Scientific and Innovative Research, (except appointment of the Director). 
It provides that all appointments of the staff of the Academy, (except appointment of 
the Director) shall be made in accordance with  the procedure laid dow n in the Statute, by 
the 
Board of Governors for the academic staff and by the Director, in any other case. 
Clause 33.—This clause contains provisions for conditions of service of employees 
of the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research. 
It provides that every employee of the Academy shall be appointed on contractual 
basis under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the Academy and a copy of 
which 
shall be furnished to the employee concerned. However, all scientists and other employees 
of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research engaged in the service of the Academy 
shall be governed by the service conditions, rules and regulations of the Council of 
Scientific 
and Industrial Research. The Academy shall have a flexible compensation system which 
recognises performance, as laid down in the Statutes, to bring the best talent in the 
Academy. 
The scientists of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research engaged in the service of 

the Academy and who draw their salary from  the Council shall be eligible for such 
allowances 
or honorarium, as may be determined by Statute. 
Clause 34.—This clause contains provisions for arbitration between employees of the 
Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research and the Academy. 
It provides that any dispute arising out of a contract between the Academy and any of 
its employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the 
Academy, be referred to a Tri bunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the 
Director, one member nominated by the empl oyee, and the such two arbitrators shall 
appoint 
the third arbitrator who shall act as the Pr esiding arbitrator. The arbitration shall be 
governed 
by the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. 
Clause 35.—This clause contains provisions for resignation, removal and suspension 
of Chairperson, other Members and Director of the Academy of Scientific and Innovative 
Research. 
It, inter alia, provides that the President of the Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research may remove from office the Chai rperson or any Member of the Board of 
Governors or the Director on any of the grounds  mentioned in the said clause. It further 
provides that the Chairperson or a Member of the Board of G overnors or the Director shall 
not be removed from his office on the grounds th at he has acquired such  financial or other 
interest as is likely 
to affect prejudicially the exercise of his functions as such Chairperson or other Member or 
Director; or has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to 
the public interest; or has been guilty of proved misbehaviour, except by an order made by 
27 
the President of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, after an inquiry made in 
this behalf in which such Chairperson or such  Member or the Director has been informed 
of  the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of 
those charges. In the event of inquiry instituted, the President of the Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research may suspend such Ch airperson or other Me mber or Director 
against 
whom inquiry has been instituted for a period not exceeding six months if it considers 
necessary in public interest. In case any nominated member under item (k) of sub-clause (1) 
of clause 11 in the Board of Governors incurs any of the disqualifications under clauses (a) 
to (i) of sub-clause ( 1), such nominated member shall not be eligible to be nominated as 
such 
and his nomination as nominated member shall be revoked by those who nominated such 
member. 
Clause 36.—This clause contains provisions for meetings of the the Board of Governors, 
Senate, or other committees constituted by the Academy of Scientific and Innovative 
Research. 
It provides that the meetings of the Board, Senate, or other committees constituted by 
the Academy may be held using contemporary tools of information and communication 
technologies (including video-conferencing) without the members necessarily having to be 
physically present. 

Clause 37.—This clause provides that, certain acts not to invalidate acts or proceedings 
of the Board of Governors of the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research or any 
other body. 
It provides that no act of the Board or the Academy of Scientific and Innovative 
Research or any other body set up under this Act or the Statutes, shall be invalid merely by 
reason of any vacancy in, or defect in the c onstitution thereof; or any defect in the 
selection, 
nomination or appointment of a person acting as a member thereof; or any irregularity in its 
procedure not affecting the merits of the case. 
Clause 38.—This clause confers power upon the Central Government to remove 
difficulties which may arise in giving effect to the provisions of this proposed legislation. It 
can, by order, make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of this proposed 
legislation, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the difficulty. No such 
order can be made after the expiry of three years from the commencement of the proposed 
legislation and such order is required to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Bill, 2010 proposes to 
establish the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research in association with the 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
2. Clause 25 of the Bill provides for the financial resources of the Academy and 
details the sources as: (a) of all fees (including tuition fees) and other charges received 
by the Academy; (b) all monies received by the Academy by way of grants, gifts, 
donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers; (c) monies for projects undertaken by 
the Academy; (d) income from investment made by the Academy or from any other 
source; (e) the funds received from the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, by 
way of loan or otherwise; (f) all monies received by the Academy in any other manner or 
from any other source. 
3. The Government has approved that the Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research can extend financial assistance from its laboratory reserves to the Academy, 
up to an amount of Rupees fifteen crores. 
4. The Bill does not involve any expenditure of recurring or non-recurring nature 
directly from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
28 
LOK SABHA 
———— 
A 
BILL 
to establish an Academy for furtherance of the advancement of learning and prosecution of 
research in the field of science and technology in association with Council of Scientific 
and Industrial Research and to declare the institution known as the Academy of 
Scientific and Innovative Research, to be an institution of national importance to 
provide for its incorporation and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
———— 
(Shri Prithviraj Chavan, Minister of State for Science and Technology, 
Earth Sciences) 
GMGIPMRND—3107LS(S4)—22-07-2010. 
 

________________________________________________________________________ 
MINUTES 
_________________________________________________________________________ 
II  
SECOND MEETING     
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Friday, the 22 nd October, 2010 in Committee 
Room 'C', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT  
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
3. Dr. Chandan Mitra  
4. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian 
5. Shri Jabir Husain 
6. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
7. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
LOK SABHA  
8. Shri Ninong Ering 
9. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
10. Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda  
11. Shri Jayaram Pangi  
12. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
13. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
14. Dr. Rajan Sushant 
SECRETARIAT  
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director 
Shri V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
Representatives from the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research 
 
1. Shri S.K. Brahmachari, Secretary & Director General 
2. Dr. Sivaram, Director, Nati onal Chemical Laboratory, Pune 
3. Dr. Tapan Chakraborty, Di rector, NEERI, Nagpur 
4. Dr. Rajesh Gokhale, Director, IGIB, Delhi 
5. Dr. R.C. Budhani, Director, NPL, Delhi. 
6. Dr. Gautam Biswas, Director, CMERI, Durgapur 
7. Dr. Gangan Pratap, Dire ctor, NISCAIR, Delhi  
8. Dr. Mohan Rao, Director, CCMB, Delhi 
9. Dr. Nagesh R. Iyer, Director, SERC, Chennai 
10. Dr. K. Jayakumar, Joint Secretary (Parl.), CSIR 
11. Dr. Sudeep Kumar, Head, PPD, CSIR, Delhi 
12. Shri Zakir Thomas, Project Director, OSDD & Head DGTC, CSIR, Delhi 
13. Shri Debashish Banerjee, Scientist, CSIR, Delhi 
 

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members and Secretary, DSIR alongwith  
his team of officials to the meeting of th e Committee.  He requested the Secretary to 
highlight the salient features of 'The Academ y of Scientific and I nnovative Research Bill, 
2010'. He also desired to know the main reasons which have led to the origin of the Bill 
and the significant changes in the scientific research scenario that are proposed to be 
achieved with the implementation of the various provisions of the Bill.  
3.  The Secretary then made an elaborate visual presentation highlighting salient 
features of the proposed Academy.  He inform ed the Committee that the main objective of 
the Bill was  to establish the  Academy as an institution of excellence  with powers to 
award degrees in inter-disciplinary and         multi -disciplinary areas, not ordinarily taught 
in academic institutions and Universities. He also informed the Committee about the vast 
network of laboratories/institut es covering  various fields of sciences falling under the 
Department and the number of students/resear ch scholars who are pursuing research work 
in those laboratories.   
4. Thereafter, Members sought clarifications  on the points that emerged out of the 
presentation. The Secretary replied to them . The Committee enquired from the Secretary 
whether the scientific progress is dependent  on the number of PhDs being produced and 
whether the Department is maintaining a track record of how these PhDs holders are being 
engaged  for the industrial grow th. The Secretary replied that higher qualification always 
give boost to the personal economic growth of the individual      as well as the  nation. He 
informed further that performance of laboratories and institutions are clearly related to   the 
number    of PhDs     the laboratory    has   awarded.  
5. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan, M.P. was of th e view that the Academy which the Bill 
proposes to establish, should not become one  more PhD producing machine, rather it 
should  foster the non-degree diploma  programmes which would help upgrade the 
technical capacity of small scale and rural indu stry sector. In this context he cited the 
Chinese concept of Township and Village Enterprises (TVEs).  It was also emphasized that 
the Academy should not focus only on number of researches and patents but it should also 
ensure their conversion into products and goods for societal benefit.  
6. The Secretary while agreeing with the Member informed the Committee that the 
motto of the Academy is scientific excellence wi th furthering the aspirations of the masses. 
Thereafter, the Secretary listed out a number of measures taken to improve the skills of 
workers and professionals in Jharkhand, Khurja and Jorhat through various laboratories and 
institutions.   
7.  It was also enquired whether the Departme nt is open to the id ea of Private-Public 
Partnership model for some of their technica l facilities. The Secretary replied that the 
Department would definitely go  for sponsored private public pa rtnership as it  has decided 
not to take budgetary support from Planning Commission.    
8. Shri Jabir Husain, M.P. took a very serious view of the fact that  while the Bill was 
introduced in Lok Sabha on the 30
th July, 2010, a notification was issued on  17 th July, 
2010 by the Government operationalising an inte rim Academy. He enquired that while the 
Bill was to get the approval of the Parliament, why certain major features of the Bill were 
operationalised through a Government Resolution?  He further stated that the Department 
had taken it for granted that th e Bill would be approved by th e Parliament in its original 
form.  
9. The Secretary submitted that on account of urgency of the matter, as a large number 
of research fellows in various laboratories of  the Department are awaiting registration for 

PhD under the proposed Academy, the Governme nt has approved for the establishment of 
an interim academy even before the Parliament clears the Bill in this regard. He submitted 
further that   Indian Institute of Scien ce Education and Research (IISER) has been 
functioning for the last 3-4 y ears in a similar way, i.e. through a Government Resolution 
and is still awaiting clearance from the  Parlia ment, so technically there is no violation.  
However, the Committee was not satisfied with  the way some of the Ministries of the 
Government are functioning, taking the approval of the Parliament for granted and 
establishing interim institutes/academies even before being approved by the Parliament. 
The Committee decided to place on record it s disapproval of the tendency on the part of 
Govt. and some Ministries to take Parliament for granted by issuing executive orders on the 
matter pending consideration of the Parliament. The Committee also took a serious note of 
the rejection of recommendations of the Standing Committees and subsequently getting the 
Bill passed.  
The officials then withdrew.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
10.  The Committee adjourned at 12.55 p. m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on 28
th 
October, 2010. 
III 
THIRD MEETING     
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Thursd ay, the 28th October, 2010 in Room 
No. '63', First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
PRESENT  
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Saman Pathak 
3. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian 
4. Shri Jabir Husain 
5. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
6. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
LOK SABHA  
7. Shri P.C. Chacko 
8. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi  
9. Shri Jayaram Pangi  
10. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi  
11. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
12. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
13. Shri Balakrishna K. Shukla 
14. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
15. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava 
SECRETARIAT  
Dr. D.B. Singh, Joint Secretary  
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director 
Shri V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
Representatives from the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research
 
1. Dr. S.K. Brahmachari, Secretary & Director General, CSIR 
2. Dr. K.Jayakumar, Joint Secretary 

3. Dr. Nagesh R. Iyer, Director, SERC, Chennai 
4. Dr. Tapan Chakraborty, Director, NEERI, Nagpur 
5. Dr. Gautam Biswas, Director, CMERI, Durgapur 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice(Department of Legal Affairs) 
1. Shri D.R.Meena, Secretary 
2. Shri M.A. Khan Yusufi, Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice(Legislative Department) 
 1. Shri V.K.Bhasin , Secretary 
 2. Dr. Narayana Raju, Joint S ecretary & Legislative Counsel 
 3. Shri Diwakar Singh, Deputy Legislative Counsel 
Representative of the Department of Atomic Energy 
        Dr. Srikumar Banerjee, Secretary 
       Witness 
Prof. V.S. Ramamurthy, Former Secretary, Department of Science & Technology 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed th e Members of the Committee, Secretaries, 
officials of the Ministries/Departments and th e experts.  He informed that the Committee 
has so far heard the views of the Secretary, De partment of Scientific & Industrial Research 
on ‘The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Bill, 2010’ and today it will have 
the benefit of views of the distinguished expe rts and Secretaries who have been invited for 
the purpose.  He  requested the  experts to give the views on the va rious provisions of the 
Bill and also to enlighten the Committee whether it would be more prudent to strengthen 
the existing infrastructure in Universities in  order to increase the number of Ph.Ds and 
enhance the quality of research rather than setting up a new Academy.   
 Thereafter, he desired to know from the S ecretaries, Ministry of Law & Justice the 
reasons for issuing a notification for  setting  up  an  interim  Academy  even before    the  
Bill  could  be  passed  by  the  Parliame nt  and asked  the Secretary, Legislative 
Department to respond to his queries.   
3. The Secretary, Legislative Department submitted that article 73 of the Constitution 
of India, provides inter-alia that the executive power of th e union shall extend to matters 
with respect to which Parliament has the powe r  to make laws.  He also cited  past 
precedents like establishment and conti nuance of a Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority, even though  the bill has not b een enacted till this date.  Similarly 
SEBI, before becoming a statutory author ity under the SEBI Act 1992, was functioning  
under a resolution of Government of Indi a. Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority (IRDA) continues to function  through a resolution while the bill is yet to be 
passed, he further added.  He also submitted that in the instant case Cabinet has given a 
mandate to set up the interim Academy and the sa me has been reflected in clause 7 of the 
Bill.  
4. Some members of the Comm ittee, however, were not satisfied and convinced with 
the submission made by the Secretary.  Shri  Jabir Hussain, M.P. observed that there are 
two aspects of the issue- one is legality an d the other one is propriety and felt that  
propriety had been infringed. He also wa nted to know the reasons for issuing the 
notification just 13 days before the introduction of the bill in Lok Sabha.   
5. The Secretary, DSIR stated that the id ea behind the CSIR getting a degree awarding 
power was recommended in 2004 by a high powered Committee chaired by Prof. Vijay 
Kelkar.  The Kelkar Committee had referred to the role of CSIR laboratories  to take on the 
role of research universities and seek d eemed university status. A committee headed by 

Prof. M.M. Sharma also debated this issu e.  He however, summed up by saying that 
heightened expectation from students and others made them to go for notifications and 
setting up of an interim Academy pending Parliamentary approval. 
6. Thereafter, the Committee heard the view s of former Secretary, Department of 
Science & Technology. He submitted that th is Bill was a very timely and necessary 
initiative. Drawing a distinction between universities and the proposed Academy, he 
observed that the up scaling for the industry wa s not the mandate of the universities but it 
was the mandate of CSIR.   He was of the view that with the setting up of this Academy, 
CSIR would get good quality students and manpower  in the long run which it had not been 
getting in the last two-three decades.  Technology transfer from laboratory to market would 
also gain momentum because CSIR was in a positi on to train students in that area.  He also 
suggested that the relationship with the Industry needs to be made broader by involving the 
industry representatives as faculties and lettin g the students have access to the facilities 
existing in the Industry. 
7. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan observed that the initiative in CSIR to maximize or 
optimize the benefits of their vast infrastruc ture to create a new breed of Ph.Ds was an 
important one.  He felt that if the Academy is going to develop a new breed of Ph.Ds who 
were well versed in the interface between science and technology and who would be able to 
stimulate industrial growth, it would be a very important contribution. 
8. The Secretary, Department of Atomic Ener gy observed that uncertainty about future 
job prospects was one of the main problems in India that a student f aced in entering into 
higher education & therefore, if students knew that after doing Ph.D., they would have a 
guaranteed job in the CSIR sy stem, then the CSIR would be  able to attract very good 
student. He further stated that the establishment of AcSIR will  complement the  traditional 
university structure in the country.  
9. Shri Jabir Hussain, M.P.  also queried a bout the low number of women scientists in 
the country and stated that there was no referen ce in the bill to wome n scientists being on 
the board of Governor or on the faculty to which the Secretary, DSIR responded and cited 
clause9(2) of the Bill, which enables the academy to make special provision for  the 
employment or admission of women. However,  the member felt that a suitable provision 
may be included in the bill for compulsory inclusion of women scientists on the board of 
AcSIR. 
The officials then withdrew.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
10.  The Committee then adjourned at 1 2.50 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on 29
th 
October, 2010. 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING     
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Friday, the 29 th October, 2010 in Committee 
Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT  
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy - Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
3. Shri Jabir Husain 
LOK SABHA  
4. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 

5. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal 
6. Shri Jayaram Pangi  
7. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
8. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
9. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
10. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
SECRETARIAT  
Dr. D.B. Singh, Joint Secretary  
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director 
Shri V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
Representatives from the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research
 
1. Dr. S.K. Brahmachari, Secretary & Director General, CSIR 
2. Dr. Nagesh R. Iyer, Director, SERC 
3. Dr. Tapan Chakraborty, Director, NEERI 
Representative from the Department of Space 
1. Shri Shantanu Bhatwadekar, OSD 
Witness 
1. Prof. Deepak Pental, Vice Chancellor, University  of Delhi 
2. Shri Anjan Das, Senior Director,  Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) 
3. Dr. D. Sengupta, Senior Advisor, Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) 
4. Shri Jibak Dasgupta, Deputy Director,  Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members, Secretary Department of 
Scientific & Industrial Research and his team of officials, Prof. D eepak  Pental, Vice 
Chancellor, University of Delh i, Shri Anjan Das, Senior Director and Dr. D. Sengupta, 
Senior Advisor, Confederation of Indian I ndustry (CII)  to the meeting of the Committee 
and informed that the Committee has already ha d the benefit of the views of Secretary, 
Department of Scientific & Industrial Resear ch, Secretary, Departme nt of Legal Affairs 
and Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law and Justice, Secretary, Department 
of Atomic Energy and Prof. V.S. Ramamurthy, Former Secretary, Department of Science 
& Technology on the Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Bill, 2010.    He 
thereafter informed that the Committee would he ar the suggestions and reservations of the 
experts/witnesses, present today, on the various provisions of the Bill.   He particularly 
desired from experts to enlighten the Committee on the significant changes in the scientific 
research scenario the world over, particularly in the developed countries and in the light of 
those changes whether the setting up of the Academy was a step in the right direction.  First 
of all, he invited Vice-Chancellor, University of Delhi to present his views.  
3. Prof. Deepak Pental, Vice-Chancellor, Univ ersity of Delhi welcomed the setting up 
of the Academy and said that it was a good pr oposal.  He stated that CSIR was producing a 
large number of Ph.Ds in Science, Technology and engineering, but th ese students had to 
register under a guide with either Jawahar Lal Nehru University or some other Universities 
so that they got a degree.  This leads, in ma ny cases, to a situation where a guide gets name 
without doing much.  This kind of parasitic collaboration is no t a good idea.  The bill aims 
to allow CSIR to register its students for Ph.D and makes it self reliant. He also felt that it 
would provide scope for high-e nd inter-disciplinary courses.  He, however, suggested that 
administrative model for the Academy should be kept simple and the name of the academy 
should be ‘Academy of Scientific  & Industrial Research’ which is the historical name for 

CSIR. He further suggested that  every doctoral degree holder sc ientist of CSIR should be 
eligible to become a faculty member after completion of 3 to 5 years of post-doctoral work 
either in CSIR or any university in India or abroad.  
4. Prof. Pental expressed his concern over a chain of hierar chies viz.   professors, 
Professors of eminence, Distinguished Pr ofessors, Outstanding Professors, Senior 
Professors, Emeritus Professors, Professors, Associate professors, Assistant professors, etc.  
that are sought to be created in the Academy vide   clause 8 (ix) of the Bill.  He was of the 
view that this creates unnecessary hierarchies  and the existing pattern in CSIR where every 
scientist is called as doctor so and so, may be followed in the Academy.  He emphasised 
that ‘achievement’ should be encouraged.  He also felt that the board of the Academy is too 
big.  
5. In reply to a clarification sought from Shri Jabir Hussain, M.P. as to why there has 
been a substantial decline in the number of Ph.Ds and why sub standard Ph.Ds are coming 
out of Universities, Prof. Pental stated that  the decline of Universities started in the 
seventies as they became too unwieldy and ther e was political interference in Universities. 
Further, there is no apex funding body in India,  which funds the universities as existing in 
developed countries. Failure to put our centers of high-end research in Universities has also 
contributed to the decline, he observed. 
6. The Chairman enquired from the Secretary, DSIR as to how such a big Academy 
which is sought to be established without any Government grant particularly as it should 
have infrastructure of international standard.  Secretary, DSIR clarified that CSIR was built 
with public funding and today it has assets worth crores of r upees.  The assets with CSIR 
are 5000 scientists, 40 central laboratories, 37 ce nters and 37 main campuses besides  land, 
equipments and facilities, and since hub an d spoke model is to be adopted, for the 
Academy, no Government grant had been asked. 
7. The representative from the Confederati on of Indian Industry (CII) emphasised on 
the need of  multi disciplinary education.  He further stated that a clear cut Intellectual 
Property Rights’ ownership policy needs to be articulated in the st atute of the academy. 
The CII also suggested that Innovation and T echnology Management aspects also needs to 
be included in the curriculum of the Academy.  The ‘CSIR Sc ientists’ should include the 
community of engineers, technologists a nd technology managers and there should be a 
provision in the Bill to include apex industry association. 
The officials then withdrew.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
8.  The Committee then adjourned at 12.30 p.m.  
V 
FIFTH MEETING     
The Committee met at 03.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 18
th November, 2010 in Room 
No. '63', First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
PRESENT  
1. Shri Francisco Sardinha - in the Chair*  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Saman Pathak 
3. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian 
4. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
LOK SABHA  
5. Shri P. C. Chacko  

6. Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
7. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal 
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
9. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
10. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
SECRETARIAT  
Dr. D.B. Singh, Joint Secretary  
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director 
Shri V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
Representatives from the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research
 
4. Dr. S.K. Brahmachari, Secretary, DSIR & Director General, CSIR 
5. Dr. Nagesh R. Iyer, Director, SERC, Chennai 
6. Dr. Gautam Biswas, Director, CMERI, Durgapur 
Witness 
       Prof. Sukhadeo Thorat, Chairman, University Grants Commission(UGC) 
1. Prof. Dinesh Singh, Vice-Chancellor, University of Delhi 
_____________________________________________________________________          
* In the absence of the Chairman, Shri Francisco Sardinha, chaired the meeting. 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, Secretary, 
DSIR and the experts. He informed that th e Committee has so far heard the views of the 
Secretaries of the Department of Scientific & Industrial Res earch, Legislative Department 
& Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice) and Department of Atomic 
Energy and some experts on ‘The Academy of  Scientific and Innovative Research Bill, 
2010’. 
 He requested the experts to give their vi ews on the various pr ovisions of the Bill 
and the significant advances that were likely to be achieved in the scientific research 
scenario with the enactment of the Bill.  He also asked the experts to enlighten the 
Committee as to whether it would have been more prudent to strengthen the existing 
infrastructure in Universities to increase th e number of Ph.Ds and enhance the quality of 
research rather than setting up a new Academy for the same purpose and whether the 
proposed Academy could have been set up by the CSIR under the present UGC 
guidelines/rules.  He invited the Chairman, UGC to respond to his queries first.   
3. The Chairman, UGC submitted that, a couple of years ago, a proposal had come to 
the UGC, to convert the various laboratories in to university system particularly in the 
category of deemed universit y.  A Committee was set up under the Chairmanship of Prof. 
M.M. Sharma, a renowned scientist, which unanimously supported the idea.    
4. Responding to the query of the Chairman as to  whether the  strengthening of 
infrastructure in the existing university fo r Ph.D. could have been thought of as an 
alternative, he stated that the strengthening of the university system was a sort of an 
independent issue and in the El eventh Five Year Plan, there has been a huge initiative to 
increase the number of universities, as well as to strengthen the existing institution, as it was 
felt that higher education had been neglected in  the past and, therefore this Plan gives top 
priority to education.  He further added that  the setting up of the Academy, should be looked 
upon as an independent initiative of the Department of Scientif ic & Industrial Research and 
to that extent, it was a welcome step. 

5. The Vice-Chancellor, University of Delhi,  welcomed the creation of the Academy. 
He observed that it could have been set up as  another university in the present structure 
through the UGC, etc. But he endorsed the idea of setting it up outside that umbrella.  The 
essence of academics really lies in its freedom and good ideas w ould come from all quarters, 
and possibilities of good ideas coming from a different model, shoul d not be precluded, he 
added.  On that count, he said that he endorsed the Academy.   
6. The Vice Chancellor, University of Delhi also  stated that various laboratories of the 
CSIR had been working along the lines of soci etal needs and interac tions, but the kind of 
cohesion and fluidity of movement which could  come through a platform like a new 
university, was lacking in the pr esent system.  He endorsed the new initiative of CSIR and 
expressed that their structure will enable them to quickly take good things off the shelf, 
wherever they are available. He further obs erved  that with certa in balance between good 
work, rewards and some checks, good things would flow. 
7.  Shri Paul Manoj Pandian, M.P. queried  regarding the possibility of the UGC 
supporting the Academy by sanctioning funds so  that there was some supervision and 
monitoring by a higher organi zation like the UGC which was vested with powers on 
educational matters in our country. 
8. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan, M.P. pointed ou t that the mandate of the CSIR is to 
provide scientific and industr ial research and development that maximizes the economic, 
environmental and societal benefits to the people of India and expressed a concern over the 
possibility of dilution of that specific mandate  of CSIR with the creation of the Academy.   
Shri P.C. Chacko, M.P. further observed that  there was no guarantee that the proposed 
Academy will deliver what other universities have failed to do.    
9. The Chairman thereafter pointed out that  ‘Objects and Reasons ’ states that the 
Academy would not require any additional fu nds from the Government and wanted to 
know if there was any other Centre of Ex cellence recognized by the UGC which was 
functioning without the assistance of the Government and whet her it would be possible for 
the proposed Academy to work smoothly without any Governme nt assistance. He further 
asked whether the opening of the Academy would lead to duplicity as the university system 
was already engaged in imparting education in those areas? 
10. The Secretary, DSIR while responding to the query as to why public funds had not 
been asked for, stated that for setting up a university, the basic requirements were  land, 
money for construction of building, equipments a nd  salary for the staff and this took away 
about ninety per cent of the budget,  but th e proposed CSIR Academ y already had this 
ninety per cent of the budget, available due to av ailability of CSIR ’s land, buildings, 
equipment and 4000 CSIR scientists, whose sa laries were already being paid by the 
Government.  
11. The Secretary, DSIR further explained th at in the Academy, efforts were being 
made to bring CSIR’s research and innova tion along with education and there was an 
element of flexibility as regards funding.  The funding gap, if any, will be met by the 
CSIR’s commercial earning and, if required,  the Government would  be requested for 
additional funds.  He further explained that  there was no chance of  a takeover by private 
sector as while sanctioning the Academy, Ministry of Finance and Prime Minister’s Office 
had specifically stated that there had to be, on the Board of the Academy, a representative 
from the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, for financia l supervision, as the 
Academy was going to utilize the CSIR’s resources whic h actually belonged to the 
Government of India 

 
12. As regards the issue regarding the possibi lity of a dilution of CSIR’s mandate, the 
Secretary, DSIR explained that  innovation can not happen unl ess you have the brightest 
mind and brightest mind would  not come unless you give them a degree, a better 
scholarship, a better system and a better structur e. He further informed that in the last ten 
years though our number of PhDs in science an d engineering, had doubled, it is still below 
the progress achieved by countries who were at  par with us ten year s ago.  Hence,  there 
was a need for acceleration of the process by using the existing infrastructure. 
13. The Chairman, UGC informed the Committee, that a few years ago, there  
was a realization that science education wa s on deceleration.  The Minister of Human 
Resource Development set up a Committee under the Chairmanship of Prof. M.M. Sharma 
to revise science educati on and the Committee Task Forc e was converted into an 
Empowered Committee, and that Empowered Co mmittee is now in the UGC.  Presently,  
Rs. 600 crores have been allocated to scien ce education and every year, Rs. 200 crores are 
spent for strengthening laborator ies, instituting fellowships, post doctoral, and for increase 
in the faculties.  Hence science has been brought on a higher agenda in the UGC.  
14. As regards the funding, the Chairman, UGC opined that the Government should 
contribute for the working e xpenses and the future development expenditure although 
initial investment has been made by the CSIR.  He was of the view that tuition fee should 
not become the only source of funding of the A cademy as it would affect the students.  If 
the fee was high then only thos e students who had ability to pay, would enter the academy. 
He, therefore, suggested that there should be  a funding from the Central Government and 
the CSIR for the development grant as well as grant for working expenses so that a very 
reasonable fee is charged from the students. He also suggested that a representative of the 
Indian Council of Medical Science and the All India Council for Technical Education 
(AICTE) should be included in the Board of the Academy as an ex-officio member as, 
medical, biomedical, engineering education and technology will be a part of the curriculum 
of the Academy. 
The officials then withdrew.  
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
15.  The Committee then ad journed at 04: 18 p.m.  
  