16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1994-95)
 
SIXTEENTH REPORT
ON
ANNUAL REPORT OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND
 FORESTS FOR THE YEAR 1993-94
 
(Environmental Pollution and Related Issues)
(Presented on March 14, 1995)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 1995/Phalguna, 1916 (Saka)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONTENTS
1.COMPASSION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.INTRODUCTION
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE    
4.SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATIONS
5.ANNEXURE
               (i) List of 37 identified polluted river stretches
               (ii) List of 17 categories of highly polluting industries :
               (iii) Estimated Vehicular Emission Load in Metropolitan Cities
6.MINUTES OF MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
 PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMI'ITEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT
 AND FORESTS (1994-95)
 
1. Syed Sibtey Razi---Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
   **2. Dr. M. Aram
3. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
4. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
   **5. Shri Suresh Kalmadi
   **6. Shri K. Rahman Khan
       7. Prof. M.G.K. Menon
       8. Shri Suresh Pachouri
       9. Shri N. Girl Prasad
     10.Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
   *11. Dr. Ranbir Singh
     12. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
LOK SABHA
 
13. Shri E. Ahamed
14. Shri P.C. Chacko
15. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
16. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
17. Shri Sharad Dighe
18. Shrimati Saroj Dubey
19. Shri Oscar Femandes
20. Shri Shankarrao D, Kale
21. Shri P. Kumarasamy
22.. Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
    ***23. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
24. Shri M.V.V.S-Murthy
25. Shri Harpal Panwar
26. Shri Balraj Pasi
27. 'Shti Bhim Singh Patel
28. Shri Chandresh Patel
29. Shri Vijay Naval Patil
______________________________________________________________________________
*Nominated w.e.f. October 4. 1994.
     ** Nominated w,e.f. November 16, 1994.
   *** Nominated w.e.f. August, 22, 1994.
       30.     Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
       31.     Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
       32.     Shri Rama Chandra Rath
       33.     Shri M.G. Reddy
       34.     Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
       35.     Shri Brij Bhuslian Sharan Singh
       36.     Shri Harchand Singh
       37.     Shri Ram Prasad Singh
       38.     Shri K.G, Shivappa
     *39.     Shri Bapusaheb Thite
     *40.     Kumari Sushila Tiriya
       41.     Kumari Frida Topno
       42.     Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar--Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi--Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani--Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar--Committee Officer
______________________________________________________________________________
*Nominated w.e.f. August 22, 1994 vice Sarvashri P.R. Kumaramangalam and Praful   
  Manoharbhai Patel resigned.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
 Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf present this
 Sixteenth Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the problem of environmental pollution and other related
 issues which fall within the mandate of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
            2. The Committee held, in all, 7 meetings on September 7, 8, 19, 20, 29, 30, 1994 and March 6, 1995. In the
 meetings held in the month of September, 1994, apart from listening to the presentation made by the Secretary,
 Ministry of Environment and forests, the Committee heard the views of the Chairman of the Central Pollution Control
 Board and Chairmen/Member-Secretaries of some of the State Pollution Control Boards/Committee. Besides, the
 Committee also heard the representatives of some of the voluntary organisations which are working in the
 environmental sector, representatives of Indian Industry, representatives of companies which are manufacturing
 pollution control devices, representatives of the Transport Department of the Government of National Capital Territory
 of Delhi and experts on environmental matters which included representatives of some of the premier institutions in the
 field.
            3. The Committee thanks the officials of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for giving the necessary
 information and placing before it the relevant background note/papers which facilitated the work of the Committee in
 examining the problem of environmental pollution and to consider related issues in detail. The Committee also thanks
 the experts and representatives of various organizations Institutions who appeared before the Committee and gave
 valuable Suggestions. The papers/memoranda submitted by many of them were found very useful by the Committee.
            4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on March 6, 1995.
 
New Delhi:
March 6,
 1995                                                                                           
    SYED SIBTEY RAZI
Chairman
                         Committee on Science and
 Technology,     Environment and Forests.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REPORT
General Background
            Advances in science and technology clearly demonstrate how all aspects of nature, living and non-living, are
 interconnected. Nature sustains us. It is in our own interests not to cause damage to it. Resources of the earth must be
 made use of in a sustainable manner. If we $o on destroying natural resources, it would lead to our own extinction
 ultimately. There is no doubt that we have to feed and meet the basic human needs of our population; but at the same
 time we have to remember that our environment should not be damaged to such a great degree that the existence of
 future generations of humanity is threatened. We are increasingly aware of the need to ensure equity in our generation;
 but we should also ensure inter-generational equity. The entire world community has been expressing itself in favour of
 development in harmony with environmental imperatives; and this was the raison-de-etre for holding the UN
 Conference on Environment and Development at Rio de Janiero in June 1992.
           
            1.1 The Earth Charter adopted at that Conference represents the agreement of the various Governments of the
 world to bring humanity back on the path of sustainable development.
1.2 Agenda-21, which was agreed at the Rio Conference, addresses itself to the major environmental and developmental
 priorities important for achieving sustainable development. It was a text agreed to unanimously, after having been
 discussed threadbare, sentence by sentence, word by word and comma-by-comma. It is, therefore, a working document
 of great importance which we as a nation should implement as well as we can.
           
            2. The Constitution casts on us a duty to preserve and protect the environment. The Directive Principles of State
 Policy, contained in Part IV of the Constitution, provide in unambiguous terms for the protection of the environment.
 Article 48A :of the Constitution deals with the protection and improvement of environment and safeguarding of forests
 and wild life. To protect and improve the natural environment, including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and to have
 compassion for living creatures, is one of the fundamental duties enshrined i~ "Part IV A of the Constitution, which
 every citizen of this country must abide by. In order to fulfill this Constitutional duty a number of laws have been
 enacted by the Government which aim at protecting and promoting environment and controlling pollution. The water
 (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act', 1974 provides for the prevention and control of water pollution; the Air
 (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 provides for the prevention, control and abatement of air pollution; and
 the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977 provides for the collection of cess on water and
 discourages indiscriminate consumption of water. The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 is an umbrella legislation
 for the protection and improvement of environment which also covers protection of environment from hazardous and
 toxic substances. The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991 provides for immediate relief to persons affected by

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 accidents which occur while handling hazardous sustains, etc.
           
            3. For the management of environment in the country, which includes the prevention and control of pollution,
 the Department of Environment was set UP at the Centre in 198o and was made a fullfledged Ministry of Environment
 and Forests in the year 1985 Present all the States and the Union Territories have set up Departments of Environment,
 under the Water and Air Acts. Central and the State Pollution Control Boards/Committee are also functioning in the
 country.
           
            4. In view of the magnitude of environmental degradation, the Committee thought that it should take stock of the
 strategies of Government with regard to the prevention and control of environmental pollution and other related issues,
 so that a clear picture may emerge about the endeavors which the Ministry of Environment and Forests is making
 towards providing a cleaner environment. The Committee accordingly, on the basis of the Annual Report (1993-94) of
 the Ministry, took up detailed examination of environmental pollution and related issues.
 
            5. As per the "information supplied by the Ministry to the Committee, water quality monitoring is being carried
 out under the Global Environmental Monitoring Systems (GEMS) and Monitoring of Indian National Aquatic Resource
 Systems (MINARS): A network of 480 Water quality monitoring stations has been set up at various locations;, these
 include revivers, lakes, ponds, etc. 37 polluted river stretches have also been identified which require immediate
 attention for restoring the water quality.* An inventory of large and medium polluting industries has also been
 compiled; and the Government has identified 17 categories of highly polluting industries.**         
 
            6. Fiscal incentives are provided to industries which install pollution control devices; and also for the setting up
 of common effluent treatment plants. Epidemiological studies are also being initiated to chalk out proper strategies to
 ensure maintenance of health in the case of people who are exposed to various risk factors clue to environmental
 pollution.
 
            7. In his presentation, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests made mention of the various factors
 which lead to the degradation of environment. He emphasised the need to chalk out a policy to ensure environmental
 preservation and conservation compatible with the developmental needs, imperatives and priorities. He also informed
 the Committee about the policy statement for abatement of pollution which was brought out by the Ministry of
 Environment and Forests in 1992. He gave the Committee an idea about the working of various environmental laws and
 regulations. About the Central and the State Pollution Control Boards, the Secretary emphasised the need to strengthen
 them and to have environmental experts on their staff so that they are able to discharge their functions more effectively.
 The Secretary also informed the Committee about the methods of environmental impact assessment developed by the
 Ministry and talked of environmental audit and need to have clean technologies which will help in environmentally
 sustainable development.
 
            8. According to the Ministry, while the economic liberalisation process eases the access to technologies from
 abroad, it is essential that Indian firms acquire the best technologies that are also environmentally sound. A clean
 technology or environmentally sound technology (EST), is more efficient technology as demonstrated so strikingly by
 Japan. It involves processes and equipment ~hat ensure optimal utilisation of natural resources and adopts a preventive,
 rather than a corrective approach to pollution abatement; as a result it minimizes waste, and emissions/effluents that
 lead to air/water pollution. To encourage identification, acquisition, development and promotion of cleaner
 technologies at all levels, the Ministry underlined the need to set up a network of Clean Technology Centres with a
 National Centre which would look after coordination functions. While identification, design development and
 promotion of clean technologies in different sectors has to be undertaken by agencies who are specialists in those
 sectors and participate in the network, the central clearing house for clean technologies would perform the following
 functions:
 
Identify areas where introduction of clean technologies is possible and needed;
 
identify sources from which clean technologies and associated datfi can be obtained;
 
assess the technologies, both domestic and imported;

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 
 suggest modifications to the technologies to suit conditions in India;
 
demonstrate the applicability of the technology to the industry concerned;
 
undertake some R & D work to develop clean technologies;
 
collect, collate and disseminate information on clean technology; and
 
maintain effective communication with industry, financial institutions, and R & D laboratories.
 
            9. Besides, the presentation made by the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests and other
 representatives of the Ministry, the Committee got valuable feedback on the subject from the Chairman of the Central
 Pollution Control Board. Chairmen/Member-Secretaries of the State Pollution Control Boards of Uttar Pradesh,
 Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal, of the Delhi Pollution Control Committee. To obtain the views of Indian
 industry, the Committee invited the representatives of the Confederation of Indian Industry, (CII), New Delhi.
 Representatives of the All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health,,, Calcutta, Industrial Toxicology Research
 Centre, (ITRC) Lucknow, National Environmental Engineering Research institute, (NEERI) Nagpur, and Central Road
 Research Institute, (CRRI) New Delhi gave very valuable information to the Committee. The Committee also benefited
 from the. views of the representatives of the Bombay Environmental Action Group, Bombay and the Indian Council for
 Enviro-Legal Action, New Delhi who were invited by the Comlfiittee to appear before it. The Committee also heard the
 representatives of the Transport Department of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi. In order to hear
 the viewpoint of the manufacturers of the pollution control devices, the Committee invited the representatives of M/s
 Bharat Heavy Electrical Limited, Voltas Limited, Andrew Yule and Company limited, Batliboi & Company Limited
 and Envirotech Instruments Private Limited. The Committee also benefited by the views of Prof. Padmanabhamurthy,
 School of Environmental Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University who appeared before the Committee on a request
 made by it:. When the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests again appeared before the
 Committee, the Additional Secretary of the Ministry answered the points arising out of the discussion which the
 Committee had held with the experts and representatives of the aforementioned organisations/institutions.
 
            10. The representatives of industry, and some of the experts, demanded that greater incentives be given to
 industry for, installing pollution control equipment, and more duty concessions be given to the units engaged in
 manufacturing pollution control devices. Besides, some of them stated that the environmental standards which have
 been laid down are too strifigent; the efforts have been to conform to western standard, but taking a pragmatic view of
 Indian conditions, a second look should be taken so as to make them more acceptable to Indian industry in terms of its
 present financial and technical capabilities and ultimate product/service c0st~. A point was also made that degraded
 forest areas could be given to industry for plantations so that the forest produce is available both to the industry and the
 people in' the region.
 
            10.1 The Committee is of the view that the idea relating to the involvement of industry in afforestation on
 degraded forest land merits consideration by Government, subject to a suitable regulatory mechanism being evolved to
 ensure  that rights  of local  people are fully  protected.
 
            10.2 The Committee would also e to emphasise that quite a few industrial units in the country are manufacturing
 pollution control devisees and it is necessary that these units are given due encouragement to produce these at low cost
 and ensure their effectiveness.
 
            11. On the basis of the discussions which took place, the Committee has come to definite conclusion that
 environmental pollution in the country is rising. In the cit vehicular pollution is increasing and the quality of air and
 water is deteriorating. T¢ elements are entering the food chain on an increasing basis. This and noise pollution in rural
 areas are risk factors affecting human health. Improper water management is leading to increase in various
 communicable water borne and vector borne diseases. Though a v organisational network exists in the country, which
 has been mandated to protect a preserve the environment yet the Committee feels that the strategies devised so far to
 protect and regenerate environment and to Control pollution have not led to tangible improvement there situation that is

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 called for. The Committee strongly feels that the prevention and cont of environmental pollution in all its aspects
 should be accorded high priority by the Minis1 of Environment and Forests which should take steps on a war-footing to
 control this menace.  The Ministry has to play a highly activist and promotional role within Government, and
 persuading concerned sectors of society to work for sustainable development with decreasing pollution of the
 environment.
 
Air Pollution
 
            12. Air Pollution is caused mainly by industries including power generation and I transport vehicles. The
 Committee was informed that the Government has identified categories of highly, polluting industries. Pollution
 Control Boards have identified 15: industrial installations in the large and medium sectors falling under these identified
 categories; out of these 1124 units have installed pollution' control measures. The Ministry informed the Committee
 that so far 5948 cases have been filed against the various defaulter units under the Water and Air Acts, out of which
 1343 cases have been filed under the A Act. Instructions have been issued to the States that the new units should not be
 allowed I operate unless they adhere to pollution control standards. Action plans for the critical~ polluted areas have
 also been taken up for the restoration of environmental quality. Despite an overall increase in the number of industries
 everywhere in the country the percentage contribution towards air pollution by industrial units has come down as is
 evident by a report published by the NEERI, Nagpur in 1991t. According to the NEERI report the percentage
 contribution to air pollution caused by industrial units in 1970-71 was 56. This had corn down to 29% in the year 1990-
91. Though this downward trend is welcome, we still cannot afford to remain complacent. Many.-of the small scale
 industrial units which play a vital role is our economy cause considerable air pollution. Part of the reason for the
 downward from s the enormous increase in vehicular traffic which contributes significantly to air pollution because of
 this increase, their percentage contribution has gone up and that due to industries has gone down.
 
            12.1 On being asked whether there are some Delhi based importers who are importing hazardous waste for reuse
 or processing without obtaining the necessary clearance of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), the Committee
 was informed that CPCB has issued  directions to the Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) under section 18(1)
 of the  Water Act and the Air Act for immediate closure of all secondary lead smelting units which have not provide
 necessary pollution control equipments  to comply with lead emission limit  of 10mg/Nm3. Considering the large
 number of smelting units in metropolitan cities and the hazardous nature of their operation, CPCB has suggested to the
 Ministry that initially five metropolitan cities viz., Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta. Madras and Bangalore be declared  as "no
 lead smelting zones". In other parts of the country these units should not be allowed to operate without necessary
 pollution control equipments. CPCB has recommended that the matter may be taken up by the Ministry of Environment
 and Forests with the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance and D.G., Foreign Trade. Ministry of Commerce so
 that such hazardous materials are not imported., The Committee was informed that the necessary action has been taken
 by the Ministry in this regard.
 
            13. As regard flyash emissions by the Thermal Power Plants, tire Committee was informed that the reduction of
 flyash emission is an identified programme, of the Ministry and that the Ministry of Environment and Forests is taking
 up the matter with the Ministry of Coal, the Ministry of Railways and the Ministry of Power to find ways of introducing
 beneficiation of coal in order to reduce flyash comment from power plants. The Ministry of Environment and Forest
 has also prescribed standards for flyash emissions; and in order to achieve these standards, the power plants are
 required to install electrostatic precipitators.
 
            14. Presence of flyash in the air causes serious health problems. The Committee was informed by the Director of
 the Central Road Research Institute that in India around 70 million tonnes of flyash is generated every year and the
 generation of flyash will touch around 100 million tonnes by the turn of the century.
 
            14.1 The Committee feels that this waste material can be put to good use if it is utilised for road embankments
 and laying of pavements. It can also be used for filling mines. The Ministry may also explore the possibility of the use
 of flyash in a proper ratio in cement for certain construction purposes. The Committee noted that presently not even one
 per cent of flyash is being used for brick-making. The Committee feels that flyash can also be utilised for brick-making,
 for which proper technology is required to be developed.
 

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
            14.2 To work out technologies for the use of flyash for different purposes the Committee recommends that the
 Ministry of Environment and Forests may tie up with the Department of Science and Technology and the Department
 of Scientific and Industrial Research.
 
            15. The Committee is of the view that no industry should be allowed in the non­conforming areas. Small Scale
 Industries which are located in residential areas are a big source of nuisance to the local residents and pollute the
 environment. Therefore, as far as possible, separate areas should be identified for industrial activity; and the existing
 industries, wherever possible, should be shifted to the industrial areas. New industries should be allowed to be set up
 only in those areas which are earmarked for setting up industries. Industries should follow the zoning regulations, and
 conform to specified landuse.
 
            15.1 The Committee learnt that the Central Pollution Control Board has prepared guidelines for the preparation
 of a zoning atlas for sitting industries. The idea behind this is to locate industries after appropriate grouping can be
 made in proper zones, where, apart from that, each unit will install, common provisions for pollution control at lower
 cost; and residual pollution is such that the environment can cope with the load and it would cause minimum nuisance
 to society.
 
            15.2 The Committee recommends that proper Zoning guidelines may be prepared and these may be strictly
 followed.
 
            16. The Committee also feels that "carrying capacity studies should also be conducted.
 
            16.1. There are certain areas which cannot tolerate any extra load of pollution, whilst there are other areas which
 can put up with additional pollution load. In this regard the Committee was informed about certain "carrying capacity"
 studies being undertaken by NEERI.
 
            16.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment and Forests should encourage these
 "carrying capacity" studies; and for conducting these studies help may h sought from the CPCB, State Pollution Control
 Boards (SPCB) and technical and scientific institutions like NEERI.
 
            17. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment and Forests should also compile proper
 guidelines for environmental impact assessment and for doing this the Ministry should take benefit of the advice of the
 various laboratories of the Council of Scientific add industrial Research (CSIR) which have the capability in this
 regard. The "Ministry can also get useful information on this aspect from various Pollution Control Boards
 
            18. In cities which are plagued with serious problem of pollution, and 1have large critical areas, the Committee
 recommends that massive afforestation programmes should be launched because that appears to be the easiest solution
 which can bring some relief to the inhabitant of those areas; and is relief in the long term. In critically polluted areas
 green belts should by developed including natural parks or national parks on vacant lands which should not be released
 for additional construction or industrial/commercial activity.
 
            19. From the discussions which the Committee held with various experts and representatives of the non-
governmental organisations (NGOs), it has emerged very clear that vehicular pollution is increasing day by day in all
 major cities; the problem ha., particularly become acute in metropolitan cities. Automobile emissions alone account for
 more than 2/$rd of the total air pollution in Delhi. The principal emissions are Carbon monoxide (CO), Hydrocarbons
 (HC), Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx) and particulates of lead from gasoline-driven vehicles and from diesel-driven vehicles.
 According to a recent report prepared by the Indian Institute of Petroleum (IIP), Dehradun on 'Vehicular Emissions and
 Control Perspectives in India' for the Ministry of Environment and Forests, the two-wheeler and the three-wheeler
 vehicles contributed about 70% of the total vehicular unburnt Hydrocarbons during the year 1992,93. Their
 contribution to the total of CO was 4670 while; it was negligible in the case of NOx. Two-wheelers powered by the
 conventional two-stroke engines have poor fuel efficiency; the mass of HC emitted amount to 20 to 30% of the fuel
 supplied to the engine. In terms of mass emissions in the country these vehicles emitted 5,60,800 tonnes of HC and
 7,96,(XX) tonnes of CO during 1992-93. Petrol-run cars and such other vehicles are estimated to have contributed
 about 4,41,500 tonnes of CO, 60,600 tonnes of HC and 41,100 tonnes of NOx during 1992-93. Out of the total

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 countrywide contribution of all gasoline and diesel-run vehicles to emissions for 1992-93, gasoline-run cars and taxies,
 etc. contributed about 25% of CO, 7.5% of HC and 5% of NOx. For the same period, diesel vehicles contributed
 approximately 4.96,700 tonnes of CO, 1,72,800 tonnes of HC and 7,99,000 tonnes of NOx. The contribution of diesel-
run vehicles to total vehicular emissions amounted to about 29% of CO, 22% of HC and 94% of NOx. While it is true
 that 2 and 3 wheelers are low cost transport systems and as such of great service to Society, and also in terms of mass
 their emission is lower than that of other vehicles, the problem that arises is because of their large and rapidly
 increasing numbers-as a result of which the total pollution load due to them becomes the most significant.
 
            20. The Committee was informed that at present the vehicular population in Delhi is 22 lakhs, which is more
 than the total vehicular population of Madras, Calcutta and Bombay put together. Out of this, 15 lakhs vehicles are two-
wheelers and three-wheelers with two-stroke engines. According to one estimate the metropolitan cities of Bombay has
 6,56,00t vehicles, Calcutta has 6,25,000 vehicles and Madras has 4,77,000 vehicles. Because of the increasing number
 of •vehicles in Delhi, the automobile emissions are increasing very fast The quantity of emissions, according to the
 Report of the 'High Powered Committee on Comprehensive Action Plan on Environment and Pollution Control in
 Delhi', is estimated to have doubled from 670 MT/day in the year 1987 to about 1300 MT/day in the year 1991 The
 Ministry of Environment and Forests informed the Committee that in the year 1987-81 the CPCB conducted a survey-
on the status of pollution from automobiles in 12 major cities of the country. The pollution load from vehicles in terms
 of all major pollutants was measured and it was found that total pollution load in Delhi was highest followed be
 Bombay and Bangalore*.
 
            21. The Committee was informed about the various steps that are being taken for controlling the vehicular
 pollution in Delhi. The Committee was told that it was possible to reduce lead contents in motor spirit from 0.56 gm/l
 to 0.15 gin/1 for petrol used in metropolitan areas. This had been achieved in June 1994. In order to further reduce lead
 emissions it has been decided that the four major metropolitan cities would be provided with unleaded petrol (0.013
 gm/l) by April, 1995 to cater to the new models sold in the for metropolitan cities which would be fitted with catalytic
 converters. Emission standards for on-road petrol and diesel-driven vehicles have been notified and emission standards
 for hey petrol and diesel vehicles for compliance at the manufacturing stage from 1996 and 2000 have also been
 prescribed. CPCB is monitoring ambient air quality at all areas of high vehicular density and at major traffic junctions
 in Delhi. It has been found that level of exhausts of nitrogen and carbon monoxide is exceeding the standards in certain
 areas. In the areas of heavy traffic movement, the level of lead is as high as 8 micrograms as against the proposed limit
 of 1 microgram per cubic meter of air; this is eight times the prescribed limit The Committee was apprised of the steps
 being initiated by the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi to control automobile pollution. The
 Committee was told that the Transport Department of the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi is
 checking vehicles, and those which do not conform to the pollution standards are fined by it. All hey vehicles are
 checked for emission-level at the time of registration. 'Pollution under Control certificates are issued' to the vehicles,
 and if any vehicle carrying 'Pollution under Control certificate is found polluting the air, its certificate is cancelled. The
 Committee was also informed about the mechanism which exists in the Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) for
 checking the DTC buses for pollution control. The Committee was told that more stringent norms for vehicular
 emissions have been notified which would become effective from April 1996 and the automobile manufacturers have
 been asked to develop and improve their: technology to meet the more stringent standards.
 
            22.. The Committee observes that the Ministry of Environment and Forests should prepare a time-bound
 programme to effectively control the noxious vehicular emissions. While laying down standards is, no doubt,
 important, what is more important is to uniformly enforce them. At present the enforcement machinery that is available
 is very weak. The Committee, therefore, suggests that the Transport Departments of the National Capita Territory of
 Delhi and the State Governments should be strengthened to enforce the law with regard to automobile pollution.
 
            23. The Committee has noted the fact that the Ministry of Environment and Forests is already in contact with the
 Ministry of Petroleum and the manufacturers of automobile regarding the introduction of unleaded petrol in the
 metropolitan cities. The Petroleum Ministry has agreed that it would be able to provide unleaded petrol to the extent of
 7 or 8 per cent of tile requirement by April. 1995. An agreement" was reached between the Ministry of Environment
 and Forests and the automobile manufacturers that tile Ministry would be insisting on the rise of unleaded petrol,
 therefore it would be necessary to have catalytic converters in new vehicles that will come into the market in the
 metropolitan cities from 1 April, 1995.

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 
            23.1 The Committee, however, feels that the supply of unleaded petrol to the extent of 7 or 8 per cent of the
 requirement of cities will really not make a dent. There may be many problems which are likely to be encountered for
 ensuring the supply of unleaded petrol. As per the present scheme there may be only few outlets and each new vehicle
 may have to travel a long distance to get unleaded petrol. Further, movement of many of these vehicles will not remain
 restricted to Delhi alone and if they go out of the city, then' unleaded petrol might not be available. Therefore, the
 Committee is of the view that supply of unleaded petrol in Delhi in this manner will not be of much help in solving the
 problem of automobile pollution. Running of a few vehicles on lead-free petrol will not ultimately lead to any effective
 solution of the problem. It is clear that the problem has not been dealt with on a comprehensive basis. The Ministries of
 Environment and Forests, Industry, Transport and Petroleum should on an urgent basis resolve this issue.
 
            24. Another area of great concern which the Committee would like to draw attention to is the condition and
 maintenance of Government vehicles. Vehicles belonging to Government office institutions and tile public sector do
 not normally conform to the emission standards.
 
            24.1 The Committee observes that unless the Government sector itself is determined to combat pollution, it is
 difficult to ask the private sector and individuals to conform to tile prescribed norms. Large centralised establishments
 of Road Transport Corporations, Defence Services and the like can easily set in motion a movement for a less polluting
 transport system.
 
            25.  Alchols, natural gas,/LPG and electricity have often been mentioned as alternative fuels which will lead to
 lower emissions. Many development of vehicles based on such alternative fuels.  In several European countries, LPG
 fuel vehicles are running.  The Committee was informed that six Delhi Transport buses, using Compressed natural Gas
 (CNG)- diesel fuel mode, are running In Delhi on a trial project for determining the technical and economic viability of
 the use of CNG as fuel.  The Chairman of the CPCB informed the Committee that CNG is definitely a non-polluting
 fuel.  As far as use of CNG in existing vehicles is concerned, the Gas Authority of India has developed a kit which used
 to cost Rs. 25,000 but now that Government has given excise duty exemption and other benefits its cost has
 significantly come down.
            25.1  The Committee noted the fact that there is no policy with regard to CNG operating vehicles. The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Environment and Forests my sort out these matters and explore the
 possibility of popularising CNG as an alternative fuel mode.
 
            26.  A suggestion was made that age of the vehicles' may be prescribed, and vehicles which are old and give rise
 to noxious emissions may be taken off the road. Though this suggestion may appear attractive for controlling vehicular
 pollution, the practicality of this suggestion is doubtful in view of the economic conditions of the country.
 
            27. The Committee was informed by the Director of NEERI that his institution has developed a catalytic
 converter which can operate on the existing leaded gasoline-run vehicles. This catalytic converter can be fixed in cars
 and also in the two-wheeler and the three-wheeler scooters which generally have two-stroke engines. The Committee
 was also given an idea about certain catalytic converters developed by other agencies like IIT, New Delhi add ACC
 which is a cement manufacturing company. About the catalytic converters developed by NEERI, Director of this
 Institute said, "Ours is a catalytic converter which works on leaded gasoline. Technology for deleaded gasoline was
 available all over the world since 1960. That is why there is lot of international interest in our technology. We went to
 Japan recently. There is interest in our technology in Taiwan, Indonesia and China also." As per the price quoted by the
 Director of NEERI the converter developed by NEERI is also quite affordable.   
                                         .
            27.1  The Committee is not very sure about the effectiveness of the catalytic converters developed by NEERI as
 this claim requires to be endorsed by the Ministry of Environment and Forests which is the nodal Ministry. This
 Committee would, therefore, like to have an upto date test report on the efficacy of this technology.
 
            27.2  The Committee, however, feels that if there is locally available converter, though it may not he as efficient
 as those which are available abroad, but which can reduce emission level from the existing vehicles to some extent, it is
 worth giving it a trial; for at least something Will he done to control pollution rather than doing nothing at all ....
 

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
            28. To reduce congestion on road, the Committee feels that mass rapid transport system would have to be
 introduced; and that public transport system should be strengthened. At present the ring railway which operates in Delhi
 is not very popular due to various reasons. The Ministry of Environment and Forests "should take up the matter with
 the Ministry of Railways to augment the service of the ring railway. The matter should also be taken up with the
 Ministry of Surface Transport and the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi to connect the ring railway
 with important city centres and the ring road by bus routes or other kinds of public transport system.
 
            29. To keep certain congested areas clean in metropolitan cities, the Committee recommends that private
 vehicles should not be allowed to enter those areas. The Ministry of Environment and Forest should impress upon the
 State Governments and the Administrations to declare tile congested areas in metropolitan cities as 'No Private Vehicle
 Entry Zones', and proper public transport should be made available at specific points to individuals who wish to visit
 those areas and these vehicles should run preferably on battery or CNG or other such non-polluting fuel.
 
            30. The Committee was also told about certain trees which generate oxygen and absorb lead from the air. These
 plants are Nerium. Babool. etc. which can absorb 16--20 per cent of lead present in the air.
 
            30.1 The Committee recommends that more of such plants should be identified and be used for road-side
 plantation, particularly in urban areas.
 
            31.  Most of the two-wheelers and the three-wheelers in the country are at present fitted with two-stroke engines.
 The main-disadvantages of these engines are that they are not fuel-efficient and emit unburned HC. But two and three
 wheelers are the most popular mode of individual transport in India due to low cost.
 
            31.1 The Committee impresses upon the Ministry of Environment and Forests to go into all aspects of the use of
 4-stroke engines on the two and three wheeler This will involve technology assessment ensuring production and'
 imposing regulations to stop inefficient engines from being fitted, financial arrangement for purchase of the more
 expensive vehicles and a phased programme of implementation.
 
            32. A suggestion was made that three-wheeler scooters, which ply on the roads in Delhi and other cities, should
 be taken off the roads. But large numbers of people in Delhi use three-wheelers, and it is one of the popular modes of
 transport.
 
            32.1 The Committee, therefore, is of the view that the suggestion is not practical. However, possibilities may be
 explored to persuade operators to run three-wheeler scooters On CNG, as this would lead to less pollution.
 
            33. In order to reduce the quantity of emissions the Committee recommends that the Government may encourage
 the use of bicycles. Certain track in big cities may be earmarked for cyclists and pedestrians and proper 
 care should be given t6 the maintenance of these tracks. It should also be ensured that fast moving Vehicles are not
 allowed to enter these pathways.
 
            Water Pollution:
 
            34. The Ministry informed the Committee about, its various activities to ensure better water quality. According
 to the Ministry the data collected from various locations have shown that the values obtained for Biochemical Oxygen
 Demand (BOD) and Dissolved Oxygen (DO) on important rivers are already critical. The Committee was told that the
 identified 37 polluted river stretches are being included under the National River Action Plan,, For assessing the coastal
 water quality an intensive programme on coastal monitoring has been taken up and monitoring carried out by the
 concerned State Pollution Control Boards on 173 locations. The Central Pollution Control Board has also identified
 coastal stretches which require immediate attention for restoring water quality.
 
            35. There are three types of substance which pollute water. Traditional organic waste, water generated by
 industrial processes, and chemical agents, the water; in addition silt causes major problems. According to the Ministry
 three-fourths of the volume of waste water is from municipal sources. Industrial waste, though small in volume,
 contributes over one-half of the total pollution load. According to the Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) large

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 and medium industries constitute less than 15 per cent of total industries located in Delhi but they contribute 50 per cent
 of the total 300 million litres of waste water generated every day. According to the DPC every day approximately 2000
 ML of waste water is discharged into the river Yamuna from Delhi through 18 drains; and domestic waste water
 constitutes about 85 per cent of the total waste water reaching the river Yamuna. The river Yamuna flows through
 Delhi in a stretch of 48 kms. The quality of water of this river is being monitored by the Central Pollution Control
 Board and the data obtained reveal that the water quality of' the fiver Yamuna is deteriorating. According to one
 estimate about 1,700 MLD of sewage is generated in Delhi every day and according to the Report of the High Powered
 Committee on Comprehensive Action Plan on Environment and Pollution Control in Delhi almost 40 per cent of the
 sewage is being discharged into the river Yamuna every day without any treatment. Even 994 MLD treated effluent is
 not receiving full secondary level treatment and, therefore, partially treated sewage is further adding to the pollution
 load in the river. A lot of solid waste is finding its way into the various drains in Delhi, thus increasing the pollution
 load falling into the already overloaded river Yamuna. The Committee observes that if this is the state of affairs in
 Delhi, one can come to one's own conclusion about the state of affairs in other parts of the country in so far as pollution
 of water is concerned. The municipal authorities and civic administrations in most cities are not able to cope with the
 treatment of waste, as a result of which untreated bio-waste is led into the rivers polluting them. In fact, the Ganga
 Action Plan, or for that matter the National River Action Plan would not have been necessary, if the municipal
 authorities or civic authorities in the cities had functioned efficiently.
 
            36. The Committee noted the fact that most of the municipal bodies are financially not very sound. If funds
 available with the municipal bodies are not sufficient to discharge their functions, they may be allowed to raise
 additional funds or impose cess at a higher rate on domestic wastewater and sewage generated. Apart from scarcity of
 funds, many of these municipal bodies are required to organise their operations on modern management principles.
 Their old equipments require to be repaired and replaced with new equipments to treat the domestic wastewater and
 sewage before discharging these into the rivers. The Committee also recommends that there should be an Environment
 Committee in each local body in the State and the Union Territories as this would help~ in creating an awareness for
 preventing the degradation of environment.
 
            36.1 During the deliberations of the Committee a point had emerged about the preparation of solid waste
 management plans for places near railway stations. This aspect has hitherto remained neglected. It is an important area
 and the Committee hopes that this will be taken care of by the Ministry by properly dovetailing it in its schemes of
 waste management, waste disposal and plans for disposal of urban solid wastes. The Committee feels that the present
 status of waste disposal needs to be reviewed thoroughly. 
       
           37. Another aspect which the Committee feels should be given special attention is checking the mushroom
 growth of slums, particularly in metropolitan cities, which not only cause congestion but contribute to the
 environmental pollution.
                                                                                                                                                    i~
            37.1 The Committee is conscious of the fact that with the rapid increase in population the pressures on human
 settlements are also likely to mount and it is, therefore, imperative that special emphasis be laid on proper land
 management, housing and sanitation as urban populations grow. One cannot allow unplanned growth to take place
 indefinitely.
 
            38. While pollution from specific sources like towns and industries can be identified, the Committee notes that
 non-point pollution from run-offs of agricultural inputs like pesticides and insecticides, chemical fertilizers, etc. has not
 been properly dealt with. The increasing use of chemical fertilizers is polluting the sub-soil water sources.
 
            39. The Committee was informed that steps to reduce the level of insecticide and pesticides in rivers, which is
 contributed through surface runoffs, are being taken by the Ministry of Agriculture. A ban on the use of DDT in
 agricultural practices was imposed in 1991. Its use, however, has been permitted only in the health sector at levels of
 8,000 tonnes per year for another, five years after which the decision would be reviewed. In respect of BHC the
 production levels have been brought down from 28,000 tonnes per year to 26,()0~) tonnes per year which would be
 phased out in agricultural sector after two years. The Ministry of Environment and Forests is coordinating with the
 Ministry of Agriculture to  ban the use of highly toxic pesticides in the country. As a result of this 12 pesticides have
 either been banned or restricted. The Committee was informed that the Ministry of Environment and Forests has

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 included all pesticides in the list of eligibility for acquiring eco-label in the pesticides sector.
 
            39.1 The Committee recommends that the use of highly toxic insecticides and pesticides should be discouraged
 in the agricultural sector and the Ministry of Environment and Forests should take up the matter with the Ministry of
 Agriculture to promote the use of organic fertilizers, eco-friendly biofertilizers and biopesticides. The Committee noted
 with great concern the report of ICMR on the high levels of pollution in milk which is a basic food, particularly with
 DDT and BHC which are used as agricultural insecticides and move down the food chain through plants and cattle.
 There is need for monitoring of milk on a regular basis in all large scale marketing outlets such as dairies.
 
            40. Small scale industries which play an important role in the Indian economy also contribute to water pollution
 in a big way. According to the Ministry there are large number of small scale industries which fall within the identified
 17 categories of highly polluting industries which are to be prioritised for pollution control. Though the Government
 has schemes to provide them soft-loans and financial assistance for installing common effluent treatment plants
 (CETPs), many of them do not show much concern towards pollution control.
 
            41. The Committee notes the fact that most of the small scale units have so far not established effluent treatment
 plants despite the facility of soft loans being made available for the setting up of CETPs. The Committee recommends
 that appropriate measures be taken to ensure that these units utilise the facility and come together to form associations
 to run CETPs.
 
            42. The DPCC informed the Committee that in Delhi alone'85 per cent of the industries are located in, non-
conforming areas. The list of-highly polluting categories of industries identified by the Ministry of Environment and
 Forests and the Central Pollution Control Board does not include such pollution generating/hazardous industries as
 lead-smelting, electroplating, potteries, rolling, hot-mix plants, etc. Many of these industries have the status of small
 scale industries. Some of these industries do not have the financial capability to establish effluent treatment plants.
 
            42.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends that action may be taken against these industries• if they pollute the
 environment. Such industries are causing a Iegal problem because the Ministry has a scheme for setting up common
 effluent treatment plants but no financial assistance can be given for a common effluent treatment plant which is
 required to be set up in a non-conforming area without obtaining the requisite permission of the Urban Development
 Authorities. This ticklish issue should be resolved by the Ministry on priority, including shifting of the industry to
 conforming areas and where CETPs can be located which would be viable.
 
            43. The Committee is happy to note that the attitude of the industry, as it emerged during the deliberations with
 its representatives has totally changed, and the entrepreneurs have now realised the cost effectiveness of clean
 technologies. The Committee has also noted the fact that the Government will be introducing a new programme of
 waste minimisation circles which would encourage a group of industries of the same type located in a cluster to
 establish waste minimisation circles on the lines of quality circles. Under this scheme, technical assistance will be
 provided to the small scale   industries of a   locality    to            come together and introduce waste minimisation
 techniques by themselves. This programme aims at reduction of waste which originates in the production process,
 improves the process efficiency and reduces the cost of production by bringing down the pollution levels. Programme
 of waste minimisation, therefore, serves the dual purpose of making the industrial operation more competitive as well
 as protecting the environment.
 
Noise Pollution
 
            44. Noise is yet another source of pollution in urban areas. The Ministry of Environment and Forests has already
 notified ambient noise standards, besides the standards for various equipments. The Committee was informed that the
 Ministry has not prescribed source standards for users of vehicles, loudspeakers, radios, TVs, etc. and only non-
statutory guidelines for reducing noise pollution have been circulated.
 
            44.1 The Committee is of the view that in order to bring down noise pollution levels, the Ministry may consider
 prescribing~ source standards.
 

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
            45. The Committee has noticed that noise is increasing in the cities due to the increase in the vehicle population
 and in order to tackle the noise pollution the regulatory bodies have to enforce standards meticulously.
 
            45.1 The Committee feels that gradually more and more number of residential areas should be notified as
 'silence zones'. The use of loudspeakers and public address system should be strictly regulated.
 
Pollution Control Boards
 
            46. The purpose of the setting up of the State Pollution Control Boards was to control pollution, but the
 Committee has noticed that pollution in the country is increasing rapidly and most of these Boards have failed in
 performing their duty. The major preoccupation of the State Pollution Control Boards, at present, is of consent
 management, that is, giving consent to industries and also collection of cess. This takes away much of their time. Many
 of the Pollution Control Boards suffer from shortage of staff and funds.
 
            46.1 The Committee, therefore, feels that the State Pollution Control Boards should be reorganized and
 strengthened.
 
            46.2 The Committee was told that assistance would be provided to some of the State Pollution Control Boards
 under the World Bank Project on Industrial Pollution Control which has an institutional development component. The
 World Bank Projects have identified eight State Pollution Control Boards for up gradation of the laboratories. Under
 the same Project, training is offered to the personnel of all Pollution Control Boards. Some of the State Pollution
 Control Boards, according to the Ministry, are being supported by bilateral assistance programmes. For example, the
 West Bengal State Pollution Control Board is being strengthened under Japanese assistance, the Kerala Board under
 Dutch and the Orissa Board is covered under Norwegian assistance.
 
            47. Many of the problems in the State Pollution Control Boards are due to the frequent change of personnel
 particularly, their Chairman and Member-Secretaries. Sometimes the Chairman of a Pollution Control Board is a non-
technical person. Indeed Ministers, MLAs, IAS and Forest Service Officers and the like have been appointed to these
 positions.
 
            47.1 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Chairmen, Member-Secretaries and other important
 functionaries of the State Pollution Control Boards should not be subject to frequent transfers and must have adequate
 tenure to say five years; and the Chairmen of the Pollution Control Boards should invariably be technically qualified
 persons.
 
            48. The Committee feels that the State Pollution Control Boards should maintain area wise lists of industries
 which are defaulters and the extent of damage being caused by them to the environment. These details may be supplied
 to the local population on demand as this would help in building public pressure on these industries to stop polluting
 environment. After all no industry can indefinitely operate without paying heed to the public opinion. 48.1 There is
 need to have organic linkages between the State and Central Pollution Control Boards. One could even consider for the
 sake of a professional approach to an area of rapidly increasing importance to have an Environment Protection Service
 manned by individuals with special interest and training.
           
Economic Instruments in the Administration of Environment
 
            49. The Committee was also given an idea about the various ince0tives for installation of pollution control
 equipments: According to the Ministry, steps have been taken to encourage the shift from curative to preventive
 measures, internalise the cost of pollution and conserve resources.
 
            49.1 The Committee is of the opinion that the policy of abatement of pollution can be implemented successfully
 if the economic instruments are gradually introduced into the administration of environment. Effluent charge can be an
 effective instrument to reduce pollution but at the same time such a charge should not be treated by industry as a safe
 device to avoid installation of pollution control measures. Installation of pollution control device~ should be made more
 attractive than paying the effluent charge. The latter should be on an escalating basis with the amount steeply increasing

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 with level of pollution and, number of years as a source of continuing pollution.
 
            49.2 The Committee was informed that the Government is considering introduction of economic instrument for
 the control of pollution generated by industries. At present the economic instrument available is under the Water
 (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977 in the form of rebate to the local authorities which are conforming
 to the provisions of Section 25 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 or any of the standards laid
 down by the Central Government under the Environment (Protection)' Act, 1986. The Committee would like to stress
 that the water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess Act, 1977 is meant to rationalise the usage of water, rather
 than as a means of augmenting the resources of State Pollution Control Boards which appears to be the emphasis at
 present.
 
Laws Relating to Environment
 
            50. As regards legal regime to deal with control of pollution, the Committee observes that the existing laws
 contain sufficiently stringent provisions, and no drastic amendments are required to the existing statues. The
 Committee, however, agrees with the view point of the Ministry that there is need to unify the parallel legal provisions
 contained in the Water Act, Air Act and Environment (Protection~ Act. The Committee was informed that the Ministry
 has started action on the drafting of comprehensive Act and a preliminary work has already been completed.
 
            51. Though stringent laws and regulations exist yet unless there is an informed public opinion about the
 importance of environment not much can be done to prevent and control pollution and regenerate environment. A
 positive attitude on the part of every one is essential for the prevention and control of pollution.
 
            51.1 The Committee, therefore recommends that the Ministry should allow wider consultations with individuals,
 industrialists, public" persons, experts and non-governmental organisations, A comprehensive approach to
 environmental planning may be adopted so as to integrate environmental concerns with the economic activity that
 should emphasise more on preventive aspects of pollution abatement.
 
Epidemiological Studies
 
            52. Epidemiological data is very important to determine the health status of the people who live in and around
 the critically polluted areas. The Ministry informed the Committee that the work on environmental epiddmiology has
 begun from 1993 and 24 critically polluted areas have been identified to take up such studies. In the first phase
 epidemiological studies have been initiated in Vapi (Gujarat). Chembur (Maharashtra), Greater Cochin (Kerala) and
 Angul Talcher (Orissa). In the next phase' the Ministry proposes to take up the epidemiological studies for Gobindgarh
 (Punjab), Korba (Madhya Pradesh), Manali (Tamil Nadu), Singrauli (Uttar Pradesh), Bhadravati (Karnataka),
 Vishakhapatnam (Andhra Pradesh) and Kanpur (Uttar Pradesh).
 
            52.1 The Committee feels that in regard to epidemiological studies the progress has been rather tardy. So far the
 work has been taken up only in four of the critically polluted areas. Epidemiological studies are essential to provide
 data which can establish a link between various types of pollution and their harmful effects on human health. It should
 not be forgotten that the prosperity d the country lies in the health of its people. The Committee has taken note of
 serious health effects such as Minimata disease in Japan which brought out the harmful Impacts of mercury effluents
 when this health problem came to the fore. Similarly, a large part of the resurgence d vector borne disease such as
 malaria, filarial,  kala filariar, are due to deterioration of the environment In respect of water bodies which permit
 vector multiplication. The Ministry of Environment and Forests does not seen to have started thinking of these
 implications.
 
Environmental Awareness and Integrated Approach to Environmental Matters
 
            53. The Committee also observes that to enable citizens to fully understand the implications of environmental
 degradation, the Government should launch a concerted awareness campaign enlisting support of Individuals and
 voluntary organisations. Environment may be added as one of the overarching topics in schools and colleges. School
 text books prepared for children studying at primary and secondary levels must incorporate chapters on matters

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 pertaining to environment. The environment awareness campaign to be launched by the Government must emphasise
 on our own rich traditions of environmental preservation and cultural ethos which revere mother nature.
 
            54. The Committee noticed during its deliberations that important policy areas for prevention and control of
 pollution come under different Ministries and Departments of the Central and the State Governments and local bodies.
 
            54.1 It is the firm view of the Committee that the scrotal approach to environmental matters will .not yield
 desired results. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government Departments, whether at Centres or States and
 local bodies which are concerned with planning and implementation of developmental projects must adopt an
 integrated approach to environmental matters. Steps should be taken to strengthen governmental structures which, deal
 with environmental management and the specific programmes developed by them which have a bearing on
 environment should be properly dovetailed with the pollution control progrummes initiated by the Ministry of
 Environment and Forests. This Ministry must regard itself as a watch dog of Government in all matters relating to the
 environment. It must play a nodal, positive, activists, promotional and catalytic role in this regard.
 
            55. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Environment and Forests is a technical Ministry and,
 therefore, it should be treated and staffed like any other scientific Ministry/Department and not run as an administrative
 Ministry.
 
            55.1 This Ministry has exactly the same problems with regard to the recruitment of scientific personnel as are
 faced by the scientific Departments. The Ministry of Environment and Forests is bound to remain a technical Ministry
 and, therefore, the Government may have to appreciate the technical aspects of its functioning and the kind of
 professionalism which is needed to push through its various programmes.
 
            56. It is the considered view of the Committee that the approach to environmental matters should necessarily be
 holistic.  Instead of dealing with the intricate and complex problem of environmental pollution on the basis of
 symptoms, what is required is to strike at the very roots of it.  The approach towards environmental matters should,
 therefore, be preventive rather than curative.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Part-II
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
General Background
 
            1. The Committee is of the view that the idea relating to the involvement of industry in afforestation on degraded
 forestland merits consideration by Government, subject to a suitable regulatory mechanism being evolved to ensure that
 rights of local people are fully protected.
[Para 10.1]
 
            2. The Committee would also like to emphasise that quite a few industrial units in the country are manufacturing
 pollution control devices and it is necessary that these units are given due encouragement to produce these at low cost
 and ensure their effectiveness.
[Para 10.2]
            3. On the basis of the discussion which took place, the Committee has come to a definite conclusion that
 environmental pollution in the country is rising. 111 the cities, vehicular pollution is increasing and the quality of air
 and water i.e deteriorating. Toxic elements are entering the food chain on an increasing basis. This and noise pollution
 in urban areas are risk factors affecting human health. Improper water management is leading to an increase in various
 communicable water borne and vector borne diseases. Tough a vast organisational network exists in the country, which
 has been mandated to protect and preserve the environment yet the Committee feels that "the strategies devised so far to
 protect and regenerate environment and to control pollution have not led to tangible improvement in the situation that is
 called for. The Committee strongly feels .that the prevention and control of environmental pollution in all its aspects
 should be accorded high priority by the Ministry of Environment and Forests which should take steps on a war-footing
 to control this menace. The Ministry hits "to play a highly activists and promotional role within Government, and in
 persuading concerned sectors of society to work for sustainable development with decreasing pollution of the
 environment.

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 [Para 11]
 
Air Pollution :
4. The Committee feels that flyash can be put to good use if it is utilised for road, embankments and laying of
 pavements. It can also be used for filling mines. The Ministry may also explore the possibility of the use of flyash in a
 proper ratio in cement for certain construction purposes. The Committee noted that presently not even one per cent of
 flyash is being used for brick making. The Committee feels that flyash can also be utilised for brick making, for which
 proper technology is required to be developed.                                                                                       [Para 14.1]
 
5. To work out technologies for the use of flyash for different purposes the Committee recommends that the Ministry of
 Environment and Forests may tie up with the Department of Science and Technology and the Department of Scientific
 and Industrial Research.
[Para 14.2]
 
6. The Committee is of the view that no industry should be allowed in the non­conforming areas: Small Scale
 Industries which are located in residential areas are a big source of nuisance to the local residents and pollute the
 environment. Therefore, as far as possible, separate areas should be identified for Industrial activity; and the existing
 industries, wherever possible, should be shifted to the industrial areas. New industries should be allowed to be set up
 only in those areas which are earmarked for setting up industries. Industries should follow the zoning regulations, and
 conform to specified land use.
[Para 15]
7. The Committee recommends that proper zoning guidelines may be prepared and these may be strictly followed.
[Para 15.21
8. The Committee also feels that "carrying capacity" studies should also be conducted.
[Para 16]
9. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment and Forests should encourage the carrying capacity
 studies; and for conducting these studies help may be sought from the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), State
 Pollution Control Boards (SPCB) and technical and scientific institutions like the National Environmental Engineering
 Research Institute (NEERI).
[Para 16.2]
10. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment and Forests should also compile proper guidelines for
 envir0mnental impact assessment and for doing this the Ministry should take benefit of the advice of the various
 laboratories of the Council of Scientific and Industrial ,Research (CSIR) which have the capability in this regard. The
 Ministry can also get useful information on this aspect from various pollution Control Boards.                                       
 [Para 17]
 
11.  In cities which are plagued with serious problem of pollution, and have large critical areas, the Committee
 recommends that massive afforestation programmes should be launched because that appears to be the easiest solution
 which can bring some relief to the inhabitants of those areas; and is relief in the long term. In critically polluted areas
 green belts should be developed including natural parks or national parks on vacant land which should not be released
 for additional construction or industrial/commercial activity.                        [Para 18]
12. The Committee observes that the Ministry of Environment and Forests should prepare a time-bound programme to
 effectively control the noxious vehicular emissions. While haying down standards is, no doubt, important, what is more
 important is to uniformly enforce them• At present the enforcement machinery that is available is very weak. The
 Committee, therefore, suggests that the Transport Departments of the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the State
 Governments should be strengthened to enforce the law with regard "to automobile pollution.
[Para 22]
13. The Committee feels that the supply of unleaded petrol to the extent of 7 or 8 per cent of the requirement of cities
 will really not make a dent. There may be many problems which are likely to be encountered for ensuring the supply of
 unleaded petrol. As per the present scheme there may be only few outlets and each new vehicle may have to travel a
 long distance to get unleaded patrol Further movement of many of these vehicles will not remain restricted to Delhi
 alone and if they  go out of the city, then unleaded petrol might not be available. Therefore, the Committee is of the
 view that supply of unleaded petrol in Delhi in this manner will not be of much help in solving the problem of
 automobile pollution. Running of a few vehicles on lead-free petrol will not ultimately lead to any effective solution of

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 the problem. It is clear that the problem has not been dealt with on a comprehensive basis. The Ministries of
 environment and Forests, Industry, Transport and Petroleum should on an urgent basis resolve this issue.
Para 23.1]
14. The Committee observes that unless the Government sector itself is determined to combat pollution, it is difficult to
 ask the private sector and individuals to conform to the prescribed norms. Large Centralized establishments of Road
 Transport Corporations, Defence Services and the like can easily set in motion a movement for a less polluting
 transport system.
[Para 24.1]
15. The Committee noted the fact that there is no policy with regard to CNG operating vehicles. ~I]~e Committee,
 therefore, recommends that Ministry of Environment and Forests may sort out these matters and explore the possibility
 of popularising CNG as an alternative fuel mode.
[Para 25.1]
16. The Committee is not very sure about the effectiveness of the catalytic converters developed by NEERI, as this
 claim requires to be endorsed by the Ministry of Environment and Forests which is the nodal Ministry. This Committee
 would, therefore, like to have an upto date test report on the efficacy of this technology.
[Para 27.1]
17. The Committee feels that if there is a locally available converter, though it may not be as efficient as those which are
 available abroad, but which can reduce emission level from the existing vehicles to some extent, it is worth giving it a
 trial; at least something will be done to control pollution rather than doing nothing at all.
[Para 27.2]
18. To reduce congestion on road, the Committee feels that some sort of mass rapid transport system would have to be
 introduced; and that public transport system should :be strengthened. At present the ring railway which operates in
 Delhi is not very popular  due to various reasons. The Ministry of Environment and Forests should take up the matter
 with the Ministry of Railways to augment the service of the ring railway. The matter should also be taken up with the
 Ministry of Surface Transport and the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi to connect the ring railway
 with important city centres and the ring road by bus routes or other kind of public transport system.
[Para 28]
19. To keep certain congested areas clean in metropolitan cities, the Committee recommends that private vehicles
 should not be allowed to enter those areas. The Ministry of Environment and Forests should impress upon the State
 Governments and the Administrations to declare the congested areas in metropolitan cities as 'No Private Vehicle Entry
 Zones'; and proper public transport should be made available at specific points to individuals who wish to visit those
 areas and these vehicles should run preferably on battery or CNG or other such non-polluting fuel.
[Para 29]
20. The Committee recommends that more of such plants which absorb lead present the air should be identified and be
 used for road-side plantation, particularly in urban area.                                                                           [Para 23.1]
 21. The Committee impresses upon the Ministry of Environment and Forests to go into all aspects of the use of 4-stroke
 engines on the two and three-wheelers. This will involve technology assessment, ensuring production and. imposing
 regulations to stop ineffective engines from being fitted, financial arrangement for purchase of the more expensive
 vehicle and a phased programme of implementation.
[Para 31.1
22. The Committee is of the view that the suggestion to take the three-wheeler scooter off the roads is not practical.
 However, possibilities may be explored to persuade operator to run three wheeler scooters on CNG, as this would lead
 to less pollution.
[Para 32. l]
 23. In order to reduce the quantity of emissions, the Committee recommends that the Government may encourage the
 use" of bicycles. Certain tracks in big cities may be earmarked for cyclists and pedestrians and proper care should be
 given to the maintenance of these tracks. It should also be ensured that fast moving vehicles are not allowed to enter
 these pathways.                         [Para 33]
 
     Water Pollution
 
24. The Committee noted the fact that most of the municipal b0dies are financially not very sound. If funds available
 with the municipal bodies are not sufficient to discharge their functions, they may be allowed to raise additional funds
 or impose cess at a higher rate on domestic waste water and sewage generated. Apart from scarcity of funds, many. of

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 these municipal bodies are required to organise their operations on modern management principles, Their old
 equipments 'require to be repaired and replaced with new equipment to treat th6 domestic waste water and sewage
 before discharging these into the rivers.
[Para 36]
25. During the deliberations of the 'Committee a point had emerged about the
preparation of solid waste management plans for places near Railway Stations. This aspect has hitherto remained
 neglected. It lean important area and the Committee hopes that this will be taken care of by the Ministry by properly
 dovetailing it in its schemes of waste management, waste disposal and plans for disposal of urban solid wastes. The
 Committee feels that the present status of waste disposal needs to be reviewed thoroughly
[Para 36.1]
26. Another aspect which the Committee feels should be given special attention is checking the mushroom growth of
 slums, particularly in metropolitan cities, which not only cause congestion but contribute to the environmental
 pollution.
[Para 37]
27. The Committee is conscious of the fact that with the rapid increase m population the pressure on human settlements
 are also likely to mount and it is, therefore, imperative that special emphasis be laid on proper land management,
 housing and sanitation as urban populations grow. One cannot allow unplanned growth to take place indefinitely.
[Para 37.1]
28. The Committee recommends that the u~ of highly toxic insecticides and pesticides should be discouraged in the
 agricultural sector and the Ministry of Environment and Forests should take up the matter with the Ministry of
 Agriculture to promote the use of organic fertilizers, ecofriendly biofertilizers and biopesticides. The Committee noted
 with great concern the report of ICMR on the high levels of pollution in milk which is a basic food, particularly with
 DDT and BHC which are used as agricultural insecticides and moved down the food chain through plants and cattle.
 There is need for monitoring of milk on a regular basis in all large-scale marketing outlets such as dairies.
[Para 39.11
29. The Committee notes the fact that most of the small scale units have so far not established the .effluent treatment
 plants despite the facility of soft loans being made available for the setting up of Common Effluent Treatment Plants
 (CETPs). The Committee recommends that appropriate measure be taken, to ensure that these units utilise the facility
 and come together to form associations to run
 CETPs.                                                                                                                       
[Para 41]
30. The Committee recommends that action may be taken against industries set up in non-conforming areas, if they
 pollute the environment. Such industries are causing a legal problem because the Ministry has a scheme for setting up
 common effluent treatment plants but no financial assistance can be given for a common effluent treatment plant which
 is required to be set up in a non-conforming area without obtaining the requisite permission of the Urban Development
 Authorities. This ticklish issue should be resolved by the Ministry on priority, including shifting of the industry to
 conforming areas and where CETPs can be located which would be viable.
[Para 42.1]
Noise Pollution
31. The Committee is of the view that in order to bring ~own noise pollution levels, the Ministry may consider
 prescribing source standards.      
[Para 44.1]
32~ The Committee feels that gradually more and more number of residential areas should be notified as 'silence zones'.
 The use of loudspeakers and public address system should be strictly regulated.
[Para 45.1]
Pollution Control Boards
 
33. The Committee feels that the State Pollution Control Boards should be reorganised and strengthened.
[Para 46.1]
34. The Committee recommends that the Chairman, Member-Secretaries and other important functionaries of the State
 Pollution Control Boards should not be subjected to frequent transfers and must have adequate tenure of say five years;
 and the Chairman of the Pollution Control Boards should invariably be technically qualified persons.
                                                       [Para 47.1]
 

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
35. The Committee feels that the State Pollution Control Boards should maintain area-wise lists of industries which are
 defaulters and the extent of damage being caused by them to the environment. These details may be supplied to the
 local population of demand as this would help in building public pressure on these industries to stop polluting
 environment. After all no industry can indefinitely operate without paying heed" to the public opinion.                         
            [Para 48]
36. There is need to have organic linkages between the State and Central Pollution Control Boards. One could even
 consider for the sake of a professional approach to an area of rapidly increasing importance to have an Environment
 Protection Service manned by individuals wiq3~special interest and training.
                                                                     [Para 48.1]
   Economic Instruments in the Administration of Environment
 
37. The Committee is of the opinion that the policy of abatement of pollution can be implemented successfully if the
 economic instruments are gradually introduced into the administration of environment. Effluent charge can be an
 effective instrument to reduce pollution but at the same time such a charge should not be treated by industry as a safe
 device to avoid installation of pollution control measures. Installation of pollution control devices should be made more
 attractive than paying the effluent charge. The latter should be on an escalating basis with the amount steeply increasing
 with level of pollution and number of years as a source of continuing pollution.                                                          
          [Para 49.1]
 
Laws Relating to Environment
 
38. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should allow wider consultations with individuals, industrialists,
 public persons, experts and non-governmental organisations. A comprehensive approach to environmental planning
 may be adopted so as to integrate environmental concerns with the economic activity that should emphasise more on
 preventive aspects of pollution abatement.                                                                                                                 
          [Para 51.1]
 
Epidemiological Studies
 
39. The Committee feels that in regard to epidemiological studies the progress has been rather tardy. So far the work has
 been taken up only in four of the critically polluted areas.  Epidemiological studies are essential to provide data which 
 can establish a link between various types of pollution and their harmful effects on human health. It should not be
 forgotten that the prosperity of the country lies in the health of its people. The Committee has taken note of serious
 health effects such its Minimata disease in Japan which brought out the harmful impacts of mercury effluents when this
 health problem came to the fore. Similarly, a large part of the resurgence of vector borne diseases such as malaria,
 filaria, kala azar are due to deterioration of the environment in respect of water bodies which permit vector
 multiplication. The Ministry of Environment and forests does not seem to have started thinking of these
 implications.                                                                                               
 [Para 52.1]
Environmental Awareness and Integrated Approach to Environmental Matters
 40. The Committee also observes that to enable citizens to fully understand the
 implications of environmental degradation the Government should launch a concerted awareness campaign enlisting
 support of individuals and voluntary organisations. Environment may be added as one of the overarching topics in
 schools and colleges. School textbooks prepared for children studying at primary and secondary levels must incorporate
 chapters on matters pertaining to environment. The environment awareness campaign to be launched by the
 Government must emphasise on our own rich traditions of environmental preservation and cultural ethos, which revere
 mother nature.
                   [Para 53]
41. It is the firm view of the Committee that the sectoral approach, to environmental matters will not yield desired
 results. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government Departments, whether at Centre or States and local
 bodies which are concerned with planning and implementation of developmental projects must adopt an integrated
 approach to environmental matters. Steps should be taken to strengthen governmental structures which deal with

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 environmental management and the specific programmes developed by them which have a bearing on environment
 should be properly
 dovetailed with the pollution control programmes initiated by the Ministry of Environment and Forests. This Ministry
 must regard itself as a Watchdog of Government in all matters relating to the environment. It must play a nodal,
 positive, activists, promotional and catalytic role in this regard.
                                                                                                   [Para 54.1]
42. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Environment and Forests is a technical Ministry and; therefore, it
 should be treated and staffed like any other scientific Ministry/Department and not run as an administrative
 Ministry.                     
            [Para 55]
43. It is the considered view of the Committee that the approach to environmental matters should necessarily be holistic.
 Instead of dealing with the intricate and complex problem of environmental pollution on, the basis of symptoms, what
 is required is to strike at the very roots of it: 'The approach towards environmental matters should, therefore, be
 preventive rather than curative.                                                                                                               [Para 56]
NEW DELHI
March 6, 1995
                                      SYED SIBTEY RAZI
                                    Chairman,
                     Committee on Science and Technology,
              Environment and Forests
.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ANNEXURES
ANNEXURE--I
List of 37 identified polluted river stretches
 
River Polluted stretches
Yamuna
 Chambal
 Kali
 Hindon
 Khan 
 Kshipra
 Damodar
 Gomti
 Cauvery
 Kolong
 Bhogdoi 
 Barak
 lmphal
 Howrah
 Sabarmati
 Satluj
 Subarnarekha
 Godavari
Delhi-ltawah
 Down stream of Nagda
 Down stream of Kota (15 Kms)
 Down Stream Modinagar to confluence with Ganga
 Saharanpur to Confluence with Yamuna
 City limit of lndore to down stream of lndore
 City limits of Ujjain to Down stream of Ujjain
 Downstream of Dhanbad to Haldia
 Lucknow to Confluence with Ganga
 Talakkavari to Yagachi
 KR Sagar Dam to Hogenekkal
 Pagalur to Grand Anicut
 Grand Anicut to Kumbakonam
 Along Nagaon Town (Assam).
 Along Jorhat Town (Assam)
 Along Silchar Town (Assam)
 Along lmphal city Manipur
 Along Agartala. Tripura
 Immediate upstream of Ahmedabad city to Sabarmati Ashram
 Sabarmati Ashram to Veutha
 Down stream of Ludhiana to Harike
 Haitia Dam to Bharagora
 Down stream of Nasik to Nanded city limits of Nasik and
 Nanded Ramagundam to Bhadrachalam
Krishna Karad to Sangli
 Dhom Dam to Narasarobadi
Bhadra
 Brahmani
 Tunga
Tributary Stream Nira
 Nagarjun Sagar Dam to upstream of Repella
 Origin to Bhadra Dam (Karnataka)

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 Narmada
 Tapi
 Betwa
 Beas
 Kamalanaga to Bhuban
 Tirthahalli to Confluence with Bhadra
 Along Jabalpur city
 Down stream of Nepanagar to Burhanpur
 Manideep. to Vidisha
 Manali to Mandi
 Mandi downstream to Himachal PradeSh Border.
 
ANNEXURE-II
 List of 17 categories of highly polluting industries
1. Aluminium Smelting
2. Caustic Soda  
3.
 4.
Cement
 Copper Smelting
 
5. Distillery  
6. Dyes & Dye Intermediate  
7. Fertilizer  
8. Iron & Steel  
9. Leather  
10. Pesticide  
11. Petrochemicals  
12. Pharmaceuticals  
13. Pulp & Paper  
14. Refineries  
15.
 16.
Sugar
 Thermal Power Plants
 
17. Zinc Smelting  
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINUTES     OF    THE     MEETINGS     OF    THE     DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
   PARLIAMENTARY    STANDING    COMMITTEE    ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
 ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
 
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met from 11.00 A.M. to 1.25 P.M. and again from             3.00 P.M. to 4.15 P.M. on
 Wednesday, the 7th September, 1994 in Room No. 'A' Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
I.Syed Sibtey Razi -- Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. M.G.K. Menon
3.Shri Suresh Pachouri
4.Shri N. Giri Prasad
5.Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
LOK SABHA
6.Shri Jitendra Nath Das
7.Shri Sharad Dighe
 8.Shrimati Saroj Dubey
9.Shri Oscar Fernandes
10.Shri Pramothes Mukherjee

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
11.Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
12.Shri Bhim Singh Patel
13.Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
14.Shri Rama Chandra Rath
15.Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
 16.Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
17.Shri Harchand Singh
18.Shri Ram Prasad Singh
19.Shri K.G. Shivappa
20.Shri Ram Kirpai Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
 Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
 
Shri N.R. Krishnan, Secretary
 Shri K.K. Bakshi, Additional Secretary
 Shri T. George Joseph., Joint Secretary
Shri R. K. Tando.n, Director
Shri Shyam Lal, Additional Director
Dr. T. Chandni, Joint Director
Shri M. Subba Rao, Joint Director
Shri K.S. Achar, Under Secretary
Shri Rameshwar Dayal, Under Secretary
 
Representatives of Central Pollution Control Board
 
Shri D.K. Biswas, Chairman
Shri S.P. Chakraborty, Member Secretary
Dr.  B. Sengupta, Sr. Scientist,
Dr. A. B. Akoiker, Scientist
Shri O. N. Mathur, Accounts Officer
 
Representatives of Uttar Pradesh Pollution .Control Board
 
Dr. C.S. Bhatt, Member Secretary
Shri J.S. Yadav, Regional Officer; Ghaziabad
Shri V.D. Raturi, Regional Officer, Noida
 
            2. At the outset the Chairman apprised the members of the Committee of some minor changes effected in the
 composition of tile Committee w.e.f. August 22, 1994. He informed the members that two members of Lok Sabha,
 namely, Shri P.R. Kumaramangalam and Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel represented on the Committee had resigned
 their membership of the Committee and three new members, all from Lok Sabha, namely, Shri Bapusaheb Thite,
 Kumari Sushila Tiriya and Shri Pramothes Mukherjee had been nominated to be the. members of the Committee. He
 welcomed Shri Pramothes Mukheqee, who, out of the three newly nominated members, was present in the meeting.
 
            3. Thereafter the Chairman apprised the Members of the two separate communications received from the
 Departments of Space and Science and Technology indicating the details of action taken by them on the
 recommendations of the Committee as contained in its Tenth and Twelfth reports, respectively, on the Demands for
 Grants (1994-95) of these Departments.

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 
            4. The Committee then took up consideration of various aspects of environmental pollution in the country. The
 Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests and Chairman. Central Pollution Control Board gave an overview of
 the state of environmental pollution in the country and the steps being taken by the Government and concerned
 agencies for its prevention. The Members sought clarifications from them on various points and necessary replies
 thereto were given by them
 
            5. In the afternoon session, tile Committee also heard the Member-Secretary, U.P. Pollution Control 'Board on
 the subject, particularly with reference to the activities being Undertaken by the Board-in the State of Uttar Pradesh in
 furtherance of its mandate to monitor and check pollution. The queries raised by the Members on the points made by
 him were answered by the Member-Secretary.
         
          6. The discussion on the subject under consideration, the Committee remained
 inconclusive.
 
          7. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
 
8. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 A.M, to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on September 8, 1994.
 
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met from 11.00 A.M. to 12.45 P.M., from 1-05 P.M. to 1.50 P.M. 3.00 P.M. to 4.25
 P.M. and again from 4.45 P.M. to  5.25 P.M. on Thursday, the 8tl September, 1994 in Committee Room
 No. 'A' Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1. Syed Sibtey Razi---Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.Prof. M.G.K. Menon
3.Shri Suresh Pachouri
4.Shri N. Giri Prasad
5.Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
6.Shfi Ram Gopal Yadav
 
LOK SABHA
7. Shri E. Ahamed
8. Shri Jitend, ra Nath Das
9. Shri Sharad Dighe
10.Shri Oscar Fernandes
11. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
12. Shri Harpal Panwar
13. Shri Harchand Singh
14. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
15. Shri Kirpal Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Delhi Pollution Control Committee
Shri D.S, Negi, Chairman,
Shri I.K. Kapila, Environmental Engineer
Representatives of Maharashtra Pollution Control Board
Shri A.K. Mago, Chairman,
Shri D.R. Rasal, Member-Secretary
Shri D.B. Boralkar, Senior Scientist Officer
Shri K.H. Mehta, Air Pollution Abatement Engineer
Representative of Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board
Shri C. Thmigaraju, Chairman
Representative Of the Bengal Pollution Control Board
Shri T.K. Burman, Member-Secretary
 
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
Shri K.K. Bakshi, Additional Secretary
 Shri T. George Joseph. Joint Secretary
 Dr. Shyam Lal, Additional Director
 
Representatives of the Central Pollution Control Board
 
Shri S.P. Chakraborty, Member-Secretary
Dr. A.B Akolker, Scientist
            2. The Committee took up further consideration of various aspects of environmental pollution in the
 country and heard the views of the Chairmen of Delhi Pollution Control Committee and Pollution Control
 Boards of Maharashtra and Tamilnadu and the Member-Secretary, West Bengal Pollution Control Board
 and officials concerned of these Boards, on the subject, particularly as regards the action being taken by
 these Boards to monitor and control pollution.
 
            3. The Members of the Committee sought clarifications from the Chairmen and officials concerned
 on various points arising out of tl~-cir oral submissions and the replies thereto were given by them.
            4. The discussion on the subject under consideration of the Committee remained inconclusive. A
 verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.25 P.M. to meet attain at 11
th September 19, 1994.           "
 
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met from ll.00 a.m. to 12.40 p.m., from 12.55 p.m. to 1.50 p.m. end again from
 4.00 p.m. to 5.25 p.m. on Monday, the 19th September, 1994 in Committee Room No. 'A' Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
 
1. Syed Sibtey Razi--Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.Shri N. Girl Prasad
3.Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
4.Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 
LOK SABHA

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 
5.Shri Jitendra Nath Das
6.Shri Sharad Dighe
7.Shri Oscar Fernandes
8.Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
9. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
10. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
11. Shri Harchand Singh
12.Shri Ram Prasad Singh
13.Shri Bapusaheb Thite
14.Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan. Parliamentary Interpreter
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
Representatives of the Confederation of Indian Industry, New Delhi
 
Shri Avininder Singh, Chairman, CII, Renewable Energy Committee
Shri Shankar Ghose, Sr. Vice President, Shriram Industrial Enterprises Ltd.
Shri S. Sen, Sr. Director, CI1
Shri K.P. Nyati, Head, Environment Management Division, CII
Mrs. Seema Arora, Deputy Director, Environment Management Division, CII
 
Representative of the All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, Calcutta
 
Prof A.K. Adhya
 
Representatives of the Industrial Toxicology Research Centre (ITRC), Lucknow
 
Dr.       R.C. Srimal, Director,
Dr.       P.K. Seth, Scientist
Dr.       P.N. Viswanathan, Scientist
Representatives of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)
 
Dr. H.R. Bhojwani, Adviser
Shri S.D. Garg, Adviser
Shri R.P. Sharma, Under Secretary
Representatives of the Central Pollution Control Board
Dr. A.B. Akolkar, St. Scientist
Shri A.P. Shrivastava, Env. Engineer.
Representatives of the  Ministry of Environment and Forests
Shri K.K. Bakshi, Additional Secretary
Shri T. George Joseph,  Joint Secretary
Dr. Shyam Lal, Additional Director
 
            2. At outset, the Chairman welcomed Shri Bapusaheb Thite, a new Member of the Committee and-
,-i0troduced him to other Members of the Committee.
 
            3. The Committee thereafter took up further consideration of Environmental Pollution and related

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
 issues ~and heard the views of the representatives of the Confederation of Indian  Industry, New Delhi,
 All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, Calcutta and Industrial Toxicology Research Centre
 (ITRC), Lucknow on the subject. The Members of the Committee sought clarifications from the
 representatives on various points and necessary replies thereto were given by them.
 
            4. The discussion on the subject under consideration of the Committee remained inconclusive. A
 verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
           
            5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.25 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on September 20, 1994.
XV
 
FIFTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met from ll.(X) a.m. to 12.25 p.m., from 12,40 p.m. to 2.15 p.m. and again from
 3.00 p.m. to 4.35 p.m. on Tuesday, the 20th September, 1994 in Committee Room No. 'A' Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi--Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.Shri N. Girl Prasad
3.Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
 
LOK SABHA
4.Shri E. Ahamed
 5.Shri P.C. Chacko
 6.Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
 7.Shri Jitendra Nath Des
 8.Shri Sharad Dighe
 9.Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
 10.     Shri Balraj Pasi
 11.     Shri Vijay Naval Patil
 12.     Shri Rama Chandra Ruth
 13.     Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
14.     Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
 15.     Shri Harchand Singh
16.     Shri Ram Prasad Singh
 17.     Shri Bapusaheb Thite
18.     Kumari Sushila Tiriya
 19.     Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
Representative of the Bombay Environmental Action Group, Bombay
Shri Debi Goenka
Representative of the Indian Council for Enviro-Legal Action, New Delhi
Shri M.C. Mehta
Representative of the School of Environmental Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
Prof. B. Padmanabhamurthy
Representative of the National Environmental Engineering and Research Institute (Neeri), Nagpur
Prof. P.  Khanna, Director
Representatives of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)
Dr. H.R. Bhojwani, Adviser (T.U.)
Shri S.D. Garg, Adviser (Pig.)
Shri R.P. Sharma, Under Secretary (Parl.)
Representatives of the 'Ministry of Environment and Forests
Shri K.K. Bakshi, Additional Secretary
Shri T. George Joseph, Joint Secretary
Dr. Shyam Lal, Additional Director
 
            2. The Committee took up further consideration of various aspects of environmental pollution and
 related issues and heard the views of the representatives of the Bombay Environmental Action Group,
 Bombay, Indian Council for Enviro-Legal Action, New Delhi, School of Environmental Sciences,
 Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi; and National Environmental Engineering Research Institute
 (NEERI), Nagpur on the subject. The Members raised some queries on points arising out of the 6ral
 submissions made by these representatives and necessary replies thereto were given by them.
 
            3. The discussion on the subject' under consideration of the Committee remained inconclusive. A
 verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
 
            4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.35 p.m. to meet again at ll.(X) a.m. on September 29, t994.
 
XVl
SIXTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met from ll.00 a. m to 12.53 p.m., 1.10 p.m. to 2.10 p.m., 3.00 p.m. to 3.20 p.m. and
 again from 3.50 p.m. to 4.35 p.m. on Thursday, the 29th September, 1994 in Committee Room 'A' Parliament
 House Annexe New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi- Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.Shri Ajito P.K. Jogi
3.Shri Suresh Pachouri
4.Shri N. Giri Prasad
5.Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
 
LOK SABHA
6. Shri P.C. Chacko
7. Shri Oscar Fernandes
8. Shri P. Kumarasamy
9. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
10. Shri l?talraj Pasi
11. Shri Vijay Naval Patil
12. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
13. Shri M.G. Reddy
14. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma                                     
15. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
16. Shri Ram Prasad Singh

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
17. Shri Bapusaheb Thiie
18. Kumari Sushila Tiriya
19. Kumari Frid;a Topno
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
Representatives of the Transport Department of the Govt. of National Capital Territory of Delhi
Shri K.S. Wahi, Additional Director
Shri ~tdhir Mahajan, Dy. Director
Representative of Bharat Heavy Electricals LTD., New Delhi
Shri A.V. Narayanan, Executive Director
Representative of Voltas LTD., Bombay
Shri Mohan Shukla, Chief Resident Manager
Representatives of Andrew Yule & Company LTD., Calcutta
Shri D.K. Bandopadhyaya, Chief Executive
Shri P. Maiti, Dy. Manager
Shri S. Maiti, Senior Manager
Representatives of the Ministry of Environmen! and Forests
Shri K.K. Bakshi, Additional Secretary
Dr. Shyam Lal, Additional Director •
2. The Committee took up further consideration of various aspects of envirohmental pollution and related
 issues and heard the views of the representatives of the Tranisport Department of Government of National
 Capital Territory of Delhi; Bharat heavy Electrical Ltd., New Delhi; Voltas Limited, Bombay and Andrew
 Yule& Cohlpan)~ Ltd., Calcutta. on the subject. The Members raised some queries on points arising out of
 the, oral submissions mad~ by these representatives and necessary, replies thereto were given by them.
3. The discussion on the subject trader consideration of the Committee remained inconclusive. A verbatim
 record of the proceedings was kept.
4. The Committee then adjourned al 4.35 p.m. to meet amfin at 11.00 a.m. on September 30, 1994.
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
            The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 1.40 p.m. and again from 3.00, p.m. to 4.00 p.m. on Friday, the
 30th September, 1994 in Committee Room 'A' Parliament House  Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi- Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
3.Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
4.Shri Suresh Pachouri
5.Shri N. Girl Prasad
6.Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Shri P.C. Chacko
8. Shri Oscar Fernandes
9. Shri P. Kumarasamy
10. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
II. Shri Balraj Pasi
12. Shri Vijay Naval Patil
13. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
14. Shri Rama Chandra Rath

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
15. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
16. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
17. Shri-Ram Prasad Singh
18. Shri Bapusaheb Thite
19. Kumari Sushila Tiriya
20. Kumari Frida Topno
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan. Parliamentary Interpreter
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
Representative of Batliboi Limited, Bombay
Shri N.K. Taxali, Dy. General Manager (Projects)
Represeotatives of Envirotech Instruments Private Limited, New Delhi
Dr. G.D. Agarwal, Honorary Advisor
Shri S.K. Gupta, Founder Director
 
Representatives of the Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi
Dr. D.V. Singh, Director
Dr. S.M. Sarin, Head of Environment & Road Safety Division
Shri Anil Singh, Scientist
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
Shri K.K. Bakshi, Additional Secretary
Shri T. George Joseph, Joint Secretary Dr. Shyam Lal, Additional Director
2. The Committee took up further consideration of various aspects of environmental pollution and related
 issues and heard the views of the representatives of the Batliboi Limited, Bombay, Envirotech Instruments
 Private Limited, New Delhi and Central Road Research Institute, New Delhi, on the subject. The Member
 sought clarifications on various points arising out 9f the oral submissions made by these represematives and
 necessary replies thereto were given by them.
            3. In the afternoon, the Committee had concluding Session on the subject in the course of which the
 Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Environment and Forests, assisted by other officials of his Ministry,
 clarified the position with respect to issues/points arising out of the evidence tendered before the Committee
 by the representatives Governmental and non-Governmental bodies organisations, etc,              of various
            4. The discussion on the subject was concluded. A verbatim record of the, proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.55 p.m.
XXVII
TWENTY SEVENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 6th March. 1995 in Room No. 63, Parliament House,
 New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi- Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
3.Shri K. Rahman Khan
4.Prof. M.G.K. Menon
5.Shri N. Giri Prasad
6.Dr. Ranbir Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Shri E. Ahamed
8. Shri P.C. Chacko
9. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
10. Shri Oscar Fernandes

16th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/16threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:57]
11. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
12. Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
13. Shri Chandresh Patel
14. Shri Vijay Naval Patil
15. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
16. Shri Harchand Singh
17. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
18. Shri K.G. Sfiivappa
19. Shri Bapusaheb Thite
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
            2. The Committee took up consideration of its draft Sixteenth Report on the Annual Report (1993-94)
 of the Ministry of Environment and Forests (Environmental Pollution and related issues) and after some
 discussion, adopted the same with minor amendments,
            3. The Committee decided to present this Report to both the Houses of Parliament on the 14th March,
 1995. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi to print this
 Report to the Rajya Sabha and  Shri Pramothes Mukherjee and in his absence, Shri P.C. Chacko to lay the
 Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.48 p.m.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------