Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
REPORT NO.
292
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th December, )16 2016
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on th December, )16 2016
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SECOND REPORT
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Eighty-third Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on
the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry
of Environment, Forests and Climate Change


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

19
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED NINETY SECOND REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Eighty-third Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on
the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry
of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 16th December, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16th December, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-11
5. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 13-18

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-17)
 (Constituted on 1st September, 2016)
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury   —  Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
5. Shri C.P. Narayanan
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
8. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Shri Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
31. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf, present this Two Hundred Ninety-second Report on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Eighty-third  Report of
the Committee on Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change, which was presented/laid in the both the Houses of Parliament on 9th May, 2016.
2. There were seventeen recommendations in the Two Hundred Eighty-third  Report of the Committee.
Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Ministry on 7th
December, 2016.
3. In the meeting held on 15th December, 2016, the Committee considered the Report and adopted the
same.
RENUKA CHOWDHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
15 December , 2016 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Agrahayana 25, 1938  Science & Technology, Environment & Forests,
Rajya Sabha
(iii)

ACRONYMS
RE : Revised Estimates
ISFR : India State of Forest Report
ZSI : Zoological Survey of India
BE : Budget Estimates
CPCB : Central Pollution Control Board
AAQMS : Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Systems
CCAP : Climate Change Action Programme
NCEF : National Clean Energy Fund
NZP : National Zoological Park
NCRD : National River Conservation Plan-National River Conservation Directorate
NNRMS SC-B : National Natural Resources Management System on Bio-resources and
Environment
SPCBs : State Pollution Control Boards
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment,
Forest & Climate Change on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty-third
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry, which was
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 9th May, 2016. The Committee had in all made
seventeen recommendations and observations in the report.  Action Taken Note on the report was
received by the Committee on 7th December, 2016.  The Committee, on examination of Action
Taken Notes, however, is disappointed to note that the Ministry has not furnished any reply to 3
observations/ recommendations of the Committee (Paras 2.5, 3.2 and 3.4 of the report) and would
like the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to furnish their response to the
observations contained in the above paras of the report.
The Committee’s recommendations, observations/conclusions, Action Taken thereon and
comments of the Committee on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate
Change are set out in the subsequent paragraphs:-
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT
Recommendation
The Committee observes that although the actual utilisation of the allocated funds of the
Ministry has been steadily increasing during the last few years, the performance of the Department
in terms of utilisation of funds leaves much to be desired. The Ministry could utilise only 84.45
per cent of the allocation upto February, 2016. Most of the reasons cited by the Ministry for under-
utilisation of funds are administrative and procedural which could have been avoided.  This also
shows lack of planning and foresightedness on part of the Ministry.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry should undertake a review of its financial performance during the
last few years and try to identify the bottlenecks responsible for not being able to optimally utilise
the funds at its disposal so as to improve its performance on this front in the future.
(Para 3.5)
Action Taken by Government
Instructions have been issued to the Programme Divisions/ autonomous bodies/ attached
offices from time to time to ensure the pace of utilization is maintained as mandated in the Cash
Management system so that there is no surrender of Plan funds at end of the year. Progress of
Plan expenditure has been 55% in current year by the end of October month. During, financial
year 2015-16, the Ministry has utilised 96% of allocated Plan funds at Revised Estimates (RE)
stage.
Regular meetings are held with the Divisional Heads in charge of the Programmes/ Schemes
to expedite utilization levels.

2
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
BUDGET ALLOCATION OF THE YEAR 2016-17
Recommendation
The mandate of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change is to ensure better
environment management and preservation of biodiversity including Wildlife.  Although the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has been allocated 18.1% more funds
compared to the allocation made in R.E. 2015-16, the Committee is of the view that allocations
are not sufficient for the Ministry to effectively discharge its functions.  In view of the importance
of the task mandated to the Ministry which has all the more relevance in the day-today life of all
of us and our surroundings, the Committee recommends that the budgetary allocation of the
Ministry should be suitably enhanced at R.E. stage to enable the Ministry to discharge its mandate
effectively. (Para 4.3)
Action Taken by Government
For Finance Year 2016-17, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has requested
Ministry of Finance for allocation of  `  2613.53 crore at Revised Estimates (RE) stage against BE
figure of  `  2000 crore  so that sufficient funds are provisioned for carrying out various crucial
environment protection, conservation activities.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry would be allocated the
requisite funds.
FOREST SURVEY OF INDIA
Recommendation
The Committee notes that although the Forest Survey of India was able to expend nearly 70%
of the allocation made upto December, 2015, there is a visible gap in its targets and achievements
in the year 2015-16 in terms of Inventory of Forests (Urban and Research).  Inventory of Forests
is one of the major activities of Forest Survey of India and it failed to achieve its targets in this
field.  The Committee recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and
Forest Survey of India should seriously consider the matter and take all necessary measures to
ensure that such shortfalls do not recur in future. (Para 6.4)
Action Taken by Government
The expenditure of 70% of the total allocation made up to December, 2015 was not only for
Forest/TOF Inventory but also pertains to all other activities of FSI including Forest Cover
Mapping, Training, Forest Fire Monitoring, and Projects etc. The expenditure on forest/TOF
inventory at FSI headquarters is very small and sizeable in zonal offices of FSI as the entire field
work is carried out by them.
Regarding visible gap in the target and achievement of Forest/TOP inventory for the year
2015-16, it may be noted that for forest/TOF inventory, targets are maintained on biennial basis

3
and not on the annual basis. To explain this further, it is submitted that the forest/TOF inventory
work is carried out on sampling basis by selecting 60 districts randomly spread over entire country.
The detailed inventory work of forest and TOF in the selected districts is carried out in two years’
time. The data collection work is carried out by the zonal officers of FSI, whereas the data
processing work and report generation is done at FSI headquarters. The data collected in one cycle
is processed in next cycle along with field data collection of next cycle. The data collected in a
cycle is used for estimation of growing stock, carbon stock
Thus due to sampling design and reporting system, targets and achievement are maintained
on two-year cycle basis. All the targets were completed well within time and reported in respective
India State of Forest Reports (ISFR). There is no shortfall in the target and achievement of forest/
TOF inventory for the year 2015-16.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
ZOOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA (ZSI)
Recommendation
The Committee observes that Zoological Survey of India was not able to achieve its targets
in terms of field surveys, Digitisation of National Zoological Specimen, documentation of species
of identified animals, training programme etc. The Zoological Survey of India could also spend
only nearly 64% of the plan allocation during 2015-16 (upto 31.12.2015). The performance of
Zoological Survey of India in terms of both achievements of targets and utilisation of funds,
therefore, is not satisfactory and accordingly, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change must take urgent remedial measures to ensure that the
performance of Zoological Survey of India improves on both these fronts and the allocations made
are not underutilised. (Para 7.4)
Action Taken by Government
The targets for field surveys were achieved during 2015-16. As against annual target of 100
surveys 120 faunistic surveys were conducted in different states viz. Andaman & Nicobar Islands,
Lakshadweep Islands, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa,
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Mizoram, Meghalaya, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Uttarakhand and West
Bengal.
Regarding digitization of National Zoological Specimens, the institution has already crossed
the target of 10,000 specimens. The digitization of 12912 specimens was completed in the year
2015-16.
With regard to documentations of Identified species, the Zoological Survey of India had
documented 1552 specimens in 2015-16, the target for 2016-17 is 1500, of which 604 have already
been documented.
Against the target of four training programme for the year 2015-16, five training programmes

4
have been conducted by the Training and Extension Division. As regards expenditure,  96% of the
sanctioned amount,  for the year (2015-16) was spent.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the performance of Zoological Survey
of India would further improve in the future.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation
The Committee is dismayed to note the big lag between the targets and achievements of the
Ministry in the Research and Development sector in all parameters during 2014-15 and 2015-16.
The performance in 2015-16 has also been sharp decline compared to the performance in 2014-15.
Facilitating research and development and investing for the same are extremely important for the
development of any nation and for a developing country like India, the critical importance of
Research and Development cannot be overemphasized. The Committee is of the opinion that without
the desired results, the objective of the Ministry of the Research & Development scheme cannot be
achieved.  The Committee also feels that the existing allocation of the Ministry for Research &
Development is not sufficient and that share of Research & Development from the plan allocation
of the Ministry needs to be increased substantially. The Committee therefore, recommends that the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should pay due attention towards achieving
its targets in Research & Development and adequate budgetary increase should be made in the
allocations of the Ministry at R.E. stage for making additional provisions for Research &
Development. (Para 8.5)
Action Taken by Government
Observations and recommendation of the Parliament Standing Committee have been noted and
measures are being taken up to review the on-going Research & Development projects.
Ministry of Finance has been requested for additional funds at Budget Estimates (BE) stage
- 2017-18 for R&D Scheme.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed of the measures taken.
ASSISTANCE FOR ABATEMENT OF POLLUTION
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that pollution, whether it be air, water or noise, has gone
beyond permissible limits during the last few years and has serious consequences for the health and
well being of the citizens of the country.  However, the Committee finds that the performance of
the Ministry/Central Pollution Control Board in a scheme relating to providing assistance for
abatement of pollution in not impressive at all. The Ministry could not achieve the physical targets
relating to Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations and New Noise Monitoring Stations while other
targets set have been stated to be under process.  Further, the Ministry could utilise only nearly

5
35% of the allocation upto December , 2015, which too reflects very poorly on the performance under
this scheme.  At a time when the Ministry is required to address the grave and critical challenge of
deteriorating air and water quality and increasing noise pollution, the Ministry has not been able to
fully utilise the allocations made for a scheme providing assistance for abatement of pollution.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should take a serious note of its performance
under this scheme and take all necessary measures to ensure that the targets under the scheme are
achieved in future and funds allocated are optimally utilised. (Para 9.4)
Action Taken by Government
The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) comes under the umbrella scheme titled
“Environmental Monitoring and Governance”. The objective of the CPCB Scheme covers all facets
of pollution viz. Water, Air and Noise etc. across the country.
The physical progress of CPCB’s Water Quality Monitoring stations, Ambient Air Quality
Monitoring Stations and Noise Monitoring stations network for the relevant period, 2014-15 &
2015-16 are as follows:
(i) Central Pollution Control Board is operating and maintaining 2500 Water Quality
Monitoring Stations.
(ii) Central Pollution Control Board is operating and maintaining, 580 Ambient Air Quality
Monitoring Systems (AAQMS) against a target of 700 stations in 244 cities/towns. 244
Air Quality Monitoring Station denotes 244 cities/towns and not the number of Ambient
Air Quality Monitoring Stations.
(iii) There are a total number of 70 Noise Monitoring Stations set up and operated by CPCB,
out of which 35 stations were operationalized in the year 2014-15 and another 35
stations were set up and operationalized in the year 2015-16.
The operationalization and maintenance of Water Quality Monitoring Stations, Ambient Air
Quality Monitoring Stations and Noise Monitoring Stations is a continuing process.
The Plan Budget allocations provided for the Central Pollution Control Board, which are to
the tune of  `  50 crore per annum are being utilized fully and no unspent balances are left with
the Board.
The physical targets and achievements provided under the caption ‘Assistance for Abatement
of Pollution’ in the Report pertains to Central Pollution Control Board Scheme and the same have
wrongly been mentioned against the Scheme titled ‘Assistance for Abatement of Pollution’.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would advise the Ministry to be more careful in
future in providing information to the Committee.
NATIONAL ACTION PLAN ON CLIMATE CHANGE
Recommendation
The Committee is dismayed to note that the Ministry had utilised only
 `  14.53 crore for the

6
programme in 2015-16 (upto 31st December , 2015) out of the allocated B.E. sum of  `  136.79
crore, which is only 11% of the funds allocated the year 2015-16.  The Committee had in its 254th
Report also highlighted the gross underutilisation of funds under this scheme during the years
2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15.  The performance of the Ministry in 2015-16 has been no better .
The Committee is at a loss to understand as to how a Ministry which is not even able to make
use of a fraction of the funds made available for Climate Change Action Programme, would
undertake additional interventions in the requisite areas of the Programme.  A glance at the
allocations made and expenditure incurred under the programme during the last few years indicates
that the Ministry does not require huge funds for the programme. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should make a realistic
assessment of the funds required for the programme and seek allocations accordingly so that the
allocations made are not underutilized in successive years. (Para 10.5)
Action Taken by Government
The scheme titled Climate Change Action Programme was approved by the Cabinet in 4th
quarter of 2013-14. The scheme was launched in the financial year 2014-15. For all the Scientific
Programme, the project documents and activities have been initiated which took some time. Total
allocated amount therefore could not be utilized during 2014-15.
Out of the allocation BE  `  136.79 crore allocated to Climate Change Action Programme
(CCAP) in 2015-16,  `  120 Crore was the grant amount earmarked for the 12 MW Waste to Energy
Project under the National Clean Energy Fund (NCEF). As per instruction of MoF, the amount was
to be released based on submission of CTO (Consent to Operate), which the project proponents
could not furnish. Therefore the money would be released the current financial year. The remaining
amount of  `  16.79 crore was spent during the financial year 2015-16. The budget for 2016-17 has
been prepared taking into account the financial requirement for ongoing activities like National
Carbonaceous Aerosol Programme, Long Term Ecological Observation, Capacity Building and other
administrative activities. Accordingly,  `  30 crore has been allocated at BE for 2016-17.  As of 30th
Sept. 2016, the expenditure made is  `  17.80 crore, which is 59% of the allocated budget for the
year 2016-17.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
BIOSPHERE RESERVES
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the Ministry was able to utilise only around 50% of its annual
allocation upto December , 2015, which shows a very casual approach of the Ministry towards in-
situ conservation of representative ecosystems of major bio-geographic zones of the country having
global importance.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should undertake a review of the
schedule of activities under the scheme and plan its activities in a manner that there is no
underutilisation of funds. (Para 11.5)
Action Taken by Government
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Changes has taken a review of the schedule of

7
activities under the Biosphere Reserve Scheme and State Governments are being pursued
relentlessly to submit the proposal and requisite documents in time to ensure full utilization of
funds.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the efforts of the Ministry would yield
the desired results.
MONITORING MECHANISM OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that a strong and potent monitoring mechanism is extremely
important for achieving the set objectives and implementation of the schemes. The Committee
takes note of the monitoring mechanism in place in the Ministry. However, as brought out in the
preceding paragraphs, the monitoring mechanism failed to ensure proper and effective utilisation
of funds.  Not only the funds allocated have been grossly under-utilised but there has also been
a shortfall in the achievements of the Ministry with respect to the targets set under various
schemes, which also results in delay in the implementation of schemes as well as time and cost
over-runs.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should undertake a review
of its administrative and monitoring mechanism and strengthen the same to ensure that funds
allocated for important schemes/programmes are not underutilised and objectives of the schemes
are achieved. (Para 12.2)
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry has recently completed an evaluation and review of all Plan Schemes, being
implemented in XII Five Year Plan. The Evaluation Committee has also recommended for stringent
monitoring and evaluation mechanism. These recommendations of PSC have been noted and
feasible measures are being worked out.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee desires that the strategic policy
interventions that have been undertaken by the Ministry in this regard may also be
intimated to the Committee.
WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT
Recommendation
The Committee notes the performance of the Ministry in various schemes under Wildlife
Management.  As regards Project Elephant, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should,
on priority, take up the matter relating to the notification of the 3 proposed Elephant Reserves in
the country with the concerned State Governments, to achieve the objectives of the scheme.  The
under-performance of the Ministry with respect to targets vis-à-vis achievements in ‘Strengthening
of Wildlife Division’ scheme in 2015-16 is quite evident.  Further , National Zoological Park, Delhi
failed to utilise even a penny of its allocated plan budget in 2015-16.  The Committee recommends

8
that the Ministry needs to seriously look into all these issues to improve the physical and financial
performance in these programmes. (Para 13.10)
Action Taken by Government
The Elephant Task Force Report, 2010 ‘Gajah’ had recommended declaration of 32 Elephant
Reserves across the country. Out of these 28 Elephant Reserves have been notified so far by the
State Governments as per recommendation of elephant experts and the Ministry; proposals of two
Elephant Reserves namely Baitarni ER and South Orissa ER have been withdrawn by the Govt. of
Odisha on the ground that notification of these Elephant Reserves is likely to affect development
of the State adversely. Notification of 2 Elephant Reserves namely Menru ER and Khasi ERare
pending with State Governments of Chhattisgarh and Meghalaya respectively, as land is owned by
community in Menru ER, and Lemru Reserves is located in mineral rich forest area.
Due to persistent efforts of the Ministry, the State Government of Karnataka has notified
Dandeli ER with area 2321.119 Sq. Km and included Bhadra Wildlife Sanctuary with area 1174.875
Sq.Km within Mysore ER. Thus at present there are Elephant   Reserves in the country with
aggregate geographical area of 65483.85 Sq. Km.
In 2015-16, MoEF&CC had allocated  `  3.62 crore to National Zoological Park (NZP), New
Delhi, comprising  `  1.50 crore for Revenue expenditure and  `  2.12 crore for various capital works.
The resources provisioned for revenue expenditure have been spent upto 99%, however, the capital
outlay was surrendered due to delay in complying with procedural issues. Therefore,  `  5.00 crore
are allocated to NZP in 2016-17 for capital works.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry would take necessary
action and avoid delays in complying with procedural issues.
Recommendation
As regards Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats, the Committee is constrained to note
that financial assistance could not be provided to important wildlife habitats which exist outside
Protected Areas, due to paucity of funds. The Committee is of the view that wildlife habitats which
exist outside Protected Areas also require special attention for conservation. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that non-availability of funds should not be allowed to come in the way of
wildlife habitats outside Protected Areas and that adequate budgetary allocation should be made
to the Ministry for this purpose in financial year 2016-17. (Para 13.11)
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry has enhanced the outlays for this scheme from  `  61.21 crore in 2015-16 to
` 100 crore in 2016-17.
Comments
The Committee hopes that the Ministry would take necessary steps to optimally utilise
the enhanced allocation of funds for this scheme.

9
NATIONAL RIVER CONSERV ATION PLAN-NATIONAL RIVER CONSERV ATION
DIRECTORATE (NCRD)
Recommendation
The Committee finds that more and more rivers and water bodies are getting polluted and the
level of their pollution is increasing day-by-day. In such a scenario, not allocating the required
funds even for the ongoing works shows a self-defeating approach. The Committee notes that the
Ministry utilised only
 `  37.35 crore out of the allocated  `  66.73 crore upto December, 2015 during
2015-16.  On the one hand, the Ministry complains of not having been provided adequate funds
for the programme and on the other, it is able to expend only nearly 56% of the allocation made.
The Committee, while recommending that adequate budgetary provisions should be provided to the
Ministry for National River Conservation Plan during the year 2016-17, advises the Ministry to
ensure that the funds are utilised optimally and the targets are met under the scheme.
(Para 14.5)
Action Taken by Government
During the Year 2015-16, a budget allocation of  `  40 crore was made for NRCP at BE stage,
which was enhanced to  `  66.73 crore at RE stage.
Against this an amount of  `  66.72 crore (99.99%) has been utilized in FY 2015-16 with the
creation of 77 mld (Million liters per day) of treatment capacity. During the current financial year
2016-17, `  95.00 crore has been allocated at BE stage and a target of creation of 75 mld treatment
capacities has been set.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry would utilise the fund
prudently and achieve the targets envisaged.
NATIONAL NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
Recommendation
The Committee expresses its displeasure that the performance of the Ministry under this
scheme with respect to targets vis-a-vis achievements is highly unsatisfactory.  The Ministry failed
to achieve any of the 4 targets under this scheme in 2014-15 and 2015-16.  The performance in
terms of utilising the allocations is also not upto the mark since the Ministry could utilise only
52.38 percent of the allocation till December, 2015.  The Committee is of the view that remote
sensing technology plays a very important role in assessment and monitoring of country’ s natural
resources.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry should make all possible efforts to ensure
that the allocations made therefor are utilised fully. (Para 15.5)
Action Taken by Government
During the F.Y 2014-15 & 2015-16 the financial outlay was utilised for ongoing and new
projects based on the recommendations of the Technical & Financial Sub-Committee of the National
Natural Resources Management System on Bio-resources and Environment (NNRMS SC-B) and
final approval of a Standing Committee on Bio-resources and Environment of NNRMS (SC-B). The
proposals so received are considered for sanction subject to their admissibility as per the guidelines.

10
One of the main reasons behind non-achievement of the given target was non-submission of
UCs/ES in proper format along with Progress report by the concerned organizations/institutes
despite follow up by the Ministry.
The suggestions of the committee are well taken and will be complied with in future.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and desires to be informed about the progress
achieved.
GENERAL OBSERV ATION
Recommendation
Pollution prevention is a major global concern because of its harmful effects on people’ s
health and the overall environment.  Air Pollution has assumed gigantic proportions in our country.
Growing urbanization, rapid industrialization and increasing population etc. during the last few
years have also tremendously impacted the environmental concerns of the country.  In such a
scenario, the measures taken by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for
prevention and control of pollution and maintaining ecological balance have not been
commensurate with the magnitude of the problem.  The budgetary allocations of the Ministry are
considerably low compared to the projections made by the Ministry for the 12th Plan period.
However, the Ministry is not even able to fully utilize the funds which are made available to it
and also falls short of achieving the physical targets set or otherwise.  The Committee is of the
view that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change needs to be adequately funded
for taking all necessary steps in pursuit of the discharge of its mandate, which includes ensuring
better environment management and preservation of biodiversity including wildlife.  In view of the
foregoing, the Committee recommends that the Ministry, on its part, must prepare a long term plan,
put forth futuristic projections and ensure that the allocated outlays are fully utilized and targets
achieved. (Para 16)
Action Taken by Government
The observations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee have been noted by the Ministry.
This Ministry is taking concrete steps to address the problem of pollution and maintain the
ecological balance keeping in view the magnitude of the problem. Ministry is taking concerted
efforts through the Central Pollution Control Board by active involvement of all stakeholder
Ministries, Departments of the Central Government as well as State Governments/State Pollution
Control Boards and other organizations.
The Ministry has convened five meetings with Ministers of all NCR States including high level
officers of Punjab to implement the activities envisaged under the short term and long term plan
to reduce the levels of air pollution in the air shed of NCR. The pollution abatement and control
measures inter-alia  include timely notification of Environmental Standards, Issuance of direction to
Industries under the provision of Environment Protection Act (1986).
Issuance of Advisory to the States for compliance of environmental standards notified,
checking Air Pollution caused by Stubble Burning, Strengthening of Water Quality Monitoring

11
Stations Network, Ambient Air/Noise Monitoring Station Network and Assistance for setting up of
Common Effluent Treatment Plants, Implementation of Short-term and long-term action plans by
the concerned State Governments to mitigate Air Pollution in NCR also are being implemented. 48
Pulp & Paper industries have been verified by inspection teams and five industries have achieved
substantial reduction in water consumption.
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change has taken up the matter regarding
leapfrogging from BS IV to BS VI standards of emission and fuel for vehicles with M/o Petroleum
& Natural Gas and M/o Road Transport and Highways by the year 2020. In this way the
implementation of BS V norms will stand skipped. The State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) have
also been sensitised to accelerate their pollution control activities during the discussion in the
concluded Annual Conference of SPCBs organised in New Delhi on 17th and 18th May, 2016. This
Ministry endeavours to step up its pollution control efforts through the Central Board and other
organizations in a more effective manner in the years to come.
As regards timely utilization of budget allocation, it may be mentioned that release of funds
for implementation of the schemes is linked with timely submission of proper Utilization
Certificates/ Statement of Expenditure by the grantee organizations. Sometimes the delay in
submission of their documents also affects timely release of funds to the grantee organizations.
However, all efforts are made to ensure that the funds earmarked for pollution abatement and
control related schemes are released within the stipulated time frame.
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change endeavours to ensure that adequate
funds are made available for utilization on these schemes in a time bound manner and the same
are released in an effective and timely manner.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the measures taken would help the
Ministry achieve its physical and financial targets.

MINUTES

V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3,00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 29th November, 2016 in Room No. ‘67’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury  —  Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
6. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
8. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
9. Kum. Sushmita Dev
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Shri Laxman Giluwa
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Chirag Paswan
14. Shri Nana Patole
15. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
16. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
17. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
18. Shri Vikram Usendi
19. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
2. * * *
3. * * *
15
***Relate to other matters.

16
4. The Chairperson then informed the Members that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change had not furnished the Action Taken Note on the 283 rd Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants 2016-17 to the Secretariat despite repeated reminders. The Committee
expressed its displeasure over the non submission of the Action Taken Note and opined that there
was a pressing need to sensitize the officers of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change to be more diligent in furnishing information to the Committee. The Committee then
decided to call the Secretary of the Ministry to appear before the Committee in the matter at a later
date.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.05 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 15th December, 2016 in Room No. ‘63’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury  —  Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri C.P. Narayanan
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
5. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
6. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
8. Shri Daddan Mishra
9. Shri Nana Patole
10. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
11. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
12. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
13. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. She
informed the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft
292ndand 293rd reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in the 283rd report of the Committee on the Demands for
Grants (2016-17) of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and ‘Forest Fires and
its Effect on Environment, Forests, Bio-diversity and Wildlife and Remedial/Preventive Measures’
respectively. The Committee then considered the draft 292nd and 293rd Reports and after some
deliberations, adopted the same.
3. The Committee also decided to present/lay its 292nd and 293rd Reports to both the Houses
of Parliament on 16th December, 2016. The Committee authorised the Chairperson and, in her
17

18
absence, Shri C.P . Narayanan and, in his absence, Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau to present the reports
in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh and, in his absence, Shri Daddan Mishra, to lay
the reports on the Table of Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.