hhhh
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/99th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
NINETY-NINTH REPORT
 
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2002-2003)OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 72)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 2ND MAY, 2002)
(LAID IN THE LOK SABHA ON THE 2ND MAY, 2002)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2002/VAISAKHA, 1924  (SAKA)
 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Website: http://parliamentofindia.nic.in
 
  C O N T E N T S
1.     COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE          
2.     INTRODUCTION               
3.     REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                     
4.     SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                                                                  
5.     ANNEXURES       
BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE YEAR 2002-2003                              
6.    MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE  
                          
 COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2002)
--------
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
           
RAJYA SABHA
 
    2.   Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
3. Smt. S. Gokula Indira
4. Shri C. Apok Jamir
5. Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
6. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
7. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
8. Smt. Savita Sharda
9. Shri B.P. Singhal
   10.Shri M. V. Rajashekaran
   11.Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
   12.Vacant
   13. Vacant
   14. Vacant
   15. Vacant
        
LOK  SABHA

hhhh
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/99th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
 
16. Smt. Margaret Alva
17. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                     
18. Smt. Bhavna Devrajbhai Chikhalia                     
19. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
20. Adv. Suresh Ramrao Jadhav                         
21. Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
22. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
  23.Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
24. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
25. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
26. Shri Kailash Meghwal
27. Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
28. Shri Rupchand Murmu
29. Shri S. Murugesan                              
30. Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                            
31. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                
32. Shri B.K. Parthasarathi   
33. Shri Ajit Kumar Panja   
34. Shri Suresh Pasi                                         
35. Dr. Ashok Patel                                        
36. Shri Prahlad Patel    
37. Prof. R.R. Pramanik                                 
38. Shri Naresh Puglia                          
39. Shri Ganta Srinivasa Rao  
40. Prof. I.G. Sanadi
41. Shri Ram Prasad Singh   
42. Shri Vishvendra Singh   
43. Shri V. Vetriselvan
44. Shri Balram Singh Yadav
45. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
      Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
      Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
      Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary         
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
      Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
INTR
ODUCTION
 
      I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
 Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Ninety-ninth Report of the
 Committee.  This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
 Science and Technology) (Demand No.72).
 
2.  In the meeting of the Committee held on 10
th April, 2002 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of Biotechnology
 gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the
 performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
 
3.  The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the Members
 and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of
 Biotechnology.
 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on 24
th April, 2002.
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                                      C. RAMACHANDRAIAH,
April 24, 2002                                                                                                                                    Chairman,

hhhh
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/99th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
        Committee on Science & Technology,
                                                                                                             Environment & Forests.
         
R E P O R T
             With the setting up of Department of Biotechnology in 1986, multifarious activities for the promotion of Biotechnology and
 for creation of a strong, indigenous self-reliant base of modern biology have been carried out. The objectives of the Department
 include development of products and processes and technologies large scale application of which  would result in societal and
 economic benefits.
2.         Department of Biotechnology has sought to develop simple, easy to use, inexpensive and sensitive diagnostic kits for early
 detection of communicable and non-communicable diseases.  In the area of crop biotechnology, several Centres for Plant
 Molecular Biology (CPMBs) have been established for research in upstream areas.  In the area of horticulture and plantation crops,
 a number of Research & Development (R&D) projects have been initiated for developing complete tissue culture regeneration
 protocols for large scale multiplication of elite planting material of desired characteristics.  So far as animal biotechnology is
 concerned, major areas in which research is being pursued are – Embryo Transfer Technology (ETT), health care, diagnostics,
 nutrition, genetic resources conservation, leather biotechnology and development of       bio-products.
3.         The biotechnology programmes are being implemented through a number of autonomous and statutory institutions and
 Universities to which assistance is provided by the Department by way of grants-in-aid.  The Department is also looking after the
 work relating to the International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB).  The six autonomous institutions
 established by the department under Societies Registration Act, 1860, include:  National Institute of Immunology (NII), New Delhi;
 National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS), Pune; Centre for DNA Finger Printing and Diagnostics, Hyderabad; National Centre for
 Plant Genome Research, New Delhi; National Brain Research Centre, New Delhi.  A Public Sector undertaking namely, the Bharat
 Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Ltd. (BIBCOL), Bullandshahr (Uttar Pradesh) is engaged in manufacturing Oral Polio
 Vaccine (OPV) and other Immunological products under Prime Minister’s Technology Mission on Immunization, with a view to
 achieve self-sufficiency in manufacturing Oral Polio Vaccine.
4.         During the year 2001-2002, the Department has undertaken many research leads, a number of technologies were transferred
 and new initiatives taken which would yield results during the Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-07).  With the creation of the biotech
 facilities, Centres of excellence and implementation of major projects in the identified areas of national relevance, a strong base of
 biology research was established with number of expert groups in universities and national laboratories.  This would be fully
 utilized for many mission oriented and time-bound projects of crucial importance to the society and the country during the Tenth
 Plan.  The endeavour was to consolidate the research leads by initiating some mega projects in the areas of food and nutritional
 security, biofuels, stem cell research, genomic and computational biology.  In the process, establishment of biotechnology parks,
 incubators, biovillages and the programmes of societal relevance were accorded high priority. 
5.         The thrust of the Biotechnology programmes during the 9
th Plan was on basic research leading towards excellence,
 development of new products or processes, large scale demonstrations, validation and technology transfer, involvement of user
 agencies and industries, patenting and enhancing the rate of quality research publications.  Emphasis was also laid on establishing
 new Centres of excellence, facilities, programme support in priority areas, expansion of bioinformatics network and human
 resource development Centres.
6.         During the year under review, National Centre for Plant Genome Research, National Brain Research Centre and National
 Bio-Resource Development Board have been made fully operational. Major programmes on genomics which included microbial,
 structural, functional and computational genomics and DNA micro array tools to understand differential expression of genes, silk
 worm genome., sequences of chromosome 11 of rice, and sequencing of pathogens like Helicobactor pylori received a big fillip. 
 The guidelines for transgenic plants for Research and Development have been revised.  Ethical policy document on “Human
 genome, genetic research and services” has been published for use by scientists supported by the Department.  National Facility for
 Containment and Quarantine of Transgenic Planting materials, Patent Facilitating Cell, International repository authority for micro
 organisms and National facility for virus diagnosis of tissue culture raised plants have also been made operational.  Stem cell
 biology and its applications, molecular probes for oral cancer, genetic based vaccines, molecular taxonomy and Integrated Nutrient
 Management programmes have also progressed satisfactorily.  Diagnostics kits for HIV, Hepatitis-C, Dengue, Japanese
 Encephalitis, Alfafeto-protein, Hepatitis-A, reproductive hormones and banana bunchy top virus have been transferred to
 industries.  In addition, several packages for biofertilizers, plant tissue culture protocols and bioremediation technologies have also
 been given to industries for commercialization.  Recombinant candidate anthrax vaccine for use in humans is being upscaled by
 one of the industries.  DBT has supported a programme for development of low-cost nutritious food and a new mission project on
 food and nutritional security paying special attention to nutrients is under formulation.  Research projects on cancer therapy and
 diabetes are under implementation and very good progress has been achieved in the diabetes research at National Centre for Cell
 Science, Pune. 
7.         The Committee was informed that during 2002-2003, concerted efforts would be made to accomplish milestones and targets
 as enunciated in the ‘Vision Document’ which is conceptualized to attain new heights in biotechnology research, shaping
 biotechnology into a premier precision tool of the future and for creation of wealth and ensuring social justice, especially for the
 welfare of the poor. In order to integrate biotechnological research in major socio-economic sectors with a view to improve their
 productivity and efficiency and ensure environmentally sustainable development and livelihood security for the people, vigorous
 efforts would continue.  A networking approach would be followed for optimal utilization of the available infrastructure and
 generation of highly skilled human resource. 
8.         As far as the programmes/activities of the Department in North-Eastern and J&K Region are concerned, the Secretary
 informed the Committee that many programmes in the North-Eastern region in the form of R&D projects and demonstrations have

hhhh
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/99th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
 been supported by the Department.  Recently, an Institute of Bioresource and Sustainable Development has been set up as an
 autonomous centre at Imphal, Manipur to cater to the requirements of biotechnology based development of the region.  It would
 generate the needed human resource, new technology package, and training and would take up demonstrations and technology
 transfer.  In Guwahati, a hardening facility for tissue cultured plants has also been set up.  Universities of Assam and Tejpur have
 been given M.Sc teaching programmes.  In addition  to these, there are informatics centres established in Shillong and Jorhat.  All
 DBT programmes are running well and they are being reviewed regularly by the experts.  In Sikkim a large scale demonstration
 project is under progress on large cardamom.  In Assam, a project on orchids has also been supported.
9.         In J&K, two M.Sc. teaching programmes – one at University of Jammu and another at Srinagar were running well.  Some
 R&D projects in the Universities, research institutions and the medical  college  there  have been supported.  A  National Gene
 Bank  for medicinal and aromatic plants and tissue culture hardening facility has been established at Regional Research Laboratory
 (RRL), Jammu.  The tissue culture corms of saffron developed at RRL were ready for field trials.  The aim of the project was to
 provide good quality planting material.  The trials would be held in consultation with the State Department in the saffron growing
 regions of J&K.
10.        In order to create awareness abut the new technologies and activities of the Department; the Secretary informed the
 Committee that there were several mechanisms developed by the Department for transfer of technology using the services of
 NRDC and Biotech Consortium India Ltd.  Besides, there were industrial biotechnology courses running at UDCT, Bombay; IITs
 at Delhi and Kharagpur; and Anna University, Chennai to generate the needed human resource.  There are regular awareness
 programmes, workshops with the stakeholders, training programmes in tissue culture, biofertilizers etc. organized by NGOs,
 research institutions with the help of DBT.  Almost in every part of the country, Department has been organizing exhibitions where
 material in regional languages, exhibits, video films and products are displayed.  The Department is regularly bringing out bilingual
 Biotech Newsletter twice a year.  There are many other publications like Biome News, publications on Independence Day and
 Republic Day etc., which bring out from time to time, important technologies, activities and events in biotechnology.  There is a
 comprehensive website ‘www.dbtindia.org’ which gives information on various activities and programme of the Department.
11.        States of Orissa, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Karnataka have set up Biotechnology
 Boards/Department/Biotechnology Advisory Council.  Many other states were in the process of finalizing an appropriate
 institutional structure and a Biotechnology policy.  In Gujarat, a Biotechnology Advisory Council functions under the
 Chairmanship of the Chief Minister
12.        The Biotech city concept initiated at Lucknow was based on creating a networking arrangement between various research
 institutions, Govt. Departments, NGOs and industries to interact among each other and promote, support and catalyse the
 development of biotechnology.  In Lucknow, there were about 22 institutions engaged in advanced biotechnology research.  All
 these have been networked together in the concept of Biotechnology city and a website has been created at Industrial Toxicology
 Research Centre (ITRC), Lucknow which gives the total information about the expertise of these institutions.  The advantage is to
 generate inter-disciplinary, inter-institutional programmes and give a big push to the biotechnology development in the region.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
13.        The Committee was informed that the current activities of the Department namely, the human resource development,
 support for new Centres of excellence, facilities, repositories and services, basic and product oriented R&D, biotech product and
 process development, bioinformatics, international cooperation in biotechnology, biotechnology based projects for societal
 development and support to the autonomous institutions would further be consolidated and continued during the year 2002-03.
 These activities form the basis for implementation of biotechnology programmes and  development  in terms of application and
 commercialization.
14.        The total budgetary allocation (Plan & non-Plan) for the Department for the year 2002-2003 is  Rs.235.58 crores as against 
 Rs.186.34 crores in the B.E. and Rs.185.52 crores in R.E. of 2001-02.  The plan component of Rs.225 crores (for the year 2002-03)
 represents an increase of about Rs.50 crores over the B.E. & R.E. of last year. The increased amount is sought to be utilised on 
 ongoing  core  activities / programmes  of the  Department.  The  details of  budgetary projections, as mentioned in the Expenditure
 Budget, for the programmes/activities of the Department during the year 2002-03 are given at Annexure-I. However, the financial
 summary of the last five years is as follows: -
                                                                                                                   (Rs. in Crores)
Year Proposed B.E. R.E. Actual Expenditure
1997-1998 129.50 107.00 85.00 85.22
1998-1999 125.00 107.00 100.81 104.46
1999-2000 139.00 110.00 116.87 116.38
2000-2001 162.97 125.00 139.92 140.90
2001-2002 252.00 175.00 175.00 150.2127
as on 22
nd Feb. 2002
 
15.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department has made optimum utilization of the funds allocated to it
 during Ninth five year plan (1997-2002)

hhhh
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/99th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
16.        Asked about the income of the autonomous and public sector institutions under the control of the Department, the Secretary
 informed the Committee that autonomous institutions of the Department were mostly conducting basic research and whatever
 technologies have been transferred by them through an agreement with the industry, the revenue generated, goes back to the
 institute and part of it, as per the Government procedure, to the scientists.  The Department does not claim any share in this.  Two
 institutions namely Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad; and National Centre for Cell Science
 (NCCS), Pune are providing services to the scientific community for which very nominal charges are made which are ploughed
 back in the R&D efforts.  The public sector unit i.e. Bharat Immunologicals & Biologicals Corporation Ltd. (BIBCOL) is buying
 the bulk for vaccine manufacture and selling its vaccine to the M/o Health.  They are running on commercial lines and no revenue
 generated by them is given to the Department.  Last year, the profit generated out of the sale of Oral Polio Vaccine was Rs.46.60
 crore.
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
17.        The focus of the programme has been to train a large number of highly trained scientists/students. An integrated manpower
 development programme comprising M.Sc./M.Tech./Post Doctoral course in biotechnology at various universities/ institutes of
 many states and union territories; Biotechnology national and overseas associates, short-term training courses, seminars and
 symposia, popular lectures, biology scholarships, publications and other miscellaneous programmes have been implemented.  Five
 bioscience career development awards and three women bio-scientists awards were given to eminent scientists in the year under
 review. 
18.       The Secretary informed the Committee that the method of selecting a University for starting a teaching programme in
 biotechnology was based on the scientific merit of the proposal.  A DBT-UGC joint Task Force in the DBT considers the proposals
 based on the evaluation by experts.  Generally, the DBT insists that a strong faculty and diverse expertise in biotechnology should
 be available with the University before starting a teaching programme.  The Department also provides for guest faculty from
 neighbouring institutions to enable better type of teaching programme in the absence of many well-trained faculty members.
19.       In order to encourage women scientists, DBT has instituted awards for senior and young scientists.  Besides, a special
 scheme is also under implementation for rural women through proven biotechnologies.
20.        The Committee observes that the Universities and Institutions need to play a momentous role to achieve widespread
 excellence both in terms of teaching quality and high calibre human resources. There is thus a need to strengthen existing support
 systems in the Universities and other educational institutions. Besides, DBT should also consider introducing research scholarships
 to the school leaving students in order to motivate them to join frontier areas of research in the field of biotechnology. These
 initiatives may help in accelerating the pace of biotech research for the development of a strong knowledge base and its application
 for the social welfare.
21.        The Committee is of the view that Department of Biotechnology should conduct an exercise to assess whether it would be
 in our interest  to generate a pool of critical mass of  well-trained scientific personnel for the various biotechnological research,
 training and industrial activities in the country and if so, what should be its size. To that end, if necessary, infrastructural facilities
 should be created in various scientific institutions in the country which may include germ plasm collection, animal house facilities,
 centralized facility for import and distribution of enzymes and bio-chemicals, genetic engineering units and a network of bio-
informatic systems etc.
VACCINE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
22.        It has been stated that significant progress has been made under National Jai Vigyan Mission on developing technologies
 for vaccines for Rabies, Cholera, Malaria, Tuberculosis, Japanese Encephalitis and HIV infections.  A formulation consisting of
 Deoxyribo Nucleic Acid (DNA) and small amount of protein from the tissue cultured grown Rabies virus has completed trials in
 dogs and cattle’s. It is being upscaled and is likely to be made available soon in the market to control rabies in dogs.  The HIV
 DNA candidate vaccine has completed its immunogenicity in small laboratory animals and is currently under going
 immunogenicity and preclinical toxicology in non-human primates.  The tissue cultured Japanese Encephalitis candidate vaccine
 elicited about 70% protection in animals following intracereberal challenge.  The technology is ready to replace the existing
 Japanese Encephalitis Vaccine.  Five DNA candidate vaccines as alternative to BCG to control tuberculosis have completed their
 immunogenicity investigations. A Laboratory Scale GMP (Good Manufacturing Practice) facility for the production of recombinant
 proteins to be used as malaria vaccine candidate is also functional.
23.        The Committee was informed that three diagnostics for HIV/AIDS have been developed, validated and found to have very
 high degree of sensitivity and specificity.  Two of the diagnostic test systems namely, the Western Immunoblot Assay and Naked
 Eye Visible Agglutination Assay (NEVA) have been transferred to industries.  The industries have refined, upscaled and launched
 these in the market after obtaining appropriate approval from the Drugs Controller General of India.  The western immunoblot
 assay confirms the HIV infections while NEVA utilizing recombinant chemeric reagents yields results with 1-2 minutes.  Both of
 these test systems have sensitivity of 99.8% with the specificity of 99.6%.  Another diagnostic test, peptide ELISA system for
 diagnosis of HIV, has been validated and was transferred to one of the Indian industries, namely M/s Ace Diagnostics, Delhi. 
 Before  the industry  could launch the product in the market, the company was wound up. The Department is again negotiating with
 other industries for taking up the technology.
24.        The contraceptive vaccine to control fertility in females, namely, the B hCG completed its phase-II clinical trials.  The
 analysis of the idea suggested that some more basic studies are required for enhanced and sustainable immune responses in
 vaccines.  A new formulation that provides relatively better-enhanced and sustainable immune response has been evaluated in
 animals.  It needs to be further validated in non-human primates and if found effective, the formulation will undergo clinical trials. 
 The oFSH candidate vaccine as a male anti fertility candidate vaccine underwent phase-I clinical trials.  The data of the trials
 indicated changes in the hormonal parameters in individuals that received vaccine.  The work on Riboflavin Carrier Protein (RCP)

hhhh
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/99th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
 is continuing and now the recombinant sub units of the same were being evaluated.  The experimental studies suggested RCP has
 efficacy as anti fertility candidate both for males & females.  More studies in assessing the efficacy of the recombinant subunit in
 primates have been planned.
25.        The DBT was involved with the development of vaccines and diagnostics.  A technique for development of ‘Artether’ from
 artimisia (medicinal plant) has been standardized at Central Institute of Medicinal & Aromatic Plants(CIMAP), Lucknow.  Efforts
 were on to transfer the technology to an industry. AIDS diagnostic kits – a peptide based ELISA was also developed and
 transferred to M/s Ace Diagnostics which has since been closed down.  Negotiations with other industries have been conducted to
 transfer this technology.  However, a western blot and NEVA – a quick test has already been given to the industry and were now
 available in the market.
26.       The Committee commends the efforts being made by the Department in vaccine research and development.  The Committee
 is of the view that much needs to be done to contain major infectious diseases like tuberculosis, malaria, Japanese encephalitis, as
 well as, non-communicable diseases like hormonal disorders.  The Committee notes with satisfaction that the diagnostic kits would
 be made available in the market this year. Besides, vaccine for rabies, cholera, HIV, TB, malaria and Japanese encephalitis should
 be ready in the next couple of years.  The Committee hopes that the vaccines/medicines would be priced reasonably so that they are
 within the reach of larger sections of the society.
AUTONOMOUS INSTITTIONS
27.        The Department has under its control five autonomous institutions namely National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi;
 National Centre for Cell Science, Pune;  Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, Hyderabad; National Centre for Plant
 Genome Research and National Brain Research Centre in New Delhi.  These institutions are involved in pursuing basic and applied
 research leading to generation of new knowledge, products, patents and publication of papers with high impact factor.  An Institute
 of Bio-resources and Sustainable Development (IBSD) has been established last year at Imphal, Manipur in order to develop and
 utilize the rich bio-resources of North East India, using tools of Biotechnology.
National Institute Of Immunology
28.        The National Institute of Immunology (NII) is working at furthering knowledge of the molecular mechanisms of interaction
 between the biological systems and their environment while searching for new intervention modalities to combat mortality and
 morbidity. The range of areas being explored at NII focus around the cellular cross-talks, parasitic targets and the precise
 modulation of bodily defense mechanisms, which have,  over the years, coalesced into four major themes; immunity and infection,
 gene regulation, molecular design and reproduction & development..
29.        While the Institute continues to work on four major themes as mentioned above. Japanese Encephalitis Virus (JEV)
 envelope protein together with the pre-membrane protein, delivered to mice by intramuscular injection or using a gene gun have
 shown good immunological responses. The studies using ribozyme approach have provided important clues on the course of HIV-
1, HIV-2 and Simian Immuno Deficiency Virus (SIV) infection  and  disease  pattern.  As part of the studies on molecular
 modelling of peptides and protein-ligand complexes a quick screening tool to identify potential MHC (an antibody) binding
 sequences and simple approach to predict peptide conformations in the MHC groove with a reasonable accuracy have been
 established. Three technological leads were granted international patents and three other Indian patents.
30.        The Committee was informed that enhanced budgetary allocation in this year was made to initiate the work of Incubator
 laboratory facility in the second campus of the National Institute of Immunology to help the biotechnology industry and upgrade
 animal facility and set up election/scanning microscopic facility.  In addition, specific cutting edge research programmes relating to
 identification of novel tissue specific gene by exploiting the genomic revolution would be undertaken in order to address
 fundamental biological issues.
31.        The Committee has also been informed that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has been apprised about the potential
 and utility of the Mw anti leprosy vaccine for inclusion in the National Leprosy Control Programme.  However, about 2.7 lakh
 doses have been supplied free of cost to various hospitals and leprosy homes.  LAPROVAC has been given to various stockists in
 Maharashtra, Gujarat, Bihar, Orissa, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka and Chandigarh.
Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics
32.        The Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics (CDFD) continues to provide services for DNA fingerprinting,
 diagnostics, bio-informatics and automated genome analysis and concentrated research & development in the area of genetics,
 molecular & cellular biology, molecular pathogenesis and bio-informatics. During the year 2001-02, the Centre has received a total
 of 201 cases for DNA fingerprinting examination. Of these, 85 cases were for establishment of paternity, 75 for identification of
 individuals, 33 involving rape, 2 for determining biological relationships, 5 for wildlife identification and one for plant
 identification. In order to provide services for diagnosis, the Centre has received a total of 1820 referral cases against 490 last year
 which represent a jump of over 370%. The Centre has screened 4180 newborn children under “New Born Screening Programme”
 for common inborn errors of metabolism.
33.        As revealed in the Background Note submitted by the Department during the examination of Demands for Grants (2002-
03), an agreement has been signed between CDFD and the Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) for developing niche software in
 Bioinformatics, train a select group of TCS employees and conduct long-term R&D. Besides, the Centre has identified several
 DNA polymorphisms in Helicobacter pylori that distinguish strains from Asia and Europe. The genotypic signatures for all the
 pathogenic strains have been generated using universal Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism (AFLP) approach of Keygene
 and Applied Biosystems. Using “Automated Genome Analysis Facility”, the Centre has carried out large scale genome sequencing
 of human DNA samples for retinoblastoma gene (rb1) mutations and CYP1B1 gene mutations associated with glaucoma. Basmati
 specific markers which discriminate pure lines from the evolved Basmati and non- Basmati rice varieties have also been identified.
34.        In reply to the question about the decline in the allocation for the Centre for the year 2002-03, the Committee was informed
 that as per the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) provision, the CDFD would require an amount of Rs.9.90 crores during the

hhhh
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/99th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
 year 2002-03 to meet its commitments.  However, CDFD has been provided Rs.8.00 crores based on the total plan outlay provided
 to the department.  The Department is in the process of revising earlier EFC provisions and would seek additional funds during
 financial year at the RE stage.
35.        The Committee undertook a visit to CDFD on 27th December, 2001 in order to study the functioning and programmes of
 the Centre. The Committee was informed about the work being done by the Centre for DNA fingerprinting, disease diagnosis and
 other services. The new born screening program whereby every child born in the Government hospitals in the city of Hyderabad for
 metabolic errors, was applauded by Committee whereby techniques of modern biology were being applied for betterment of human
 kind. The Committee was also apprised about the research work being carried out leading to several new findings, particularly the
 development of new Hybrid varieties of silk work with improved commercial traits, identification of the gene for childhood
 blindness, molecular typing of the tuberculosis bacterium and the one that causes gastric cancer and gastric ulcer, regulation of
 genes in both bacteria and viruses and the development of clinical-informatics databases. 
36.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics (CDFD) has emerged as a
 Centre of Excellence.The Centre has been delivering a range of services relating to modern biology even though it is operating
 from a rentedbuilding. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that maximum support should be provided to the Centre so as to
 reinforce the unique synthesis of services and research being carried out by CDFD. The Centre should be encouraged to have its
 own building.  To that end the Department should help it with adequate funds so that its planned projects on Genome analysis, Bio-
terrorism & Bioinformatics do not suffer.
National Brain Research Centre
37.            National Brain Research Centre (NBRC), Gurgoan is undertaking multidisciplinary research on neurosciences to
 understand brain function encompassing relating genes to cognition, from molecules to mind. NBRC has worked towards achieving
 these objectives through the state-of-art facilities. Efforts are on to support and network the existing groups in the country and
 provide comprehensive training and teaching in neuroscience.
38.        The Committee was informed that the research on several parameters of neurosciences namely, dynamic control of saccade
 target selection; Mitochondrial dysfunction and protein thiol homeostasis in neurodegenerative diseases; Psychoactive drug
 metabolism by brain cytochromes P-450 and mechanisms of neuronal stem cell differentiation have been initiated at the NBRC,
 Gurgoan. Two Indo-US Workshops were held to promote research collaboration through the MoU signed between National
 Institute of Mental Health, USA and NBRC, India.
39.       The Committee feels the need for coordination between the research activities undertaken at National Brain Research Centre
 (NBRC), Gurgoan and for their knowledge/application etc. to the neurologists so that they can optimally apply the same while
 treating brain related cases. To that end, workshops must also be conducted at regular intervals in order to apprise Medical colleges
 and concerned departments in neurology about the research findings with a view to improve patient care. 
 BIOTECHNOLOGY PATENT FACILITATING CELL
40.        The Biotechnology Patent Facilitating Cell (BPFC) is working towards the creation of awareness and understanding relating
 to patents among scientists by arranging workshops, seminars, conferences, providing patenting facilities to biotechnologists in the
 country for filing Indian and international patents on a continuous basis and make important issues known to policy makers, bio-
scientists, biotech industry, etc. The patent cell has streamlined the process of patent facilitation and has created patent search
 capabilities within the Department for conducting preliminary patent search for rigorous assessment of the inventions received at
 the Department for patenting.
41.        The Committee was informed that during 2001-02, 13 new patent applications have been received and six applications have
 been filed through Patent Co-operation Treaty (PCT). One Indian and one US patent have been granted. A total of 99 patents have
 been filed by the Department so far.
42.       The Committee recommends the Department to refurbish the system for protecting intellectual property rights in the
 booming biotechnology sector. In order to achieve its set targets, the Department should take initiatives to frame appropriate
 strategies and policies to maximize the benefits and minimize the disadvantages from the post General Agreement on Trade &
 Tariffs-Intellectual Property Rights (GATT-IPR) regime. The Department should also launch a major well-directed plan, with
 significant investment, for harnessing biotech tools for generation of products, processes and technologies.
43.       The Committee is also of the view that the complete procedure for filing applications for patents and patents etc.
 already granted should be available on the web-site, if not already available, to help the prospective applicants.
BIO-INFORMATICS
44.        The plan scheme of bio-informatics envisages to provide a National Bio-informatics Network in the country designed to
 bridge the gaps in Biotechnology information and to establish links among scientists in Biotechnology.  The network aims to
 provide a single reference to various information resources of importance to biotechnology and modern biology including data
 banks of genetic importance published literature, patents and other information of scientific and commercial value.  It also aims to
 provide necessary infrastructural support for modern research in biology involving computationally intensive analysis.  The
 network consists of 11 Distributed Information Centers (DICs) and 45 sub-DICs computational facilities at the national level.  It
 has also established linkages with international institutions like International Centre for Co-operation in Bio-informatics (ICCB), a
 UNESCO based funded bio-informatics programme and is also linked with EMB net, as well as international legume-data base and
 information services (ILDIS).  Educational and training activities in bio-informatics will also form part of the scheme.  National Jai
 Vigyan Mission on Mirror Sites for Genomic Research to establish four major databases at Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore;
 University of Pune; Jawaharlal Nehru University and Institute of Microbial Technology, Chandigarh have progressed well.  New
 projects for establishing Centres of excellence in bio-informatics will be taken up.

hhhh
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/99th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
45.       The Committee was informed that the on-going Bioinformatics network has 57 Bioinformatics centres spread across the
 country at various research institutions/universities.  Each centre of the network has built up Bioinformatics resources in their
 specialized areas in the form of databases,  software packages for  application to Biotechnology  and  Molecular Biology. 
These are shared over the network by the researchers in the country.  Towards the development of molecular modelling and
 simulation studies in biotechnology, six interactive graphic facilities have been established and they act as a National facility for
 the benefit of researchers in the country.  Four one-year Post-graduate Diploma courses on Bioinformatics are being offered by
 major universities with a view to enhance human resource in the field.  Every year more than 50 short-term training programmes
 are being conducted to provide awareness towards the utilization of Bioinformatics resources.  Under the National Jai Vigyan
 Science & Technology Mission, mirror sites of internationally recognized databases have been established for unhindered access to
 large amount information resources for the acceleration of R&D activities in genomics and proteomics.
46.            Besides, continuation of the ongoing activities during 2002-03, the emphasis will be on augmenting the Centres and
 development of new tools.  Five more Bioinformatics Centres are proposed to be set up as part of the network.  Mirroring of some
 important databases like celera genomics is also proposed to be undertaken.  Preparatory work has already been completed for the
 establishment of a high speed Virtual Private Network (VPN).  It is also proposed to support the M.Tech programme in
 Bioinformtics and other manpower development activities.  Important research leads are expected to arise through the use of
 Bioinformatics resources.  The network will act as knowledge pathway for the discoveries in Biotechnology and Molecular
 Biology.  The proposed new initiatives are designed to add value to the existing network and available resources will be utilized for
 the same through prioritization.  
47.       The Committee observes that it is necessary to augment the Biotech network with a view to exploit the germplasm
 base and vast pool of talented bioinformatics scientists and low cost software skills.  Department of Biotechnology should
 undertake an exercise to ascertain how far the exploitation is desirable & feasible.  Thereafter, if necessary, the Department
 should establish more Centres for high areas of research and development, functional genomics microarray and structural
 genomics and for creating infrastructure. The Government support should be kept at minimal and more and more
 industrial interface should be supported/enhanced. The Department should also bolster the bioinformatics education
 through publication of bioinformatics textbooks and monographs by reputed scientists in the field.
48.       The Committee is of the view that in order to fulfil the growing need for latest information, Biotechnology Information
 Network should also be established to work as a distributed database and network organisation in order to provide an integrated
 information resource on all aspects of biotechnology, that will provide bio-informatics and bio-computing services to
 researchers and manufacturing activities.
MEDICAL BIOTECHNOLOGY
49.        Medical Biotechnology has come to a centre stage with spectacular advances in biology. This is due to a number of
 emerging and re-emerging infections requiring immediate attention for development of suitable diagnostics and therapeutics.
 Several events at the international biotech scene such as the rise of genomics era, stem cell research and bioinformatics have
 percolated down to the national biotechnology scene with a large number of scientists galvanized to reap the benefits. The
 Department of Biotechnology has continued its efforts for the development of suitable diagnostics, vaccines, therapeutic and better
 drug delivery systems. 
50.        The Committee was informed that three Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) based diagnostics for tuberculosis have been
 validated and are ready for commercialistion. A new probe indicating multi drug resistance for Mycobacterium tuberculosis
 infection is undergoing evaluation. Moreover a unique mechanism of transport of anti malaria drug has led to identification of 65
 KDA molecules as a possible new drug target. Major programmes on stem cell biology and applications have been implemented at
 LV Prasad Eye Institute at Hyderabad, National Brain Research Centre, Gurgoan and Christian Medical College, Vellore. A multi
 centric programme on oral cancer to identify molecular probes for early detection and possible markers for progression and
 prognosis of the oral cancer has also been implemented.  Twenty-one diagnostics technologies have been developed and twelve
 have been transferred to industries for upscaling and commercialization. Two HIV diagnostics test systems and one Hepatitis-C
 diagnostics test system has been launched in the market. As a collaborative effort, the scientists at Deccan College of Medical
 College of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad along with industries have been able to sequence the whole genome of one of the Indian
 isolate of Hepatitis C. This is the first effort made by Indian scientists to sequence a microbe relevant to the country.
51.        The Background Note on Demands for Grants (2002-03) for the Department contains the information that seventeen
 prototype diagnostic test systems and other bio-medical technologies relating to vaccines have been transferred to industries. Of
 these, five namely: Leprosy Immunomodulator; Leshmanisis detection Kit; Western Blot for HIV-I & II; Naked eye agglutination
 system for HIV I & II; and ELISA based Hepatitis-C diagnostics have been launched by the industries.
52.        Twelve technologies transferred to the industries are in the process of upscaling and refinement for commercial use.  These
 are : The lgM Mac ELISA for the detection for Dengue, Japanese Encephalitis,  West Nile, ELISA system to measure alpha-feto
 protein levels in pregnant women, An lgM based system for the detection of Hepatitis.  A virus using monoclonal/polyclonal
 antibodies, Urine based system (ELISA) for the detection of four reproductive hormones, a technology utilizing Yerrowia lipolytica
 expressing Hepatitis B surface and pre S genes, a technology for expressing  hCG using Pichia pastoris and Recombinant
 candidate Anthrax vaccine. In addition, eleven other technologies have been developed and some have already undergone
 validations.  The Department is in the process of transferring these to industry. 
BIOFUELS AND BIOENERGY
53.        This area has been identified as a mission programme for 10th Plan (2002-07). A multi-institutional coordinated network

hhhh
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/99th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
 programme on “Bio-engineering for Bio-fuels and Bio-energy” has been initiated. The programme will encompass areas of Energy
 plantation; Bio-ethanol production; Bio-diesel and hydrocarbon production; Hydrogen production as alternative sources of Bio-
energy. The programme aims at establishment of Bio-energy Plantations of high value energy crops and utilization by the local
 community in six different agroclimatic locations. It would serve as a feedstock for other biofuel programme.
54.       The Committee is of the view that as fossil fuels are fast depleting, efforts need to be made to search for alternative
 modes or source of energy. Perhaps bio-fuels and bio-energy can provide better substitutes as fossil fuels. Besides, bio-fuels
 being cleaner fuels, they do not pollute the environment.
 BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT
55.        The objective of the programme is to provide biotechnology tools/products to benefit SC/ST population and empowerment
 of women for their economic development. The programmes on rural areas are stated to have benefited around 10,000 rural
 people.  More than 2,000 rural people have been trained to cultivate medicinal plants.  Many more people have also been trained in
 preparation of products like Jams, Jelly, squash, pickle and these products are being sold in local market.  24 projects on
 biotechnology involving women were supported in 11 States and Union Territories. These projects have resulted in training of
 women for entrepreneurship development in various areas such as food processing, sericulture, mushroom cultivation, micro
 propagation or orchids and other ornamental plants, biofertilizer production, goat and poultry rearing, fish farming, rabbit rearing
 for quality wool production and establishment of nurseries of medicinal and aromatic plants as well as formulation of certain herbal
 products. So far, around 8000 women are stated to have benefited from the programme.  A total of 102 projects have been
 supported in 20 States and Union Territories benefiting about 15,000 families under the programme for SC/ST.  The programmes
 were started with the objective of creating awareness on biotechnology packages for income generation and better healthcare, using
 biotechnological processes and tools for creating new avenues of employment and promoting bio-village concept for socio-
economic upliftment of target population in rural area and women and SC/ST.     
56.        The Committee commends the efforts made by the Department for upliftment of SC/ST population and women. The
 Committee feels that Department should publicise their entrepreneurship programmes so that concerned companies could come
 forward for marketing their products through these communities. The Department   may also consider taking initiatives to motivate
 the Khadi & Village Industries Commission (KVIC) or similar bodies to provide their products and market them through their
 stores.
BIOLOGICAL CONTROL OF PLANT PESTS, DISEASES AND WEEDS
57.        The Committee was informed that effective modules/packages that are cost effective, sustainable and eco-friendly have
 been developed by the Department through a network programme on Integrated Pest Management and Integrated Nutrient
 Management for increasing agriculture productivity in existing cropping systems of various agro-climatic zones. About 50,000
 have farmers have benefited through training programmes and extension activities and around 1600 handouts in regional languages
 were released.  Several biopesticide technologies have also been developed based on the large-scale field efficacy. Patents have
 also been filed for the mass production technologies of biocontrol agents and their product formulations.
58.       The Committee notes with satisfaction the achievements made by the Department in the field of biological control of plant
 pests, diseases and weeds. However, it would like to add a note of caution that before undertaking large scale production, proper
 field tests must be conducted to pre-empt any controversy.
INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATIONS
59.            International Collaboration in Biotechnology received major thrust in advanced areas of research in medical, agricultural
 and environmental fields aimed at updating and advancing the state-of-the-art research facilities in the country through promotion
 of bilateral as well as multilateral collaborations. The collaborations included adaptation of latest technologies complementary to
 the  research and  development work  with the most advanced  countries to the mutual benefit. The important ones include: Indo-
US collaboration research; collaboration with Switzerland, Sweden and Germany and with Russia where the collaboration has led to
 establishment of a research Centre at Allahabad. The Department has been working in specific areas with Tunisia, Israel, Belarus
 and Sri Lanka.  Progamme with China and Poland are also under progress.  As a result, there is much greater exchange of scientists
 thus providing opportunities to young scientists from India to work in some of the best laboratories abroad. 
60.        The autonomous institutions of the Department have also been an integral part in the international collaboration.  The
 National Brain Research Centre had the first scientific event under the Indo-US forum where an Indo-US workshop in brain
 research in the country was organised.  The Department has specially provided help to Myanmar and Syria for development of
 biotechnology initiatives, institutions and research programmes.
61.        A network project on development of pro-vitamin-A rich rice under Indo-Swiss collaboration in biotechnology has also
 been approved.  Future collaborations are being identified with European Union and Scandinavian and Latin American countries,
 Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore including strengthening SAARC cooperation.
62.            International cooperation is pursued for adaptation of latest technology complimentary to the R&D work with the most
 advanced countries for mutual benefit.  It helps in implementation of national R&D programmes and to open up avenues for
 collaborative interaction in advanced areas leading to transfer of technologies/knowledge into the country.  This has already
 provided training to a large number of young scientists and helped in the development of products and processes, for example
 development of a new process for lactic acid production, biosensors, tissue culture protocols, cryo preservation to teak, and
 development of vaccine for rota viral diarrhea.  Under material transfer agreements in different joint projects, gene constructs,
 reagents, protocols, sophisticated equipment, tools and techniques have also been made available to Indian laboratories.  Several
 interactive workshops and seminars have added value to the knowledge base.  Financial support from some of these collaborations
 to the Indian laboratories is to the tune of about Rs.20 crores.
63.       The Committee feels that all efforts for bilateral cooperation must aim at developing better research facilities in India. It
 should be the continuous endeavour of the Department to provide world-class research conditions so as to stop brain drain and

hhhh
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/99th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
 migration of scientists abroad.
STEM CELLS
64.        Stem Cell has been identified as a potential area of research. The development of stem cell lines that may produce many
 human tissues would revolutionalise the practice of medicine and improve the quality and longevity of life. According to News
 Reports researchers at John Hunters Hospital in New South Wales were said to be using adult stem cells to repair  a man’s
 damaged  heart tissue.  They took stem cells from bone  marrow in the man’s hip and injected them into his heart.  In what is
 described as a world’s first, they hope, they would grow into new blood vessels.  It would take about a year to see if the trial is
 successful.  Potentially it could be used to treat almost a third of patients with     end-stage coronary artery disease.
65.        In 2000, the Department had organized a Brain Storming Session on “Stem Cell Biology and its Applications” to develop
 programmes on biology and clinical use of stem cells and related ethical issues. Basic areas identified in session are understanding
 the basic biology of stem cells, banking and characterization of stem cells, utility of stem cells for organogenesis & gene therapy.
 66.        In response to a question about the Department’s awareness of the reservations expressed by  countries notably Germany
 on red gene technology which deals with stem cells and as a result thereof  moratorium in the European Union and  ban imposed by
 the Germany on stem cell research, the Committee was informed that  Stem cells especially embryonic stem cells have great
 potential in generating tissues for cell therapies for disorders like Parkinson’s Aizheimer, Diabetes, Cardiac muscles, Cardio-
vascular disorders, bones & cartages and haemoglobinopathies. While India has permitted the use of both adult & embryonic stem
 cells for therapeutic purposes only, Germany initially permitted the research on imported embryonic stem cells.  But it has now
 banned this.  The Department was aware of the concerns of Germany and other European countries.  These countries fear that such
 programmes represent the first step towards embarking on reproduction cloning and germline interventions.  However, as per the
 ethical document entitled “Ethical Policies on Human Genome, Genetic Research and Services” prepared by the “National
 Bioethics Committee” of the Department of Biotechnology any research on human cloning and germline interventions by Indian
 investigators, was banned.
67.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology and assessing the progress of various
 important programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Budgetary allocation of Rs.
 235.58 crores, as sought by the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2002-2003, under Demand No. 72, may be
 approved.
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS AT GLANCE
1.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department has made optimum utilization of the funds allocated to it
 during Ninth five year plan (1997-2002).
(Para 15)
2.         The Committee observes that the Universities and Institutions need to play a momentous role to achieve widespread
 excellence both in terms of teaching quality and high calibre human resources. There is thus a need to strengthen existing support
 systems in the Universities and other educational institutions. Besides, DBT should also consider introducing research scholarships
 to the school leaving students in order to motivate them to join frontier areas of research in the field of biotechnology. These
 initiatives may help in accelerating the pace of biotech research for the development of a strong knowledge base and its application
 for the social welfare.
(Para 20)
3.         The Committee is of the view that Department of Biotechnology should conduct an exercise to assess whether it would be in
 our interest  to generate a pool of critical mass of  well-trained scientific personnel for the various biotechnological research,
 training and industrial activities in the country and if so, what should be its size. To that end, if necessary, infrastuctural facilities
 should be created in various scientific institutions in the country which may include germ plasm collection, animal house facilities,
 centralized facility for import and distribution of enzymes and bio-chemicals, genetic engineering units and a network of bio-
informatic systems etc.
(Para 21)
4.         The Committee commends the efforts being made by the Department in vaccine research and development.  The Committee
 is of the view that much needs to be done to contain major infectious diseases like tuberculosis, malaria, Japanese encephalitis, as
 well as, non-communicable diseases like hormonal disorders.  The Committee notes with satisfaction that the diagnostic kits would
 be made available in the market this year. Besides, vaccine for rabies, cholera, HIV, TB, malaria and Japanese encephalitis should
 be ready in the next couple of years.  The Committee hopes that the vaccines/medicines would be priced reasonably so that they are
 within the reach of larger sections of the society.
(Para 26)
5.  The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics (CDFD) has emerged as a
 Centre of Excellence.The Centre has been delivering a range of services relating to modern biology even though it is
 operating  from a rentedbuilding. The Committee, therefore, is of the view that maximum support should be provided to
 the Centre so  as to reinforce the unique synthesis of services and research being carried out by CDFD. The Centre should
 be encouraged to have its own building.  To that end the Department should help it with adequate funds so that its planned
 projects on Genome analysis, Bio-terrorism & Bioinformatics do not suffer.
(Para 36)
6.         The Committee feels the need for coordination between the research activities undertaken at National Brain Research Centre
 (NBRC), Gurgoan and for their knowledge /application etc. to the neurologists so that they can optimally apply the same while

hhhh
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/99th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
 treating brain related cases. To that end, workshops must also be conducted at regular intervals in order to apprise Medical colleges
 and concerned departments in neurology about the research findings with a view to improve patient care.
(Para 39)
7.         The Committee recommends the Department to refurbish the system for protecting intellectual property rights in the
 booming biotechnology sector. In order to achieve its set targets, the Department should take initiatives to frame appropriate
 strategies and policies to maximize the benefits and minimize the disadvantages from the post General Agreement on Trade &
 Tariffs-Intellectual Property Rights (GATT-IPR) regime. The Department should also launch a major well-directed plan, with
 significant investment, for harnessing biotech tools for generation of products, processes and technologies.
(Para 42)
8.         The Committee is also of the view that the complete procedure for filing applications for patents and patents etc.
 already granted should be available on the web-site, if not already available, to help the prospective applicants.
(Para 43)
9.         The Committee observes that it is necessary to augment the Biotech network with a view to exploit the germplasm
 base and vast pool of talented bioinformatics scientists and low cost software skills.  Department of Biotechnology should
 undertake an exercise to ascertain how far the exploitation is desirable & feasible.  Thereafter, if necessary, the Department
 should establish more Centres for high areas of research and development, functional genomics microarray and structural
 genomics and for creating infrastructure. The Government support should be kept at minimal and more and more
 industrial interface should be supported/enhanced. The Department should also bolster the bioinformatics education
 through publication of bioinformatics textbooks and monographs by reputed scientists in the field.
(Para 47)
10.       The Committee is of the view that in order to fulfil the growing need for latest information, Biotechnology Information
 Network should also be established to work as a distributed database and network organisation in order to provide an integrated
 information resource on all aspects of biotechnology, that will provide bio-informatics and bio-computing services to researchers
 and manufacturing activities.
(Para 48)
11.       The Committee is of the view that as fossil fuels are fast depleting, efforts need to be made to search for alternative
 modes or source of energy. Perhaps bio-fuels and bio-energy can provide better substitutes as fossil fuels. Besides, bio-fuels
 being cleaner fuels, they do not pollute the environment.
(Para 54)
12.       The Committee commends the efforts made by the Department for upliftment of SC/ST population and women. The
 Committee feels that Department should publicise their entrepreneurship  programmes   so  that  concerned   companies could 
 come   forward   for marketing their products through these communities. The Department   may also consider taking initiatives to
 motivate the Khadi & Village Industries Commission (KVIC) or similar bodies to provide their products and market them through
 their stores.
(Para 56)
13.       The Committee notes with satisfaction the achievements made by the Department in the field of biological control of plant
 pests, diseases and weeds. However, it would like to add a note of caution that before undertaking large scale production, proper
 field tests must be conducted to pre-empt any controversy.
     (Para 58)
14.       The Committee feels that all efforts for bilateral cooperation must aim at developing better research facilities in India. It
 should be the continuous endeavour of the Department to provide world-class research conditions so as to stop brain drain and
 migration of scientists abroad.
(Para 63)
15.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology and assessing the progress of various
 important programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Budgetary allocation of Rs.
 235.58 crores, as sought by the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2002-2003, under Demand No. 72, may be
 approved.
(Para 67)
ANNEXURE
 
Annexure
BUDGET ESTIMATES 2002-2003
            ( Rs. in crores)
SR.
NO.
HEAD OF DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS/
 PROGRAMMES/ SCHEMES
Plan                  Non-Plan             Total
1 Secretariat Economic Services -- 4.55 4.55

hhhh
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/99th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
 Other Scientific Research    
2
 
Assistance to Scientific Institutions/Professional Bodies 25.00 1.08 26.08
2.01 National Institute of Immunology 9.00 0.45 9.45
2.02 National Centre for Cell Sciences 8.00 -- 8.00
2.03
2.04
2.05
2.06
Centre for DNA Finger printing and Diagnostics
National Brain Research Centre
National Centre for Plant Genome Research
Institute of Bioresources and Sustainable Development
 
TOTAL:
11.00
 
7.00
 
2.00
 
62.00
--
 
--
 
--
 
1.53
11.00
 
7.00
 
2.00
 
63.53
 
 
   
3 Assistance to Other Scientific Bodies    
3.01 Human Resource Development 10.00 -- 10.00
3.02 Centres for Excellence Facilities, Repositories & Services -- -- --
3.03
 
Basic & Product Oriented R&D -- -- --
3.04 Bio-Tech. Product & Process Development -- -- --
3.05 Bioinformatics 7.00 -- 7.00
3.06 National Bioresources Development Board -- -- --
3.07 Biotech Facilities, Centres of Excellence and Programme
 Support
21.00 -- 21.00
3.08 Research and Development 104.00 -- 104.00
3.09
3.10
Biotechnology for Societal Development
Bio-Process and Product Development
6.00
8.00
--
--
6.00
8.00
4 I&M Sector-Assistance for Technology incubators, Pilot
 Project, Biotechnology Parks and Biotech Development
 Fund
1.00 -- 1.00
5.
6.
International Cooperation
International Centre for Genetic Engineering & Bio-
Technology
6.00
--
--
4.50
6.00
4.50
7. Lumpsump provision for Projects/Schemes for N.E.R.
 Sikkim.
-- -- --
 GRAND TOTAL: 225.00 10.58 235.58
 
M I N U T E S
 
VI SIXTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 10
th April, 2002 in Room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
 
1. Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
3. Smt. S. Gokula Indira
4. Shri C. Apok Jamir
5. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
6. Smt. Savita Sharda
7. Shri B.P. Singhal
 
LOK SABHA
 

hhhh
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/99th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
8. Smt. Bhavana D. Chikhalia
9. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
10. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
11. Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
12. Shri Rupchand Murmu
13. Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                            
14. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                
15. Shri Suresh Pasi                                         
16. Dr. Ashok Patel                                        
17. Shri Prahlad Patel                
18. Prof. R.R. Pramanik                                 
19. Shri Naresh Puglia                          
20. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
21. Shri V. Vetriselvan      
22. Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K.Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY
 
      Dr. (Mrs.) Manju Sharma, Secretary
      Dr. V.K. Vinayak, Adviser,
Dr. M. Balasubramanian, Adviser
Dr. S. Natesh, Adviser 
Dr. B.M. Gandhi, Adviser
Dr. V.P. Gupta, Adviser
Shri Arun Sharma, JS&FA
Shri S.L. Bhat, Joint Secretary
Shri Anand Kumar, Director
Dr. S.R. Rao, Scientist ‘F’
Dr. (Ms.) Renu Swarup, Scientist ‘F’
Dr. K.S. Chark, Scientist ‘F’
Dr. T. V. Ramanaiah, Scientist ‘F’
Dr. Mohd. Aslam, Scientist ‘E’
Shri O. P. Rastogi, Under Secretary
     
*                                              *                                  *
2.   At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Biotechnology and other representatives of the Department
 of Biotechnology and requested the Secretary to make a brief presentation on Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Department. 
 The Secretary made visual presentation of the activities and achievements of the Department and briefly explained the budgetary
 allocation on different heads as also the functioning of the Department.  The Members then sought clarifications on points relating
 to the Demands for Grants.  The Secretary replied to the questions and assured the Committee to send written comments on the
 points on which information was not readily available and for want of time.    
            The witnesses then withdrew.
3.   The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 1.30 P.M. and re-assembled at 3.00 P.M. *   *    *
4.         *                                        *                                  *.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5.   The Committee then adjourned at 5.40 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 11
th April, 2002.
 
*** Relates to other matters.
VIII
EIGHTH  MEETING
 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 24th April, 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament

hhhh
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/99th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1. Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
3. Shri C. Narayana Reddy
 
LOK SABHA
 
4. Smt. Margaret Alva
5. Smt. Bhavana D. Chikhalia
6. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
7. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
8. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
9. Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
10. Shri S. Murugesan
11. Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                            
12. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                
13. Shri Prahlad Patel                
14. Prof. R.R. Pramanik
15. Prof. I. G. Sanadi                         
16. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
17. Shri V. Vetriselvan      
18. Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration the draft 99
th & *** Reports of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2002-
03) of the Department of Biotechnology and ***.  The Committee considered and adopted each of the reports.
3.         The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri Manoj Bhattacharya to present the Reports to the Rajya
 Sabha and Smt. Bhavana D. Chikhalia and in her absence Smt. Margaret Alva to lay the Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha.
4.   The Committee then adjourned at 10.15 A.M. & to meet again at 10.30 A.M. on 2nd May, 2002.
______________________________________________________________________________
*Relates to other matters.
 
# Nominated w.e.f. 4th January, 2002. 
& Nominated w.e.f. 24th April, 2002. 
J Nominated w.e.f. 24th April, 2002.
*Shri Cho S. Ramswamy ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.15th February, 2002 on his resignation  from the membership of
   the Committee.
f  Dr. Raja Ramanna ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.18th February, 2002 on his resignation from  the membership of the
   Committee.
b
  Shri Peter Alphonse & Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray  ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of his term  in the Rajya Sabha  
   w.e.f.  2nd  April, 2002.
¥ Smt. Chandresh Kumari and Shri Lachhman Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of his term in the Rajya Sabha 
   w.e.f. 9th  April, 2002.

hhhh
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/99th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
% Nominated  w.e.f. 26th April , 2002.