PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY SECOND REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Two Hundred Fifty-fifth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2015-16) of the Department of Space
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)
272
REPORT NO.

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY SECOND REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in
the Two Hundred Fifty-fifth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2015-16) of the Department of Space
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-12
5. M INUTES ............................................................................................................... 13-16

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September , 2015)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
9. Shri Bhupinder Singh
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakraborty
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar

(ii)
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
30. Shri Vikram Usendi
31. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Two Hundred Seventy-second Report on the Action Taken by the Department of
Space on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Fifty-fifth Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Department of Space, which was presented/laid in both the Houses
of Parliament on 5th May, 2015.
2. There were twenty one recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Fifty-fifth Report of the
Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the
Department on 29th September, 2015.
3. In the meeting held on 15th January, 2016, the Committee considered the draft Report and adopted
the same.
N
EW D ELHI; ASHWANI KUMAR
January 15, 2016 Chairman,
Pausha 25, 1937 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
GSLV : Geostationary Satellite Launch Vehicle
CUS : Cryogenic Upper Stage
MRC : Mixture Ratio Controller
CES : Crew Escape System
ECLSS : Environment Control and Life Support System
SPAC : Standing Project Appraisal Committee
IRNSS : Indian Regional Navigational Satellite System
NESAC : North Eastern Space Applications Centre
FLEWS : Flood Early Warning System
ASDMA : Assam State Disaster Management Authority
NRSC : National Remote Sensing Centre
(iv)

REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Space on the
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Fifty-fifth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2015-16) of the Department of Space, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament
on 5th May, 2015. There were twenty one recommendations in the Report of the Committee. Action
Taken Note on the recommendations of the Committee was received from the Ministry on 29th September,
2015. The Ministry has intimated that it has accepted all the recommendations of the Committee.
The Committee's recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the
action taken by the Department of Space are set out in the succeeding paragraphs:
FINANCIAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF DEPARTMENT:- AN ANALYSIS OF TREND OF UTILISATION
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the fact that despite the Department of Space being capable of
utilizing 100% of its allocated grants, it has had to face cuts in grants at the R.E. stage in the successive
financial years and the Committee feels that this would delay or disrupt some of  its programmes of
strategic importance to the country. The Committee believes that the Departments such as Space and
Atomic Energy cannot be burdened by resource crunch in the implementation of projects of strategic
importance. The Committee recommends accordingly and the priorities determined by the heads of these
Departments should be respected. (Para 4.2)
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. The views of the Committee will be communicated
to Ministry of Finance during Budget discussions.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of further developments in
this regard.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2015-16
Recommendation
The Committee feels that drastic reduction of Plan components of some of the major programmes
of the Department scheduled for 2015-16 ought not to have been made in view of the strategic
importance of these projects. In fact, there is a case for higher outlays for projects of national importance.
The Committee therefore, recommends that the budget allocation of the Department should be suitably
enhanced at the RE stage. (Para 5.1)

2
Action Taken by Government
The views of the Committee are noted. The Department will review its funding requirements at RE
stage and seek appropriate budget allocations at RE stage depending on programmatic requirements.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that adequate funds are made available to the
Department according to its requirements.
PHYSICAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT IN 2014-15
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the achievements of the Department in 2014-15. The Department had
successfully placed the spacecraft into the Martian orbit making India the first nation to do so in the
first attempt. The launch of GSLV Mk III experimental flight has demonstrated India's capability of
launching satellites of more than 2 ton capacity. The launch of GSLV D5 exhibits India's might in
developing indigenous cryogenic engine. The Committee hopes that with the launch of the fourth satellite
IRNSS-1D, an independent regional navigation system will be accomplished very soon. These major
achievements of the Department make India a world leader in space technology. (Para 6.2)
Action Taken by Government
The encouraging views of the Committee are noted. The Department will strive towards achieving
greater heights in Space technology in coming years.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes the Department continues to accomplish
achievements in space technology.
POLAR SATELLITE LAUNCH VEHICLES
Recommendation
The Committee expresses its concern over the trend of reduction of B.E. outlay at R.E. stage for
PSLV Projects. The Committee notes that some important launches of PSLV are scheduled during
2015-16 and hopes that PSLV project would not be allowed to be adversely affected this year due to
budgetary constraints. The Committee recommends that the Department of Space utilize the allocated
amount efficiently and in time to have minimal cuts at the R.E. stage to have smooth continuation of
PSLV launches. (Para 10.6)
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. Allocated amount for PSLV continuation programme
will be optimally utilised to ensure timely completion of PSLV launches planned in 2015-16.

3
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
GEOSTATIONARY SATELLITE LAUNCH VEHICLE (GSLV)
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that upgradation and enhancement of GSLV technology is extremely
important for advancement of launch vehicles. The Committee appreciates the launching of GSLV D5
and successful experimental flight of GSLV MK III which has demonstrated India's capability and
progressiveness in developing indigenous cryogenic engines. The Committee, however, feels that improving
the payload performance and advancement of GSLV is needed and recommends that the Department
should take necessary steps in this regard. The Committee also expects the successful launch of GSLV-
D6 in the third quarter of 2015 and the first and second developmental flights i.e. (GSLV MK III - D1)
and (GSLV MK III - D2) in the scheduled time frame of 2016-17 and 2017-18. (Para 11.6)
Action Taken by Government
GSLV-D6/GSAT-6 mission carrying GSA T-6 communication satellite on-board was successfully
launched on 28th August 2015. With this launch, the payload capability of GSLV launch vehicle with
indigenous cryogenic stage has been improved to 2117Kg from 1982Kg (payload mass in GSLV-D5
flight). This improvement was achieved by optimization of Cryogenic Upper Stage (CUS) dry mass,
operating of CUS cryogenic engine at higher mixture ratio, improvement of CUS engine efficiency and
optimization of mission strategies.
Further to the successful launch of GSLV experimental flight of GSLV Mk III during December
2014, two developmental flights viz. GSLV MK III-D1 and GSLV MK III-D2 are targeted during
December 2016 & December 2017 respectively. Towards launching of GSLV MK-III-D1 flight, stage
integration for Liquid (L110) stage has started & propellant casting for solid boosters for Solid (S-200)
stages are in progress. Ground testing of CE20 cryogenic engine has been successfully completed.
Vacuum ignition trials of cryogenic engine and ground testing of cryogenic stage along with engine are
the pending activities to be completed before first developmental flight.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee feels that since GSLV MK II is a very crucial launch vehicle with a capability to
put about 4 ton payload to geo-synchronous Transfer orbit, the Department must make all out efforts
to make it successful expeditiously and make full utilization of budgetary resources made available for
this project. Technical hurdles coming in the way must also be overcome so as to ensure that the project
is completed within the scheduled time frame as we are already way behind USA and China in this regard.
(Para 11.11)

4
Action Taken by Government
The GSLV Mk-III is a three stage vehicle with two solid motor strap-ons (S200), a liquid propellant
core stage (L110) and a cryogenic stage (C25). The solid motors and liquid propellant core stages have
been successfully flight tested in sub-orbital mission of GSLV MK-III (LVM3-X) mission during December
2014. This flight validated the operation of vehicle lower stages in the severe aerodynamic and aero-
thermal environments during atmospheric flight and the stage separation systems. Significant achievements
have been made in the development of CE20 cryogenic engine. Integrated Engine (E1) development tests
at sea level conditions successfully completed which validated the structural integrity of engine systems
and demonstrated the repeatability of engine. So far, two cold flow tests and 11 hot tests have been
carried out, which include flight duration hot test for 635Sec, hot test with Mixture Ratio Controller
(MRC) in closed loop and extended duration hot tests with MRC (Mixture Ratio Controller) in closed
loop for 800 Sec.
Development of cryogenic stage (C25) for GSLV MK-III is in advanced stage. Propellant tanks are
realised and engine & stage integration are in progress. The ground testing of C25 cryogenic stage is
expected to be completed during second quarter of 2016. Vacuum ignition trails of cryogenic engine and
ground testing of cryogenic stage along with engine are the pending activities to be completed before
the first developmental flight.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the programme will progress as per its
scheduled time-frame.
TRISONIC WIND TUNNEL PROJECT
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that the Trisonic Wind Tunnel Project is very important to meet the
test requirements for future launch vehicles as it will provide research facility for conducting research tests
for upgrading technology of satellite launch vehicles. However, the Committee as constrained to note that
the inability of the Department to obtain necessary approvals. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the approval of the project should be obtained at the earliest and the Department should ensure that all
necessary efforts are made and adequate funds provided to achieve the desired targets of the project
during 2015-16 and the project is not delayed any further. (Para 12.2)
Action Taken by Government
The project proposal for realisation of Trisonic Wind Tunnel facility has gone through rigorous
internal reviews to firm up the technical specifications of the facility. The project proposal for setting
up the facility is being revised for further processing. During 2015-16, all efforts will be made to obtain
the financial approval for the project.

5
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised about the development in the
matter at the time of examination of Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Department.
MANNED MISSION/HUMAN SPACE FLIGHT PROGRAMME
Recommendation
The Committee notes that most of the pre-project activities for development of critical technologies
had made significant progress in this critically important mission. However, some of the other critical
technologies like Crew Escape System (CES) and Environment Control and Life Support System (ECLSS)
are still being developed. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should develop
other technologies of the project in an expeditious and time bound manner. The Committee hopes that
the Department would make earnest efforts to optimally utilize the allocation made for the project during
2015-16. (Para 13.5)
Action Taken by Government
Developments of critical technologies for future Human Spaceflight programme such as environmental
and life support system, flight suit & crew escape systems are progressing well. Heat exchangers for
the Thermal & Humidity control system module of Environmental Control and Life Support System
(ECLSS) and five development models and two Engineering models of flight suit have been realised.
The simulation & test facilities like Environment Simulation Chamber (ESC) for the testing of
ECLSS modules & Flight suit systems and Human metabolic CO2 simulator have been realised.
Further development tasks such as Static testing of solid motors used in the Crew Escape System
(CES), Fabrication, testing & qualification of the sub systems for the Crew Module & Crew Escape
System, Fabrication of Service Module simulator & launch pedestal interfaces, Assembly & integration
followed by Launch Pad Abort Test to validate the Crew Escape System and realization, testing and
validation of ECLSS subsystems & improved version of Flight Suit are planned to be completed during
2016-17.
Comments
The Committee notes the progress made in development of manned mission/human space
flight programme and hopes that the Department would be able to complete the ongoing task
of testing and validation of ECLSS subsystems and improved version of flight Suit within its pre
determined schedule.
RADAR IMAGING SATELLITE - RISAT-1A
Recommendation
The Committee is aware that the original target for launch of RISAT-1A with indigenous PSLV
rocket was scheduled for 2017-18 which was later revised to 2019. However, the Committee notes with

6
concern that there has hardly been any progress in the development of RISAT-1A and the project report
is yet to be submitted for necessary approval. The Department of Space has stated that subsequent to
the project approval, it would take about 3 1/2 years to realize the spacecraft. As such, it is amply clear
that the project is way behind schedule. Given the fact that RISAT-1A is an important optical satellite,
relying on sunlight to illuminate the ground below, having many benefits in flood mapping, agriculture
and also glacial studies, the Committee recommends that the Department should make all out efforts for
the completion of the programme even before its scheduled target in 2019, if possible. (Para 15.4)
Action Taken by Government
A project proposal for building and launching RISAT-1A satellite, to ensure data continuity of
C-Band Microwave data of RISAT-1 satellite has been reviewed by Standing Project Appraisal Committee
(SPAC). Based on the recommendations of the committee, the project proposal has been revised and
being processed further for obtaining necessary approvals. The spacecraft is targeted to be launched
during 2018. RISAT-1A is an active microwave remote sensing satellite and does not rely on sunlight to
illuminate the ground below.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee also observes that an amount of 
` 2.00 crores has been allocated to the Mission
this year and the Department had stated that the amount shall be suitably augmented at R.E. stage once
the project is approved. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to ensure its early
approval so as to be able to get adequate funds at R.E. stage. (Para 15.5)
Action Taken by Government
The views of the committee are Noted. The amount of ` 2.00 Crores allocated in BE 2015-16 will
be suitably augmented at RE 2015-16 based on the activities planned during the current financial year.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
INDIAN REGIONAL NA VIGATIONAL SATELLITE SYSTEM (IRNSS)
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that the launching of the remaining satellites of IRNSS will be a great
achievement of Indian Space Programme in accomplishing an independent robust navigation system and
the Committee hopes that the Department will successfully launch the satellites in the scheduled time
frame. The Committee, therefore, recommends that construction of Satellite Control Centre at Hassan,
backup IRNSS Navigation Centre at Lucknow and the backup Satellite Control facility at Bhopal should
be completed at the earliest so that their services are available to the nation without delay .
(Para 17.6)

7
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. As on date, Four navigation satellites viz.
IRNSS-1A, IRNSS-1B, IRNSS-1C & IRNSS-1D have already been launched and the remaining three
satellite viz. IRNSS-1E, IRNSS-1F and IRNSS-1G are scheduled for launch before the first quarter of
2016 so that the constellation of Seven satellites is completed. All existing IRNSS satellites are controlled
from Hassan and Bhopal. The primary and backup control functions are already catered to. With regard
to establishing total ground system for controlling all seven satellites with backup ground control centers,
the primary control station at MCF and backup control centre at Bhopal, the work is in progress and
will be completed by first quarter of 2016.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the work completed by the
Department with regard to the ground control centers.
ASTROSAT MISSION
Recommendation
The Committee is constrained to note that ASTROSAT satellite, which was originally scheduled to
be launched in 2009-10, has not been launched so far. Further, the Department has been reiterating
almost the same reasons for the postponement of the project. The Committee recommends that the
Department should ensure that mission is accomplished in the revised time frame set by the Department.
It is unacceptable that such projects are being repeatedly delayed on account of stated challenges and
reasons that can early be addressed. (Para 19.7)
Action Taken by Government
The ASTROSAT Spacecraft has been successfully launched on-board PSLV-C30 on September 28,
2015. The Department thanks the committee for their valued opinion, and will include development times
and challenges into the schedules for future complex satellites.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
INDIAN LUNAR MISSION - CHANDRAYAAN-2
Recommendation
The Committee is concerned about the reduction in the budgetary allocation for the mission at the
R.E. stage in 2014-15 and also the reduction in allocation to the tune of 
` 20.00 crores in B.E. 2015-
16 as compared to B.E. 2014-15. The Committee recommends that shortage of funds may not be allowed
to adversely affect the completion of the project. (Para 20.5)
Action Taken by Government
Chandrayaan-2 is now reconfigured as a fully indigenous mission with an Orbiter, Lander and Rover
modules. The approval for Revised Cost Estimates of Chandrayaan-2 mission has also been obtained.

8
Payloads for Orbiter, Lander and Rover have been selected and are at various stages of development.
The funding requirements for the mission will be reviewed at RE stage and will be suitably augmented
as per programmatic requirements in order to complete the mission on schedule.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Department will take all necessary
measures to complete the mission on schedule.
NASA ISRO SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR MISSION (NISAR)
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that keeping in view the importance of the NISAR Mission, the possibility
of preponing its launch before its schedule in 2021 should be explored particularly when components of
the hardware satellite building as well as launch vehicle are likely to be ready before 2019. The
Department should also pursue JPL NASA to accordingly get ready before 2019. (Para 22.3)
Action Taken by Government
ISRO has completed the Baseline Design Reviews (BDR) of Spacecraft and S-band SAR payload
(being developed by ISRO) successfully. ISRO is working on its Spacecraft & S-band SAR realization
schedules to match with L-band SAR payload schedule of JPL, while hoping to work for an earlier
launch (than 2021). This point was discussed during the NISAR Joint Steering Group Meeting held on
July 21, 2015 and will be further pursued with NASA/JPL.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be further apprised of the developments
in the matter.
Recommendation
The Committee notes that an amount of 
` 50.00 crores has been allocated for the NISAR Mission
this year and the Department had hopes that the amount shall be suitably augmented at R.E. stage once
the project is approved. The Committee recommends that adequate funds be provided for expeditious
completion of the Mission. (Para 22.5)
Action Taken by Government
The views of the committee are noted. An amount of ` 50.00 crores has been allocated in BE
2015-16 based on the project milestones envisaged during the current financial year. However, the
Department will review the progress and augment the budget provisions at RE Stage, if necessary.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

9
SATELLITE FOR SAARC COUNTRIES
Recommendation
The Committee notes the benefits that the satellite for SAARC countries would bring about in
matters related to education, tele medicine, disaster response, resource management, weather forecasting
and communication sectors. The Committee feels it will also help foster good relations of India with
SAARC countries. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the approval for realization of this project
may be given at the earliest. (Para 23.4)
Action Taken by Government
DOS/ISRO is making all efforts to realize the satellite for SAARC countries on schedule. Towards
building the satellite, in liaison with Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), a meeting of all SAARC member
nations was convened and the details of the satellite were provided to all member countries. Follow-up
activities in securing concurrence from all members for finalizing the orbital slot and frequency bands
are under progress. After obtaining the concurrence, final approval from the government will be obtained.
Comments
The Committee notes the progress made in the matter and recommends that the Department
should make all out efforts to realize the satellite for SAARC countries on schedule and obtain
the necessary approval from the Government at the earliest.
CONTRIBUTION TO THE SOCIETY
Recommendation
The Committee is disappointed to note that a programme like Educational Communication Unit is
facing cuts in the budget which severely hampers the goal of taking education to the people. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that allocations made for societal programmes should not be reduced
so that the society at large is able to benefit by making full use of the applications of space technologies.
The Committee also takes note of the use of the spin off technologies for socially useful purposes by
the Department. However, the Committee feels that much more needs to be done in view of newer
challenges coming up before the society and the people. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department should review their priorities in this sector to come up to the expectations of the people and
provide them with greater facilities and benefits. (Para 25.4)
Action Taken by Government
The observations of the Committee are noted. All efforts will be made by DOS/ISRO to improve
the reach of space based solutions to the common man through societal programmes. DOS/ISRO had
actively coordinated with 60 Central Ministries/Departments in order to find suitable space based solutions
to the problems. About 170 projects across various Ministries/Departments have emerged in the areas
of Natural Resources Management, Energy & Infrastructure, Disaster & Early Warning, Communication
& Navigation, e-Governance & Geo-spatial Governance, Societal Services, and Support to Flagship

10
programmes. One day National Meet on promotion of Space Technology was organised on September
07, 2015 at Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi to deliberate on the action plans of various Ministries/Departments.
National Meet has received an overwhelming response with participation of more than 1200 delegates
across 60 Central Ministries/Departments, 28 States and 5 Union Territories. DOS/ISRO will further
pursue the outcomes of the meet.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
DISASTER MANAGEMENT SUPPORT
Recommendation
The Committee feels that unseasonal rains and floods pose great danger to the lives of the people
and cause severe loss of property and damages to crops. As such, there is an urgent need to improve our
Flood Early Warning System. The Committee, therefore, recommends that with the improved observation
capability of our satellites, the capability of the Flood Early warning system should also be improved
at the earliest for securing the lives and property of the people from such unseasonal climatic disasters.
(Para 26.4)
Action Taken by Government
Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) / Department of Space (DOS) has developed methodology
for forecasting flood events using aero-space based inputs and conducted pilot projects in Assam and
Andhra Pradesh. The North Eastern Space Applications Centre (NESAC) is carrying out the Flood Early
Warning System (FLEWS) as an R&D project in Assam State in association with Assam State Disaster
Management Authority (ASDMA). The flood forecasting methodology developed for Godavari basin in
Andhra Pradesh by National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC) is transferred to Central Water Commission
(CWC), Hyderabad. Models developed under both of these projects are terrain specific and in addition
to satellite based inputs, in-situ data on rainfall and river discharge at critical points is also required. The
FLEWS model developed for Assam uses meteorological parameters from Indian weather monitoring
satellites for rainfall prediction. The Central Water Commission (CWC), Ministry of Water Resources is
mandated for flood forecasts in India and ISRO is closely working with CWC to increase the lead time
of Early Warning and in extending the models to other flood prone river basins.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply
SPACE PROGRAMME AND INDUSTRY PARTICIPATION
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that participation of industry in the Indian Space Programme is of
utmost importance for various reasons, particularly taking note of the fact that the Department till now

11
has not set up the National Committee which will enhance participation of Industry, the Committee
recommends that the proposed National Committee should be set up without further delay.
(Para 27.3)
Action Taken by Government
In order to evolve a comprehensive strategy to step-up production capacity with industry partnership,
the Department has formed two high-power steering Committees in the areas of Launch Vehicle and
Satellite production.
Among other things, the Committees shall (i) consolidate the requirements for on-going and future
missions and also based on emerging opportunities for space markets, (ii) establish the production profile
for Satellites and Launch vehicles, (iii) assess gap areas in meeting production needs and to work out
broad plans to realize their critical inputs, (iv) create a "Strategy Map" for production, with criteria for
selection of Prime contractors, industry linkages, technology sharing methods, IPR issues, joint ventures,
infrastructure build-up, investment plan, quality assurance support, cost effectiveness, risk mitigation and
other related issues, (v) recommend appropriate structural changes, policy guidelines, procedures, skill
set needs, HR plans etc., (vi) identify critical technologies and collaborations towards selective "self-
reliance" and (vii) recommend an "implementation plan" for ensuring the fulfillment of the objectives
defined with effective review mechanism.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the said Committees would effectively work
towards achieving the mandates assigned to them.
Recommendation
It has been reported that China is exploring the potentiality of solar power at the altitude of 36000
kms. The Committee feels that the Department of Space should also look into such path breaking
initiatives to be a world leader in the field of space. (Para 27.4)
Action Taken by Government
Several space faring nations of the world are reported to be exploring the ways of solar power from
space for past many years. While many studies and experiments have been conducted, as on date such
efforts are not finding any viable solutions. ISRO had done preliminarily studies in this area and is
continuously observing the world scenario. Based on the technological advancement in this area in
understanding the feasibility of generating solar power from space for use on earth will further be
explored.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be updated regarding the efforts of the
Department in exploring ways of generating solar power from space and studies being made in
this regard.

12
Recommendation
The Committee was informed that the Department has the manpower capacity of about 18000 and
around 150-200 are retiring every year. It was also informed that during the last 15 years, manpower
has been increased only once. The last was 5 years back. The Committee feels that in view of the big
strides made and also proposed to be made in various sectors in the area of space, the availability of
adequate, well trained and well equipped manpower is vital. The Committee recommends that while the
Department present its requirement for adequate manpower with cogent reasons keeping the needs of its
future programme and projects, Ministry of Finance must consider the same positively considering the
strategic importance of these projects. The Committee feels that the aim of the Department of Space
should be to establish the position of India as a global leader in its area of operations. The approach
of the government should accordingly be to encourage and facilitate in all manner possible the realization
of this aspirational goal in and of national development and security. (Para 27.5)
Action Taken by Government
Department of Space has drawn up challenging programme during the 12th five year plan, wherein
nearly 58 missions will have to be achieved. While finalising the plan profile, the Department had
estimated an augmentation of 1000 scientific and technical manpower and 100 administrative manpower
to support the increased workload. The Department also constituted two high power committees, with
various domain experts as its members, to take up a detailed work study to assess the optimum level
of manpower augmentation required to support the increased workload of 12th five year plan and
beyond. The recommendations of the work study group for assessing the scientific and technical
manpower has been received and the recommendations of the work study group of administrative
manpower are under finalisation. In addition, the Department also proposed a meagre augmentation of
18 administrative posts to support the project specific requirement of Semi-cryogenic Engine Development
project. Following are the actions completed on the subject:
1. The Department has already submitted a proposal for creation of 18 additional posts to support
the Semi-cryogenic Engine Development project to Ministry of Finance. Ministry of Finance
(MoF) has sought some clarifications, which are being addressed in the Department.
2. The Department is in the process of submitting a proposal for creation of 1000 scientific and
technical manpower to MoF, to support the increased workload arising due to enhanced
activities during 12th five year plan and beyond.
3. The recommendations of the Work Study Group for creation of 100 additional administrative
manpower is underway and a proposal for the same will be submitted to MoF shortly.
Comments
The Committee recommends that to encourage and facilitate the aim of the Department of
Space to establish India as a global leader in space programmes and technology, the Ministry of
Finance should positively consider all the genuine demands of Department of Space for augmenting
its scientific, technical and administrative manpower.

13
MINUTES

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Friday, the 15th January, 2016 in Committee Room 'A', Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Shri Bhupinder Singh
5. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
6. Kum. Sushmita Dev
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Shri Laxman Giluwa
9. Dr. K. Gopal
10. Shri Daddan Mishra
11. Shri Nagendra Singh
12. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
** *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
15
***Relate to other matters.

16
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. The Committee then considered the draft 271st to 276th Reports of the Committee on Action Taken
by the Government on recommendations/observations contained in reports of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (2015-16) pertaining to Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy, Science &
Technology, Space, Earth Sciences, Scientific and Industrial Research and Biotechnology and adopted the
same.
14. * * *
15. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5.29 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.