 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
352 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY SECOND REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations 
Contained in the Three Hundred Forty Second Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants  
(2021-22) of The Department of Biotechnology 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
 CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY SECOND REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations 
Contained in the Three Hundred Forty Second Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants (2021-
22) of the Department of Biotechnology 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
 

C O N T E N T S 
 
   
  PAGES 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………… (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………… (ii) 
  3. ACRONYMS ……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
4. REPORT …………………………………………………………………... 1-10 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been  
                       accepted by the Government………………………………... 
 
2-7 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee     
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
replies……………………………………………………….. 
 
8 
 Chapter III.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted  by the     
Committee…………………………………………………… 
 
9 
 Chapter IV.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
                      Replies of the Government are still awaited………………… 
 
10 
5. MINUTES …………………………………………………………………. 11-12 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2021)  
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh – Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2.    Shri Anil Baluni 
3.    Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
4.    Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5.    Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
6.    Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
7.    Shri Parimal Nathwani 
8.    Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
9.    Shri Nabam Rebia   
10. # Vacant 
 
   LOK SABHA 
 
11.    Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
12.    Shri Pradan Baruah 
13.    Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
14.    Shri Jashvantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
15.    Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16.    Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
17.    Shri S. Jagathrakshakan 
18.    Shri Mohammed Azam Khan 
19.    Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
20.    Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
21.    Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
22.    Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
23. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
24. Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
25. Shri Francisco Sardinha  
26. Shri Anurag Sharma 
27. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
28. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
29. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
30. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
31. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
 
         SECRETARIAT 
 
         Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
         Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
         Shri Rakesh Anand, Additional Director 
         Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director 
         Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
         Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
         Shri Ankit Chansoria, Assistant Committee Officer 
    _________________________________________________________________________                      
#Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha ceased to be the member of the Com mittee consequent upon his resignation 
from the Committee w.e.f. 11th October, 2021    
(i) 

 
             INTRODUCTION  
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climat e Change, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Three 
Hundred Fifty Second  Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  
recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Forty Second Report  of 
the Committee on  Demands for Grants (2021-2022) of the Department of Biotechnology, 
which was presented/laid in both the Houses of Parliament on 8th  March, 2020.  
2.   There were 1 5 recommendations/observations in the Three Hundred Twenty 
Seventh Rep ort of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee were received from the Department on 
29th June, 2021.   
3.   In the meeting held on 30 th November, 2021, the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 (JAIRAM RAMESH) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
30th November, 2021   Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Agrahayana 09,1943 (Saka)                                   Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
ACRONYMS 
     
ABLE Association of Biotechnology Led Enterprises 
ATR Action Taken Report 
ATGC Accelerated Translational Grant for Commercialization 
ATN Action Taken Note 
BE Budget Estimates 
BIRAC Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council 
BSL3 Biosafety Level-3 
CII Confederation of Indian Industry 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
DBT Department of Biotechnology 
DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid 
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee 
FC Financial Year  
ICGEB International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology 
IED Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development 
ILS Institute of Life Sciences 
NII National Institute of Immunology  
PMO Prime Minister’s Office 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking  
RE Revised Estimate 
RCB Regional Centre for Biotechnology  
SBE Statement of Budget Estimates 
SFC Standing Finance Committee 
SMEs Small and Medium Enterprises 
THSTI Translational Health Science and Technology Institute 
TRL Technology Readiness Level 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Forty Second 
Report of the Committee on „Demands for Grants (202 1-22) of the „Department of Biotechnology‟. 
The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 8th March, 2021.  
2. Action Taken Notes (ATN) have been received from the Department of Biotechnology‟ (DBT) 
in respect of the recommendations/observation s contained in the Three Hundred Forty Second Report. 
This has been categorized as follows:-  
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos.:- 2.3, 2.3, 3.5, 3.7, 3.9, 3.10, 5.3, 6.2, 7.5, 8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 8.7, 8.9, and 8.10 
(of the Three Hundred Forty Second Report) 
  Total recommendations – 15 accepted. 
  The Committee is pleased to note that the Department has accepted its 
recommendations/observations as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report. 
Chapter II:    Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: Nil 
Chapter III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: Nil 
Chapter IV:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government 
are still awaited:- Nil 
3. The details of the ATR have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters.  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020 -21 AND ALLOCATION FOR 
2021-22 
Recommendation/observation 
1.1  The Committee recognises that the Department has been able to utilise over 75 percent of the 
funds allotted during R.E. 2020 -21 upto 31.01 .2021. The Committee appreciates the overall fund 
utilsation by the Department in the recent past and urges the Department to fully utilise the funds by 
the end of the financial year.                                                                       (Para 2.3 of the 342nd Report)                                                                                                                             
Action Taken 
1.2 The Department of Biotechnology (DBT)  gratefully acknowledges the appreciation of the 
Committee.  It is submitted that out of the total allocation of Rs.2300 crore in RE 2020 -21, the total 
utilisation of funds by the end of the financial year was Rs.2266.45 crore which is 98.54% of the total 
RE allocations. 
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES OF THE DEPARTMENT 
Recommendation/observation 
1.3 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the allocation wa s increased at the R.E. 2020 -21 
stage under the Central Sector Scheme –‘Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development’ under which 
the Department is implementi ng the crucial programs related to mitigation of COVID -19 pandemic. 
The Committee wishes that the Department will continue and further strengthen the initiatives taken by 
it under these schemes.                                                                                                         (Para 3.3ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.4 The observation of the Committee is noted. It is submitted that  besides the initiatives already 
under implementation, under the Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development (IED) sc heme, the 
Department of Biotechnology has launched „Mission COVID Suraksha -The Indian COVID -19 
Vaccine Development Mission‟, following due approval of the Expenditure Finance Committee and 
the Ministry of Finance, Government of India.  
1.5 The Mission was launched as part of the third stimulus package, Atmanirbhar Bharat 3.0, for 
promoting research and development of Indian COVID -19 vaccines. Mission COVID Suraksha is 
being implemented by Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC), a Public Sector 
Undertaking (PSU) of DBT, at a total cost of Rs. 900 Cr. for 12 months. The goal of the Mission is to 
accelerate the development of at least 5-6 COVID-19 vaccine candidates and ensure that some of these 
are brought closer to licensure and introducti on in public health systems. Support is being provided 
under the Mission for candidate vaccines in clinical development, as well as, for strengthening the 
vaccine development ecosystem. As observed by the Committee, focused efforts will be made to 
further strengthen the initiative and contribute to the mitigation of the pandemic. 
Recommendation/observation 
1.6 The Committee hopes that with the increased allocation of Rs. 3502.37 crore in B.E. 2021 -22, 
the Department will be able to regain the momentum lost due to COVID -19 pandemic in the 
implementation of some of its schemes and new initiatives, and shall utilise its resources judiciously to 

3 
 
augment research and development, human resource capacity building, identify and support the start -
up ecosystem and strengthening initiatives for fighting COVID-19.                                   (Para 3.5ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.7 With the budget allocated for FY 2021 -22, the Department would be able to implement all 
major ongoing activities and would also augment the act ivities in the areas of research and 
development, Human Resource Development and translation research & entrepreneurship. The 
Department will continue to support the ecosystem for S&T solutions to fight COVID-19.   
Recommendation/observation 
1.8  The Commi ttee notes and appreciates the initiative of the Department towards ensuring the 
timely development of COVID-19 Vaccine for the nation.                                                  (Para 3.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.9 The Department acknowledges the apprec iation of the Committee. Development of COVID -19 
Vaccines is a priority area for the Department of Biotechnology, whereby, the Department has been 
identified as the Central co -ordinating agency for the PMO constituted Task force on Vaccines. Both 
national efforts and international partnerships are being leveraged for vaccine development and 
manufacturing. Several projects of industry and academia for development of vaccines candidates for 
COVID-19 and associated resources are being supported by DBT under th e DBT-BIRAC COVID-19 
Research Consortium. To strengthen and accelerate these efforts further, the Department has launched 
“Mission COVID Suraksha –The Indian COVID -19 Vaccine Development Mission” for ensuring that 
at least few of these vaccine candidates ar e brought closer to licensure and introduction in the market 
for consideration of regulatory authorities and for introduction in public health systems.  Five vaccine 
candidates in clinical development stage are being supported under the Mission.  Further, as part of the 
efforts to strengthen the vaccine development ecosystem , support is being provided for03 
immunogenicity assay laboratories and 03 animal challenge facilities. Also, 19 clinical trial sites across 
the nation are being supported to facilitate quick initiation of clinical trials for vaccine candidates. 
Recommendation/observation 
1.10   The Committee notes with utmost concern that details of the activities planned to be undertaken 
by the Department with the increased allocation for creation of Cap ital assets are not available in the 
documents furnished by the Department and break -up of budgetary allocations for Revenue and 
Capital Expenditure as well as funds allotted for Establishment Expenditure under various Budgetary 
Heads.  Without the above i nformation, the Committee is constrained in analysing the spend on new 
infrastructure and research. The Committee recommends that the Department should invariably 
furnish the above information to the Committee to facilitate analysis of Demands for Grants, and 
recalibrate the outcomes and outputs based on the complete Departmental funding.        (Para 3.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.11 A copy of the Statement of Budget Estimates (SBE) is annexed at Annexure -I. The 
recommendations made by the Committee have been noted for compliance. 
Recommendation/observation  
1.12 The Committee further recommends that the Department should immediately take up the matter 
with the concerned authorities and explore the possibility of bringing the necessary changes in the 
classification of allocation of funds under revenue and capital expenditure.                   (Para 3.10 ibid)                                                                                              
Action Taken 
1.13 The recommendations made by the Committee has been noted for compliance. 

4 
 
MAJOR INITIATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT FOR FY 2021-22 
Mission COVID Suraksha 
Recommendation/observation 
1.14 The Committee notes the response of the Department and recommends the Department to 
strengthen on its part, the efforts f or ramping up the production capacity of the two approved vaccines 
as well as provide all research, laboratory infrastructure and capacity building support to the other 
vaccine candidates in the pipeline, in order to ensure the availability of a safe, affo rdable, and 
efficacious vaccine to the wider population as soon as possible.                                        (Para 5.3 ibid) 
 Action Taken 
1.15 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.  Under Mission COVID Suraksha, the 
Department of Biot echnology is providing financial support to augment the vaccine production 
capacities. Accordingly, support for one private industry and three public sector manufacturing 
facilities, viz., Bharat Biotech, Hyderabad; Indian Immunologicals, Hyderabad; Haffki ne 
Biopharmaceuticals, M umbai and  Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals, Bulandshar; is being 
provided to make them ready for enhanced capacities to support augmented vaccine production over 
the next 6 -8 months. It is expected that the current manufacturin g of Covaxin of 10 million doses/ 
month will be enhanced to nearly 100 million doses/ month in the next 8 -10 months. An amount of ~ 
Rs. 200 Cr. has been allocated for supporting augmentation of capacities for manufacturing. 
BIOTECH URJIT CLUSTER 
Recommendation/observation 
1.16 The Committee impresses upon the Department the need to have orientation, clear focus and 
seamless framework for translation of research outcomes into technologies, products and services that 
may be used by the Industries, SMEs, Entre preneurs and citizens at large. The Committee appreciates 
the initiative taken by the Department and extends its full support to this endeavour of the Department.       
                                                                                                                                             (Para 6.2 ibid)                                                                                  
Action Taken 
1.17 The Department gratefully acknowledges appreciation from the Committee. The Department 
has been implementing a program on “Accelerated Translational Grant for Commercialization 
(ATGC)” to promote the translation research and industry -academia partnership in biotechnology. 
Biotechnology Industry Research Assitance Council (BIRAC), a Public Se ctor Undertaking of the 
Department, over the past 9 years of its existence, has been able to support product and technology 
development from academia, start -ups and industries which has led to market launch of nearly 200+ 
products/technologies. The funding  schemes and programs have been designed to have focus on 
supporting transition of    Products & Technologies from ideation stage (Technology Readiness 
Level-1 i.e. TRL -1) to Proof of Concept (TRL -3) to Extensive Validation/Trials  (TRL -7), finally 
leading to market launch & commercialization (TRL -8&9). BIRAC has been providing mentorship 
with the help of domain experts at every stage of the project. By facilitating connection with right 
partners, providing regulatory guidance and follow -on funding for succ essful projects working on 
potential technologies/products, BIRAC has been able to support translation of ideas & prototypes 
into validated market-ready products.  
 
 
 

5 
 
TECHNOLOGY CLUSTER 
Recommendation/observation 
1.18 The Committee recognises the need for extending all possible support in terms of resources, 
technology, infrastructure and creating opportunities for growth for budding start -ups and 
entrepreneurs as well as for SMEs. The Committee appreciates the initiative of the Department and 
recommends th e Department should accelerate the process of identification of priority sectors and 
selection of location for setting up T -Clusters. The Committee also recommends that the Department 
should ensure equitable geographical distribution of these Technology Cl usters, so that the benefits of 
this initiative can reach the underserved regions of the country as well.                           (Para 7.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.19 The Committee‟s support for this initiative is greatly appreciated. Technology Clusters ar e 
expected to cater to the following sectors based on the experts and stakeholders feedback. Among this 
list, top 3 sectors shall be taken up on priority: 
o Medtech Devices and Diagnostics 
o Biopharma  
o Agritech & allied areas  
o Industrial Biotech 
o Clean Energy 
1.20 The department has undertaken a landscaping activity of Indian States to study biotech cluster 
potential. A formal report entitled “Realising Investment Potential for Indian State -Specific Biotech 
Industries” has been recently released. These inputs ar e important to gauge local potential, national 
priorities together with policy and incentives level support at State level to promote biotech ecosystem 
and shall assist in identif ication and prioritization of Technology Clusters seeding across the country.  
Subject to resource allocation, the activity will be expedited for implementation. 
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT 
Recommendation/observation 
1.21   The Committee recommends that the Department make judicious use of the revised allocations 
for 2 020-21 by prioritising the available resources and ensuring full utilisation of funds. The 
Committee also recommends the Department to make efforts to generate internal budgetary resources 
and try to offset the reduction in budgetary allocation.                                                      (Para 8.2 ibid)                                                                                                
Action Taken 
1.22 The Department utilized the revised allocation for FY 2020 -21 judiciously and utilized 98.54% 
of the revised allocation. The DBT Autonomous Institutions have been making efforts to generate 
internal budgetary resources.   
Recommendation/observation 
1.23 The Committee notes the contribution of the Autonomous Institutions under the Department and 
extends its heartfelt appreciation to the scientists, researchers, etc. working in the Department of 
Biotechnology and its affiliated institutions for their invaluable efforts/contribution towards 
strengthening the nation’s fight against COVID -19 pa ndemic.  The Committee further recommends 
upgrading infrastructure to address the gaps in BSL3/4 capabilities to further improve both 
diagnostics and research on new pathogens.                                                                      (Para 8.4 ibid) 
             
                                                                                       

6 
 
Action Taken 
1.24 The Department , along with its Autonomous Institutions , acknowledges gratefully the 
observations of the Committee. The Autonomous Ins titutions i.e. NII, ICGEB, In  Stem, ILS, RCB, 
THSTI of the Department have BSL 3 laboratories. Further, the Department is working on upgrading 
these facilities and also creating new facilities – BSL4/BSL-3.  
Recommendation/observation 
1.25 The Committee also recommends that the Department should impress upon all the Autonomous 
Institutions to enlist 10 goals/objectives that each of these laboratories propose to pursue in the 
medium to long term plan. The Autonomous Institutions should further indicate the g oals/objectives 
that will be pursued during the year 2021 -22 along with the steps that the Department plans to 
undertake to achieve these goals during the year.   On its part, the Department of Biotechnology 
should also develop a mechanism to periodically monitor the progress of the goals/objectives of each 
of these Autonomous Institutions.                                                                                        (Para 8.5 ibid) 
Action taken 
1.26 The recommendations of the Committee have been n oted for compliance. The goals/objectives 
of DBT Autonomous Institutions are annexed at Annexure - II.  
Recommendation/observation 
1.27 The Committee notes the efforts made by the Department for revenue generation and 
recommends that the Department should explore further avenues to augment revenue generation 
through technology transfer, consultancy services, patents, etc. The Committee recommends that the 
Department should actively reach out to the private sector and disseminate information about the 
technologies/products/services developed by the Department. On its part , the Department should also 
set targets for the same and actively monitor the progress.                                                (Para 8.7 ibid)                                                                       
Action Taken 
1.28 The Department has noted the recommendations of Committee. Actions   have been taken to 
augment revenue generation through technology transfer, consultancy services, Patents, etc. by the 
Autonomous Instituti ons of the Department.   BIRAC has launched the Biotech e -portal 
http://www.biotech-solutions.com showcases commercialized 150+ technologies, products from 
Startups to create awareness and attract stakeholders to support startups in the growth and scale up.  For 
COVID-19 related solutions, BIRAC has periodically taken out compendium to showcase Startup 
solutions that has led to their recognition and growth.    International mega events like Global Bio -India 
organized by DBT/BIRAC along with industry bodies CII , Invest India, ABLE provide exposure and 
opportunities like New Product Launch by Startups at international platform; Social media 
communications on Twitter, success story features on „ Vigyan se Vikas ‟  which shall be augmented 
further to monitor the outcome.  The Autonomous Institutions of the Department are being promoted to 
create industrial collaborations and also to offer consultancy services. Further, policy for user charges 
for high end equipment and for services to stakeholder, technology transfer are also framed by the 
Autonomous Institutions.    
Recommendation/observation 
1.29 The Committee recommends that the Department should resolve all the administrative issues 
which have held up the release of the second instalment of the Grant and release th e funds allocated 
for the Pune Biocluster, at the earliest.                                                                               (Para 8.9 ibid) 
 
            

7 
 
Action Taken 
1.30 As per the direction of Hon‟ble Minister of Science & Technology, the SFC note on 
Establishment of a Pune Biotech Cluster “Model Organisms to Human Disease” is being processed for 
the approval of the Competent Authority. 
Recommendation/observation 
1.31 The Committee strongly urges the Department to explore deeper into developi ng cure for 
certain rare diseases, for which the country is, by and large, dependent on imports and the patients 
have to shell out exorbitant amount of money for the cost and a sizeable amount on their excise/import 
duty.                                                                                                                                    (Para 8.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.32 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. The Department has been supporting 
the several research proposals on development of bio-better therapeutics for rare and genetic disorders. 
The Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, an autonomous institution of the Department has 
been at the forefront of genetic diagnostics and research in rare diseases for the past 25 years.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

8 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

9 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

10 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
  

11 
 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________________________ 

12 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 30 th November, 2021 in Room No. 63, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
              MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.   Shri Jairam Ramesh -- Chairman 
              RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3.  Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
4.  Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
5.  Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
6.  Shri Nabam Rebia 
             LOK SABHA 
7.  Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
8.  Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
9.  Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
10.  Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
11.  Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
12.  Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
13. Shri Anurag Sharma 
14.  Shri Ram Shiromani 
             SECRETARIAT 
             Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
             Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
             Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
             Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
             Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee.  The 
Committee decided to take up the consideration  and adoption of the draft 348 th, 349th, 350th, 351st, 
352nd, 353 rd, 354 th, 355 th, 356 th and 357 th  reports of the Committee on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 316 th Report on 'Air Pollution 
in Delhi and National Capital Region'; the 324 th  Report on „Status of Forests in India; the 325 th  
Report on „An Expanded Role for the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) in Cancer Treatment 
in India through An Enlarged Network of the Tata Memorial Centre (TMC)‟; an d 351 st to 357 th 
Reports on the Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; 
Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial Research; Science & Technology; Space; Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, respectively. The Committee, then, considered the 
draft 348th to 357th reports and adopted the same. 
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 1 st December, 2021.  The Committee also authorised the  Chairman to decide the 
names of the Members for presentation/laying of the reports in both the Houses of Parliament.  
4. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10.25 a.m. 