 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2023/ Magha, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
(DEMAND NO. 89) 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
       Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Sixty Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, 
Forests and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants (2022-23) of the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2023) 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
368 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
 
 
 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE  
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED SIXTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observation 
contained in the Three Hundred Sixty Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, 
Forests and Climate Change on the Demands For Grants (2022-23) of the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
 
((Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th February, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th February, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2023/ Magha, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
  PAGES 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………… (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………… (ii) 
  3. ACRONYMS ……………………………………………………………… (iii) 
4. REPORT …………………………………………………………………... 1-14 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been  
                       accepted by the Government………………………………... 
 
2-6 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee     
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
replies……………………………………………………….. 
 
7-12 
 Chapter III.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted  by the     
Committee…………………………………………………… 
 
13 
 Chapter IV.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
                      Replies of the Government are still awaited………………… 
 
14 
5. MINUTES …………………………………………………………………. 15-16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
                             
 _____  

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2022-23) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh -    Chairman 
 
         RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi  
4. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
6. Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
7. Shri Jose K. Mani 
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
9. Shri Nabam Rebia   
10. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  
         LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
13. Shri Jashwantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
14. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
15. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16. Shri Sunny Deol 
17. Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
18. Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
19. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
20. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
21. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
22. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
23. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
24. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
25. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha  
26. Shri Anurag Sharma 
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
28. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
29. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava  
30. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
31. *Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
      Dr. Vandana Kumar, Additional Secretary 
      Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
      Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
       Shri Thangzasiam Paite, Committee Officer 
      Shri Rama Nand, Committee Officer 
      Shri Ankit Chansoria, Assistant Committee Officer 
  _______________________________________________________________ 
   * Shri S. Jagathrakshakan ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 8th December, 2022 
 
(i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been authorised 
by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Three Hundred Sixty 
Eighth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  recommendations/observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Sixty Report  of the Committee  on  Demands for Grants 
(2022-2023) of the Department of  Scientific and Industrial Research , which was 
presented/laid in both the Houses of Parliament on 15th March, 2022.  
 
2.   There were 21 recommendations/observations in the Three Hundred Sixty Report of 
the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of the Committee 
were received from the Department on 12th July, 2022.   
3.   In the meeting held on 13th January, 202 3, the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 (JAIRAM RAMESH) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
13th January, 2023    Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
Pausha 23, 1944 (Saka)                                   and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change,  
Rajya Sabha 
 . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
 
A2K+ Access to Knowledge  
BE Budget Estimate 
CEL Central Electronics Limited 
COVID Corona Virus Disease 
CRTDH Common Research and Technology Development Hubs  
CSIR - HRDG Council of Scientific and Industrial Research  Human 
Research Development Centre 
CSIR- NCL Council of Scientific and Indust rial Research National 
Chemical Laboratory  
CSIR-NAL Council of Scientific and Industrial Research – National 
Aerospace Laboratories 
DRDO-DMRL Defence Research and Development Organisation  
Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory  
DSIR Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
FY Financial Year 
ICAR Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
IRD Industrial Research and Development  
IRD Innovation Research and Development 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MSME Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
NRDC National Research and Development Corporation  
PACE Patent acquisition and Collaborative   
PPE Personal Protective Equipment 
PRISM Promoting Innovations in Individuals  
PSE Public Sector Enterprises 
R&D Research and Development 
RE Revised Estimates 
SFC   Standing Finance Committee  
SME Small and Medium Enterprises 
UDAN Ude Desh ka Aam Naagrik 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
                  
REPORT 
 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change deals with the action taken by  
the Government on the recommendations/observations of the contained in its „Three Hundred Sixtieth 
Report‟ on „Demands for Grants (202 2-23) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
(DSIR)‟. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 15th 
March, 2022.  
2. Action Taken Note s (ATNs) ha ve been received from the Department of Scientific and 
Industrial Research‟ ( DSIR) in respect of  all the 21 recommendations/observations contained in the 
„Three Hundred Sixtieth Report‟. The replies of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research  
have been categorized as follows:-  
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government: 
Para Nos. 2.6, 2.7, 2.8, 2.9, 3.4, 4.3, 6.5, 6.8, 6.10 and 6.18  
 Total recommendations – 10 Accepted 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Department has accepted its ten 
recommendations/observations as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report. 
Chapter II:    Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue 
in view of the Government’s replies: 
Para Nos. 5.4, 5.5, 5.6, 6.11, 6.9, 6.13, 6.14, 6.15, 6.16 and 7.10  
 Total recommendations – 10  Not to be pursued further 
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research  and, therefore, does not want to pursue the 
recommendations further. 
Chapter III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee: ‘Nil’ 
Chapter IV:   Recommendations/Observations in respe ct of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: Para No. 3.5 To be pursued further 
 Total recommendation- 01 
The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and detailed 
Action Taken Notes in respect of recommendation/observation made in chapter IV of 
the Report. 
3. The details of the ATNs have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters. 

2 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
B.E. DEMANDED AND B.E. ALLOCATED FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022-23  
Recommendations/Observations  
1.1 The Committee recognises the need for an additional allocation of at  least Rs.100 crore to the 
Department, in addition to the allocation made in B.E. 2022 -23. The Committee underlines the 
importance of the timely c ompletion of projects and, therefore, recommends that the Department 
should review the capital requirements of the projects and explore internal budgetary reallocations to 
ensure availability of funds for the projects.                                                (Para 2.6 of the 360th Report)  
Action Taken 
1.2 Department thankfully acknowledges the Committee‟s recognition  towards need for an 
additional allocation of at least Rs. 100.0 crore in B.E. 2022-23. Department has noted the directions of 
the committee for compliance. 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.3 The Committee also recommends that, if required,  the Department should seek additional 
funds from the Ministry of Finance at the supplementary/R.E. stage so that the Department is able to 
sustain its key programmes; especially initiatives relating to research and development and Regional 
Transport Aircraft -SARAS.                                                                                                 (Para 2.7 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.4 As per recommendations of the Committee, if require d, Department will seek additional funds 
from the Ministry of Finance at the supplementary/R.E. stage to sustain its key programmes including 
initiatives relating to research and development and Regional Transport Aircraft – SARAS.   
Recommendations/Observations  
1.5 The Committee notes the initiative of the Department in raising funds through CSR donations 
and collaborating with other Departments/Ministries for sponsoring its projects and recommends that 
the Department should explore innovative ways of enhancing its outreach so that the capabilities of the 
Department in terms of research and development of technologies can be widely projected.  
                   (Para 2.8 ibid)                                           
Action Taken 
1.6 To receive and utilize CSR contributions from the corporates, CSIR has developed Policy and 
Guidelines for proper and effective utilization of CSR funds available with the corporates. Subsequent 
to issuance of CSIR Guidelines, Ministry  of Corporate Affairs has issued amendment through 
notifications and clarifications with regard to Section 135 of the Companies Act, 2013 which have been 
endorsed to be followed by CSIR Labs over and above CSIR Guidelines. 
1.7 During Covid-19 pandemic, CSIR through its labs has  been continuously exploring availability 
of CSR funds with Industries/ corporates for establishing Covid -19 testing facilities, Make Shift 
Hospitals, Oxygen Enrichment Units and Face Masks. CSIR labs will make further efforts to tap CSR 
funds available with Industries/ corporates and utilize them for the benefit of the society.  
 
 

3 
 
 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.8 The Committee notes that the Department had demanded Rs. 12.93 crore in B.E. 2022 -23 
towards assistance to CEL, a PSE of the Department, but no funds have been allocated for the same. 
The Committee recommends that the Department should seek funds at the R.E. stage and also explore 
other avenues of re-appropriation of funds towards CEL, if such need arises.                 (Para 2.9- ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.9 Department will follow the recommendations of the Committee. 
ADDITIONAL BUDGETARY REQUIREMENT FOR DEVELOPMENT OF CIVILIAN 
AIRCRAFT-'SARAS' BY CSIR-     NAL 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.10 The Committee accordingly recomme nds that the Department should be given an additional 
fund of at least Rs. 95.06 crore so as to ensure that activities relating to development of SARAS are 
completed without any further delay.                                                                                 (Para 3.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.11 Department acknowledge s with thanks for the said recommendation and its support for the 
project.  It may kindly be noted that SARAS Mk2 project activities have picked up and pre -CDR 
review of major sub sys tems like Landing Gear, Wheels and Brakes, Flaps, Airframe structures were 
completed by January 2022. During the FY 2022 -23 it is planned to initiate the design and fabrication 
of Jigs, fixtures and tooling and procurement of LRUs initiated during the year  2021-22.  Hence, the 
minimum anticipated requirement for smooth execution of the SARAS project is Rs. 95.06 crores. 
DEPARTMENT’S INITIATIVES ON DRUG DISCOVERY FOR MALARIA 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.12      The Committee is cognizant of the fact that since malaria is a disease common to the entire 
country, especially in the densely populated pockets, low cost and effective treatment is absolutely 
essential to save poor pepole’s life, loss of productive man hours and decrease the need for 
hospitalisation. In this backdrop, the Committee applauds the efforts of the Department in research 
and development of drugs for the treatment of malaria. The Committee observes that all scientific 
advancements serve their purpose only when those are implemented in the welfare of the larger 
populace and, therefore, recommends that the Department should initiate a programme on a mission 
mode, along with other stakeholder Departments/Ministries, with a target of reaching out to a sizeable 
population in the most affected ar eas and create awareness about the various interventions of the 
Department in treatment of Malaria.                                                                                  (Para 4.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.13 Department thankfully acknowledges the Co mmittee‟s recognition for the  Department‟s efforts 
in research and development of drugs for the treatment of malaria.   
1.14 The National Vector Borne Disease Control Programme (NVBDCP), part of the Technical 
Division of the Directorate General of Health S ervices, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare is 
proactively involved in attending the directions mentioned towards programme on Malaria along with 
other stakeholder Departments/Ministries. 
1.15 CSIR thorough its constituent laboratory Central Drug Research  Institute (CSIR -CDRI), 
Lucknow has a long -standing program on malaria drug discovery and development as well as parasite 
biology and drug target identification. CSIR-CDRI has been working on malaria parasite biology with  

4 
 
 
particular emphasis on identifyi ng new targets and pathways for designing novel interventions. Some 
of the notable achievements in terms of drugs and ongoing research programs are α, β -Arteether and 
elubaquine. Further, an anti -malarial late lead molecule, CDRI S011 -1793, is being develo ped under 
the CSIR IND mission. This antimalarial lead compound has shown excellent in vitro and in vivo 
potency against chloroquine resistant P. falciparum  strains as well as strains resistant to other anti -
malarial drugs. S011 -1793 has also shown efficac y in P. falciparum field isolates from Africa and P. 
falciparum and P. vivax field isolates from Brazil accessed through the Medicines for Malaria Venture 
(MMV). 
1.16    In addition to extramural projects addressing aspects of organelle biology, genome mai ntenance 
mechanisms, biochemical pathways and vaccine approaches, CSIR -CDRI also has a n ongoing project 
entitled “Chemical biology approaches towards dissecting non -canonical protein functions and novel 
targets in Malaria, Leishmania and Filaria parasites”. 
CSIR LABORATORIES 
Recommendations/Observations  
1.17 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department and recommends that under Phase II 
of the CSIR - Aroma Mission, where the Department targets to add an additional 30,000 hectares, 
special emphasi s should be given towards implementation of this programme in the aspirational 
districts. The Committee also recommends that mechanisms of ‘better price discovery’ be explored 
through enhanced marketing and value addition, so that farm incomes are further augmented.  
Further, providing technical and infrastructural support to farmers/growers will also help in 
generating employment in rural areas of the country.                                                        (Para 6.5ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.18 Department thankfully acknowledges the Committee‟s recognition and appreciation towards 
CSIR-Aroma Mission. 
1.19 The CSIR laboratories have collectively achieved considerable success in their efforts to bring 
about 30,000 ha of additional cultivated area under the CSIR-Aroma Mission Phase -II, and will 
hopefully meet the targets within the defined time period. Emphasis has already been given to include 
aspirational districts and other regions or districts which are frequently affected by the vagaries of 
weather like floods, cyclones and droughts. Furthermore, the unutilized fields are also being brought 
under cultivation by introducing some stress -tolerant crops. Even in areas where traditional crops are 
commonly affected by animal attacks, several aromatic crops have  been introduced that are not 
damaged by wild or domestic animals.  
1.20 A separate vertical for value -addition is part of the Aroma Mission programme, where 
technology related to value-addition is being developed so that the farmers' income could be incre ased. 
Efforts are also being made to connect the user industry with the farmers so that they may earn a fair 
price for their produce without having to go through a middleman. In addition, frequent meetings 
involving all the stakeholders including farmers, industry and scientists, are being arranged to examine 
and address the industry's needs as well as the difficulties faced by farmers. CSIR labs have been 
conducting frequent awareness or training programmes for the skilling of the farmers and to make them 
aware about the appropriate crop varieties and agro-technologies for maximizing their yields.  
1.21 In clusters where a large number of farmers are cultivating aroma crops, infrastructural support 
in the form of improved processing facilities has been prov ided to reduce post -harvest processing 
losses. Several Aroma Mission beneficiaries cultivating these crops have gone on to become successful 
entrepreneurs, making essential oil-based formulations or products and employing many others in rural 
areas. 
 

5 
 
 
CSIR-NGRI - Heli-borne survey technology for groundwater management 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.22 The Committee feels that the technological expertise of CSIR should be used to redress the 
challenges relating to sustainable management of underground water resources. The Committee, 
therefore recommends the Department to proactively reach out to State Governments as well as 
stakeholder Ministries/Departments at the centre and engage in mapping of underground water 
resources at a large scale.                                                                                                  (Para 6.8 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.23 The Department acknowledges with thanks the suggestions given by the Committee. Currently 
CSIR- National Geophysical Research Institute ( CSIR-NGRI), Hyderabad is closely working with 
Ministry of Jal Shakti, Central Ground Water Board and National Mission for Clean Ganga on issues 
related to mapping of groundwater resources at a large scale. The institute has already completed a 
pilot project in 5 states on the national aquifer mapping project of Ministry of Jal Shakti and Central 
Ground Water Board (CGWB) and is currently executing a project of ground water mapping and 
management in the arid regions of the country. Further CSIR-NGRI will conduct stake holder meetings 
with state government departments as well as Ministries/Departments in the near future on the 
heliborne geophysical investigations for groundwater exploration and management. 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.24 The Committee observes th at as against a demand of Rs.5899.62 crore under the head ‘CSIR’ 
the Department has been allocated Rs. 5562.76 crore in B.E. 2022 -23, which is about Rs. 300 crore 
less. The Committee recommends the Department to raise internal budgetary resources and try t o 
offset the reduction in budgetary allocation and, if required, the Department should seek additional 
funds from the Ministry of Finance at the supplementary/R.E. stage so that the Department is able to 
sustain its key programmes.                                                                                              (Para 6.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.25 Department has noted the recommendations for   compliance.  Department will seek an 
additional fund from the Ministry of Finance at the supplementary/R. E. stage to sustain its key 
programmes/ projects.   
Recommendations/Observations 
1.26 The Committee further recommends that the Department should also constantly monitor the 
utilisation of funds under the various programmes on a quarterly basis and ensure optimal utilisation 
of funds.                                                                                                                             (Para 6.11 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.27 Constant monitoring is being made in CSIR for the utilisation of fu nds under the various 
programmes on a monthly/quarterly basis to ensure optimal utilisation of funds. 
Recommendations/Observations 
1.28 The Committee is compelled to observe, that the number of patent applications filed and patents 
granted in India during the year 2021 -22 has been the lowest in the past five years.  The Committee 
strongly recommends the Department to give special emphasis in improving these numbers in the year 
2022-23.                                                                                                                             (Para 6.18 ibid) 
 
 

6 
 
 
Action Taken 
1.29 CSIR will follow the directions of the Committee and would encourage its constituent 
laboratories to improve its number of patent filings and grant in the year 2022 -23 based on commercial 
& Strategic interest of CSIR.  It would also conduct webinars/seminars/workshop to increase the IP 
awareness within its laboratories. 
 
 
.  
  

7 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
SICKLE CELL ANAEMIA (SCA) MISSION 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.1  The Committee observes that the activities of SCA Mission remain confined to two states, i.e. 
Chhattisgarh and Maharashtra in the Phase I undertaken during the period from 2017-2020. The SCA 
Mission has now been extended to Madhya Pradesh in Phase II with plans to extend the same model to 
Jharkhand. The Committee also observes that a programme on SCA is also executed by the 
Department of Biotechnology and, th erefore, recommends the Department of Scientific and Industrial 
Research to coordinate with the Department of Biotechnology to ensure synergy of efforts and 
avoidance of duplicity.                                                                                                        (Para 5.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.2 Focussing on two states, Maharashtra and Chhattisgarh, CSIR SCA mission has developed a 
comprehensive screening model by taking a multi -pronged approach of population screening, 
especially focussing on school -going children, antenatal screening of pregnant women and new born 
screening. Close to 25 lakh children have been screened in the two states and patients and carriers have 
been provided support as mentioned above. Hundreds of target couples w ere identified and through 
prenatal diagnosis and counselling, birth of affected kids has been prevented. In our comprehensiv e 
mode, regular camps were conducted  in both states for a proper follow -up of the enrolled patients and 
designed a modified severi ty score which allowed patients to be categorized into mild, moderate and 
severe category and thus , enabled  the management  of disease . An interactive social communication 
network was established to address any social stigma, queries and confusion related t o SCA, 
management and prevention of disease. With the success of the model, the same has now been 
extended to certain regions of Madhya Pradesh and plans are in place  for covering the state of 
Jharkhand in near future. Early identification of  patients and carrier allows to conduct a targeted 
approach from the model that we have developed. CSIR is in discussion with DBT in dissemination of 
comprehensive model for management of SCA in the affected areas so as to increase the reach of 
screening, management and training of State health workers. 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.3 The Committee notes and appreciates the efforts of the Department towards early screening, 
treatment and management of Sickle Cell Anaemia. Since the disease is endemic to many tribal area s, 
cost effective and efficient scientific interventions are the need of the hour to prevent any further 
prevalence of this disease and improve the patient’s quality of life. The Committee, feels that 
identifying the carriers and avoidance of marriage of c arrier couples may -be successful in a limited 
manner to manage the disease. The Committee strongly recommends that appropriate interventions 
backed by effective policy/guidelines will go a long way in not only improving the quality of life of the 
SCA patients but also prevent and reduce the number of children born and affected by this disease. The 
Committee firmly recommends that the Department should engage with other national and 
international agencies undertaking research on gene therapy and gene editing  based treatment of 
Sickle Cell Anaemia.                                                                                                           (Para 5.5 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.4 Department thankfully acknowledges the Committee‟s recognition and appreciat ion towards 
early screening, treatment and management of Sickle Cell Anaemia.  
 

8 
 
 
2.5 The leads from the CSIR Sickle Cell Anaemia Mission on genome editing technology has been 
taken forward by CSIR -Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology ( CSIR-IGIB), New Delhi 
towards getting a multi -centric five year preclinical/clinical trial for ex vivo and in vivo gene editing 
approved by Department of Science and Technology (DST) in association with Ministry of Tribal 
Affairs. CSIR-IGIB will be undertaking the project in collaboration with few national and International 
organizations. The overarching goal of this proposal is the following: 
I. Evaluate cell therapy products (modified HSCs through endogenous CRISPR effectors) in 
appropriate DCGI/FDA recommended preclinical models; 
 
II. Identify, educate, counsel, and recruit potential participants of the trial using internationally 
accepted inclusion/exclusion criteria. Follow them before and after P1 CT for 24 months; 
 
 
III. Perform safety, toxicity and efficacy trials in preclinical settings; and  
 
IV. Clinical trial at Dept. of Haematology, AIIMS, New Delhi. 
Further, if required, engagement with international agencies will be done at a later stage. 
  Recommendations/Observations 
2.6 The Committee feels that the Department needs to take more proactive steps in increasing on -
ground presence and collaborate with local and State level stakeholders so that the solutions 
developed by the Department can actually reach to the affected masses and other intended 
stakeholders. To this effect, the Committee strongly recommends the Department to aggressively 
promote the use of Hydroxy urea therapy for the treatment of Sickle Cell Anaemia.      (Para 5.6 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.7 Other than the symptomatic treatment for SCA patients, hydroxyurea (HU)  is one of the 
cheapest and most commonly used alternatives for long -term management of such patients. It was 
earlier approved for use only in cancer in India and extended to Sickle Cell treatment. Although HU 
therapy provides a robust therapeutic response  in SCA patients, unavailability of various formulations 
in the absence of CDSCO approval has been a major reason for a poor compliance and hence 
variability in the response to HU therapy. Under the Mission, the CSIR - Indian Institute of Integrative 
Medicine (CSIR-IIIM), Jammu generated relevant information and data on its utility and in association 
with a private firm, which led to its approval from CDSCO/DCGI for its marketing for specific use in 
SCA children, post Phase-IV studies. 
CSIR LABORATORIES 
CSIR-NGRI - Heli-borne survey technology for groundwater management 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.8 The Committee feels that the technological expertise of CSIR should be used to redress the 
challenges relating to sustainable management of underground water r esources. The Committee, 
therefore recommends the Department to proactively reach out to State Governments as well as 
stakeholder Ministries/Departments at the centre and engage in mapping of underground water 
resources at a large scale.                                                                                     (Para 6.8 ibid) 
2.9 Further, the Committee recommends that this information should be made available to the 
public in a user friendly manner with special focus on promoting ground water recharge initiatives 
         (Para 6.9 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.10 Since Ministry of Jal Shakti - Central Ground Water Board (CGWB) is the nodal agency for 
groundwater mapping, efforts will be made to communicate the recommendation of the committee to  
 

9 
 
CGWB and jointly work for developing a user friendly information system for the promotion of ground 
water recharge activities. 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.11 The Committee observes that in the year 2020 -21, against a target of 5000 fellowships, only 
2743 fellows hips were disbursed. The Department informed that due to COVID -19 pandemic, CSIR 
could conduct only one Joint CSIR-UGC JRF-NET exam and hence targets could not be achieved. The 
Committee further observes, that even-though only about 50 percent of the target set for 2020-21 could 
be achieved, the Department has completely utilised the budgetary allocation under the head for the 
same year.                                                                                                                          (Para 6.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.12 Department likes to inform that due to Covid19 pandemic the whole nation was affected and 
due to spread of virus and to save the lives of young researchers from catching virus, CSIR conducted 
only one NET exam and hence t he target envisaged could not be achieved during 2020 -21. It is also 
humbly informed that the total number of fellowship beneficiaries was about 8500 during the financial 
year 2020-21. The department utilized the complete budgetary allocation of Rs. 400 cr ore of 2020 -21 
for making payment of fellowship including pending stipend in respect of CSIR research fellows who 
were not paid earlier for various reasons including of not submitting their continuation reports or 
fellowship claim bills , etc. The expenditu re incurred during 2020 -21 also includes the expenditure 
incurred on other sub -schemes of the umbrella scheme “Capacity Building and Human Resource 
Development”.  Further, it is humbly apprised that the Demand for Grant during 2020 -21 for the 
scheme “Capacity Building and Human Resource Development” was Rs. 500 crore against which only 
Rs. 400 crore were allocated by the Ministry of Finance. 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.13 The Committee further observes with surprise, that the Department has substantially  reduced 
the targets for 2021 -22 by 60 percent, to only 2000 (as opposed to 5000 in 2020 -21) and yet the 
budgetary allocation under the head is higher for the year 2021 -22 as compared to 2020 -21 by 18 
percent (Rs. 75 crore). In addition to this counterintu itive allocation of funds, the Committee is very 
disturbed to note that so far no fellowships have been disbursed out of the target of 2000 for the year 
2021-22.                                                                                                                            (Para 6.14 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.14 Department likes to kindly submit that though in 2020, CSIR could conduct only one JRF -NET 
Exam but on the other hand due to the prevailing pandemic conditions across the country, CSIR 
extended the tenability of JRF-NET certificate (to avail the fellowship from CSIR) which is normally 2 
years from a particular date i.e. (a fellow has a time of 2 years of joining the fellowship after qualifying 
a particular JRF-NET Exam). For JRF-NET conducted in December 2017, June 2018, December 2018, 
the JRF-NET certificate tenability was extended upto 31/03/2022 whereas the tenability of JRF -NET 
conducted in June 2019 has been extended upto 30/09/2022.  It is further apprised that a JRF -NET or 
JRF-GATE or SPMF qualified candidate is eligible to get the fellowship for a period of five years from 
date of joining the CSIR fellowship i.e. if a candidate joins on 01/04/2016 will get the fellowship upto 
31/03/2021. Similarly, the tenure of other doctoral and postdoc toral fellowship, the tenure is 3 years 
and can avail the fellowship upto 3 years from Date of Joining e.g. a fellow joins on 01/04/2016, 
his/her fellowship tenure will end on 31/03/2019. During the current financial year 2021 -22, CSIR has 
been financially supporting about >9000 research fellows and also during the last three years CSIR has 
been supporting over 8000-8500 research fellows annually.  The research fellows who joined the CSIR 
doctoral and postdoctoral fellowships during the last five years and current year is given in the table 
below: 
 

10 
 
S. No Financial Year Number of fellows joined the CSIR fellowship  
1 2016-17 1181 
2 2017-18 2329 
3 2018-19 3150 
4 2019-20 3170 
5 2020-21 2137 
6 2021-22 1774 
 
2.15 The data in table above shows the research fellows continued to join the fellowship and 
therefore, the expenditure was continuously made by CSIR on the fellows on the roll of CSIR. It is 
further, stated that during the financial year 2021 -22, a total of Rs. 576.65 crore was sought from 
Ministry of Finance and against which only Rs. 475 crore was allocated. The higher budgetary demand 
was made keeping in view of the legacy payment (pending fellowships) to the research fellows who 
have not been paid during the last financial years but otherwise were eligible to get the fellowship. As a 
result of the high number of fellowship awarded for Doctoral and Postdoctoral Research Fellowships 
during 2017 -18 (7110), the number of fellows joining the fellowship increased considerably by an 
about 34% during 2018 -19 and 2019 -20 compared to the period 2017 -18 and these higher joining 
resulted in increase in demand of budgetary allocations vis -a-vis increased expenditure since financial 
year 2019-20 onward.   
Recommendations/Observations 
2.16  It is astonishing to note  that despite this fact, the Department has indicated an expenditure of 
almost 85 percent of the budgetary allocation under the head for the year 2021 -22. It is unclear to the 
Committee that on one hand the Department has stated that out of the target of 2000 fellowships for the 
year 2021-22, none could be disbursed so far, but on the other hand there is an expenditure of almost 
85 percent against this head. The Committee desires to seek clarity on this aberration and demands 
that the Department must furnis h a detailed note on performance during the last five years, including 
2021-22 clearly indicating therein, the month wise expenditure and physical targets achieved under the 
head ‘Research Schemes, Scholarships and Fellowships’.                                        (Para 6.15 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.17 The CSIR scheme “Research Schemes, Scholarship and Fellowships” – i.e. Capacity Building 
and Human Resource Development has four sub-schemes viz. (i) Doctoral and Postdoctoral Fellowship 
Scheme, (ii) Extramura l Research Scheme and Emeritus Scientist Scheme, (iii) Promotion and 
Recognition of Excellence through award scheme, and (iv) Promoting knowledge sharing through 
Travel and Symposia Grant Scheme. 
2.18 The year -wise quantitative achievements in terms of fre sh awards of fellowships/research 
scheme/awards/seminar and travel grants under all four sub -schemes during the last 5 years (2016 -17 
to 2020-21) and the year 2021-22 have been summarized in the table below: 
Table:  The quantitative achievement during 2016 -17 to 2021 -22  
 
Scheme 16-17 17-18 18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 
Doctoral and Postdoctoral Research Fellowships 4870 7110 5004 5129 2743 1057 
Research Scheme and Emeritus Scientist Scheme 232 258 197 273 100 177 
Award & recognition (SSB/YSA, GNR Gold 
Medal, Bhatnagar Fellowship) 
18 15 24 23 22 19 
Seminar/Symposia/Travel Grant 734 1311 1432 1553 25 203 
 
2.18 During financial year 2016-17, CSIR has been supporting about 6919 doctoral and postdoctoral 
research fellows which in the current financial year have increased by 33% and the number of fellows  
 
 

11 
 
 
availing the CSIR fellowship gradually increased and  as on date (March 2022) there are around 10 ,000 
active research fellows who are eligible to get the fellowship from CSIR. Further, as information 
provided in pa ra 6.14 above, the tenure of a JRF -NET fellowship, JRF -GATE and SPM Fellowship 
(Junior) is 5 years and on completion of 2 years  of  initial tenure is upgraded to SRF -NET/SRF-
GATE/SPM Fellowship (Senior) and become eligible to get higher remuneration for an other three 
years tenure. Similarly, the tenure of other doctoral and postdoctoral fellowship is 3 years and the 
fellows therefore, are entitled to get the fellowship for next three years from date of joining or actual 
date of leaving the fellowship on var ious accounts.  It is further stated that CSIR continued disbursing 
the fellowships to the fellows who kept on joining during 2021 -22 along with others who have been 
having the valid sanctioned tenure and were eligible to get the fellowship from CSIR. Furt her, the 
extramural research projects sanctioned during a financial year are sanctioned for a  duration of 3 years 
whereas an Emeritus Scientists get s the project for a tenure of 5 years and therefore , the expenditure 
during a financial year will include th e liability of new projects sanctioned during a financial year and 
of those which were sanctioned earlier and have valid sanctioned tenure. It is further apprised that 
during any financial year, CSIR has been supporting on an average 800 extramural researc h projects. 
Apart from this, the SSB awardees, CSIR -YSA awardees are paid a monthly honorarium of Rs. 
15000/- pm and Rs. 7500/ - pm till the age of superannuation (SSB awardees) and upto the age of 45 
years (YSA awardees), respectively.    
 
2.19 As apprised  above, the expenditure therefore incurred also include the fellowship pendency 
payments.   The sub -scheme wise expenditure incurred during the last five years and current year 
(2021-22 upto February 2022) is given below: 
Table: The Sub-Scheme wise expenditure incurred during 2016-17 to 2021-22 
                                                                                                                                                Rs. in Crore 
Scheme 16-17 17-18 18-19 19-20 20-21 21-22 
 
Doctoral and Postdoctoral Research Fellowships 213.715 241.860 205.273 373.319 375.333 456.174 
Research Scheme and Emeritus Scientist Scheme 34.981 33.519 27.038 37.342 17.774 29.308 
Award & recognition (SSB/YSA, GNR Gold Medal, 
Bhatnagar Fellowship) 
0.756 2.806 2.890 5.480 1.412 0.230   
 
Seminar/Symposia/Travel Grant 6.461 6.004 8.529 6.108 6.919 7.288 
Total 255.913 284.189 243.730 422.249 401.438 493.000 
 
 
2.20 In view of the above facts, Department would like to submit that the expenditure during any 
financial year is not linked with new fellowships awarded/extramural research schemes sanctioned but 
also include the component of overall liability to be honoured in accordance to fellowship/schemes 
tenure guidelines. 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.21  The Committee further recommends the Department to clear any pendency in the disbursement 
of fellowships and ensure that targets set for the year 2022 -23 are met. The Department, in 
collaboration with UGC, should also explore alternate methods of conducting the qualifyi ng 
examinations so that researchers do not have to suffer in future.                                     (Para 6.16 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.22 CSIR has implemented an online portal for fellowship management w.e.f. 01/04/2021 so that 
the research fellows could  track the status of their applications and monthly stipend etc. It is further 
apprised that the current budgetary allocation of Rs. 475 .0 crore has been completely utilised. It is 
further stated that in the interest of research fellows and as an emergency , an allocation of Rs. 18 .0 
crore was made from CSIR‟s internal resources to be used for making the fellowship payment to the  

12 
 
 
research fellows. To fulfil the financial commitments of CSIR to research students, CSIR has submitted 
a revised EFC Memo on “Ca pacity Building and Human Resource Development” at a total projected 
outlay of Rs. 2793.0 crore for Fifteenth Finance Commission Cycle 2021 -22 to 2025-26 to Department 
of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. It is pertinent to mention here that the JRF -NET which is widely 
known as Joint CSIR -UGC JRF -NET for award of Junior Research Fellowship and Eligibility of 
Assistant Professorship is basically conducted by CSIR only.  It is further apprised that to achieve the 
envisaged target for 2022 -23, CSIR has planned  to hold the three JRF-NET Exam and one such JRF -
NET has recently been conducted in January and February 2022.        
DISINVESTMENT OF CENTRAL ELECTRONICS LIMITED (CEL) 
Recommendations/Observations 
2.23 The Committee notes the details regarding CEL, the ba sis of decision for its disinvestment and 
the process, as appraised by the Department. The Committee recommends the Department that all 
measures to ensure the welfare of the employees be taken and that no employee should suffer 
adversely. The Committee als o notes that CEL, with an intention to work in common areas of interest 
for the development of technology, has signed many MoUs such as with Indian Institute of Technology -
Kanpur, Naval Materials Research Laboratory –DRDO and many more. The Committee theref ore 
recommends that since CEL was working in many important sectors in collaboration with various 
laboratories, the partnerships must be honoured, as mutually decided, in the best interest of the nation.                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                           (Para 7.10 ibid) 
Action Taken 
2.24 Department of Investment and Public Asset Management (DIPAM) through its Inter Ministerial 
Group (IMG) decided the terms and conditions of disinvestment including the welfare of CEL 
employees. The message of Parliamentary Standing Committee will be communicated to DIPAM. 
2.25 CEL signed Transfer of Technology (ToT) with different national labs/institutions for taking up 
know-how of different national interest technologies, where terms and conditions are indicated 
including Premia and royalty, etc. CEL is complying the same for the national interest. 
 
 
 
 

13 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE  
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF 
THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
ADDITIONAL BUDGETARY REQUIREMENT FOR DEVELOPMENT OF CIVILIAN 
AIRCRAFT-'SARAS' BY CSIR-     NAL 
Recommendations/Observations 
4.1 At this point, the Committee would like to reiterate its earlier recommendations made in para 
3.3 of the 343 rd Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research, which is reproduced below:                (Para 3.5 of the 360th Report) 
“The Committee reiterates that SARAS is a crucial project in promot ing connectivity to small 
airports and underserved regions along with a variety of military uses. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends that the Department should look for internal budgetary reallocations to ensure 
availability of funds for the pro ject and if need be, seek additional allocations at the R.E. stage, so 
that the Department is able to sustain the National Mission on Development and Certification of 19 - 
Seat Light Transport Aircraft –„SARAS‟ and ensure its timely completion” 
4.2 In its A ction Taken note (para 4.15 of 353 rd Report of the Committee), the Department 
submitted that it was asked by the Ministry of Finance to manage from the budgetary support made for 
the fiscal year 2021 -22. The Committee expresses its concern over less budget ary allocation for the 
development of SARAS and strongly urges that the Department be provided enough budgetary support 
so that the completion of SARAS can be ensured at the earliest.  
Action Taken 
4.3 In addition to the above, as per recommendations of th e Committee, based on the progress of 
the project and if require d, Department will seek additional funds from the Ministry of Finance at the 
supplementary/R.E. stage to sustain its key programmes especially initiatives relating to research and 
development and Regional Transport Aircraft – SARAS. 
Further Observation/Recommendation 
4.4 The Committee notes the reply of the Department and desires to be apprised about the 
details of additional budgetary expenditure sought, if any, and if not, the reasons thereof . The 
Committee also desires to be apprised about the status of implementation of SARAS , its timeline 
and the major risks that threaten the success of the project. 

15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________ 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
___________________________________________________________________ 

16 
 
 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Friday, the 13th January, 2023 in Committee Room No. 4, 
First Floor, „A‟ Block, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
 
              MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.   Shri Jairam Ramesh - Chairman 
              RAJYA SABHA 
2.   Shri Anil Baluni 
3.   Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
              LOK SABHA 
4.  Shri Jaswantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor 
5.  Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
6.  Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
7.  Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
8.  Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
9.  Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
10.  Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
11.  Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha 
12.  Shri Anurag Sharma 
13.  Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi 
14.  Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
             SECRETARIAT 
  Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
 Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
             Shri Thangzasiam Paite, Committee Officer 
             Shri Rama Nand, Committee Officer 
             Shri Ankit Chansoria, Assistant Committee Officer   
2. *   *   *    * 
3. *   *   *    * 
4. *   *   *    * 
5. *   *   *    * 
6. *   *   *    * 
7. *   *   *    * 
8. The Committee then took up for consideration the draft 366 th, 367 th, 368 th, 369 th, 370 th, 371 st 
and 372 nd Reports of  the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in Reports of the Committee on Demands 
for Grants (2022 -23) of the Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific & 
Industrial Research; Science & Technology; Space; Environment, Forest & Climate Change; and Earth 
Sciences, respectively and adopted the same. 
9. Verbatim record of the meeting was kept. 
10. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 12.50 p.m. 
_________________________________________________________ 
****Relate to other matters. 