PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY FIFTH REPORT
Effects of Tobacco Curing on Environment and Health
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th May, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th May, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2016/Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka)
285
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY FIFTH REPORT
Effects of Tobacco Curing on Environment and Health
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th May, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th May, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2016/Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................... ( IV)
4. R EPORT  .............................................................................................................. 1-7
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV A TIONS — A T A G LANCE................................................... 8-9
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 1 1-17
7. A NNEXURE ........................................................................................................... 19-21

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2015-16)
(Constituted w.e.f.  1 st September, 2015)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
9. Shri Bhupinder Singh
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakraborty
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan

(ii)
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
30. Shri Vikram Usendi
31. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2015-16)
(Constituted w.e.f. 1st September, 2015)
1. 1Smt. Renuka Chowdhury — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
9. Shri Bhupinder Singh
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakraborty
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
(iii)
1Nominated w.e.f. 21st April, 2016.

25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
30. Shri Vikram Usendi
31. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report
on its behalf, present this Two Hundred and Eighty-fifth Report on "Effects of Tobacco Curing on
Environment and Health".
2. In its meeting held on the 31st August, 2015 the Committee heard the views of the Ministries of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Health and Family Welfare; Department of Commerce and
some experts on the subject. The Committee also undertook a study visit to Bengaluru and Goa from
4th to 7th February, 2016 and discussed the subject with the representatives of Union Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Tobacco Board at its meeting held at Bengaluru on 4th
February, 2016.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministries of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change; Health and Family Welfare; Department of Commerce; Tobacco Board and experts for
placing before the Committee the required material and replying to the clarifications sought by the
Members on the subject.
4. In its meeting held on 6th May, 2016 the Committee considered the draft report and adopted the
same.
N
EW D ELHI; RENUKA CHOWDHURY
May 6 , 2018 Chairperson,
Vaisakha 16, 1938 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
FCV : Flue Cured Virginia
GDP : Gross Domestic Product
WHO : World Health Organization
CTRI : Central Tobacco Research Institute
(vi)

REPORT
INDIA'S CONTRIBUTION IN TOBACCO
India is the third largest producer of Tobacco in the world, producing around 800 million kg of
tobacco every year and accounting for more than 12% of the world's raw tobacco production. The
major tobacco producing states of India are Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Gujarat, Maharashtra, Bihar and
Tamil Nadu, with Karnataka responsible for 80% of India's tobacco production. Currently, Indian tobacco
is exported to more than 80 countries spread over all the continents. India has a highly integrated tobacco
industry involving growing of range of leaf types, manufacturing of different tobacco products, including
unprocessed and chewing tobacco and an extensive distribution and retail system. Over the years, a
combination of strong prices, domestic consumption, good export demand for tobacco and low prices
of other crops helped the growth of tobacco from a cash crop to a production industry linked with
commercial considerations.
2. Tobacco makes a significant contribution to the national economy by earning about US $914.43
million foreign exchange (2012-13) besides accruing US $3.65 billion (2012-13) to the exchequer by way
of excise levies on its manufacture. Tobacco industry is providing employment to nearly 38 million
people, who are engaged in the various processes of tobacco from cultivation, curing, grading manufacturing
to marketing.
3. The adverse impact of tobacco on health are well known. What was lesser known was the effect
of tobacco curing on environment. Some studies have indicated many negative environmental impacts
of tobacco production, often linking them with associated social and health problems. Concerned with
the enormity of adverse affects of tobacco and its serious health hazards, the Committee took up the
subject 'Effects of Tobacco intake on Health and its Curing on Environment for examination and report.'
4. The Committee started consideration of the issue by hearing the views of representatives of
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, and Department
of Commerce and some surgeons/doctors on issue of adverse affects of tobacco on health and environment
at its meeting held on the 31st August, 2015.
ILL EFFECTS OF TOBACCO ON HUMAN HEALTH
5. The Committee first heard the views of some doctors. Dr. Pankaj Chaturvedi, Head and Neck
Surgeon, Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai highlighted the following issues and problems related to
consumption of tobacco:-
(i) 50% of cancer cases in India are due to the consumption of tobacco and these figures are
increasing day by day. Further, the loss of revenue in treatment of diseases caused due to
tobacco consumption is one lakh crore per year which is more than the revenue earned i.e.
`17,000 crore by selling tobacco.
(ii) The diseases caused due to consumption of tobacco are killing 10 lakh people in the middle-
aged group.
1

2
(iii) Three non-communicable diseases namely Cardio-Vascular disease, Lung disease and Cancer
are causing 60% of deaths and the main cause of these three diseases is tobacco.
(iv) Three argument for not restricting tobacco are the liveli hoods of people, revenue earned and
personal choice of the people to consume tobacco.
(v) The number of registered Flue Cured Virginia (FCV) tobacco growers/farmers is 43000 and
tobacco cultivated by these farmers is killing 10 lakh people per year. A choice of a trade-off
between the livelihood of some people and lives of the people lost for their livelihood has to
be made.
(vi) The Ministry of Health has stated that only 17% of the revenue is earned compared to the loss
of revenue on treatment of diseases caused due to tobacco. Therefore, every year revenue of
` 17,000/-crore earned on account of tobacco is draining ` 100,000 crore on loss of lives due
to tobacco.
(vii) The cases of lung cancer are increasing in Andhra Pradesh. In Karnataka, cases of mouth and
lung cancer are increasing. Tobacco causes nearly 60 percent of the cancers in these states.
In the State of Gujarat, in the name of 100% export, 'Gutka' or chewing tobacco is being
manufactured illegally. As a result, the cases of mouth (oral) cancer have doubled.
(viii) The cigarette butts contain toxins, plastic and cancer causing elements and were non-
biodegradable.
(ix) The demand and supply of tobacco should be reduced simultaneously. Tobacco is extremely
addictive substance and there is a need to create awareness among people, especially youth
about its adverse effects so that its consumption, and thereby its production is reduced.
(xi) Consuming tobacco in any form is dangerous whether in the form of smoking, chewing,
snuffing or in patches and the effect of all is carcinogenic.
6. Shri Sanjay Seth, another expert highlighted that as per some studies, one cigarette butt in one liter
of water was enough to kill the fish. 60% of the waste collected from beaches in the country are
cigarette butts, bidi butts and gutka packets, which were not bio-degradable. He stated that most of the
people who started smoking early in their lives are not able to quit smoking and therefore the need is
to create awareness amongst people before they start smoking. He also informed the Committee that in
India only 3% of people are able to quit smoking and 97% of people continue smoking all their lives.
He further informed that consumption of tobacco in India is in different forms as a result of which many
programmes would be required to motivate people to quit tobacco consumption in different forms unlike
in western countries where facilities for quitting deal mostly with smoking.
7. The Committee sought the reaction of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare the ill effects of
tobacco on human health. The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare informed the Committee that tobacco
is foremost preventable cause of death and disease in the world today and a major risk factor for non-
communicable diseases. The Committee was further informed by the Ministry that each year 8-9 lakh
deaths in India are attributable to tobacco use resulting into 50% of cancers in male and 20% of cancers
in female. The Committee was also informed that the Ministry commissioned a study titled "Economic
burden of tobacco related diseases in India" (2014) which found that the total economic costs attributable
to tobacco use from all diseases in India in the year 2011 for persons aged 35-69 years amounted to

3
` 1,04,500 crores highlighting significant economic burden on society. This estimated cost was 1.16%
of the GDP and was 12% more than the combined state and central government expenditures on health
in 2011-12.
8. The Committee was further informed that tobacco, consumed in various forms including smoking,
chewing, snuffing, etc., causes all types of cancer predominantly lung cancer and the exposure to
tobacco dust may lead to wheezing and tightness in the chest and reduces expiratory flow rates and
diffusion capacity. The Committee was informed that about 60 compounds in tobacco are carcinogens,
tumour initiators and tumour promoters and among them, nicotine is a deadly toxic addictive compound
causing various severe diseases.
9. Ministry of Health and Family Welfare also informed the Committee that the meeting was very much
concerned about tobacco control. He stated that a national programme namely 'National Tobacco Control
Programme' was in operation in 108 districts of the country and the Ministry was trying to implement
it in the other districts of the country. He further stated that Article 18 of WHO Framework Organisation
on Tobacco Control lays stress on protection of the environment and health of the persons and India
is a party to this framework. The Ministry informed that it has taken the steps to curb the consumption
of tobacco such as declaration of smoke-free public places under Cigarette and other Tobacco Products
Act, 2003 (COTPA). Through the COTPA, the Ministry was also regulating sale and advertisement of
tobacco products. Further, awareness programme was major component of Tobacco control programme.
The Ministry also informed that Health Education was being introduced in schools for imparting knowledge
to students on health and adverse effects of smoking.
10. The Committee finds that financial benefits that accrue in various forms on account of
tobacco are negligible compared to losses suffered in terms of deaths of people and the expenditure
incurred by the Government on treatment of tobacco related problems of people. Besides financial
burden on the exchequer, its social cost/effect on society in terms of expenditure on treatment
on tobacco related diseases and loss of lives, is enormous. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the cultivation of tobacco needs to be discouraged by providing incentives for shifting to
other crops and disincentivizing production of tobacco gradually but definitively. The Committee
also recommends that to discourage consumption of tobacco in any form, effective awareness
campaigns need to be launched.
11. The Committee feels that better coordinated efforts by the Ministries of Health and Family
Welfare, Agriculture, Finance, Commerce and Industry, Human Resource Development, Information
& Broadcasting and Environment, Forest and Climate Change needs to be undertaken.
EFFECTS OF CURING OF TOBACCO ON ENVIRONMENT
12. It was also informed by Shri Pranay Lal, another expert that the forests of near tobacco cultivation
areas are facing decline in and loss of biodiversity including forest litter. He pointed out that 6 to 8 kgs
of fuel wood and 12 kg. dried wood, is required for curing 1 kg. of tobacco which results in decline
in forest cover. He also informed that in India's State of Forest Report (SFR), 2014, it was stated that
the highest number of incidence of burning of forests happens in Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh,
followed by all States where tendu patta is plucked. He also informed that for making better flower and
fruit flushing the whole tree of tendu is burnt and huge amount of carbon dioxide is released. Tobacco
produces a high amount of carbon dioxide when it is produced as well as when it is used. He pointed

4
out that loss of biomass on a large scale whether it is fuel-wood, leaf litter or cereal waste, was also
contributing to air pollution. He further pointed out that the pesticides and fungicides used in tobacco
cultivation are highly toxic and, therefore extremely harmful for human health. Shri Sanjay Seth, another
expert informed the Committee that the cigarette butts contain toxins, plastic and cancer causing elements
and one butt in one litre of water is enough to kill all the fishes and 60% of the wastes on the beaches
are cigarette butts. He further informed that crops that are cultivated in and around areas of tobacco
fields have been found to contain good amount of chemical pesticides. Moreover, studies conducted in
other countries are in agreement with the fact that tobacco cultivation adversely impacts crops cultivated
in the vicinity.
13. The Committee was informed by the Central Pollution Control Board, Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change that tobacco cultivation results into felling of trees (deforestation), soil
degradation and land pollution due to the use of pesticides. Further, tobacco plants consume nutrients
at a higher rate than other crops and they are sensitive and prone to many diseases and consequently,
tobacco farmers are forced to use large amounts of fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides and some of
the pesticides are highly toxic to the human health. The Committee was further informed that due to
consumption of nutrients at a much faster rate, the fertility of soil decreases rapidly and hence the soil
requires regular input of chemical fertilizer particularly potassium. Moreover, the tobacco crop is the
most erosive crop causing loss of 45 kg of top soil on every acre per year.
14. The Committee was also informed by the Central Pollution Control Board, Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change that about 200,000 hectares of land in the central black soil belt of the state
of Andhra Pradesh, which were once forests or cultivable fallows and pastures, are now no more than
a horrifying barren waste, where nothing may grow. The cultivation of tobacco had accentuated the
problems of salinity in the black soils since the mid 60's. Further, the areas of Tobacco cultivation are
prone to forest fires.
15. When the Committee desired to know from Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
as to whether any Environmental Impact Assessment of growing tobacco has ever been undertaken by
the Ministry the Ministry informed that they conducted Environmental Impact Assessment on 39 industries
but tobacco curing was not among them. Environmental Impact Assessment of other industries is
conducted by the concerned Ministries. Hence Department of Commerce could consider conducting
Environment Impact Assessment study of tobacco plantation in general and tobacco curing in particular.
The Committee was further informed that there are no estimates on illegal felling of trees for curing
tobacco.
16. The Committee, recommends that an Environmental Impact Assessment of cultivation of
tobacco needs to be undertaken by the concerned agencies of Government of India in order to
know its harmful effects on environment. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change should find out the estimated felling of trees for curing of tobacco and its effect on
forests. Effect of chemical pesticides in tobacco cultivation and its affect on the crops which are
grown in and around tobacco fields needs to be find out. The Committee further recommends
that tobacco farmers need to be educated about the effect of chemical fertilizers and pesticides
on soil quality and encouraged to use organic manures/fertilizers. The Committee further
recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change may put in place an
institutional mechanism in coordination with other concerned Ministries to alleviate the soil and
environmental degradation caused by tobacco cultivation.

5
17. The Committee also discussed the issue with the representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change and Tobacco Board during its study visit to Bengaluru on 4th and 5th February 2016.
A list of representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Tobacco Board
present in the meeting is at Annexure-I.
18. The Committee was informed by the Tobacco Board that to address the problem of deforestation
caused due to tobacco curing a massive programme on 'Grow Your Own Fuel' is being followed in Brazil
and Kenya that can be followed in India also. It was also informed that the Tobacco Board is encouraging
planting of trees needed for tobacco curing by the registered growers and had made it mandatory that
all the growers who are registered as growers of tobacco with the Board shall undertake to plant a
minimum of 10 plants per year. Further, Tobacco Board has restricted horizontal expansion of the area
under tobacco by not granting registration to new growers and not issuing any licenses for construction
of new barns creating additional curing infrastructure and not expanding FCV tobacco cultivation to new
areas. It was stated that in the year 2010-11, the total area under Tobacco production in the country
was 2,58,229 hectare which has been reduced to 1,94,671 hectare in the year 2014-15. Tobacco Board
had also made it mandatory that all the registered growers of tobacco at the time of registration should
submit a declaration stating that no forest wood is used for tobacco curing for getting their renewal of
registration. Tobacco Board has been playing a small but significant role in ensuring that the area under
Tobacco cultivation is gradually reduced. The representative of Department of Commerce stated that a
total of 800 million kg of tobacco is grown in the country out of which FCV tobacco is about 300 million
kg, which is regulated by the Tobacco Board. He informed that there has been a conscious effort to
reduce the area under tobacco cultivation during the last 4-5 years. Further, Tobacco Board had initiated
measures to encourage less consumption of firewood by encouraging alternate fuels. Tobacco Board was
giving ` 71000/- to farmers for Barns Insulation under a subsidy scheme. To disincentivise tobacco
production and export, they had withdrawn all the incentives which they were earlier giving under the
Foreign Trade Policy. He was also of the view that the long-term solution of the problem lied in reducing
the demand of tobacco. It was also informed that the Department had withdrawn all incentives which
they in order to disincentivise tobacco production and it export.
19. The Committee is of the view that the feasibility of programme "grow own fuel" by tobacco
growers on the lines of a similar programme in Brazil and Kenya, may be explored. The Committee
takes note of the steps taken by the Tobacco Board to limit the area under tobacco cultivation
and to discourage deforestation by making planting of trees mandatory by the farmers. The
Committee however feels that tobacco cultivation, except for exports, needs to be discouraged in
the gradual way.
CURING OF TOBACCO
20. When the Committee desired to know about the process of curing of tobacco, the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change informed that after the green leaves of tobacco are picked,
leaves are cured i.e. slowly dried to change the colour and reduce their chlorophyll content using a
source of energy to make it fit for consumption. The Committee was informed that there are four main
methods of curing:
(i) Flue-curing, in which heated air is passed through Flue pipes in barn to indirectly heat the
harvested leaves. The flue-curing process takes 3 to 5 days. It is used to make cigarettes, pipe
tobacco and chewing tobacco.

6
(ii) Air-curing, which depends largely on natural variations in temperature and humidity to achieve
the desired result. Air-cured tobacco is hung in well-ventilated barns and allowed to dry over
a period of four to eight weeks depending on weather conditions and the kind of tobacco.
(iii) Sun-curing, in which the air-curing process is completed by drying the leaves in the sun. In
India, a number of tobaccos are sun-cured. The process is relatively quick (2-3 weeks) and
there is little interference from weather changes.
(iv) Fire-curing, where wood smoke is introduced during the process to produce a dark, smoky-
flavoured product. Fire-cured tobacco is hung in large barns where fires of hardwoods are
kept on continuous or intermittent low smoulder and takes between three days and ten weeks,
depending on the process and the kind of tobacco.
21. The Committee was also informed by Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change and
Tobacco Board that the production of Flue-cured Virginia (FCV) tobacco is about 280-300 million kg
while 450-500 million kg Non-FCV tobaccos. Of all the tobaccos grown in India, only Flue Cured
Virginia (FCV) tobacco needs an energy source for curing, while 10 other types require little or no energy
for curing as they are naturally dried in air or sun using sun energy. This means that out of total 800
mn kg production of tobacco in India, only 300 million kg (37%) needs curing using energy sources,
while the rest of production does not use any energy for curing and thus has no impact or effect on
the environment.
22. During the meeting of the Committee held on the 31st August 2015, the Committee was also
informed by the representative of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change that a very
small percentage of forest wood was used for tobacco curing and the demand was met mostly from
the private plantation. He also stated Forest Conservation Act which came into force in 1980, did not
mention tobacco industry which meant that it had very little or negligible impact on forests. He, however,
promised to go through the specific studies quoted by the experts in the matter.
23. The Committee was also informed by the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change that
Indian Institute of Forest Management, Bhopal had estimated that historical use of fuel wood from 1962
to 2002, for tobacco curing and manufacture of cigarette and other smoking, consumables, had destroyed
680 million tones of fuel wood through successive extraction. Further, a study funded by Karnataka State
Department of Science and Technology estimates that 120,000 tonnes of firewood are needed every year
to cure tobacco leaves in the state. The Committee was informed that production of one kg of cured
tobacco requires 4.5 to 5.0 kg of firewood and therefore, adoption of energy saving methods minimizes
the use of valuable fuels besides overall cost of cultivation and helps in sustaining environment.
24. When the Committee desired to know the steps taken by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change and Tobacco Board for sensitizing the concerned agencies for utilizing alternative energy
and other renewable sources to fuel tobacco farms, the Ministry informed that the following measures
taken up to conserve energy in curing of Tobacco and thus reducing curing costs:-
(i) Fixing of Venturi furnaces in the barns replacing traditional furnaces;
(ii) Barn Roof Insulation;
(iii) Modified Flue Boxes - replacing 50% of the existing cylindrical pipes in the barn;

7
(iv) Promoting establishment of briquetting units for manufacture of briquettes from agri waste;
(v) Promoting raising of own fuel by growers;
(vi) Training programmes to growers on curing of tobacco and appointing master curers to advise
growers on curing techniques; and
(vii) Efforts are underway to develop suitable solar barn for curing of tobacco.
25. In the meeting the Committee was also informed by the representative of Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change that they had made strategies for energy conservation. He also stated that
solar energy and renewable energy could be used for curing tobacco. Further, three species of wood
mostly used for tobacco curing, namely, prosopis, subabul and eucalyptus, did not need transit permit
and forest permit and could be grown by the farmers. He also stated that tobacco curing was a seasonal
activity since it is taken up only for seven to ten weeks. Further, the exhaust fumes are sent high through
chimney avoiding any smoke pollution. Flue Cured Virginia (FCV) tobacco crop cultivation was being
regulated by Tobacco board and its horizontal expansion is not encouraged. That limits the tobacco
growing area and the requirement for fuel and also its impact on environment.
26. The Committee was also informed by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change that
FCV (Flue Cured Virginia) Tobacco is cured in a barn with the help of firewood/coal/natural gas/oil.
Fuelwood is the main source of FCV tobacco curing because it is easily available locally, is easy to store
and requires no modifications in traditional barn. Further, solar energy, bio-gas and electricity have been
tried to cure tobacco with limited success.
27. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change also informed that production of tobacco
is contributing to climate change because the cutting and burning of wood or other fuels for curing
tobacco adds to the greenhouse effect. Tobacco farmers often burn trees while clearing land. This
burning releases large quantities of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere whereas deforestation results in
fewer trees being available to absorb the excess carbon dioxide.
28. The Committee notes that tobacco curing and cultivation is not only destroying forests but
also contributing to green house effect. The Committee is at a loss to understand the reasons
for the limited success of using solar energy, bio-gas and electricity for curing tobacco. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change, in
coordination with other concerned government agencies, take all necessary measures/devise
ways to minimize fuel consumption by regulating the area under FCV cultivation, using innovative
and fuel efficient designs of curing barns, furnace and flue distribution system, adopting and
promoting improved curing technologies etc. and thereby reduce the impact of tobacco curing on
the environment.
29. The Committee is of the view that human consumption of tobacco should be reduced gradually
and efforts should be made to explore its alternative uses such as pesticides, etc. The Committee
also recommends that appropriate co-ordination may be made with the Departments and research
agencies already engaged in such research work or other agencies capable of doing research and
development for suggesting alternative uses of tobacco.

8
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A  GLANCE
ILL EFFECTS OF TOBACCO ON HUMAN HEALTH
The Committee finds that financial benefits that accrue in various forms on account of
tobacco are negligible compared to losses suffered in terms of deaths of people and the expenditure
incurred by the Government on treatment of tobacco related problems of people. Besides financial
burden on the exchequer, its social cost/effect on society in terms of expenditure on treatment
on tobacco related diseases and loss of lives, is enormous. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the cultivation of tobacco needs to be discouraged by providing incentives for shifting to
other crops and disincentivizing production of tobacco gradually but definitively. The Committee
also recommends that to discourage consumption of tobacco in any form, effective awareness
campaigns need to be launched. (para 10)
The Committee feels that better coordinated efforts by the Ministries of Health and Family
Welfare, Agriculture, Finance, Commerce and Industry, Human Resource Development, Information
and Broadcasting and Environment, Forest and Climate Change needs to be undertaken.
(para 11)
EFFECTS OF CURING OF TOBACCO ON ENVIRONMENT
The Committee, recommends that an Environmental Impact Assessment of cultivation of
tobacco needs to be undertaken by the concerned agencies of Government of India in order to
know its harmful effects on environment. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change should find out the estimated felling of trees for curing of tobacco and its effect on
forests. Effect of chemical pesticides in tobacco cultivation and its affect on the crops which are
grown in and around tobacco fields needs to be find out. The Committee further recommends
that tobacco farmers need to be educated about the effect of chemical fertilizers and pesticides
on soil quality and encouraged to use organic manures/fertilizers. The Committee further
recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change may put in place an
institutional mechanism in coordination with other concerned Ministries to alleviate the soil and
environmental degradation caused by tobacco cultivation. (para 16)
The Committee is of the view that the feasibility of programme "grow own fuel" by tobacco
growers on the lines of a similar programme in Brazil and Kenya, may be explored. The Committee
takes note of the steps taken by the Tobacco Board to limit the area under tobacco cultivation
and to discourage deforestation by making planting of trees mandatory by the farmers. The
Committee however feels that tobacco cultivation, except for exports, needs to be discouraged in
the gradual way. (para 19)
CURING OF TOBACCO
The Committee notes that tobacco curing and cultivation is not only destroying forests but
also contributing to green house effect. The Committee is at a loss to understand the reasons
for the limited success of using solar energy, bio-gas and electricity for curing tobacco. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
8

9
in coordination with other concerned Government agencies, take all necessary measures/devise
ways to minimize fuel consumption by regulating the area under FCV cultivation, using innovative
and fuel efficient designs of curing barns, furnace and flue distribution system, adopting and
promoting improved curing technologies etc. and thereby reduce the impact of tobacco curing on
the environment. (para 28)
The Committee is of the view that human consumption of tobacco should be reduced gradually
and efforts should be made to explore its alternative uses such as pesticides, etc. The Committee
also recommends that appropriate co-ordination may be made with the Departments and research
agencies already engaged in such research work or other agencies capable of doing research and
development for suggesting alternative uses of tobacco. (para 29)

MINUTES

XXII
TWENTY SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 4.15 P.M. on Monday, the 31st August, 2015 in Committee Room 'D', Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Bhupinder Singh — In chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
6. Shri C.P. Narayanan
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
8. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
9. Kumari Sushmita Dev
10. Dr. K. Gopal
11. Shri Daddan Mishra
12. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
13. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
14. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
15. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
16. Shri Nagendra Singh
17. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
18. Shri Vikram Usendi
19. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
20. Shri Chirag Paswan
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
13

14
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Shri H.K. Pande, Additional Secretary
2. Shri Bishwanath Sinha, Joint Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Mehta, Joint Secretary and Chairperson, Central pollution Control Board
4. Dr. Rashid Hasan, Advisor
5. Dr. A.B. Akolkar, Member Secretary, Central Pollution Control Board
6. Shri J.S. Kamyotra, Director, Central Pollution Control Board
7. Dr. Jagram, Director, Central Pollution Control Board
Representatives of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Dr. Md. Shaukat Usta, Deputy Director General (NCD), Directorate General of Health Services
2. Shri Amal Pusp, Director
Representatives of Department of Commerce
Shri S.K. Sarangi, Joint Secretary
Experts
1. Dr. Pankaj Chaturvedi, Professor, Head and Neck Surgeon, Tata Memorial Centre
2. Shri Sanjay Seth
3. Shri Pranay Lal
2. As the Chairman of the Committee could not attend the meeting, the Committee decided to choose
Shri Bhupinder Singh, Member of the Committee, to act as Chairman of the Committee for the meeting,
under rule 73(3) read with Rule 275 of the Rules of procedure and Conduct of Business in the Council
of States (Rajya Sabha).
3. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, the representatives of
Ministries of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Health and Family Welfare, Department of
Commerce, experts and other senior officials present in the meeting of the Committee.
4. The Chairman informed that some studies have indicated many negative environmental impacts of
tobacco production, often linking them with associated social and health problems. He desired to know
from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change the effects of tobacco curing on environment
degradation and quality of soil, etc. Highlighting that approximately 6 to 8 kgs. of fuel wood was required
for curing 1 kg. of tobacco, the Chairman desired to know the steps taken by the Ministry for sensitizing
the concerned agencies for utilizing alternative and other renewable sources of energy to fuel tobacco
curing barns and adopting fuel efficient modern technologies to reduce the adverse effects of tobacco
curing. He also desired to know from the representative of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
whether any study had been undertaken to assess the adverse impact of tobacco curing on human health
and if so, the details the steps taken to contain these adverse effects.

15
5. The Chairman first asked Dr. Pankaj Chaturvedi and other experts to apprise the Committee of the
ill effects of tobacco curing on environment and human health. Dr. Pankaj Chaturvedi stated that tobacco
had both environmental and health concerns. Cancer cases were rising in the country and tobacco was
the cause of nearly half of these cases. Further tobacco was also responsible for 60% of non-communicable
diseases. He also stated that as per the data of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, as against the
annual earning of ` 17 thousand crore from tobacco, 1 lakh crore was spent annually on treating the
diseases caused by tobacco. He also brought out that 2 hectare farmland was required to cure 1 hectare
tobacco crop, which resulted in depletion of forest land. The cigarette butts contained toxins, plastic and
cancer causing elements and were non-biodegradable. Highlighting the fact that Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka
and Gujarat accounted for 80% of tobacco production, he emphasized the need to save the society and
the environment from the adverse effects of tobacco. He pointed out that tobacco was extremely
addictive substance and there was a need to create awareness among people, especially youth about its
adverse effects so that its consumption, and thereby its production could be reduced.
6. Shri Pranay Lal pointed out that 6 to 8 kgs. of fuel wood required for curing 1 kg. of tobacco
actually meant cutting of 12 kg. dried wood, which resulted in decline in forest cover. He also stated
that highest number of incidents of burning of forests happened in Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh, major
tobacco producing states, followed by other States where Tendu patta  is plucked. Tobacco produced
a high amount of carbon dioxide when it is produced as well as when it is used. He pointed out that
loss of biomass on a large scale whether fuel-wood, leaf litter or cereal waste, was also contributing
to air pollution.
7. The representative of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change stated that tobacco was
cured in the country in four different ways, two of which were environment-friendly i.e. air curing and
sun curing. The other two ways of tobacco curing were flue curing and fire curing. He further stated
that a very small percentage of forest wood was used for tobacco curing and the demand was met
mostly from the private plantation. He also stated Forest Conservation Act which came into force in
1980, did not mention tobacco industry which meant that it had very little or negligible impact on forests.
He, however, promised to go through the specific studies quoted by the experts in the matter.
8. As regards the use of alternative fuels in the curing of tobacco, the representative of Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change stated that they had made strategies for energy conservation.
He also stated that solar energy and renewable energy could be used for curing tobacco. Further, three
species of wood mostly used for tobacco curing, namely, prosopis, subabul and eucalyptus, did not need
transit permit and forest permit and could be grown by the farmers. He also stated that tobacco curing
was a seasonal activity since it is taken up only for seven to ten weeks. Further, the exhaust fumes are
sent high through chimney avoiding any smoke pollution. Flue Cured Virginia (FCV) tobacco crop
cultivation was being regulated by Tobacco board and its horizontal expansion is not encouraged. That
limits the tobacco growing area and the requirement for fuel and also its impact on environment.
9. A member of the Committee enquired as to whether the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change would consider undertaking environmental impact assessment of tobacco curing. The
representative of the Ministry stated that they would obtain the studies from the experts and do all that
was possible under the Environment (Protection) Act.
10. The representative of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare stated that the Ministry was very much
concerned about tobacco control. He informed that a national programme namely 'National Tobacco

16
Control Programme' was under operation in 108 districts of the country and the Ministry was trying to
implement it in the other districts of the country. He further stated that Article 18 of WHO Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control, to which India is a party, explicitly lays stress on protection of the
environment and health of the people. The Ministry was also collaborating with Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change in the matter. He also provided details of the steps taken by the Ministry for
tobacco control and awareness programme. He also informed that they were preparing study material
for health education programme of children from class III to class X.
11. The representative of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change then informed that they
conducted Environment Impact Assessment of 39 industries listed under the Environment Protection Act
and tobacco curing was not among them. Environment Impact Assessment of other industries is conducted
by the concerned Ministry. Hence Department of Commerce could consider conducting Environment
Impact Assessment study of tobacco plantation in general and tobacco curing in particular.
12. The representative of Department of Commerce stated that a total of 800 million kg. of tobacco
was grown in the country out of which FCV tobacco is about 300 million kg., which was regulated by
the Tobacco Board. He informed that there had been a conscious effort to reduce the area under tobacco
cultivation during the last 4-5 years. Further, Tobacco Board had initiated measures to encourage less
consumption of firewood by encouraging alternate fuels. To disincentivise tobacco production and
export, they had withdrawn all the incentives which they were earlier giving under the Foreign Trade
Policy. He was also of the view that the long-term solution of the problem lied in reducing the demand
of tobacco.
13. One of the Experts then highlighted that as per some studies, one cigarette butt in one litre of water
was enough to kill the fish. 60% of the waste collected from beaches in the country was cigarette butts,
bidi butts and gutka packets, which were not bio-degradable. He stated that most of the people who
started smoking early in their lives were not able to quit smoking and impressed upon the need to create
awareness amongst people before they start smoking.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
14. The meeting adjourned at 6.14 
P.M.

17
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 6th May, 2016 in Room No.'63', First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Shri Bhupinder Singh
LOK SABHA
5. Kum. Sushmita Dev
6. Shri Laxman Giluwa
7. Shri Daddan Mishra
8. Shri Chirag Paswan
9. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
10. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
11. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. She
informed the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 285th ***
report of the Committee on 'Effects of Tobacco Curing on Environment and Health.’***
3. The Committee, after considering the recommendations made in the draft 285th report, adopted the
draft report with slight modifications. ***
4. *** The Committee also authorised the Chairperson and, in her absence, Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
to present the 285th report in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Chirag Paswan and, in his absence, Shri Vikram
Usendi, to lay the same on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th May, 2016.
5 . *                              * *
6 . *                              * *
7. The meeting of the Committee, then, adjourned at 4.10 
P.M.
17
***Relate to other Matters.

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE
Representatives of Tobacco Board and Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change present in the meeting at Bengaluru on 4th February, 2016
Representatives of Tobacco Board
1. Shri Manoj Kumar Dwivedi, IAS, Joint Secretary, MOC & Chairman, Tobacco Board
2. Shri C S Patnaik, Executive Director, I/C & Secretary, Tobacco Board
3. Shri Bipin Bihari Chowdary, IOFS, Director (Auctions), Tobacco Board
4. Shri B N Mithra, Manager (Extn.), Tobacco Board
5. Shri A V Shivarudraiah, Regional Manager, Tobacco Board
6. Dr. Ramakrishna, Head, CTRI, Tobacco Board
7. Dr. M Mahadevaswamy, Principal Scientist, CTRI, Tobacco Board
8. Shri C H Maruthi Prasad, Auction Superintendent (PDN), Tobacco Board
9. Shri R. Sreenivasa, Auction Superintendent, Tobacco Board
Representatives of Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Dr. Rashid Hasan, Advisor
2. Shri Amarnatha Shetty, Additonal Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Central)
3. Dr. Sathya K. Susarla, Scientist G, Regional Office, Bengaluru
21