PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON  
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
  
SECOND REPORT 
ON 
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT TRIBUNAL BILL, 1992 
  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 8TH DECEMBER, 1993) 
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT  
NEW DELHI 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
C O N T E N T S 
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                    
2.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                     
3.BILL AS REPORTED BY THE COMMITTEE                                             
4.APPENDIX 
  MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE               
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 1 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
  
1.         Shri Syed Sibtey Razi--Chairman 
  
                   RAJYA SABHA 
2.                  Shri N. Girl Prasad 
3.                  Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi 
4.                  Prof. M.G.K. Menon 
5.                  Shri Suresh Pachouri 
6.                  Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel 
@7.     Vacant 
*8.       Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi 
9.                  Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh 
10.              Shri Ram Gopal Yadav 
       
LOK SABHA 
11.       Shri M.G. Reddy 
12.       Shri Oscar Fernandes 
13.       Shri K.G. Shivappa 
14.       Shri Digvijaya Singh 
15.       Shri Shankarrao D. Kale 
16.       Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel 
17.       Shri Sharad Dighe 
18.       Shri Rama Chandra Rath 
**19.   Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav 
20.       Shri Harchand Singh 
21.       Shri Yashwantrao Patil 
22.       Shri Vijay Naval Patil 
23.       Shri P.C. Chacko 
24.       Kumari Frida Topno 
25.       Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh 
26.       Shrimati Mahendra Kumari 
27.       Shri Chandresh Patel 
28.       Shrimati Vasundhara Raje 
29.       Pt. Vishwanath Sharma 
30.       Shri Balraj Pasi 
31.       Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia 
32.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh 
33.       Shrimati Saroj Dubey 
34.       Shri Harpal Panwar 
35.       Shri Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
36.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das 
37.       Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy 
38.       Shri Nani Bhattacharya 
39.       Shri Bhim Singh Patel 
40.       Shri E. Ahamed 
____________________________________________________________________________________
@  Vacancy caused due to retirement of Dr. R.K. Poddar from the membership of the Rajya Sabha. 
*    Nominated w.e.f. 'May 13 , 1993 in the vacancy caused by th e resignation of Dr. Naunihal Singh
from the membership of the Committee. 
Page 2 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

**    Nominated w.e.f. 26-8-93 vice Shri Bhagey Gobardhan died. 
 
Page 3 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

SECRETARIAT 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director 
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary 
Smt. Vandana Garg, Under Secretary 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRIES 
Ministry of Environment & Forests 
1.   Shri R. Rajamani, Secretary 
2.   Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary 
3.   Shri J.C. Kala, Joint Secretary 
4.   Shri Mukul Sanwal, Joint Secretary 
5.   Shri N. Bagchi, Director 
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs 
1.      Dr. S.C. Jain, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser, Department of Legal Affairs  
2.   Shri B.R. Atrey, Joint Secretary, Legislative Department. 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------- 
Page 4 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
 ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS ON THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT TRIBUNAL BILL, 
1992 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Scien ce and Technology, Envir onment and Forests to
which the Bill to provide for strict liability for damages arising out of a ny accident occurring while
handling any hazardous substance and for the establ ishment of a National Environment Tribunal fo r
effective and expeditious disposal of cases arising from such accident , with a view to giving relief an d
compensation for damages to persons, property a nd .the environment and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto, wa s referred, having been authorised to submit the Repor t on its behalf,
present its Report, with the Bill, as amended by the Committee, annexed thereto. 
2.         The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha  on the 18th August, 1992. The Bill was referred to the
Committee by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consulta tion with the Speaker, Lok Sabha for examination
and report.** 
3.         The Committee held 5 meetings in all. 
4.         In the first meeting held on the 17t h August, 1993, the Committee he ard the representatives o f
the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the provisions of the Bill. 
5.         In its second meeting held on the 18th August, 1993, the Committe e sough~ clarifications on
certain provisions of the Bill from the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests and the Secretary,
Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs. 
6.         In its meeting held on the 25th A ugust, 1993 general discussion took place on the amendments
suggested by Members. 
7.         The Committee held clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill on the basis of amendments 
suggested by Members at its meeting held on the 26th August, 1993. 
8.         The Committee considered and adopted  the report at its meeting held on the 13th September,
1993. 
9.         The observations of the Committee with regard to the principal chan ges proposed in the Bill are
detailed in the succeeding paragraphs. 
10.       Clause 4. -- This clause confers power on  the Central Government to  exempt from the operation 
of the Act, the Central Government , any State Government, any corporation owned or controlled by the
Central Government or a State Government or any local author ity. While handli ng any hazardous
substance a mishap or an accident can take place in  an organisation or corpor ation owned or controlled
by the Central Government  or any State Government or lo cal authority. In order to provide
compensation in such cases, the Committee strongl y feels that there should be no exemption. The
Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that the pr ovisions relating to exempt ion from liability may be
dropped from the Bill. Accordingly, Clause 4 of the Bill has been deleted. 
11.       Clause 5. -- In sub-clau se (1) it has been provided as to who can make applic ation for claim fo r
compensation. The Committee is of  the opinion that the National Environment Tribunal may also be
empowered to take up cases of claim for compensation sue motu. The Committee has, therefore, added a 
new sub-clause (2) after sub-clause  (1) in Clause 5. Existing sub-clau ses (2), (3), .(4) & (5) have 
accordingly been renumbered as (3), (4), (5) and (6). 
______________________________________________________________________________ 
"Published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 2, dated the 18th August, 1992. 
**Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin, Part II, dated August 6, 1993. 
12.       The Committee suggests th at the words 'Chairman' and 'Vice- Chairman' wherever they occur in 
the Bill should be substituted by the words 'Chairpe rson' and 'Vice-Chairper son'. Accordingly, these 
changes have been incorporated in the Bill. 
Page 5 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

13.       All other modifications not enumerated in the foregoing paragraphs are either of consequential or
of drafting nature. 
14.       The Committee  recommends that the Bill as amended, be passed. 
General Recommendation 
15.       The Committee was informed that the decisions which were taken at the United Nations
Conference on Environment and De velopment held at Rio de' Jane rio in 1992, in which India also
participated, called upon the participat ing countries to devel op national laws rela ting to liability and
compensation for the victims of pol lution and other environmental dama ges. Pursuant to  this decision,
arrived at the United Nations Conference on E nvironment and Development, the Ministry o f
Environment & Forests informed th e Committee that the Government of  India has brought forward the
National Environment Tribunal Bill. The Committee, however observed that though the ti tle of the Bill
conveys an impression that the Bill is very comp rehensive and covers within its ambit all cases o f
liability and compensation arising due to environmental damage or pol lution whatever be its cause, its
scope is actually restricted to cases concerni ng the protection of envi ronment and payment o f
compensation for damage to persons; property a nd the environment whil e handling the hazardous
substances. The representati ve of the ministry clarified that the Na tional Tribunal Bill  is an altogethe r
new piece of legislation and: its scope has been presently restricted to the environmental damage caused
due to handling of hazardous substances  but the scope of the Bill can be  enlarged later on in the light o f
the experience gained. 
The Committee strongly feels that the Government may seriously think of enlarging the scope of the
Bill by including under the ambit of the Bill, cases of compensation for damages which are caused even
by such substances as have not been identified as hazardous by the Ministry of Environment and Forests
because environmental pollution can be caused by s ubstances which may not be  hazardous as per the
specifications of the Ministry but the scale of damage which they can cause may be quite extensive. 
 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                          Bill No. 133 of 1992
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT TRIBUNAL 
BILL, 1992 
  
(As REPORTED BY THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS) 
 
New Delhi;        
Sept: 13, 1993 
SYED SIBTEY RAZI
 Chairman,
            Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment   and Forests
Page 6 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

Bill No. 133 of 1992
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT TRIBUNAL BILL, 1992 
ARRANGEMENT OF. CLAUSES 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1.         Short title and commencement. 
2.         Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
            COMPENSATION FOR DEATH OF~ OR INJURY TO) A PERSON AND 
DAMAGE TO PROPERTY AND ENVIRONMENT 
3.         Liability to pay compensation in certain cases on principle of no fault. 
4.         Application for claim for compensation. 
5.         Procedure and powers of Tribunal.                                 
6.         Conditions as to making of interim orders. 
7.         Reduction of amount of relief paid under any other law. 
CHAPTER III 
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT TRIBUNAL 
AND BENCHES THEREOF 
8.         Establishment of National Environment Tribunal.
 
9.         Composition of Tribunal and Benches thereof. 
10.       Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other Member. 
11.       Vice-Chairperson to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in certain circumstances. 
12.       Term of office. 
13.       Resignation and removal. 
14.       Salaries and allowances and other te rms and conditions of serv ice of Chairperson, Vice-
Chairperson and other Member. 
15.       Provision as to the holding of offices by Chairperson, etc., on ceasing to be such Chairperson,
etc. 
16.       Financial and administrative powers of Chairperson. 
CLAUSES 
17.       Staff of the Tribunal 
18.       Distribution of business amongst the Benches. 
CHAPTER IV 
JURISDICTION AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE TRIBUNAL 
19.       Bar of Jurisdiction. 
20.       Power of Chairperson to transfer cases from one Bench to another.
 
21.       Decision to be taken by majority. 
22.       Deposit of amount payable for damage to environment. 
23.       Execution of award or order of Tribunal.
Page 7 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

24.       Appeals. 
CHAPTER V 
MISCELLANEOUS 
25.       Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Tribunal. 
26.       Offences by companies. 
27.       Proceedings before the Tribunal to be judicial proceedings. 
28.       Members and staff of Tribunal to be public servants. 
29.       Protection of action taken in good faith. 
30.       Act to have overriding effect. 
31.       Power to make rules. 
THE SCHEDULE 
 
Page 8 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

Bill No. 133 of 1992
  
THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT TRIBUNAL BILL, 1992 
(As REPORTED BY THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS) 
[Words underlined or side-lined indicate the amendments suggested by the Committee, asterisks 
indicate omissions] 
A 
BILL 
to provide for strict liability for damages arising out of any ac cident occurring while handling any
hazardous substance and for the establishment of a National Environment Tribunal for effective and
expeditious disposal of cases arising from such ac cident, with a view to giving relief an d
compensation for damages to persons, property and the environment and for matters connecte d
therewith or incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS decision were taken at the United  Nations Conference  on Environment and
Development held at Rio de Jane iro in June, 1992, in whic h India participated, calling upon the tates to
develop national laws regarding liability and compensation for th e victims of po llution and othe r
environmental damages; 
            AND WHEREAS it is considered expedient to implement the decision of the aforesaid
Conference so far as they relate to the protect ion of environment and payment of compensation fo r
damage to persons, property and the environment while handling hazardous substances; 
            BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows:-- 
CHAPTER I 
                                           PRELIMINARY 
       1. (1) This Act may be called the National Environment Tribunal     Short title           
Act, 1993.                                                                                            and commencement. 
 (2) It shall come into force on such date or dates as the Central          Definition. 
Government may by notification, appoint, and different dates may 
be appointed, for different States and any reference in any provision 
of this Act to the commencement of this Act shall be construed in 
relation to any State or part thereof as a reference to the coming into 
force of that provision in that State or part thereof.                                 5 
       2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-- 
       (a) "'accident" means an accident involving a fortuitous or sudden 
or unintended occurrence while handling any hazardous substance 
resulting in continuous or intermittent or repeated exposure to death 
of, or injury to, any person or damage to any property or environment  10 
but does not include an accident by reason only of war or radio 
activity; 
       (b) "'Bench" means a Bench of the Tribunal; 
       (c) "Chairperson" means, the Chairperson of the Tribunal; 
       (d) "'environment" includes water, air and land, and the inter-        15 
relationship which exists among and between water, air and land, and 
human beings, other living creatures, plants, micro-organism and
Page 9 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

property; 
       (e) "handling", in relation to any hazardous substance, means 
the manufacture, processing, treatment, package, storage; transporta-  20 
tion by vehicle, use, collection, destruction, conversion, offering for 
sale, transfer or the like or such hazardous substance;      :  
(f) "hazardous substance" means any substance or preparation 
which is defined as hazardous substance in the Environment (Protec- 
tion) Act, 1986, and exceeding such quantity as specified by the                         25 
Central Government under the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991;       29 of 1986, 
                                                                                                                6 of 1991. 
(g) "Judicial Member" means a Member of the Tribunal 
appointed as such under this Act, and includes the Chairperson 
or a 
Vice-Chairperson who possesses any of the qualifications specified in 
                                     sub-section (3) of section 10;   30 
(h) "Member" means a Member (whether Judicial or Technical) 
of the Tribunal, and includes the Chairperson and a Vice-Chair- 
                                                                      person; 
(i) "notification" means a notification published in the Official 
                                                                     Gazette;   35 
(j) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(k) "rules" means the rules made under this Act; 
(/) "Technical Member" means a Member of the Tribunal who is 
not a Judicial Member within the meaning of clause (g); 
(m) "Tribunal" means the National Environment Tribunal estab-             40 
       lished under section 8; 
(n) "Vice
-Chairperson" means the Vice-Chairpers-on of the 
      Tribunal. 
Explanation.--In the case of the Tribunal having two or more Vice-Chairpersons, references to the 
Vice-Chairperson, in this Act 45 shall be construed as a reference to each of those Vice-Chairpersons. 
       (o) "owner" means a person who owns, or has control over 
handling, any hazardous substance at the time of accident and includes,-- 
          (i) in the case of a firm, any of its partners;                                  50 
          (ii) in the case of an association any of its members; and 
J 
(iii) in the case of a company, any of its directors, managers, s ecretaries or other officers 
who is directly in charge of, and is res ponsible to, the company for the conduct of the
business of the company. 
                                                               CHAPTER II 
                      COMPENSATION FOR DEATH OF, OR INJURY TO, A. PERSON AND 
                                         DAMAGE TO PROPERTY AND ENVIRONMENT 
                             3. (1) Where death of, or injury to, any person (other than a          Liability to 
                      work-man) or damage to any property or environment has resulted     pay compen. 
             10     from an accident, the owner shall be liable to pay compensation for     sation to cer- 
                                                                                                                               tain cases on 
                      such death; injury or damage under all or any of the heads specified     principle of 
                      in the Schedule.                                                                                        no fault.
Page 10 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

                        (2)In any claim for compensation under sub-section (1), the 
                        claimant shall not be required to plead and establish that the death, 
             15       injury or damage in respect of which the claim has been made was 
                        due to any wrongful act, neglect or default of any person. 
                           Explanation.--For the purposes of this section,-- 
                                    (i) "workman" has the meaning assigned to it in the 
   5 of 1923         Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923; 
           20                   (ii) "injury" includes permanent total or permanent partial 
                           disability or sickness resulting out of an accident. 
                           (3) If the death, injury or damage caused by an accident cannot 
                   be attributed to any individual activity but is the combined or 
                   resultant effect of several such activities, operations and processes, 
           25     the Tribunal may apportion the liability for compensation amongst 
                   those responsible for such activities, operations and processes on an 
                   equitable basis. 
                           4. (1) An application for claim for compensation may be made--     Application 
                                                                                                                                      for claim for 
                                                                                                                               Compensa- 
                                                                                                                               tion. 
                               (a) by the person who has sustained the injury; 
           30                 (b) by the owner of the property to which the damage has 
                               been caused; 
                               (c) where death has resulted from the accident, by all or any 
                               of the legal representatives of the deceased; 
                               (d) by any agent duly authorised by such person or owner of 
          35                   such property or all or any of the legal representatives of the 
                               deceased, as the case may be; 
                               (e) by any representative body or organisation, functioning 
                               in the field of environment and recognised in this behalf by the 
                               Central Government, under all or any of the heads specified in 
      40                      the Schedule; or 
                               (f) by the Central Government or a State Government or a 
                               local authority under all or any of the heads specified in the 
                               Schedule: 
Provided that where all the legal representatives of the deceased 
have not joined in any such application for compensation, the 
                           application shall be made on behalf of or for the benefit of all the 
                           legal representatives of the deceased and the legal representatives 
                           who have not so joined shall be impleaded as  respondents to the       5 
                           application. 
                           (2) The Tribunal may, if it thinks fit, take up the cases for claims 
                           for compensation suo motu. 
                           (3) Any claimant making an application under sub-section (1) 
                           may also make an application before the Tribunal for such relief    10 
                           as is  provided in the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991:               6 of 
1991.                                                   
                            
Provided that no suchapplication shall be made if the relief has
Page 11 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

been received by the claimant earlier or an application made by the 
claimant to the Collector under the said Act is pending and has not 
been withdrawn.                                                                            15 
                            (4) The Tribunal shall have, and exercise, the same jurisdiction, 
                     power" and authority in respect of the matters specified in the Public 
                     Liability Insurance Act, 1991 as the Collector has and may exercise     6 of 1991. 
                           and, for this purpose, the provisions of that Act shall have effect 
                                  subject to the modification that the references therein to the     20 
       ,             Collector shall be construed as including a reference to the Tribunal. 
  
(5) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be made to the 
Tribunal and shall contain such particulars and shall be accompanied 
by such documents and such fee, not exceeding one thousand rupees, 
                                                    as may be prescribed:                    25 
                           Provided that no fee shall be payable by a person whose annual 
income is below the prescribed limit or by a representative body or 
 organisation referred to in clause (e) of sub-section (1) or by 
 the Central Government, a State Government or "a local authority. 
  
                  (6) No application for compensation shall be entertained unless it            30 
                            is made within five years of the occurrence of the accident. 
Procedure5. (1) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1) of Section 
and powers 4, the Tribunal may, after such inquiry as it may deem fit, reject the 
of Tribunal.    application summarily. 
                 (2) Where the Tribunal does not reject the application under sub-            35 
             section (1), the Tribunal may, after giving notice of the application to 
              the owner and after giving the parties an opportunity of being heard, 
             hold an inquiry into the claim or each of the claims and may make an 
             award determining the amount of compensation which appears to be 
                just and specifying the person or persons to whom such amount of            40 
                     compensation shall be paid. 
               (3) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by 
                       the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, but shall be guided by the            5 of 1908 
            principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this 
                  Act and of any rules, the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its            45 
              own procedure including the fixing of places and times of its inquiry. 
                        (4) The Tribunal shall have, for the purpose of discharging its 
                   functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil 
            court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in            5 of 1908 
                                                    respect of the following matters, namely:--            50 
(a) Summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and  
examining him on oath; 
                           (b) requiring the discovery and production of documents. 
                           (c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
5                         (d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian 
5 of 1872.           Evidence Act, 1872 requisitioning any public record or document or 
                        copy of such record or document from any office;
Page 12 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

                        (e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or 
                        documents; 
10                    (f) reviewing its decisions; 
                        (g) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte; 
                        (h) setting aside any order or dismissal of any application for 
                                    default or any order passed by it ex parte; and 
                                    (i) any other matter which is to be, or may be prescribed. 
15                    6--N6txvithstanding anything contained in any other provision of                Conditions as
                        this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no interim    to making 
                        order (whether by way of injunction or stay or in any other manner) of interim 
                        shall be made on, or in any proceedings relating to, an application     orders. 
                        unless-- 
20               (a) Copies of such application and of all documents in support of 
                   the plea for such interim order are furnished to the party against 
                   whom such application is made or proposed to be made; and  
                          (b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter: 
                   Provided that the Tribunal may dispense with the requirements of 
25               clauses (a)and (b) and make an interim order as an exceptional 
                   measure if it is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that it 
                   is necessary so to do for preventing any loss or damage being caused 
                   to the applicant which cannot be adequately compensated in money 
                   but any such interim order shall if it is not sooner vacated, cease to 
30               have effect once expiry of a period of fourteen days from the date 
                   on which it is made unless the said requirements have been complied 
                   with before the expiry of that period and the Tribunal has continued 
                   the operation of the interim order. 
                   7. Where in respect of death of, or injury to, any person or damage     Reduction of 
35               to any property, the owner liable to pay compensation under this         amount of 
                   Act, is also liable to pay any amount as relief under the Public              relief paid 
of 1991.      Liability Insurance Act, 1991 or any other compensation under any     under any 
                   other law, the amount of compensation payable under this Act shall     other law. 
                   be reduced, by the amount of relief and other compensation paid 
40                under any other law. 
                                                          CHAPTER III 
                   ESTABLISIIMENT OF NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT TRIBUNAL AND 
                                                          BENCHES THEREOF 
                 8. The Central Government shall, by notification establish a Tribunal,     Establish- 
45              to be known as the National Environment Tribunal, to exercise the     ment of Na. 
                 jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on It by or under this        tional Envi- 
                 Act.                                                                                                   roument Tri-
                                                                               bunal. 
                 9.-- (l) The Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson and such number    Composition 
                 of Vice-Chairpersons, Judicial Members and Technical Members as   of Tribunal 
50              the Central Government may deem fit and subject to the other            and Benches 
                 provisions of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the       thereof. 
                 Tribunal may be, exercised by Benches thereof. 
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench shall consist 
of one Judicial Member and one Technical Member.
Page 13 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in  sub-section (1) the Chairperson-- 
 (a) may, in addition to discharging the functions of the Judicial            5 
Member or the Technical Member of the Bench to which he is  
appointed, discharge the functions of the Judicial Member or,  
as the case may by  the Technical Member, of any other Bench; 
                   (b) may transfer the Vice-Chairperson or other Member from 
                      one Bench to another Bench;                                                          10 
                 (c) may authorise the Vice-Chairperson or the Judicial Member 
or the Technical Member appointed to one Bench to discharge  
also the functions of the Vice-Chairperson or, as the case  
may be, the Judicial Member or the Technical Member of another  
Bench; and 
                  (d) may, for the purpose of securing that any case or cases                 15 
                      which, having regard to the nature of the questions involved, requires 
                      or require, in his opinion or under the rules made by the Central 
                      Government in this behalf, to be decided by a Bench composed of 
                      more than two Members, issue such general or special orders, as he 
                      may deem fit:                                                                                  20 
Provided that every Bench constituted in pursuance of this clause  
shall include at least one Judicial Member and one Technical Member. 
               (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions 
               of this section, it shall be competent for the Chairperson, or any              25 
               ,other Member authorised by the Chairperson, in this behalf to 
               function as a Bench consisting of a single Member and exercise the 
               jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribuna.l in respect of such 
               classes of cases or such matters pertaining to such classes of cases as 
               the Chairperson may, by general or special order, specify:                             30 
  
            Provided that if at any stage of the hearing of any such cases or 
            matter, it appears to the Chairperson or such Member that the case 
            or matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard by a Bench 
            consisting of two Members, the case or matter may be transferred by 
            the Chairperson or, as the case may be, referred to him for transfer            35 
            to such Bench as the Chairperson may deem fit. 
                   (5) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Benches of the 
                   Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi "(which shall be known as the 
                   principal Bench) and at such other places as the Central Government 
                   may, by notification specify.                                                                   40 
Qualifica-     10. (1) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the 
tions for ap-  Chairperson unless he-- 
pointment as 
Chairperson,              (a) is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or a High 
Vice-              Court; or 
Chairperson
 
or      other    (b) has, for at least two years, held the office of Vice-Chairperson.          45 
Member.                                                                                                                     
Page 14 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

(2) A person shah not be qualified for appointment as the Vice- 
Chairperson unless he-- 
(a) is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or 
(b) has, for at least two years, held the post of a Secretary to the 
5            Government of India or any other post under the Central or a  
State Government carrying a scale of pay which is not less than  
that of a Secretary to the Government of India; or 
                (c) (i) has, for at least five years, held the post of an Additional 
                Secretary to the Government of India or any other post under the 
      10      Central or a State Government carrying a scale of pay which is not 
                 less than that of an Additional Secretary to the Government of India; and 
           
                 (ii) has adequate knowledge of, or experience in, legal, administra- 
                 tive, scientific or technical aspects of the problems relating to 
      15       environment; or 
                 (d) has, for at least three years, held office as a Judicial Member or 
                 Technical Member. 
                 (3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment ,as a Judicial 
                 Member unless he:- 
       20    (a) is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of High Court; or 
                                                                                                      
            (b) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has 
           held a post in grade I of that Service for at least three years. 
              (4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical 
       25  Member unless he has adequate knowledge of, or experience in, or 
             capacity to deal with, administrative, scientific or technical aspects of 
             the problems relating to environment. 
          (5) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (6) and (7), the 
              Chairperson, Vice
-Chairperson and every other member of the 
       30    Tribunal shall be appointed by the President. 
          (6) No appointment of a person possessing the qualifications 
             specified in this section as the Chairperson 
or the Vice-Chairperson 
       shall be made except after consultation with the Chief Justice of India. 
                                                                                                      
     35        (7) No appointment of a person as a Judicial Member or a 
               Technical Member shall be made except on the recommendation of a 
               Selection Committee appointed by the Central Government consisting 
               of the following, namely:-- 
                      (a) Chairperson of the Tribunal         Chairperson of the Com- 
                                                                             mittee, ex officio 
     40       (b) Secretary to the Government            Member, ex-officio 
             of India in the Ministry of Environ- 
                                      ment and Forests. 
               (c) Secretary to the Government of          Member, ex-officio; 
              India in the Ministry of Law, Justice 
      45      and Company Affairs (Department
Page 15 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

                                          of Legal Affairs). 
              (d) Director-General, Council of              Member, ex-officio; 
                   Scientific and Industrial Research. 
              (e) An Environmentalist to be                   Member. 
      50     nominated by the Central Government 
                                                           
     Vice-Chair-      11. (1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office 
     person to act of the Chairperson by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, 
     as Chairper-         the Vice-Chairperson or, as the case may be, such one of the Vice- 
     son or to            Chairpersons as the Central Government may, by notification, 
     discharge his    authorise in this behalf, shall act as the Chairperson until the date on      5 
     functions in      which a new Chairperson appointed in accordance with the provisions 
     certain cir-       of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office. 
     cumstances. 
                                      (2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions 
                             owing to absence, illness or any other cause, the Vice-Chairperson 
                                or, as the case may be, such one of the Vice-Chairpersons as the   10 
                                 Central Government may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, 
                           shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on 
                           which the Chairperson resumes his duties. 
     Term of               12. The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Member shall 
     office,             hold office as-such for a term of five years from the date on which he15 
                           enters upon his office, but shall be eligible for re-appointment for 
                             another term of five years: 
                            Provided that no Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, or other 
                            Member shall hold .office as such after he has attained,- 
                           (a) in the case of the Chairperson, the age of seventy years;               20 
                           (b) in the case of the Vice-Chairperson, the age of sixty-five 
                              years; and 
                           (c) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty-two, 
                                years. 
     Resignation   13. (1) The Chairperson, Vice
-Chairperson, or other Member            25 
     and               may, by notice in writing underhis hand addressed to the President, 
     removal.      resign his office: 
                         Provided that the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other 
                         Member shall, unless he is permitted by the President to relinquish 
                         his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three           30 
                         months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly 
                      appointed as his successor enters upon his office or Until the expiry of 
                      his term of office, whichever is the earliest. 
                      (2) The Chairperson, Vice Chairperson or any other Member 
                      shall not be removed from his office except by an order made by the        35 
                      President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after 
                      an inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court in which such 
                      Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other Member had been informed 
                      of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of 
                      being heard in-respect of those charges.                                                  40 
Page 16 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

                      (3) The Central Government may, by rules regulate the proce- 
                      dure for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the 
                      Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other Member referred to in sub- 
                      section (2). 
Salaries and   14. The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms 45 
allowances     and conditions bf service (including pension gratuity and other 
and other       retirement benefits) of, the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other 
terms and       Member shall be such as may be prescribed-- 
conditions of 
service of         Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other 
Chairperson,     terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson         50 
Vice-Chair-      or other Member shall be varied to his disadvantage after his 
person and        appointment. 
other Mem- 
bers. 
                   15. On ceasing to hold office,-                                                       Provision as 
                   (a) the Chairperson 
of the Tribunal shall be ineligible for                   to the holding 
                   further employment either under the Government of India or           of office by 
                   under the Government of a State;                                                       Chair-person 
                                                                                                                        etc., on  
                                                                                                                        ceasing to 
     5            (b)the Vice
-Chairperson of the Tribunal shall, subject to the          be such 
                   other provisions of this Act, be eligible for appointment as the         Chairperson 
                                                                                                                                   etc. 
                   Chairperson of the Tribunal, but not for any other employment         
                   either under the Government of India or under the Government                               
                                                                                                  of a 
State;                                                                       
   10            (c) a Member (other than the Chairperson 
or Vice-Chair-person) 
                   of the Tribunal shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, 
                   be eligible for appointment as the Chairperson or Vice- 
                   Chairperson of the Tribunal or as the Chairperson, Vice- 
                   or Member of any other Tribunal, but not for any other 
   15           employment either under the Government of India or under the 
                   Government of a State; 
                  (d) the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other Member shall 
                   not appear, act or plead before the Tribunal. 
                   Explanation--For the purposes of this section, employment 
   20           under the Government of India or under the Government of a State 
                  includes employment under any local or other authority within the     
                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                        
                  territory of  India or under the control of the Government of India or 
                 under any corporation or society owned or controlled by the 
                 Government. 
25            16. The Chairperson shall exercise such financial and administra-    Financial and 
                 tire powers over the Benches as may be vested in him under the     administrative 
                 rules:                                                                                             powers of 
                                                                                                                      Chair-person 
                                                                                                                                                            
Page 17 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

                 Provided that the Chairperson shall have authority to delegate                                    
                  such of his financial and administrative powers as he may think fit to    
35            the Vice-Chairperson or any other officer of the Tribunal, subject to 
                 the condition that the Vice-Chairperson or such officer shall, while 
                 exercising such delegated powers, continue to act under the direction, 
                 control and supervision of the Chairperson. 
 
                 17. (1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and    Staff of the 
30             categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the  Tribunal. 
                  Tribunal in the discharge of its functions and provide the Tribunal 
                  with such officers and other employees as it may think fit. 
                 (2) The officers and other employees of the Tribunal shall 
                 discharge their functions under the general superintendence of the 
40             Chairperson. 
                (3) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the 
          officers and other employees of the Tribunal shall be such as may  
          be prescribed. 
                18. (1) Where any Benches of the Tribunal are constituted, the     Distribution 
45            Central Government may, from time to time, by notification, makeof business 
                provisions as to the distribution of the business of the Tribunal       amongst the 
                amongst the Benches and specify the matters which may be dealt  Benches. 
                with by each Bench.                                                     
                                                                                                                   
               (2) If any question arises as to whether any matter falls within 
50          the purview of the business allocated to a Bench, the decision of the 
               Chairperson shall be final. 
               Explanation - For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared 
              that the expression "matters" includes applications for interim relief. 
CHAPTER IV 
                JURISDICTION AND PROCEEDINGS OF THE TRIBUNAL, 
 
Bar of juris-              19. On and from the commencement of this Act, no court or 
diction,                other authority except the Tribunal shall have, is or be entitled to 
                               exercise, any jurisdiction, powers or authority to entertain any      5 
                        application or action for any claim for compensation which may be 
                                                         entertained or dealt with the by the Tribunal. 
Power of           20. On the application of any of the parties and after notice to the 
Chairperson    parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, 
to transfer             or on his own motion without such notice, the Chairperson may     10 
cases from          transfer any case pending before one Bench, for disposal, to any 
oneBench to    other Bench. 
another,       
Decision to     21.        If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any. point, 
be taken by   the point shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority, if 
majority.       there is a majority, but if the Members are equally divided, they shall     15 
                      state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference 
                      to the Chairperson who shall, either hear the point or points himself 
Page 18 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

                      or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more 
                            of the other Members and such point or points shall be decided 
                        according to the opinion of the majority of the members who have     20 
                   heard the case including those who first heard it.               
  
Deposit of                22. (1) Where any amount of compensation is ordered to be paid  6 of 199:. 
amount payable        under any award by the Tribunal on the ground of any damage to 
for damage to     environment, that amount shall be remitted to the authority specified 
environment.        under sub-section (3) of section 7A of the Public Liability Insurance   25 
                           Act, 1991 for being credited to the Environmental Relief Fund 
                       established under that section. 
                          (2) The amount of compensation credited to the Environmental 
                  Relief Fund under sub-section (1) may be utilised by such person or 
                      authority, in such manner and for such purposes of environment as        30 
            may be prescribed. 
 
Execution of         23. (I) An award made by the Tribunal under this Act shall be 
award or          executable by the Tribunal as a decree of civil court, and for this 
order of               purpose, the Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court. 
Tribunal. 
                               (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (I), the     35 
                         Tribunal may transmit to the Collector having jurisdiction over the 
                     area in which the accident has occurred the copy of the order made 
                                  by it for payment of relief as provided in the Public Liability 
                     Insurance Act, 1991 and the Collector shall execute the order in the     6 of 1991. 
                           same manner as if it were an order made by him under that Act.     40 
  
                            (3) Where the owner against whom the award or order is made 
                       by the Tribunal fails to make the payment or deposit the amount as 
                       directed by the Tribunal within the period specified in the award or 
                   order, such amount shall be recoverable from the owner as arrears of 
                                                                        land revenue or of public demand.   45 
  
Appeals.       24. (1) Save as provided in sub-section (2) and notwithstanding           5 of 1908. 
                anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or in any 
               other law, an appeal shall lie against any award or other order, not 
                being an interlocutory order, of the Tribunal to the Supreme Court 
                on one or more of the grounds specified in section 100 of the Code.       50 
                        (2) No appeal shall lie against an award or other order made by 
               the Tribunal with the consent of the patties. 
                        (3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a 
               period of ninety days from the date of the award or other order 
      5       appealed against: 
                        Provided that no appeal by the person who is required to pay 
               any amount in terms of such award shall be entertained by the 
               Supreme Court unless he has deposited with it the amount so
Page 19 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

               awarded in the manner directed by the Supreme Court: 
      10     Provided further that the Supreme Court may entertain the appeal 
               after the expiry of the said period of ninety days, if it is satisfied that 
               the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the 
               appeal in time. 
CHAPTER V 
    15                                                      MISCELLANEOUS 
               25. Whoever fails to comply with any order made by the                              
                        for 
               Tribunal, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which                 
to 
                      may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to ten lakh      
comply with 
                      rupees or with both.                                                                              orders Of Tri. 
                                                                                                                                  bunal 
20              26. (I) Where any offence under this Act has been committed   by               Offences 
by                               a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed                 
companies. 
              was directly in charge of, and was responsible to, the company 
               for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the 
             company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be 
25         Tribunal to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
             Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such  
              person liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he 
                 proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that 
           he excerised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
30       offence. 
             (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where 
            an offence under this Act has been committed by a company and it is 
            proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
           connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
35       director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such 
          director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to 
          be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against 
          and punished accordingly. 
                      Explanation.--For the purposes of this section,-- 
             40    (a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a 
                     firm or other association of individuals; and 
                     (b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the 
                     firm. 
                     27. All proceedings before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be             Proceedings 
45 of 1860. 45  judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228   before the 
                      of the,, Indian Penal Code.                                                                 Tribunal to 
                                                                                                                               be judicial 
                                                                                                                               proceedings. 
 
Page 20 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

45 of 1860.   28. The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Members and         Members 
                  the officers and other employees of the Tribunal shall be deemed to         and staff 
                  be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian              of Tribunal 
            50   Penal Code.                                                                                          to be' 
                                                                                                                               public ser. 
                                                                                                                               rants. 
Protection      29. "No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie 
of action         against the Central Government or against the Chairperson, Vice- 
taken in          Chairperson or other Member of the Tribunal or any other person 
good faith.      Authorized by the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson or other Member 
                      for anything which is in good-faith done or intended to be done in        5 
                      pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder. 
Act to have      30. Save as provided in the Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991,       6 of 1991. 
overriding        the provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
effect.                inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being 
                     in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other      10 
                     than this Act. 
Power to     31: (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make 
make rules.  rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act. 
                   (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the 
                   foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the                 15 
                   following matters, namely:-- 
                                    (a) the particulars which an application shall contain, the 
                                  documents and the fee which shall be accompanied with it and 
                                  the limit of annual income of a person so as to enable him to 
                           make application without paying any fee, under sub-section (5)     20 
                           of section 4; 
(b) any such matter in respect of which the Tribunal shall 
            have powers of a civil court, under clause (i) of sub-Section (4) of 
            section 5; 
(c) the case or cases which, having regard to the nature of           25 
the questions involved, requires or require to be decided by a  
Bench or more than two members, under clause (d) of sub section  
(3) of section 9; 
(d) procedure for the investigation of misbehaviour or 
                      incapacity of the Chairperson, Vice
-Chairperson or other                      30 
            Member of the Tribunal under-sub-section (3) of section 13; 
                               (e) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other 
            terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson, Vice-- 
            Chairperson and other Members under section 14; 
                               (f) financial and administrative powers of the Chairperson      35 
                               over the Benches under section 16; 
                               (g) the salaries and allowances and conditions of service of 
                                    the officers and other employees of the Tribunal under  
Sub-section (3) of section 17;
Page 21 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

(h) the person or the authority by whom, the manner in               40 
which and the purposes of environment for which, the amount  
of compensation credited to the Environmental Relief Fund  
shall be utilised under sub-section (2) of section 22, and 
                             (i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, 
                      prescribed. 
                      (3) Every *** rule made under other provisions of this Act shall       45 
                    be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
                       Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
              which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 50 following  
the session or the .successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in  
making any modification in the *** rule or both Houses agree that the 
 ***rule should not be made, the *** rule shall thereafter have effect only  
in such modified form or be of no effect,  as the case may be; so,  
however, that any such modification or                                                      55 
            annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that *** rule. 
 
Page 22 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

15 
THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 3 (1)] 
HEADS UNDER WHICH COMPENSATION FOR DAMAGES MAY BE CLAIMED 
(a) Death; 
(b) Permanent, temporary, total or partial disability or other injury or sickness; 
(c) Loss of wages due to total or partial disability or permanent or temporary disability; 
(d) Medical expenses incurred for treatment of 'injuries or sickness: 
(e) Damages to private property; 
(f) Expenses incurred by the Government or a ny local authority in providing relief, aid an
d
rehabilitation to the affected persons; 
(g) Expenses incurred by Government for any adminis trative or legal action or to cope with any. 
harm or damage, including compensation for environmental degradation and restoration of the quality of
environment; 
(h) Loss to Government or local au thority arising out of, or connect ed with, the activity causing any 
damage; 
(i) Claims on account of any harm, da mage or destruction to the fauna including milch and draught
animals and aquatic fauna; 
(/) Claims on account of any harm, damage or destruction to flor a including aquatic flora, crops,
vegetables, trees and orchards; 
(k) Claims including cost of restoration on account of any harm or damage to environment including 
pollution of soil, air, water, land and eco-systems; 
(l) Loss and destruction of any property other than private property; 
(m) Loss of business or employment or both; 
(n) Any other claim arising out of, or connected with, any activity of handling of hazardous 
substance. 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 23 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

APPENDIX 
Minutes   of the Meetings of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests 
XIII 
THIRTEENTH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science& Technology, 
Environment & Forests met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 17th August, 1993 in Committee 
Room No. 63, First, Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Syed Sibtey Razi---- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.         Prof. M.G.K. Menon 
3.         Shri Suresh Pachouri 
4.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel 
5.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh 
LOK SABHA 
6.         Shri Oscar Fernandes 
7.         Shri Digvijaya Singh 
8.         Shri Shankarrao D. Kale 
9.         Shri P.C. Chacko 
10.       Kumari Frida Topno 
11.
              Shrimati Vasundhara Raje  
12.              Shrimati Bhavana Chikhalia  
13.        Shri Ram Prasad Singh 
14.       Shrimati Saroj Dubey 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director 
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary 
Smt. VandanaGarg, Under Secretary 
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forests 
Shri R. Rajamani, Secretary 
Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary 
Shri J.C. Kaia, Joint Secretary 
Shri Mukul Sanwal, Joint Secretary 
Shri N. Bagchi, Director 
2.         The Committee took up for consideration the National Environment Tribunal Bill, 1992, referred
to it by the Hon'ble Ch airman, Rajya Sabha, in consultati on with the Speaker, Lok Sabha, fo
r
examination and report. The Secretar y of the Ministry of Environment & Forests at the outset gave a
background of the necessity for the Bill and enlightened the Commi ttee about its various provisions.
Thereafter, the Members sought clar ifications from the Secretary and other re presentatives of the
Ministry of Environment & Fore sts on various points relating to the provisions of the Bill. Afte r
discussion, it was decided to invite amendments to the Bill, from the Members of the Committee and the
Chairman, accordin gly, re quested them to send the same  to the Secretariat office b y 6.00 p.m. on
Page 24 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

Thursday, the 19th August, 1993. The discussion on tile Bill remained inconclusive. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m. to meet again at 5.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 
18th August, 1993. 
           XIV                   
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, 
Environment & Forests met at 5.00  p.m. on Wednesday the 18th Augus t, 1993 in Committee Room 'A',
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi ---- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.         Shri Suresh Pachouri 
3.         Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel 
4.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh 
LOK SABHA 
5.         Shri Oscar Fernandes 
6.         Shri Shankarrao D. Kale 
7.         Shri Harchand Singh 
8.         Kumari Frida Topno 
9.         Shri Balraj Pasi 
10.       Shrimati Bhavana Chikhalia 
11.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh 
12.       Shrimati Saroj Dubey 
13.       Shri Jitendra Nath Das 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director 
Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary 
Smt. Vandana Garg, Under Secretary 
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary        
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forests 
Shri R. Rajamani, Secretary 
Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary 
Shri Mukul Sanwal, Joint Secretary 
Shri J.C. Kala, Joint Secretary 
Shri N. Bagchi, Director 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs (Department of Legal 
Affairs
) 
Page 25 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

Dr. P.C. Rao, Secretary 
Dr. S.C. Jain, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser 
 
2.         The Committee took up for further consideration the National Environment Tribunal 
Bill, 1992. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests replied to the clarifications sought 
by the Members on the provisions of the Bill. Thereafter the Secretary, Department of Legal 
Affairs explained at some length, the legal aspects of the Bill and clarified the position with 
respect to certain points raised by the Members. 
 
3.         The discussion on the Bill remained inconclusive.
 
 
            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
 
 
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 6.20 p.m. 
XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment 
& Forests met at 10.00 a.m. on Wednesday the 25th August, 1993 in Committee Room No. 63, 
Parliament House, New Delhi.  
PRESENT 
      1.      Syed Sibtey Razi ---- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.      Shri N. Giri Prasad 
3.      Prof. M.G.K. Menon 
4.      Shri Suresh Pachouri 
5.      Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel 
LOK SABHA 
6.      Shri Oscar Frenandes 
7.         Shri Shankarrao D. Kale  
8.         Shri Harchand Singh  
9.         Kumari Frida Tqpno 
10.    Shri Balraj Pasi 
11.    Shri Ram Prasad,Singh 
12.    Shrimati Saroj Dubey 
13.    Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy 
14.    Shri E. Ahamed 
  
   SECRETARIAT 
               Shri N.C. Joshi, Joiut Director 
               Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary         . 
               Smt. Vandana Garg, Under Secretary 
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forest~ 
         Shri R. Ra
jamani, Secretary 
Page 26 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

         Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary  
         Shri J.C. Kala, Joint Secretary  
         Shri Mukul Sanwal, Joint Secretary  
         Shri N. Bagchi, Director 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs 
               Dr. S.C. Jain, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser (Department of Legal Affairs) 
               Shri B.R. Atrey, Joint Secretary, Legislative Department 
2.         The Chairman, at the outset, informed  the Members that the meeting fixed for the 24th August,
1993 had to be adjourned for wa nt of quorum. The Committee th en took up clause by clause
consideration of the National En vironment Tribunal Bill, 1992 alo ngwith the amendments thereto
received from the Members. 
3.         The discussion on the clause by clause consideration of the Bill and the amendments thereto 
remained inconclusive. 
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 11.30 a.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 26th 
August, 1993.
 
 
Page 27 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
 
            The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, 
Environment & Forests met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday the 26th August, 1993 in Committee 
Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
 
PRESENT 
      1.      Syed Sibtey Razi-----Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
      2.      Shri N. Giri Prasad 
      3.      Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi 
      4.      Prof. M.G.K. Menon 
      5.      Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel 
LOK SABHA 
 
      6.      Shri Oscar Fernandes 
      7.      Shri  Shankarrao D. Kale 
      8.      Shri  Harchand Singh 
      9.      Kumari Frida Topno 
    10.      Shri Balraj Pasi 
    11.      Shrimati Bhavana Chikhalia 
    12.      Shri Ram Prasad Singh 
    13.      Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy 
 
SECRETARIAT 
               Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director 
               Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary 
               Smt. Vandana Garg, Under Secretary 
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forests 
               Shri Rajamani, Secretary 
               Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary 
               Shri T. George Joseph, Joint Secretary 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs 
               Shri B.R. Atrey, Joint Secretary, and Legislative Counsel (Legislative Department) 
               Dr. S.C. Jain, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser (Department of Legal Affairs) 
2.         The Committee resumed clause by clause consideration of the National Environment 
Tribunal Bill, 1992. 
            After discussion, clauses 2, 3 & 6 to 32 and the schedule were adopted without any 
amendments. 
               Clause 4 was deleted. 
               The following amendments in clause 5 was accepted:-- 
               At page 4 after the proviso to clause 5 (1) the following sub clause be added, namely:-- 
               2 'The Tribunal shall have the power to take up cases for claim for 
compensation                                            suo-motu ' 
               Clause 5, as amended was ado
pted.
Page 28 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

               The following amendment of a general nature was accepted:-- 
               The words 'Chairman' and 'Vice-Chairman' wherever they occur in the Bill be 
               substituted .by the words 'Chair-person' and 'Vice-Chairperson'. 
 
               Clause 1, the Enacting Formula,  Preamble and the Title were adopted, with the following
amendments:- 
 
               Page 1: Line 10, for "Forty-third" substitute "Forty-Fourth". 
               Page 1: Line 15 and in the Title of the Bill for ,'1992" Substitute "1993".
 
 
               3. The Chairman authorised the Joint Secretary and Legislativ e Counsel in the Ministry o f
Law, Justice & Company Affairs (Leg islative Deptt.) to pr epare a manuscript copy of the Bill amended
by the Committee to carry out amendments and also to make consequential changes in 
the Bill. 
               4. The Committee then adjourned at 11.30 a.m. to meet again at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 13th
September, 1993 to adopt the draft report and the amended Bill. 
 
Page 29 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, 
Environment & Forests met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 13th September, 1993 in CommitteeRoom No.
'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1.      Syed Sibtey Razi----Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2.      Shri N. Giri Prasad 
3.      Prof. M.G.K. Menos 
4.      Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel 
5.      Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh 
6.      Shri Ram Gopal Yadav 
LOK SABHA
 
7.      Shri Oscar Fernandes 
8.      Shri K.G. Shivappa 
9.      Shri Shankarrao D. Kale  
10.        Shri Rama Chandra Rath  
11.        Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav  
12     Shri Harchand Singh 
13.    Shri P.C. Chacko 
14     Shri Ram Prasad Singh 
15.    Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy 
16.    Shri E. Ahamed 
SECRETARIAT
 
         Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director 
         Shri Nand Lal, Under Secretary 
         Shri Vandana Garg, Under Secretary 
         Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer 
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forests  
               Shri Sarweshar Jha, Joint Secretary  
               Dr. Rasheed Hasan, Deputy Director 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice & Company Affairs (Legislative Department) 
Shri B.R. Atrey, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel  
Shri P.D. Singh, Assistant Legislative Counsel 
2.         The Committee considered and adopted the Bill, as amended. 
3.         The Committee then considered and adopted the draft Report with minor changes. 
4.         The Chairman announced that the Minut es of Dissent, if any, ma y be sent to Rajya Sabha
Secretariat so as to reach them by 4.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 15th September, 1993. 
5.         The Committee placed on record its appreciati on for the assistance rendered by the officials o f
the Ministry of Environment and Forests and Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs. 
6.         While considering its future programme, the Committee decided to hold its next meetings on the
Page 30 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm

22nd and 23rd September, 1993. 
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 3.55 p.m. 
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Page 31 of 312nd REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/2ndreport.htm