PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 221
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/PHALGUNA, 1933 (SAKA)MARCH, 2012/PHALGUNA, 1933 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY , 
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIRST REPORT
ON
THE NUCLEAR SAFETY REGULATORY AUTHORITY BILL, 2011
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 6 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 6 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 6 MARCH, 2012)
TH  
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 6 MARCH, 2012)
ST
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21  MARCH, 2012)
ST
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21  MARCH, 2012)
ST
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21  MARCH, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21  MARCH, 2012)ST

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY FIRST REPORT
ON
THE NUCLEAR SAFETY REGULATORY AUTHORITY BILL, 2011
(PRESENTED TO THE HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 6 TH MARCH, 2012)
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 6 TH MARCH, 2012)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21 ST MARCH, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21 ST MARCH, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2012/PHALGUNA, 1933 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—9
4. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 11—70
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS  OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................ 71—99

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
*2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Anil H. Lad
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Dr. Chandan Mitra
6. Shri Saman Pathak
7. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
8. Shri Jabir Husain
9. Dr. Barun Mukherji
10. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
12. Shri Ninong Ering
#13. V acant
14. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
15. Shri Abdul Rahman
16. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
17. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
18. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
19. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
20. Shri Cosme Francisco Caitano Sardinha
21. Shri Shibu Soren
22. Dr. Rajan Sushant
23. Shri Pradeep Tamta
24. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava
25. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
26. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
**27. Shri Kristapa Nimmala
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
* Shri Janardan Dwivedi re-nominated w.e.f. 2 nd February, 2012.
# Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 3 rd January, 2012 on his
resignation from the Membership of the Committee.
** Nominated w.e.f. 25 th November, 2011.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred and Twenty First Report on The Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011.
2. In its meetings held on 16
th November, 2011 and 5 th and 6 th January, 2012; the Committee
heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy and various experts on “The
Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011”. The Committee took up clause-by-clause
consideration of the said Bill on 16
th January, 2012.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department and experts for
rendering their valuable views/clarifications sought by the Committee.
4. In the meeting held on 5 th March, 2012 the Committee considered the draft report and
adopted the same.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
March 5, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

1
REPORT
Nuclear technology, indeed, is a double edged sword. While, it has tremendous potential of
providing energy sustainability on the one hand, it also carries with it danger of causing devastating
and catastrophic effect on the people and the environment. Chernobyl incident in Russia, 3 Mile
accident in USA and more recently the Fukushima incident in Japan are burning examples of the
disastrous consequences that unintended nuclear incident can cause. This is the reason why this
technology has to be utilised not only with utmost caution and care but also only when it is
absolutely necessary and inevitable. It is in this context that the concept of a regulatory authority
separate and independent from the proponents and promoters of the atomic energy, has emerged.
2. Evolution of the concept of a regulatory authority in India started with setting up of a
safety committee during the commissioning of Tarapur Atomic Power Station in 1969. This
Committee was set up to advise on matter relating to safety and to give clearance for the first
criticality and subsequent power operations of the Station. Later on, a Design and Operations
Review Committee, was constituted to independently monitor the safety aspects of Tarapur Atomic
Power Station operations. Thereafter, a Safety Review Committee was set up by the Deptt. of
Atomic Energy on February 3, 1972 to advise on safety matters related to commissioning and
operations of Unit-I of Rajasthan Atomic Power Station, consisting of experts drawn from the
Deptt. of Atomic Energy. However, on December 2, 1975, the Safety Review Committee was
reconstituted to deal with major safety policies and issues in all the Units under the Deptt. of
Atomic Energy. On July 23, 1979, a Committee was constituted with Dr. M.D. Karkhanawala as
Chairman and Shri S.D. Soman as the Member Secretary to study the terms of reference of the
Safety Review Committee, its functions, the modalities of reporting by the Units, as well as, the
impediments faced by the Committee. This Committee was reconstituted on February 18, 1980
with Shri V .N. Meckoni as the Chairman and Shri S.D. Soman as the Member Secretary. The
Committee submitted its report titled ‘Reorganisation of Regulatory and Safety Functions’ in
February, 1981. The Committee recommended creation of Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB)
to specify safety standards and help Deptt. of Atomic Energy frame rules and regulations to
enforce regulatory and safety requirements envisaged under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962. The
Committee had also recommended that AERB should be made a statutory body to give it a legal
status.
3. Accordingly, Atomic Energy Regulatory Board was constituted in 1983 by a notification
issued under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 which reports to the Atomic Energy Commission. The
Government has, now with a view to preserve the functional independence of the regulatory board
and to give it a statutory status, brought the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill.
4. The Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha, referred*
‘The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011’ (Annexure-I) as introduced in Lok Sabha on
7
th September, 2011 and pending therein, to the Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests for examination and report.
5. The Committee held its first meeting on the 16 th November, 2011, for a preliminary
discussion on the various provisions of the Bill with the Secretary and other senior officials of the
Department of Atomic Energy. Besides, the Committee held three more meetings on the 5
th, 6 th and
16th January and 14 th February, 2012 to hear various experts, organizations, Secretary of the Deptt.
of Atomic Energy and National Security Advisor on the various aspects of the Bill.
*Rajya Shbha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II dated 16 th September, 2012.

2
6. In view of the wider ramification of the Bill, the Committee issued a Press Release in the
national dailies and other regional newspapers on the 1 st October, 2011, inviting memoranda
containing suggestions/views/comments of experts/institutions/organizations interested in the subject
matter of the Bill. In response to the Press Release, the Committee received seven memoranda on
the Bill, which were examined and forwarded to the Department of Atomic Energy for their
comments/observations. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan, M.P. and a Member of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, also gave
his detailed comments/suggestions on the Bill and the comments of the Department of Atomic
Energy were also obtained on them.
7. The Committee also heard the views of experts drawn from various fields namely, Dr. G.
Balachandran, Consulting Fellow, Institute for Defence Studies and Analyses, New Delhi; Shri L.V .
Krishnan, Former Director, Safety Group, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakam;
Shri M.R.Madhavan, Head, PRS Legislative; Shri Prabir Purkayastha, Delhi Science Forum; Dr.
D.N. Sharma, President, Indian Association of Radiation Protection, Mumbai; Dr. A.
Gopalakrishnan, Former Chairman, Atomic Energy Regulatory Board and Shri Shivshankar Menon,
National Security Advisor.
8. The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill at its meeting held on the
16th January, 2012. The Committee considered the draft Report at its meeting held on the 31 st
January, 2012. Subsequently, the Committee decided to hear the views of Dr. A. Gopalakrishnan,
Former Chairman, Atomic Energy Regulatory Board and Shri Shivshankar Menon, National Security
Advisor. The Committee heard their views on 14
th February, 2012. The Committee finally
considered the draft report at its meeting held on the 5 th March, 2012 and adopted it by broad
consensus. The two Members namely, Dr. Anup Kumar Saha and Shri Saman Pathak, however,
submitted identical minute of dissent which has been appended to the report as Appendix-I.
9. Salient features of the Bill
9.1 The salient features of the Bill are as follows:
(i) Establishment of a Council for Nuclear Safety with the Prime Minister of India as its
Chairperson and the Union Ministers in Charge of the Ministries of Environment and
Forest, External Affairs, Home Affairs, Science and Technology and any other
minister nominated by the Central Government as its Members, the Cabinet Secretary
and the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission as Ex-officio Members of the Council
and such number of eminent experts as may be nominated by the Central Government
to the Council as Members.
(ii) Establishment of an Authority to be called the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority
consisting of a Chairperson, 2 whole-time Members and part-time Members not
exceeding four. The Chairperson and the Members of the Authority shall be persons
of outstanding ability, impeccable integrity and having distinguished professional
record and experience.
(iii) The Chairperson and Members of the Authority shall be selected by Search
Committees constituted by the Council of Nuclear Safety and appointed by the Central
Government. Chairperson of the Authority, however, shall be a Member of the Search
Committee constituted for the appointment of Members.
(iv) The term of the office of Chairperson and other Members shall be three years and
they shall be eligible for reappointment for a further period of three years.

3
(v) The Authority shall inter-alia devise and implement policies and programmes for
radiation safety and nuclear safety, ensure high quality of safety management at all
places, where nuclear and radiation related activities are carried out and ensure
transparency by systematic public outreach on matters related to nuclear safety.
(vi) The Bill empowers the Central Government, to exempt from the jurisdiction of the
Authority, for the purposes of national defence and security, any nuclear material,
radioactive material, facilities, premises, activities and the assets and areas associated
therewith and, establish by order, in writing, one or more regulatory bodies and
demarcate the responsibility thereof to discharge the functions which but for such
exemption were within the jurisdiction of the Authority.
(vii) Establishment of an Appellate Authority (to be constituted by the Council), as and
when required, to hear the appeals from the orders of the Authority. The Chairperson
of the Appellate Authority shall be a person who is, or has been a judge of the
Supreme Court or Chief Justice of a High Court. The Appellate Authority shall have
not more than two members who shall be eminent scientist(s) holding or having held
the post of Secretary or equivalent to the Government of India in a Ministry or
Department or an institution dealing with Science and Technology.
(viii) Provision of penalty of imprisonment for a term which may extend upto five years,
or fine, or both for the offences arising out of contravention of the provisions of the
Act, the rules and regulations made thereunder, and the orders passed under the Act.
(ix) Bar of jurisdiction of the Civil Courts in the matters within the jurisdiction of the
Authority or other regulatory bodies under the Act.
(x) The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board shall stand dissolved on and from the date of
establishment of the Authority. The Chairman and Members of Atomic Energy
Regulatory Board shall be transferred as such to function as Chairperson and
Members under the Act and be deemed to be the Chairperson and Members of the
Authority under the Act until the Chairperson and Members of the Authority are
appointed in accordance with the provisions of the Act.
10. OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
Clause-wise observations/recommendations of the Committee are as follows:-
10.1 It has been provided in Clause 1(3) of the Bill that the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority
Act, 2011 shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may by notification
appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act. The Committee,
while appreciating that considering the nature of its various provisions, such flexibility may be
necessary, however, felt that such open ended discretion to enforce the various provisions of the
Act may not be desirable and an upper limit may be prescribed for enforcement of all the
provisions of the Act. When the Committee enquired about the rationale behind this provision and
desired to know as to whether an upper limit of 120 days or 180 days could be laid in the Act
to ensure that various provisions of the Bill are enforced in a time bound manner, the Department
of Atomic Energy replied that this is a standard Clause incorporated in many other legislations. The
Central Government would require time to frame the roles which would be highly technical in
nature and also to establish the machinery to give effect to the provisions of the Act. Therefore,
stipulating a time limit of 120 or 180 days may not be feasible in this case.
10.2 The Committee feels that the logic given by the Department is not convincing and
it is advisable to fix the upper limit of 120 days or 180 days in the Act for enforcement

4
of all the provisions of the Act. Such a provision exists in the Right to Information Act.
This will ensure that various Authorities/bodies envisaged in the Bill are established in a
time bound manner {Clause 1(3)}.
10.3 Some of the experts who appeared before the Committee expressed several reservations on
establishment, composition and functions of the Council of Nuclear Safety as provided in Clause
5 of the Bill. While some experts were of the view that there was no need for a Council of Nuclear
Safety, others were of the view that the Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission should not
be included in the Council as Ex-officio Member. A view was also expressed that the Defence
Minister should also be included in the Council.
10.4 The Committee feels that the composition of the Council is fairly large with Prime
Minister as Chairperson and 6 Union Ministers as Members, two Ex-officio Members and
such number of eminent experts as nominated by the Central Government as Members. The
argument of the Atomic Energy for having such a large Council is that broad-basing is
necessary in view of multi-disciplinary nature of the subject of nuclear safety.
10.5 The Committee is of the view that in order to make the functioning of the Council
more effective, the number of Members of the Council needs to be restricted to a reasonable
limit. For this purpose, the field, which has been left wide open for inclusion of as many
number of eminent experts as nominated by the Central Government to be Members of the
Council, needs to be restricted by imposing an upper limit of five on the number of Experts
who could be nominated by the Central Government This may be done by inserting - “not
exceeding five’ in Clause 50) of the Bill at the appropriate place (Clause 5).
10.6 Clause 9 of the Bill provides that the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority shall consist of
a Chairperson, two whole time and part time Members not exceeding four. Thus, while the number
of whole time Members including Chairperson comes to three, the number of part-time Members
could be four. If this is read with Clause 15(3) of the Bill which provides that all questions which
come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority vote of the Members
present and voting, it becomes evident that the part-time Members may have a decisive say on the
issues to be decided by the Authority by virtue of their number being more than the whole-time
Members.
10.7 When the Committee desired to know the reasons for keeping the number of full-time
Members less than the part time Members, the Deptt. of Atomic Energy replied that the group of
three full time Members including the Chairperson would also be responsible for dealing with day
to day functions of the Authority, the four part time Members representing different disciplines
relevant to the functions of the Authority would contribute their expertise and take equal
responsibility in the decision making process. The Secretary, Deptt. of Atomic Energy further added
that though they would be part time Members of the Authority, they would be permanent Faculties/
Directors drawn from prominent institutions like IIT or CSIR, etc. Thus, they would contribute
their expertise and take equal responsibility in the decision making process of the Authority. The
Committee accepts the reasoning given by the Deptt. and feels that the number of part
time Members as provided in the Bill may be retained.
10.8 The Committee, however, expresses its reservation over the nomenclature - ‘Part-
time Members’ as it does not seem appropriate and in keeping with the dignity of the
Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority.
10.9 Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy while clarifying the issue stated that the provision
for part-time Members in the Authority had been made keeping in view the expected workload on
the Authority based on the practical experience. While full-time Members of the Authority shall be

5
salaried employees of the Authority, part-time Members would be not so. The provision of part-
time Members had also been made with view to extract impartial and expert advice.
10.10 The Committee feels that the Authority may not require 7 whole-time Members but
to call a Member of the Authority a part-time Member does not look dignified. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the nomenclature ‘Part-time Members’ as provided
in Clause 9(1) (iii) may be suitably changed to a more dignified nomenclature. [Clause 9]
10.11 Clause 10(1) of the Bill provides that the Council shall constitute a Search Committee for
the selection of Chairperson and another Search Committee for the Members of the Authority. It
further provides that the Chairperson and Members of the Search Committee shall be from amongst
persons of eminence having knowledge and experience in the field of science, engineering and
technology. The Committee finds that the number of Members of the Search Committee
which is proposed to be constituted for the selection of Chairperson and Members of the
Authority has not been specified. The Committee feels that the number of Members of the
search committee which is going to play a vital role in the scheme of the things of the Bill
should not be left open to interpretation or discretion. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the composition of the search Committee should be clearly specified.
[Clause10]
10.12 Clause 11(1) of the Bill provides that the Chairperson and other Members of the Authority
shall hold office for  a term of three years and shall be eligible for  reappointment for a further
period of three years. The Committee  feels that the provision as contained in the Bill does not
specify as to how many times, reappointment for a further period of  three years is permissible
under this provision. In case, the provision is to be used to grant repeated extensions, at the
discretion of Government, it may impinge on the functional autonomy of  the Authority. When the
Committee enquired from the Secretary, Department of  Atomic Energy, about the justification of
inclusion of such a provision in the Bill, he stated that normally not more than two terms were
given. When he was asked whether it would be desirable to modify the provision by adding – ‘not
exceeding two terms’, he did not seem to agree to the suggestion. He explained that a Member
can become a Chairperson. He further stated that normally respect was given to age and
experience. The Committee, however, does not agree with the explanation given by the
Secretary and recommends that it should be clarified in the Bill that Chairperson and the
Members of the Authority shall be eligible for reappointment for not more than one term
of three years. [Clause 11]
10.13 Clause 20(2) (h) provides that the Authority shall specify by regulations inter-alia, hours of
work, minimum leave and requirements of periodical medical examination of  employees. Some of  the
Experts who deposed before the Committee were of the view that  these were archaic provisions and
were no more in existence and hence these should be  deleted from the Bill. The Committee feels
that with the advancement in the technology  for monitoring exposure to radiation level of the
employees, there is no need for a  regulatory authority to specify hours of work, minimum
leave, etc. When the Committee sought the comments of the Dep artment of Atomic Energy
on this issue, it was stated that the Dep artment did not have any views against the suggestion
of deleting these provisions from Clause 20(2)(h). The Committee recommends that they may
be deleted, being neither necessary nor desirable. [Clause 20(2)(h)]
10.14 Clause 20(2)(q) provides that the Authority shall discharge its functions and powers in a
manner consistent with the international obligations of India. T he Committee is of the view that
while international obligations existing on the date the Authority is established may, be
respected, but after establishment of the Authority, before undertaking any international
obligations on any aspect within the jurisdiction of the Authority, the Authority shall be
consulted and its views taken into account.  [Clause 20(2)(q)]

6
10.15 The Committee finds that Clause 21 of the Bill provides that the Authority while discharging
its powers and functions shall not act against the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India,
the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality.
The Committee fails to understand the rationality of such a provision being included in the Bill. The
proposed Authority is contemplated to be the highest regulatory authority in the country consisting
of persons of outstanding ability, impeccable integrity and standing, having distinguished
professional record to be empanelled by Search Committees set up by the Council of Nuclear
Safety headed by the Prime Minister. If the creditability of persons with such an exalted, lofty and
high stature is looked askance at and it is apprehended that they could be indecent or immoral, is
something very surprising. The Committee is of the opinion that Clause 21 is not at all
relevant in the context of this Bill and hence may be deleted. The Committee also
recommends that identical words appearing in Clause 42(1) of the Bill may also be
reconsidered by Government Alternatively, the Committee recommends insertion of
following proviso to Clause 21 and 42(1):-
Provided that nothing contained in this Clause shall be construed to empower the
Central Government to interfere with the exercise by the Authority of its powers and
functions under this Act. [Clause 21 and 42(1)]
10.16 Clause 24 provides that the Authority may delegate such of its powers and functions as it
may deem necessary to a State Government or such officer or authority subordinate to State
Government When the Committee enquired as to how a highly specialized job which the Authority
was supposed to discharge could be delegated to a State Government or such officer or Authority
subordinate to State Government, the Department of Atomic Energy informed the Committee that
the Authority, in exercise of the powers delegated to it, would be under the statutory obligation to
ensure that sub-delegation was in accordance with the object and purposes of the Act. The
Committee is not satisfied with the explanation given by the Deptt. and feels that the powers and
functions of the Authority which are of highly technical and specialized nature having direct bearing
on the safety and security of the public and the environment, should not be delegated to the
Generalists. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Bill may specify that the
delegation of powers and functions by the Authority, shall be made only to such officers or
authorities of the State Government as have necessary competence to efficiently and
effectively perform the delegated functions. [Clause 24]
10.17 The Central Gov ernment may establish one or more regulatory bodies as provided in the
Clause 25(2) of the Bill. The word ‘may’ leaves scope of discretion to establish or not to establish
regulatory bodies even where exemption from jurisdiction of the Authority has been made under
Clause 25(1) of the Bill. The Committee feels that such a discretion is not justified as threat to public
safety from nuclear material and facilities exempted from the purview of the Authority is as serious
as from the ones within the purview of the Authority and as such there is an equal sense of urgency
and necessity to regulate them too. The Committee further noted that in situations of extreme
emergency, recourse to Clause 27 was possible. The Deptt. of Atomic Energy clarified that purpose
of Clause 25 was precisely to ensure that material, facilities, premises and activities exempted from
NSRA could be regulated to ensure that the use of radiation and atomic energy was safe. The reply
lacks conviction and determination and the Committee, therefore, recommends that it should
be mandatory for the Central Government to bring the facilities and activities exempted
under Clause 25(1) of this Bill on grounds of the national defence and security from the
purview of the Authority under one or other regulatory body to ensure that sufficient
safeguards are put in place to assure citizens of nuclear safety and radiation safety.  [Clause 15]
10.18 Clause 25(2) provides that the Central Government may by order establish one or more
Regulatory Bodies for regulating the material, facilities, activities, premises, assets and areas, etc.

7
exempted from the jurisdiction of the authority for national defence and security purposes. The
Committee finds that the number of such Regulatory Bodies to be established by Government has
not been specified in the Bill leaving a scope of establishment of as many Regulatory Bodies as
desired by the Government. The Committee feels that there is hardly a need for creating a number
of other Regulatory Bodies as it would unnecessarily burden the public exchequer. Ideally one or
two other Regulatory Bodies may be sufficient for the purpose. When asked to comment on this
issue, the Department of Atomic Energy clarified that at the moment the only other regulatory body
for nuclear safety is that which has been established for strategic activities for which reason an
enabling provision was envisaged in the legislation. Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy
categorically asserted that there could not be umpteen numbers of Bodies. The Committee is
satisfied with the clarifications given by the Secretary and is of the opinion that the existing
provision may be retained in the Bill.
10.19 Clause 35(1) provides that the Council shall, as and when, required constitute an Appellate
Authority to hear appeals from any Order or decision passed by the Authority. Some of the experts
who appeared before the Committee felt that there was no need for an Appellate Authority to
examine a decision taken by a body of experts on nuclear safety. These experts were of the view
that the Appellate Authority only dilutes the authority of the regulator, i.e., NSRA. They further
pleaded that the option of invoking writ jurisdiction of the High Court or the Supreme Court was
always open for the person aggrieved by the orders of NSRA. The Committee, however, concurs
with the views of the Deptt. that the Appellate Authority provides a statutory mechanism for
redressal to the persons aggrieved by the orders of NSRA and it does not dilute the powers of
the NSRA. The Committee feels that the provision for an Appellate Authority consisting of
a judge of Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court and two eminent scientists
as Members would be an appropriate forum to hear the appeals of the aggrieved persons.
The Committee, therefore, is of the view, that the existing Clause of the Bill may be
retained.
10.20 The Committee deliberated in detail on Clause 35(4)(a) which provides that a person shall
not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson of the Appellate Authority unless he is or has
been a judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High Court. A view was expressed
that a judge need not be the Chairperson of the Appellate Authority particularly when a decision
has to be taken on a scientific matter in the light of scientific facts. However, in view of the fact
that the Appellate Authority will be a quasi-judicial body superior to the Authority and final
view, if so agitated, on an order of the Appellate Authority shall ultimately lie with superior
courts only, the Committee is of the opinion that the existing provision may be retained.
{Clause 35(4)(a)}
10.21 Clause 35(4)(b) provides that a person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Member
of the Appellate Authority unless he is an eminent scientist and has held the post of Secretary to
the Govt. of India or any equivalent post in the Central Govt. Some of the Experts felt that the
eligibility condition for the membership of the Appellate Authority is very restrictive as not many
scientists hold the post of the Secretary to the Govt. of India or equivalent and it appears tailor
made to suit the interest of bureaucrats and to obviate inclusion of eminent scientists in the
Appellate Authority. It was, therefore, suggested that the (eligibility condition needs to be
sufficiently broad based so as to facilitate participation of those eminent scientists who have not
held the post of Secretary to the Govt. of India or equivalent. The Deptt. of Atomic Energy
expressed the view that considering the status of the Authority and demand of high-level expertise,
it was desirable that a Member of the Appellate Authority was an eminent scientist of the rank of
Secretary to Govt. of India. Suitable incumbents from amongst the serving and retired Secretaries
and equivalent positions, Directors of IITs, IISc, NISER, IISER and Vice-Chancellors of
Universities could be inducted into the Appellate Authority. The Committee was given to understand

8
that Directors of IITs, even though they get the pay equivalent to the Secretaries to Govt. of India,
are not treated as equivalent to Secretaries. Similarly, Vice-Chancellors of Universities also do not
hold that rank. On the more, the Committee feels that there might be many more eminent
scientists who would not have held the high posts mentioned above and the eligibility
conditions as prescribed would deprive them of being included as Members of the Appellate
Authority. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there is a need to broad base the
eligibility criteria prescribed for being a Member of the Appellate Authority and the Govt.
should suitably amend the provision in the light of the observations of the Committee.
{Clause 35(4)(b)}
10.22 The Committee notes that Clause 35(1) provides that the Appellate Authority is to be
constituted ‘as and when required’. It, therefore, appears that the Appellate Authority shall be an
ad-hoc body constituted only after an appeal has been preferred. On the other hand, the Clause
35(5) provides that the Central Government or any person aggrieved by an order of the Appellate
Authority may file an appeal ‘before the Appellate Authority’ within a period of thirty days from
the date of such order. These two clauses viz. Clause 35(1) and 35(5) appear to be incongruous
in as much as if an Appellate Authority is not in existence permanently, how a person aggrieved
from an order of the Authority can file an appeal ‘before the Appellate Authority’. The use of the
word ‘before the Appellate Authority’ suggests permanent existence of the Appellate Authority
whereas the words occurring in Clause 35(1) ‘as and when required’ suggest that the Appellate
Authority is only an ad-hoc  body. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this
incongruity between the  aforesaid two clauses needs to be reconciled. {Clause 35(5)}
10.23 The Committee finds that under Clause 35(7), it has been provided that every appeal shall
be heard and disposed of as expeditiously as possible, within a period of 90 days from the date
of its filing. The Committee finds that provision of a watertight deadline of 90 days for disposal
of appeal does not seem to be a feasible proposition, particularly, in the light of the fact that the
Appellate Authority is contemplated to be an ad-hoc body – ‘to be constituted as and when
required’ and selection of Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Authority is to be made in
consultation with Chief Justice of India or his nominee. The Committee expresses its serious
apprehensions that the appellate authority will get constituted and the Appeal decided within
90 days and as such the appeal is most likely to abate and this will defeat the very purpose
of making provisions relating to the Appellate Authority. The Committee is, therefore, of
the opinion that the rigidity of 90 days needs to be made flexible to avoid appeal from
abating and the word ‘preferably’ may be added before the words ‘within a period of 90
days’. The Govt. may also enhance the period in which appeal is to be decided to make it
more realistic. {Clause 35(7)}
10.24 The Committee finds that while Clauses 36 to 39 under Chapter 9 make detailed provisions
regarding finance, accounts and audit of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority, no such provision
has been made in respect of the Council, Other Regulatory Bodies and the Appellate Authority while
these bodies are also sought to be created by or under the same statute. The Committee fails to
comprehend the manner in which the activities of these bodies being created by or under the
statute shall be financed, their accounts maintained and audit of their expenses done. In response
to queries on these issues the Deptt. of Atomic Energy advanced the argument that provision
regarding finance, accounts and audit in respect of the Council and Other Regulatory Bodies would
be taken care by the Central Govt. as they would be part of the Central Govt. The Committee
is constrained to observe that the Deptt. has not given serious thought on the issues raised
by the Committee and has given a very casual reply. While it has not bothered at all to
address the issue of finances, accounts, etc. of the Appellate Authority, it has also failed to
clarify as to how the Council which is a creation of this Bill would be treated as part of
the Central Govt. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Deptt. of Atomic Energy

9
should seek legal opinion in the matter in order to ascertain if separate provisions are
required for the purpose.
10.25 The Committee feels that efficacy and success of a Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority
can be gauged on four core values, i.e., competence, independence, stringency and transparency.
The current Bill while by and large seems to meet. The three criteria but it lacks somewhat on
the count of independence. The Committee finds that there are certain Clauses in the Bill
viz. Clause 14(1) (Removal of Chairperson and Members of the Authority), Clause 42
(Directions by the Central Govt. to the Authority) and Clause 48 (power of Central Govt.
to supersede the Authority), which may impinge on functional autonomy of the Authority.
The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the Deptt. should explore the possibilities of
making the Regulatory Authority more independent and autonomous not only to carryout
its functions effectively but also to enjoy credibility among the public and the trust of the
people. {Clause 14(1), Clause 42, Clause 48}
10.26 The Committee deliberated on the provisions contained in Clause 47 and felt that a large
number of cases were already pending in lower courts and they might not find enough time to take
cognizance of the offence punishable under this Act. When the Committee  enquired from the
Secretary, Deptt. of Atomic Energy if it would be possible to set up separate courts, designated
as special courts to try cases arising out of this Act, he said that the Deptt. would take opinion
of the Law Ministry in the matter. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the Deptt.
should give a serious thought on the observations of the Committee. {Clause 47}
10.27 The Committee also takes a serious objection on the provision made in Clause 51 (1) which
requires that the Authority, may, with previous approval of the Central Govt. make regulations to
carryout the provisions of the Act. The Committee sees no rationale in Authority seeking
previous approval of the Central Govt. for making regulations for purposes specified in the
Bill, particularly, as in no case these regulations can be inconsistent with the provisions of
this Act or the Rules made thereunder. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that
Govt. should re-look into this provision. {Clause 51(1)}

ANNEXURE

APPENDIX
To
The Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests
Parliament House Annexe
New Delhi
Minutes of Dissent on the Standing Committee Report on
The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011.
This is to register my dissent on the Standing Committee Report on the Nuclear Safety Regulatory
Authority Bill. The setting up of a Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority (NSRA) is a necessary and
welcome step, in the backdrop of renewed concerns on nuclear safety all over the world in the
aftermath of the Fukushima nuclear disaster in March 2011.
In the light of peoples’ protests in Kudankulam, Jaitapur and other nuclear power plants, it is
imperative that a credible and independent Nuclear Safety Regulator be created, without which
India’s nuclear energy program cannot go forward. In order to protect the public interest without
fear and favour, the nuclear safety regulator must have independence and autonomy. Unfortunately,
the proposed Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill 2011 fails to provide substantive autonomy
to the NSRA and makes it subservient to the Central Government. Such a regulatory structure will
be ineffective and not carry credibility with the people.
The draft report of the Standing Committee has approved the NSRA Bill with some minor changes
and comments. This is unsatisfactory. What is required is a thorough overhaul of the regulatory
structure through suitable amendments, which are listed below: Clause 5 to 7:  These clauses
establish the Council of Nuclear Safety with the Prime Minister as the Chairperson, 6 Cabinet
Ministers, Cabinet Secretary and nominated experts, in order to “oversee and review the policies
with respect to radiation safety, nuclear safety...” This Council will appoint the Chairperson and
members of the NSRA through search committees. Such a structure will make the NSRA
subservient to the Central Government through the Council for Nuclear Safety.
At present, the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) is answerable to the Atomic Energy
Commission (AEC). Under the current Bill, the Council to be created will impose much more
restrictions and control on the Regulatory Authority (NSRA) than those exerted by the AEC over
the AERB in the existing regulatory framework. From that point of view, the newly created NSRA
is bound to be more of a captive agent of the Government, than the current AERB. This will be
a retrograde step, cloaked in the garb of increased autonomy.
If a policy level body is desired for nuclear energy, it should not be set up under the guise of
supervising the Nuclear Safety but for the purpose of the Nuclear Energy as a whole. Nuclear
Energy Policy is distinct from Safety of Nuclear plants; (he first is the purview of the executive.
The second is a technical issue and should be dealt independent of any policy that may exist.
The Council of Nuclear Safety is unnecessary. Clause 5 to 7 can be deleted and other sections
suitably modified. The process of appointment of the NSRA chairperson and members can be laid
down in a manner in Clause 10 so that the Prime Minister has to consult the Parliament (Lok Sabha
13

14
Speaker, Rajya Sabha Chairperson” Leader’ of Opposition) and Judiciary (Chief Justice of Supreme
Court).
Clause 10:  In place of the Council of Nuclear Safety, the Search Committee should be constituted
by the Cabinet.
Clause 14: This clause enables the Central Government to remove the NSRA chairperson and
members under certain conditions. This needs to be amended and such removal made contingent
upon the approval of a majority in parliament.
Clause 18:  This should define clearly the facilities under the proposed Nuclear Safety Regulatory
Authority. A section can be introduced defining the such facilities:
Section 18(1)(e):  All facilities and programs currently under the purview of the Atomic
Energy Regulatory Board shall be transferred to the jurisdiction of the Authority, and
deemed to be governed by this Act. Any new nuclear facility which is not explicitly
excluded by the Cabinet while setting it up will be deemed to be a civilian facility and will
come under the purview of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority.
Clause 20(2)(c):  There does not seem to be much appreciation of the necessity to maintain
maximum degree of openness and transparency in civilian nuclear safety matters. The only mention
of transparency is in Section 20(2)(c) which states, “The Authority shall ensure transparency by
systematic public outreach on matters relating to nuclear safety without disclosing sensitive
information and compromising confidentiality of commercially sensitive information of technology
holders.” The principal means by which the Authority is to “ensure transparency and public
outreach” could have been briefly spelt out as guidance, upon which operational rules can be
framed at a subsequent stage.
To correct the existing situation three distinct activities of the Authority should be prescribed. The
first is to upload and maintain at the Authority’s web site all the pertinent documents relating to
regulatory decision-making. Besides the NSRA’s safety standards, codes, safety guides, Annual
Reports etc., the Minutes of the Authority’s Board and various Advisory Committee Meetings,
Safety Evaluation Reports, etc. which detail the decision-making on important safety issues and its
rationale should also be made available publicly. In doing so, precautions have to be taken to ensure
that no proprietary information or data relevant to maintaining physical security are publicly
revealed.
The second addition necessary in the Bill is a Section to enable the creation of a Local Information
Body (LIB) near each  major nuclear facility, consisting of members of Panchayats, Gram Sabha
representatives and others from the local area. The official representatives of the State, District and
the Nuclear Facility Management shall be part of the LIB and shall participate in these meetings.
Each LIB shall be headed by a senior representative of the Authority and shall meet regularly at
periodic intervals.
The third addition is to have a provision which requires the Regulatory Authority to organize and
conduct open Public Hearings at crucial junctures of setting up and operating any nuclear facility
which could potentially have major public safety and environmental impact.
Suitable modifications should be made to Clause 20  to incorporate the above. Further, in Section
20(2)(t) a provision should be added to ensure that any new reactor design or a major component/
sub-system sought to be introduced in the country will require a national design certification and
preliminary safety approval by the NSRA. Such a design certification and safety approval by the
Authority shall be mandatory, notwithstanding any certifications or safety approvals granted by a
foreign nuclear safety regulator or Government.

15
Clause 21:  This clause suggest that unless prescribed by the law, the NSRA may act against
national interest. This is wholly irrational and should be deleted. There is no need for any alternative
formulation in the Report.
Clause 25(2):  In view of the exemptions sought under 25(2) from the RTI Act in the Second
Schedule PART II, AMENDMENTS TO THE RIGHT TO INFORMATION ACT,  2005 (22 OF
2005), it is necessary to restrict the scope of Other Regulatory Bodies mentioned in Clause 25(2)
to deal with only the strategic sector, which currently is also not under the AERB. The civil nuclear
facilities should not be made exempt from the RTI Act.
Clause 42 and 48:  Clause 42 empowers the Central Government to issue directions to the NSRA
on policy questions, by which it will be “bound”. Clause 48 allows the Central Government to
supersede the NSRA through notification. These provisions clearly expose the unwillingness of the
Government to grant any meaningful autonomy to the NSRA.
The draft report of the Standing Committee mentions that Clauses 14, 42 and 48 are problematic
and that the Government should “explore the possibilities” of making the NSRA more independent
and autonomous. The point is, unless these clauses are fully deleted or drastically amended, the
NSRA will have no meaningful autonomy. The draft report of the Standing Committee fails to
recommend any specific amendments or deletion of the relevant clauses and leaves it to the
Government to modify these clauses as it sees fit. Clause 42 and 48 must be deleted.
If the Committee fails to incorporate the above-mentioned suggestions in the final Report, this
should be appended as a dissent note to the Report.
Sd/- Sd/-
Dr. Anup Kumar Saha Saman Pathak

16
16
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
7 Sep. 2011
Bill No. 76 of 201 1
THE NUCLEAR SAFETY REGULATORY AUTHORITY BILL, 2011
ARRANGEMENTS OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
3. Act not to prejudice national sovereignty, etc.
CHAPTER II
PROHIBITION  OF CERTAIN ACTIVITIES  WITHOUT  CONSENT
4. Prohibition of certain activities without consent.
CHAPTER III
COUNCIL  OF N UCLEAR  S AFETY
5. Establishment of Council of Nuclear Safety.
6. Meeting of Council.
7. Powers and functions of Council.
CHAPTER IV
E
STABLISHMENT  OF N UCLEAR  S AFETY  R EGULATORY A UTHORITY
8. Establishment of Authority.
9. Composition of Authority.
10. Constitution of Search Committees.
11. Term of office and other conditions of service of Chairperson and Members.
12. Financial and administrative powers of Chairperson.
13. Restriction on Chairperson or Members on employment after of cessation of office.
14. Removal of Chairperson and Members.
15. Meeting of Authority.

17
CLAUSES
16. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.
17. Secretary and other officers and employees of Authority.
18. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of Atomic Energy Regulatory Board and saving of
its action, etc.
19. Jurisdiction of Authority.
CHAPTER V
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS  OF A UTHORITY
20. Functions of Authority.
21. Authority to act in interest of sovereignty and integrity of India.
22. Power of Authority to give directions to owner of radioactive material, etc.
23. Administration of Factories Act, 1948.
24. Delegation of powers.
CHAPTER VI
ESTABLISHMENT  OF OTHER  REGULATORY  BODIES
CLAUSES
25. Establishment of regulatory bodies.
26. Prohibition of disclosure of information.
27. Power of Central Government to carry out certain functions itself.
CHAPTER VII
G
RANT  OF CONSENT
28. Procedure for grant of consent for carrying out activities related to nuclear material, etc.
29. Suspension and cancellation of consent.
30. Responsibilities of grantee of consent.
31. Power of Authority to call for information, conduct investigations, etc.
32. Power of Authority to issue certain directions.
33. Powers of inspection, search and seizure.
34. Review of order of Authority.
CHAPTER VIII
A
PPEAL
35. Appellate Authority.
CHAPTER IX
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT
36. Budget.
37. Grants by Central Government.

18
CLAUSES
38. Annual statement of accounts.
39. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government.
CHAPTER X
OFFENCES  AND PENALTIES
40. Offences and penalties.
41. Offences by Companies, etc.
CHAPTER XI
MISCELLANEOUS
42. Directions by Central Government.
43. Members, officers and employees of Authority to be public servants.
44. Bar of jurisdiction.
45. Obligations as to fidelity and secrecy.
46. Protection of action taken in good faith.
47. Cognizance of offence.
48. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority.
49. Application of other laws not barred.
50. Power to make rules.
51. Power to make regulations.
52. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.
53. Amendment of certain enactments.
54. Power to remove difficulties.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.

19
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 76 of 201 1
THE NUCLEAR SAFETY REGULATORY AUTHORITY BILL, 2011
A
BILL
to establish an Authority and such other regulatory bodies for
regulation of radiation safety or nuclear safety and achieving
highest standards of such safety based on scientific approach,
operating experience and best practices followed by nuclear
industry and to ensure that the use of radiation and atomic
energy in all its applications is safe for the health of the
radiation workers, members of the public and the environment
and also to establish a Council of Nuclear Safety to oversee
and review the policies relating to radiation safety and
nuclear safety and to provide for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS  India has excellent record in nuclear safety and
radiation safety;
AND WHEREAS  the Central Government intends to promote
nuclear energy to meet shortfall in total energy requirement of the
country;
A
ND WHEREAS such excellent safety record in nuclear safety
and radiation safety is required to be sustained for growth in the
nuclear energy sector;
N
OW , THEREFORE , it has been considered necessary and
expedient to establish regulators to ensure continued excellence in
nuclear safety and radiation safety in all applications of radiation and
atomic energy on a large scale.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-second Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Nuclear Safety Regulatory
Authority Act, 2011.
(2) It extends to the whole of India.
19
Short title,
extent and
commence-
ment.

20
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint and
different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.
2. ( 1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Appellate Authority” means an authority constituted
by the Council of Nuclear Safety under sub-section ( 1) of
section 35;
(b) “Atomic Energy Regulatory Board” means the Board
constituted vide notification of the Government of India in the
Department of Atomic Energy number S.O. 4772, dated the
15
th November, 1983;
(c) “Authority” means the Nuclear Safety Regulatory
Authority established under sub-section ( 1) of section 8;
(d) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authority
appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 9;
(e) “consent” means a written permission including a
licence, authorisation, registration or approval of the Authority
under this Act;
(f) “Council” means the Council of Nuclear Safety
established under section 5;
(g) “Member” means a Member of the Authority appointed
under sub-section ( 1) of section 9 and includes the Chairperson;
(h) “notification” means a notification published in the
Official Gazette and the expression “notify” shall be construed
accordingly;
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under
this Act;
(j) “radiation worker” means any person who is
occupationally exposed to radiation;
(k) “regulations” means regulations made by the Authority
under this Act.
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act,
but defined in the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 shall have the meanings
respectively assigned to them in that Act.
3. ( 1) Nothing contained in this Act shall be construed as to
require or permit any person to do or to refrain from doing anything
which the Central Government may, by notification, declare to be
prejudicial to the national defence and security.
(2) A declaration made under sub-section (1) shall be conclusive
and not be called in question before any court of law.
Definitions.
33 of 1962.
Act not to
prejudice
national
sovereignty, etc.

21
CHAPTER II
PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN ACTIVITIES WITHOUT CONSENT
4. No person shall carry out any activity falling within the
jurisdiction of the Authority without obtaining the written consent
under section 28.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section and section 28,
the term “activity” includes production, storage, disposal, transport
(within India or outside India), transfer by sale or otherwise, import,
export and use of any nuclear material, radioactive material or any
other substance, or equipment used for production or use of radiation
or atomic energy.
CHAPTER III
C
OUNCIL OF N UCLEAR S AFETY
5. The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a
Council to be called the Council of Nuclear Safety consisting of-—
(a) the Prime Minister of India as its Chairperson;
(b) Union Minister In-Charge of the Ministry of
Environment and Forest-–Member;
(c) Union Minister In-Charge of the Ministry of External
Affairs–Member;
(d) Union Minister In-Charge of the Ministry of Health–
Member;
(e) Union Minister In-Charge of the Ministry of Home
Affairs–Member;
(f) Union Minister In-Charge of the Ministry of Science
and Technology-–Member;
(g) any other Union Minister to be nominated by the
Central Government–Member;
(h) Cabinet Secretary –Member, ex officio;
(i) Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission–Member, ex
officio;
(j) such number of eminent experts as may be
nominated by the Central Government-Members.
6. The Council shall meet at such places and intervals as may
be necessary and shall regulate its own procedure for its meetings.
7. The Council shall oversee and review the policies with
respect to radiation safety, nuclear safety and other matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto and for this purpose, it
shall have a Secretary to assist it.
Prohibition of
certain activities
without consent.
Establishment of
Council of
Nuclear Safety.
Meetings of
Council.
Powers and
functions of
Council.

22
CHAPTER IV
ESTABLISHMENT  OF N UCLEAR S AFETY R EGULATORY A UTHORITY
8. ( 1) The Central Government shall, by notification,
establish an Authority to be called as the Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority, to exercise the powers conferred on and
perform the functions assigned to it by or under this Act.
Explanation.— For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified
that notwithstanding anything contained in section 7, the Authority
shall be autonomous in the exercise of its powers and functions
under this Act.
(2) The Authority established under sub-section (1) shall be a
body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal,
with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable
and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue or
be sued.
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at such
place as the Central Government may notify.
(4) The Authority may, with the prior approval of the
Central Government, establish its offices at such other places
as may be considered necessary.
9. ( 1) The Authority shall consist of—
(i) a Chairperson;
(ii) two whole-time Members; and
(iii) part-time Members not exceeding four,
to be appointed by the Central Government on the
recommendations of the Search Committees constituted under
section 10.
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the
Chairperson of the Authority, if such person—
(a) is a citizen of India;
(b) is of outstanding ability, impeccable integrity and
standing and having distinguished professional record and
experience of at least twenty-five years in Government,
industry, academic institutions or national laboratories and is
an expert in one or more disciplines or areas of nuclear
science and technology, nuclear safety and regulation,
operation and design of nuclear power plants and fuel cycle
facilities, radiation safety, nuclear medicine, radiation therapy,
radiation applications, industrial and chemical plant safety,
earth science, environmental science and engineering, power
plant engineering or materials science and engineering or such
other discipline or areas which may, in the opinion of the
Central Government, be relevant.
Establishment of
Authority.
Composition of
Authority.

23
(3) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as the Member
of the Authority, if such person—
(a) is a citizen of India;
(b) is of outstanding ability, impeccable integrity and
standing and having distinguished professional record and
experience of at least twenty years in Government, industry,
academic institutions or national laboratories and is an expert
in one or more disciplines or areas of nuclear science and
technology, nuclear safety and regulation, operation and
design of nuclear power plants and fuel cycle facilities,
radiation safety, nuclear medicine, radiation therapy, radiation
applications, industrial and chemical plant safety, earth
science, environmental science and engineering, power plant
engineering or materials science and engineering or such other
discipline or areas which may, in the opinion of the Central
Government, be relevant.
10. ( 1) The Council shall constitute a Search Committee for
the selection of Chairperson and another Search Committee for the
selection of Members of the Authority:
Provided that the Chairperson and members of the Search
Committee shall be from amongst persons of eminence having
knowledge and experience in the field of science, engineering and
technology:
Provided that the Chairperson of the Authority shall be a
Member of the Search Committee constituted for the appointment of
Members.
(2) The Central Government shall, within a period of three
months from the date of occurrence of any vacancy by reason of
death, resignation or removal of the Chairperson or a Member and
six months before the superannuation or completion of the term of
the Chairperson or Member, make a reference to the Search
Committee for filling up the vacancy.
(3) No appointment of the Chairperson or Member shall be
invalid merely by the reason of any vacancy in the Search
Committees.
(4) The term of the Search Committees and the manner of
search of panel of names for making recommendations for
appointment of Chairperson or Member shall be such as may be
specified by the Council.
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections ( 1) to ( 4), the
Search Committee shall regulate its own procedure.
(6) Before appointing any person as the Chairperson or
Member of the Authority, the Central Government shall satisfy itself
that such person does not have any financial or other interest as is
likely to affect prejudicially his functions.
Constitution of
Search
Committees.

24
11. (I) The Chairperson and other Members shall hold office
for a term of three years from the date on which they enter upon
their offices, and shall be eligible for reappointment for a further
period of three years:
Provided that the Chairperson shall not hold office as such
after he has attained the age of seventy years and a whole-time
Member shall not hold office as such after he has attained the age
of sixty-five years.
(2) Any person holding any office (whether as an employee or
an officer or a director or managing director or secretary or
manager or in any other capacity) under the Central Government or
State Government or in a company (including a Government
Company referred to in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956) or
in any other institution, organisation, society or University or Board,
shall, on his selection as the Chairperson or a whole-time Member,
be required to seek retirement or resign from the services of such
Central or State Government or company or institution or
organisation or society or University or Board, as the case may be,
before accepting the employment as such Chairperson or as the
case may be, the Member.
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other
terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and
Members shall be such as may be prescribed:
Provided that the salary, allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson or a Member shall not be
varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the
Chairperson or Member may—
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the
Central Government a notice of not less than three months; or
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the
provisions of section 14.
12. The Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive Officer of
the Authority and shall exercise such financial and administrative
powers as may be prescribed:
Provided that the Chairperson shall have authority to delegate
such of the financial and administrative powers as he may think fit
to any whole-time Member or an officer of the Authority subject to
the condition that such Member or officer shall, while exercising
such delegated powers, continue to act under the direction, control
and supervision of the Chairperson.
13. ( 1) The Chairperson or a whole-time Member, ceasing to
hold office as such, shall not accept any employment with,—
(a) any person who has been granted consent for any
activity under this Act; or
1 of 1956.
Term of office
and other
conditions of
service of
Chairperson
and Members.
Financial and
administrative
powers of
Chairperson.
Restriction on
Chairperson or
Members on
employment
after cessation
of office.

25
(b) any person who has been associated with the
person referred to in clause ( a); or
(c) any person who has been connected with the
management or administration of the person referred to in
clause ( a) or clause ( b).
(2) The Chairperson or a Member, ceasing to hold office as
such shall not,—
(a) act, for or on behalf of any person or organisation
in, connection with any specific proceeding or transaction or
negotiation or a case to which the Authority is a party and
with respect to which the Chairperson or the Member, before
cessation of his office, had acted for, or provided advice to,
the Authority; or
(b) give advice to any person (including his client,
business associate or employer) using information which was
obtained in his capacity as the Chairperson or a Member and
being not available or cannot be made available to the public;
or
(c) enter into a contract of service with, or accept an
appointment to a board of directors of, or accept an offer of
employment with, an entity with which he had direct and
significant official dealings during his term of office as such,
without the approval of the Central Government.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act or any other law
for the time being in force, the Chairperson and Members shall not
communicate during holding of office as such or thereafter or reveal
to any person any matter which has been brought under his
consideration or known to him while acting as such.
14. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 10, the
Central Government may, by order remove from office, the
Chairperson or any Member, if he—
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the
opinion of the Central Government, involves moral turpitude;
or
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of
acting as Chairperson or Member; or
(d) has acquired such financial or other interests as is
likely to affect prejudicially his functions; or
(e) has so abused his position as to render his
continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest.
(2) The Chairperson or any Member shall not be removed
under clauses ( d) and ( e) of sub-section ( 1) unless he has been
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
Removal of
Chairperson and
Members.

26
15. (1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places, and
observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of
business at its meetings (including quorum at such meeting) as may
be specified by regulations.
(2) Where the Chairperson is unable to attend a meeting of
the Authority for any reason, the senior most whole-time Member
shall preside at the meeting.
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the
Authority shall be decided by a majority vote of the Members
present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the
Chairperson or in his absence, the senior most whole-time Member
presiding, shall have a second or casting vote.
16. No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalidated
merely by reason of—
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of,
the Authority; or
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person as a
Member of the Authority; or
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not
affecting the merits of the case.
17. (1) The Authority may appoint a Secretary and such
number of other officers, employees, consultants or experts, as it
considers necessary, for the efficient discharge of  its functions and
exercise of its powers under this Act:
Provided that no appointment of officers of employees shall
be made unless prior written approval of the Central Government
has been obtained by the Authority for creation  of posts therefor.
Provided further that the Central Government may, on the
establishment of the Authority, provide by order, such number of
officers, employees, consultants or experts till such time the
Authority appoints its secretary and such number of other officers,
employees, consultants or experts and such officers, employees,
consultants or experts shall be deemed to be on deputation or short
term contract, on such terms and conditions, as it may specify.
(2) The salaries, allowances and pensions payable to, and other
terms and conditions of service of the officers, other employees of
the Authority, shall be such as may be specified by the regulations.
18. ( 1) On and from the establishment of the Authority—
(a) the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board shall stand
dissolved;
(b) all sums of money due to the Atomic Energy
Regulatory Board immediately before that day shall be deemed
to be due to the Authority;
Meetings of
Authority.
Vacancies, etc.
not to invalidate
proceedings of
Authority.
Secretary and
other officers
and employees
of Authority.
Transfer of
assets, liabilities,
etc., of Atomic
Energy
Regulatory Board
and saving of its
action, etc.

27
(c) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or
which could have been instituted by or against the Atomic
Energy Regulatory Board immediately before that day may be
continued or may be instituted by or against the Authority;
(d) anything done or any action taken by the Atomic
Energy Regulatory Board shall be deemed to have been done
or taken under corresponding provisions of this Act.
(2) The Chairman and Members of the Atomic Energy
Regulatory Board shall be transferred as such to function as
Chairperson and Members under this Act and be deemed to be the
Chairperson and Members of the Authority under this Act until the
Chairperson and Members of the Authority are appointed in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(3) On and from the date of the commencement of this Act,
every officer and employee holding a post in the Atomic Energy
Regulatory Board before that date, shall hold the post in the
Authority by the same tenure, and upon the same terms and
conditions of service including remuneration, leave, provident fund,
retirement and other terminal benefits as he would have held such
post as if this Act had not been passed and shall continue to do so
as an officer or employee, as the case may be, of the Authority for
a period of three years from the date of the commencement of this
Act, unless he, within the said period of three years, opts not to be
an employee of the Authority or until his tenure, remuneration or
other terms and conditions of service are duly altered by the
regulations.
(4) Every person, who opts not to be an employee of the
Authority within the period so specified, shall be governed by the
rules and orders as are applicable to the Central Government
officers and employees of equivalent rank.
(5) Subject to the provisions of this section, the tenure,
remuneration and other terms and conditions of service including
pension of any employee of the Authority shall not be altered to his
disadvantage without the previous approval of the Central
Government.
(6) After the dissolution of the Atomic Energy Regulatory
Board under clause (a) of sub-section (1), such of the functions
and powers of that Board as are vested in the Authority under this
Act shall be carried out by the Authority after such dissolution.
19. Save as otherwise provided in sections 25  and 27, the
jurisdiction of the Authority shall extend to all areas to which this
Act is applicable and activities relating to production, development
or use of atomic energy and radiation in all its applications, or
transport (within India or outside India), transfer by sale or
otherwise, import, export or storage or disposal of nuclear and
radioactive material.
Jurisdiction of
Authority.

28
CHAPTER V
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY
20. ( 1) The Authority shall, subject to the provisions of this
Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder, take measures,
within its jurisdiction, to ensure that the use of radiation and atomic
energy is safe for the health of the radiation workers, members of
the public and the environment.
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby
declared that the functions of the Authority shall be confined only
to ensure the radiation safety and nuclear safety during activities
relating to production, storage, disposal, transport, transfer by sale
or otherwise, import, export and use of any nuclear material,
radioactive material or any other substance, or equipment, and
physical security of nuclear material, radioactive material, and
radiation and nuclear facilities, and in no case shall extend to the
functions or any other matter which the Central Government is
required to discharge under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of foregoing provisions,
and the measures referred to in sub-section ( 1), the Authority shall—
(a) devise and implement policies and programmes for
radiation safety and nuclear safety to ensure that use of
atomic energy or radiation in all its applications is safe for,
the health of radiation workers and members of public, and
the environment;
(b) ensure high quality of safety management at all
places where nuclear and radiation related activities are carried
out;
(c) ensure transparency by systematic public outreach
on matters relating to nuclear safety without disclosing
sensitive information and compromising confidentiality of
commercially sensitive information of technology holders.
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause, the expression
“sensitive information” means information pertaining to—
(i) physical security of nuclear material and facilities, or
(ii) reprocessing of spent fuel, enrichment of fissile
material or heavy water production technologies;
(iii) any information under section 26 which has been
accessed by the Authority or has come to its knowledge or
made available to it in the discharge of its functions;
(d) strive to be a knowledge organisation with state of
the art scientific capabilities in the domain of its
responsibilities, arrange for and conduct research in areas
relevant to its functions and develop linkages with technical
support organisations;
Functions of
Authority.
33 of 1962.

29
(e) interact with other bodies and international
organisations engaged in activities relevant to the functions of
the Authority including nuclear and radiation safety, physical
security of nuclear material and facilities, transportation of
nuclear and radioactive materials and nuclear and radiation
safety and regulation:
Provided that the Authority shall not interact with such
bodies and international organisations outside India without the
prior approval of the Central Government;
(f) advise the Central Government with respect to—
(i) safety of public and the environment;
(ii) measures to implement and coordinate a
nationwide programme for environmental surveillance to
check any harmful build up of radioactivity in the
environment;
(iii ) measures to ensure establishment and
maintenance of appropriate mechanisms and plans for
preparedness in response to nuclear and radiation
emergencies;
(g) notify the limits of radiation exposure to radiation
workers and the members of the public;
(h) specify by regulations, the requisite qualification, the
training required to the persons for employment at premises
or places where at any activity relating to production, storage,
disposal, transport and use of any nuclear material, radioactive
material or any other substance or equipment used for
production, or use of atomic energy is carried out, and
specify hours of work, minimum leave and requirements of
periodical medical examination of such employees;
(i) specify by regulations the requirement of approval
to, or licensing of, the persons referred to in clause (h);
(j) establish an appropriate regulatory mechanism which
shall provide for issue of consents, monitoring of
compliances, inspections and enforcement;
(k) develop and notify the standards and codes, and
develop and publish other supporting documents for safety in
design, siting, construction, commissioning, operation, quality
assurance, decommissioning, storage, transportation and other
activities related to plants, facilities, nuclear and radioactive
wastes, radiation sources and radioactive materials;
(l) issue, renew, modify, suspend and revoke consents
with specified conditions for conduct of any activity which
come under its jurisdiction for the production, storage,
disposal, transport (within and outside India), transfer by sale

30
or otherwise, import, export and use of any nuclear material,
radioactive material or any other substance, or equipment
used for production, or use of atomic energy;
(m) levy fee, by regulation, for issue, modification and
renewal of consents;
(n) take such measures as to enforce compliance of the
provisions of the Act by the holder of the consent;
(o) notify measures for physical security within the area
of main plant boundary, physical protection of nuclear and
radioactive materials under storage as well as transport
(within and outside India), and nuclear and radiation facilities;
(p) engage with the consent of Head of concerned
bodies, the institutions, laboratories, agencies, technical
support organisations, industries, individual experts and
professionals of integrity and outstanding ability, who have
expertise in scientific, technical, sociological, legal and such
other disciplines related to nuclear, radiation and industrial
safety to assist the Authority in the discharge of its functions;
(q) discharge its functions and powers in a manner
consistent with the international obligations of India;
(r) apprise, from time to time, the National Disaster
Management Authority established under section 3 of the
Disaster Management Act, 2005 regarding nuclear safety and
radiation safety measures and management of disaster arising
from nuclear incident notified under section 3 of the Civil
Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010 and coordinate with
the said Authority in the case of such disaster;
(s) notify nuclear incident as required by section 3 of
the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010.
(3) The Authority may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
exempt, by notification, subject to such conditions as may be
specified by it in the notification, any radioactive material, any class
or classes of radioactive material or any radiation generating plant
from the applicability of any of the provisions of the safety related
regulations or orders issued under this Act.
21.  The Authority, while discharging its powers and
functions, shall not act against the interest of the sovereignty and
integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with
foreign States, public order, decency or morality.
22. Without prejudice to any provisions of this Act, the
Authority may—
(a) direct any owner of, or holder of the consent or
any person dealing with radioactive material, radiation source
or facility to hand it over to the Central Government if, in the
Authority to act
in interest of
sovereignty and
integrity of
India.
53 of 2005.
38 of 2010.
38 of 2010.
Power of
Authority to
give directions
to owner of
radioactive
material, etc.

31
opinion of the Authority, continuation of such material or
facility under the control of its owner or the holder of the
consent or any such person is detrimental to the safety and
physical security of such material or facility, or has a
potential to be detrimental to the safety of public or the
environment;
(b) advise the Central Government to take control of
the radioactive material or radiation source if owner thereof
cannot be identified.
23. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Factories
Act, 1948, the Authority and other regulatory bodies shall, subject
to the rules made under this Act, administer the said Act, and do all
things for the enforcement of its provisions, including the
appointment of inspecting staff, in any factory engaged in the
development, production and use of radiation and atomic energy or
any facility engaged in research and development activities related to
radiation or atomic energy, and owned or administered by the
Central Government or any other authority or corporation
established by it or a Government company under the jurisdiction of
the Authority or the regulatory bodies, as the case may be.
(2) No authority under the Factories Act, 1948 shall have
jurisdiction in respect of functions referred to in sub-section ( 1).
24. The Authority may, by general or special order in writing,
delegate to the Chairperson or any Member or officer of the
Authority or a State Government or such officer or authority
subordinate to the State Government, subject to such conditions and
limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its
powers and functions under this Act (except the power to make
regulations under section 52), as it may deem necessary.
CHAPTER VI
E
STABLISHMENT  OF OTHER REGULATORY BODIES
25. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the
Central Government may, for the purposes of national defence and
security, exempt,—
(a) any nuclear material, radioactive material, facilities,
premises and activities;
(h) the premises, assets and areas associated with
material and activities referred to in clause (a), from the
jurisdiction of the Authority.
(2) The Central Government may, for the purposes of
regulating the material, facilities, activities referred to in clause ( a)
or premises, assets and areas referred to in clause ( b) of sub-
section ( 1), by order, in writing establish one or more regulatory
bodies and demarcate responsibility thereof to discharge one or
Administration
of Factories
Act, 1948.
63 of 1948.
63 of 1948.
Delegation of
powers.
Establishment of
regulatory bodies.

32
more of the functions in respect thereof which otherwise before
such exemption were within the jurisdiction of the Authority and
such functions amongst other things shall include to-
(i) ensure that the use of radiation and atomic energy
is safe for the radiation workers, the members of the public
and the environment;
(ii) report to that Government release of radiation or
radioactive material exceeding specified limits from facilities
under its jurisdiction into any area falling within the
jurisdiction of the Authority.
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, specify that
the provisions of this Act shall, subject to such modifications or
conditions or adaptation as it may specify, apply to such regulatory
bodies.
26. ( 1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the regulatory
bodies referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 25 shall not disclose
to any person the information relating to the activities falling under
their jurisdiction.
(2) No Chairperson or Member or officer or other employees
or consultant or expert shall, either during his employment with
such regulatory bodies or after cessation of such employment,
disclose any confidential information relating to activities falling
under the jurisdiction of regulatory bodies.
27. Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any
other law for the time being in force, the Central Government may,
for the purposes of national defence and security, by order, exempt
any area, nuclear material, radioactive material, nuclear facility or
plant from jurisdiction of the Authority or other regulatory bodies
under this Act and carry out those functions itself in relation
thereto, which, but for such exemption, would have been carried
out by the Authority or other regulatory bodies under this Act.
CHAPTER VII
G
RANT OF CONSENT
28. (1) Every person shall, for carrying out any activity
falling under the jurisdiction of the Authority relating to production,
storage, disposal, transport (within and outside India), transfer by
sale or otherwise, import, export and use of any nuclear material,
radioactive material or any other substance, or equipment used for
production, or use of radiation or atomic energy, obtain the consent
of the Authority and for that purpose, submit an application in such
form and manner, along with such fee and accompanied by such
documents and information as may be specified by the regulations.
(2) On receipt of the application under sub-section ( 1), the
Authority shall undertake an evaluation of the application based on the
practices and requirements of codes and standards developed by it.
Prohibition of
disclosure of
information.
Power of Central
Government to
carry out certain
functions itself.
Procedure for
grant of consent
for carrying out
activities related
to nuclear
material, etc.

33
(3) The Authority, on completion of evaluation under sub-
section ( 2), shall-
(a) if it is of the opinion that the activity for which the
consent has been sought fulfils all the requirements for the
grant of consent, it may, by an order in writing, grant
consent for such period and with or without condition for
such activity;
(b) if it is of the opinion that the activity for which
consent has been sought does not fulfil all the requirements
for the grant of consent, it may, by an order in writing,
refuse to grant consent;
(c) if the Authority has reasonable grounds to believe
that the person may not comply with the conditions which
may be imposed under clause ( a) in respect of the consent,
it may by an order in writing, refuse to grant consent for the
proposed activity.
(4) Where the Authority refuses to grant the consent referred
to in clause ( c) of sub-section ( 3), it shall record the reasons for
such decision and furnish a copy thereof to the applicant.
29. (1) The Authority may cancel consent granted under
section 28 on anyone or more of the following grounds, namely:—
(a) the grantee of consent has violated any of the terms
and conditions of consent; or
(b) the grantee of consent has violated any provision of
this Act; or
(c) the grantee of consent has, subsequent to the grant
of consent, been convicted by a court in India for any
offence under this Act; or
(d) the consent has been obtained on misrepresentation,
or suppression of any material fact.
(2) Where the Authority, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, is satisfied that, pending the consideration of question of
cancelling consent on any of the grounds mentioned in sub-
section ( 1) it is necessary so to do, it may, by order in writing,
suspend the consent so granted and require the grantee to show
cause, within fifteen days from the date of receipt of such order,
as to why the consent should not be cancelled.
30. Every person who has been granted consent shall be
responsible for safety and physical security of radiation and nuclear
facility and radioactive and nuclear material contained therein.
31. ( 1) Where the Authority considers it expedient so to do,
it may by order in writing,—
(a) call upon any owner or any person in charge of or
managing director, director, secretary or other officer of
Suspension and
cancellation of
consent.
Responsibilities
of grantee of
consent.
Power of
Authority to call
for information,
conduct
investigations,
etc.

34
radiation or nuclear facility at any time to furnish in writing
such information or explanation relating to its activities as the
Authority may require to carry out its functions under this
Act; or
(b) appoint one or more persons to make an inquiry in
relation to the affairs of any radiation or nuclear facility; and
(c) direct any of its officers or employees to inspect
the books or other documents of any radiation or nuclear
facility.
(2) Where any inquiry in relation to the affairs of any person
referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) has been undertaken
under that sub-section,—
(a) every owner or managing director or director,
manager, secretary or other officer, if such person referred to
in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) is a company; or
(b) every partner, manager, secretary or other officer, if
such person referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) is a
firm; or
(c) every other person or body of persons who has had
dealings in the course of business with any of the persons
mentioned in clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub-section ( 1),
shall be bound to produce before the Authority making the inquiry,
all such books of account or other documents in his custody or
power relating to, or having a bearing on the subject- matter of
such inquiry and also to furnish to the Authority with any such
statement or information relating thereto, as the case may be,
required of him within such time as may be specified.
(3) Every person referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1)
shall maintain such records or other documents as may be
prescribed.
32. The Authority may, for the purpose of discharge of its
functions under this Act issue such directions, to the persons who
have been granted consent under this Act, as it may consider
necessary.
33. (1) The Authority or any other officer specially authorised
by it in this behalf may carry out such inspection or inquiry as may
be necessary, enter any building or place where the Authority has
reason to believe that any document or object relating to the subject
matter of the inquiry may be found, and may seize any such
document or object subject to the provisions of section 100 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in so far as they may be applicable.
(2) For the purpose of sub-section ( 1), the Authority shall
have power of access to—
Power of
Authority to
issue certain
directions.
Powers of
inspection,
search and
seizure.
2 of 1974.

35
(a) premises and places, vehicle, vessel or aircraft
where radiation is present or used or proposed to be used;
and
(b) documents, drawings, photographs, plans, models
or any other form which relates to or represents or illustrates
any existing or proposed plant, used or proposed to be used
for the purpose of producing, developing or using atomic
energy or radiation.
34. ( 1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the
Authority under sections 28 and 29 may file an application to the
Authority for review of that order within a period of thirty days
from the date of such order:
Provided that the Authority may entertain such application
after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that
there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period:
Provided further that notwithstanding the filing of an
application under this section, the aggrieved person shall abide by
the order in question, unless it has been stayed by a subsequent
order of the Authority in writing.
(2) Every application for review under sub-section ( 1) shall
clearly state the ground or grounds on which a review is sought.
(3) An application for review filed before the Authority shall
be heard and disposed of as expeditiously as possible and endeavour
shall be made to finally dispose of the application within a period of
ninety days from the date of its filing.
CHAPTER VIII
A
PPEAL
35. (1) The Council shall, as and when required, constitute,
by notification, an Appellate Authority for the purpose of this Act,
to hear appeals from any order or decision passed by the Authority
under section 28 or section 29 or under sub-section ( 3) of section
34, as the case may be.
(2) The Appellate Authority constituted under sub-section ( 1)
shall consists of a Chairperson and not more than two Members to
be appointed by notification, by the Council.
(3) The selection of the Chairperson and Members of the
Appellate Authority shall be made by the Council in consultation with
the Chief Justice of India or his nominee.
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the
Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Authority unless he—-
(a) in the case of Chairperson, is, or has been, a Judge
of the Supreme Court, or the Chief Justice of a High Court;
Review of order
of Authority.
Appellate
Authority.

36
(b) in the case of a Member, is an eminent scientist and
has held the post of Secretary to the Government of India or
any equivalent post in the Department of the Central
Government in the Ministries or Departments or an institution
administered by that Government dealing with science and
technology.
(5) The Central Government or any person aggrieved by an
order referred to in sub-section ( 1) may file an appeal before the
Appellate Authority within a period of thirty days from the date of
such order:
Provided that the Authority may entertain such appeal after
the expiry of the said period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there
was sufficient cause for not filing the appeal within that period.
(6) The appeal shall be filed in such manner and accompanied
by such fees as may be prescribed.
(7) Every appeal shall be heard and disposed of as
expeditiously as possible, within a period of ninety days from the
date of its filing.
CHAPTER IX
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
36. The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such
time in each financial year as may be prescribed, its budget for the
next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure
of the Authority and forward the same to the Central Government.
37. The Central Government may, after due
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make
to the Authority grants of such sums of money as are required
to be paid.
38. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts
in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may
be specified by him.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the
accounts of the Authority under this Act shall have the same rights,
privileges and Authority in connection with such audit, as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India generally has, in
connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in
particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books,
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and
to inspect any of the offices of the Authority.
Budget.
Grants by
Central
Government.
Annual
Statement of
accounts.

37
(4) The accounts of the Authority, as certified by Comptroller
and Auditor-General of India or any other person appointed by him
in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be
forwarded annually to the Central Government and the Central
Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of
Parliament.
39. (1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central Government,
at such time and in such form and the manner as may be prescribed
or as the Central Government may direct, such returns and
statements and such particulars in regard to any matter under the
jurisdiction of the Authority, as the Central Government may, from
time to time, require.
(2) The Authority shall prepare, once every year, in such form
and at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report, giving a
summary of its activities during the previous year and copies of the
report shall be forwarded to the Central Government.
(3) A copy of the report received under sub-section ( 2) shall
be laid by the Central Government, as soon as may be after it is
received, before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER X
O
FFENCES AND PENALTIES
40. Whoever—
(a) discloses any information prohibited under section
26; or
(b) contravenes any condition subject to which a
consent is granted under section 28; or
(c) contravenes any order made under section 31; or
(d) obstruct any person authorised by the Authority
under section 33 in the exercise of the powers under that
section; or
(e) contravenes any rule or regulation made under this
Act or any requirement, prohibition or restriction imposed
under any such rule or regulation; or
(f) fails to comply with any direction, order or decision
of the Authority or other regulatory bodies under this Act,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to five years, or with fine, or with both.
41. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed
by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was
committed was in charge of, and was responsible to the company
for the conduct of, the business of the company as well as the
company shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:
Furnishing of
returns, etc., to
Central
Government.
Offences and
penalities.
Offences by
companies, etc.

38
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any such person liable to any punishment provided in this Act
if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge
or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission
of such offence.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),
where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company,
and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the
part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer or
employees of the company such director, manager, secretary or
other officer or employees shall also be deemed to be guilty of the
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section—
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm
or other association of individuals or any other juridical person; and
(b) “director” means a whole-time director in the company
and in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.
CHAPTER XI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
42. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time,
issue to the Authority or other regulatory bodies, such directions as
it may think necessary in the interest of the sovereignty and
integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with
foreign States, public order, decency or morality or in the public
interest.
(2) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the
Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its
functions, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the
Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time:
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be
given an opportunity to express its views before any direction is
given under this section.
(3) The decision of the Central Government whether a
question is one of policy or not shall be final.
43. The Chairperson, Members, Secretary, officers and other
employees of the Authority shall be deemed, when acting or
purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act,
to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian
Penal Code.
Directions by
Central
Government.
Members,
officers and
employees of
Authority to be
public servants.
45 of 1860.

39
44. No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any
matter which the Authority or other regulatory bodies are
empowered by or under this Act to determine.
45.  Every Chairperson, Member, adviser, consultant,
Secretary, officer or any other employee of the Authority or other
regulatory bodies shall, before entering upon his duties, make a
declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the First
Schedule.
46. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie
against the Central Government or the Authority or any Member,
officer or other employees thereof for anything which is in good
faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules and
regulations made thereunder.
47. No court inferior to the Chief Judicial Magistrate shall
take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act, except
upon a complaint in writing made by—
(i) the Authority or any officer of the Authority duly
authorised by it where the offence relates to an act falling
within the jurisdiction of the Authority;
(ii) the Central Government or any officer of that
Government duly authorised by it in respect of any other
offence.
48. (1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of opinion—
(a) that the Authority has acted in a manner inconsistent
with the provisions of this Act or rules and regulations made
thereunder; or
(b) that on account of circumstances beyond the
control of the Authority, it is unable to discharge the functions
and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this
Act; or
(c) that the Authority has persistently made default in
complying with any direction issued by the Central
Government under this Act or in the discharge of the
functions and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions
of this Act and as a result of which default, the financial
position of the Authority has suffered or the administration of
any radiation or nuclear installation has deteriorated; or
(d) that circumstances exist which render it necessary
in the public interest so to do,
the Central Government may, by notification, supersede the
Authority for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be
specified in the notification:
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub-
section, the Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity
Bar of
jurisdiction.
Obligations as to
fidelity and
secrecy.
Protection of
action taken in
good faith.
Cognizance of
offence.
Power of Central
Government to
supersede
Authority.

40
to the Authority to show cause as to why it should not be
superseded, and shall consider the explanations and objections, if
any, of the Authority.
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-
section ( 1) superseding the Authority,—
(a) the Chairperson and other Members shall, as from
the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by
or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or
discharged by or on behalf of the Authority, shall until the
Authority is re-constituted under sub-section ( 3), be exercised
and discharged by the Central Government or such authority
or person as the Central Government may specify in this
behalf;
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority
shall, until it is re-constituted under sub-section ( 3), vest in
the Central Government.
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified
in the notification issued under sub-section ( 1), the Central
Government may,-
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further
term not exceeding six months, as it may consider necessary;
or
(b) re-constitute the Authority by fresh appointment and
in such case the Chairperson and other Members who vacated
their offices under clause (a) of sub-section ( 2) shall not be
deemed disqualified for appointment:
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before
the expiration of the period of supersession, whether as specified
under sub-section ( 1) or as extended under this sub-section, take
action under clause ( b) of this sub-section.
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued
under sub-section ( 1) and a full report of any action taken under
this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid
before each House of Parliament at the earliest.
49. ( 1) The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and
not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time
being in force.
(2) Nothing in this Act shall affect the provisions of the
Atomic Energy Act, 1962 and save and except as otherwise
provided, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and not
in derogation of that Act.
Application of
other laws not
barred.
33 of 1962.

41
50. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this
Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—-
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other
terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members
under sub-section ( 3) of section 11;
(b) the financial and administrative powers to be
exercised by the Chairperson under section 12;
(c) the manner of maintaining books of account and
other documents under sub-section ( 3) of section 31;
(d) the manner and fees for filing appeal under sub-
section ( 6) of section 35;
(e) the form and time for preparing the budget under
section 36;
(f) the form for annual statement of accounts under
section 38;
(g) the form and manner of furnishing returns under
sub-section ( 1) of section
(h) the form and time for preparing the annual report
under sub-section ( 2) of section 39;
(i) any other matter which is to be, or may be,
prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be made by
rules.
51. ( 1) The Authority may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, and with the previous approval of the Central Government,
make regulations, not inconsistent with this Act, and the rules made
thereunder, to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the
foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or any of the
following matters, namely:—
(a) the time, place, procedure for transaction of
business and the quorum of the Authority under sub-
section ( 1) of section 15;
(b) the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to,
and other terms and conditions of service of the officers and
other employees of the Authority under sub-section ( 2) of
section 17;
(c) the requisite qualifications and training required to
persons under clause ( h
) of sub-section ( 2) of section 20;
Power to make
rules.
Power to make
regulations.

42
(d) the requirement of approval to, or the licensing of,
persons under clause ( i) of sub-section ( 2) of section 20;
(e) levy of fee for issue, modification and renewal of
consent under clause ( 1) of sub-section ( 2) of section 20;
(f) the form and manner of application for consent, the
fee and documents and information to accompany it under
sub-section ( 1) of section 28;
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be, specified by regulations.
52. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall
be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days,
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session
immediately following the session or the successive sessions
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule
or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should
not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule
or regulation.
53. The enactments specified in the Second Schedule to this
Act shall be amended in the manner specified therein and such
amendments shall take effect on the date of establishment of the
Authority.
54. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order
published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to
be necessary for removing the difficulty:
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after
the expiry of three years from the date of commencement of this
Act.
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament.
Rules and
regulations to be
laid before
Parliament.
Amendment of
certain
enactments.
Power to
remove
difficulties.

43
43
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
(See section 45)
I,.............., do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and
to the best of my skill and ability, execute and perform the duties
required of me as the Chairperson, Member, or officer or other
employee of the Authority which properly relate to the office or
position held by me in relation to the Nuclear Safety Regulatory
Authority.
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be
communicated to any person not legally entitled thereto any
information relating to the affairs of the Authority or to the affairs
of any person having any dealing with the said Authority, nor will
I allow any such person to inspect or have access to any books or
documents belonging to or in possession of the said Authority and
relating to the business of the said Authority or the business of any
person having any dealing with the said Authority.
(Signature)
Signed before me

44
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
(See section 53)
PART I
AMENDMENTS TO THE A TOMIC E NERGY A CT, 1962
(33 OF 1962)
1. For section 16, the following section shall be substituted,
namely:—
“16. The Central Government may, subject to such
rules as may be made in this behalf and by order, prohibit the
manufacture, possession, transfer by sale or other-wise,
export or import of any radioactive material, except under a
licence granted by it.”.
2. In section 17, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided that nothing contained in this section shall
apply on or after the commencement of the Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority Act, 2011.”.
3. In section 23, the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided that nothing contained in this section shall
apply on or after the commencement of the Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority Act, 2011.”.
4. In section 26, in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( a), for the
words and figures “section 8, 14 or 17", the words and figures
“section 8 or 14” shall be substituted.
5. In section 30,—
(a) in sub-section ( 2), in clause ( i), the words “use or
disposal” shall be omitted;
(b) in clause ( j), the following proviso shall be inserted,
namely:—
“Provided that nothing contained in this clause
shall apply on or after the commencement of the
Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Act, 2011.”.
44
Substitution of
new section for
section 16.
Control over
radioactive
material.
Amendment of
section 17.
Amendment of
section 23.
Amendment of
section 26.
Amendment of
section 30.

45
PART II
AMENDMENTS TO THE R IGHT T O I NFORMATION A CT, 2005
(22 OF 2005)
1. In section 8, in sub-section ( 1), after clause ( c), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(ca) information referred to in clause ( c) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 20 of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory
Authority Act, 2011”.
2. In the Second Schedule, after item 7, the following item
shall be inserted, namely:—
“7A. The Regulatory Bodies established under sub-
section ( 2) of section 25 of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory
Authority Act, 2011.”.
PART III
AMENDMENT TO T HE D ISASTER M ANAGEMENT A CT, 2005
(53 OF 2005)
In section 6, after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2A) The National Authority, while laying down the policies,
plans and guidelines for disaster management for ensuring timely
and effective response to disaster, shall have due regard to the
safety requirements laid down and regulations made by the Nuclear
Safety Regulatory Authority under the Nuclear Safety Regulatory
Authority Act, 2011 and coordinate with such Authority in the case
of a disaster resulting from a nuclear incident notified under section
3 of the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010.”,
PART IV
AMENDMENT TO THE C IVIL L IABILITY F OR N UCLEAR D AMAGE A CT, 2010
(38 OF 2010)
For section 3, the following section shall be substituted, namely:—
“3. ( 1) The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority established
under the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Act, 2011 shall,
within a period of fifteen days from the date of occurrence of a
nuclear incident, notify such nuclear incident:
Provided that where the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority
is satisfied that the gravity of threat and risk involved in a nuclear
incident is insignificant, it shall not be required to notify such
nuclear incident.
(2) The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority shall,
immediately after the notification under sub-section ( 1) is issued,
cause wide publicity to be given to the occurrence of such nuclear
incident, in such manner as it may deem fit.”.
Amendment of
section 8.
Amendment of
Second Schedule.
38 of 2010.
Substitution of
new section for
section 3
Nuclear Safety
Regulatory
Authority to
notify nuclear
incident.

46
46
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Atomic Energy Act, 1962 was enacted, after repealing the
Atomic Energy Act, 1948, to provide for a legal framework for the
development, control and use of atomic energy for the welfare of
the people of India and for other peaceful purposes.
2. The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board was constituted by a
notification issued under the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 to carry out
certain regulatory and safety functions for administering nuclear and
radiation safety in the facilities under its jurisdiction. The said Board
is also vested with powers for regulating radiation safety in radiation
facilities relating to medicine, industry and research and for
enforcement of the Factories Act, 1948 in respect of installations
under its jurisdiction. The said Board has functional independence
and reports to the Atomic Energy Commission.
3. The Fukushima incident in Japan has led to worldwide
concerns and apprehension on safety issues relating to nuclear
power. The Government of India attaches highest importance to
nuclear safety and considers it expedient to establish statutory
regulatory bodies to further strengthen regulation of radiation and
nuclear safety in the country. Hon’ble Prime Minister has made a
statement on the floor of the Lok Sabha on 14th March, 2011 and
assured that India’s nuclear safety regulatory framework would be
strengthened.
4. It is, therefore, considered necessary to establish a legal
framework for regulation of radiation safety and nuclear safety to
achieve highest standards of such safety based on scientific
approach, operating experience and best practices followed by
nuclear industry and to ensure that the use of radiation and atomic
energy in all its applications is safe for the health of the radiation
workers, members of the public and the environment.
5. The Bill, inter alia, seeks—
(a) to provide for the establishment of the Council of
Nuclear Safety to oversee and review the policies with
respect to radiation safety, nuclear safety and other matters;
(b) to provide for the establishment of the Nuclear
Safety Regulatory Authority to ensure that the use of radiation
and atomic energy is safe for the health of the radiation
workers, members of the public and the environment;
(c) to provide for the establishment of other regulatory
bodies for the purpose of national defence and security;

47
(d) to prohibit certain activities without the consent of
the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority and provide for the
procedure for grant of consent to persons carrying out the
activities falling under the jurisdiction of such Authority;
(e) to provide for the suspension and cancellation of
consent by the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority and also
for review of orders passed by it;
(f) to empower the Council of Nuclear Safety to
constitute an Appellate Authority with Chairperson who is a
Judge of the Supreme Court or Chief Justice of a High Court
and two other Members who are eminent scientists in the
field of nuclear or atomic energy;
(g) to enable the Central Government or any person
aggrieved by the order of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory
Authority to file an appeal to the Appellate Authority;
(h) to provide for the offences and penalties for
contraventions of the provisions of the Act;
(i) to empower the Central Government to supersede
the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority under the
circumstances specified in the Act;
(j) to provide for certain amendments in the Atomic
Energy Act, 1962; the Right to Information Act, 2005; the
Disaster Management Act, 2005; and the Civil Liability for
Nuclear Damage Act, 2010.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
7. The Notes on Clauses explains the various provisions
contained in the Bill.
NEW DELHI;
The 5th September, 2011 V . NARAYANASAMY .

48
48
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1.—This clause, inter alia, seeks to extend the
provisions of the Bill to the whole of India.
Clause 2.—This clause defines various expressions used in
the Bill.
Clause 3.—This clause provides that the Act not to prejudice
national sovereignty, etc. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides
that nothing in the Act shall be construed as to require or permit
any person to do or to refrain from doing anything which the
Central Government may declare to be prejudicial to the national
defence and security. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that
a declaration so made shall be conclusive and not be called in
question before any court of law.
Clause 4.—This clause provides for prohibition of certain
activities without consent. The said clause prohibits carrying out of
any activity related to nuclear material, etc., falling within the
jurisdiction of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority without
obtaining its written consent. Further, it explains the expression
‘activity’.
Clause 5.—This clause provides for establishment of Council
of Nuclear Safety. The said clause empowers the Central
Government to establish a ‘Council of Nuclear Safety’ consisting of
Prime Minister as its Chairperson and the Union Ministers for
Environment and Forests, External Affairs, Health and Family
Welfare, Home Affairs, Science and Technology, any other Union
Minister to be nominated by Central Government, the Cabinet
Secretary, the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission, as its ex
officio Members and such number of eminent experts as may be
nominated by the Central Government also as its Members.
Clause 6.—This clause provides for meetings of Council. The
said clause provides that the Council shall meet at such places and
intervals as may be necessary and to regulate its own procedure for
its meetings.
Clause 7.—This clause provides for powers and functions of
Council. The said clause provides that the Council shall oversee and
review the policies with respect to radiation safety, nuclear safety
and other matters connected therewith or incidental thereto and for
this purpose, it shall have a Secretary to assist it.
Clause 8.—This clause provides for establishment of Nuclear
Safety Regulatory Authority. The sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause
empowers the Central Government to establish an Authority to be
called as the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority to exercise the

49
powers conferred on and perform the functions assigned to it by or
under the Act. The explanation to it clarifies that notwithstanding
anything contained in section 7, the Authority shall be autonomous
in the exercise of its powers and functions under the Act. Sub-
clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that the Authority shall be a
body corporate. Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that the
head office of the said Authority shall be at such places as the
Central Government may notify. Sub-clause ( 4) of the said clause
provides that the Authority may, with the prior approval of the
Central Government, establish its offices at such other places as
may be considered necessary.
Clause 9.—This clause provides for composition of Nuclear
Safety Regulatory Authority. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause
provides that the Authority shall consist of a Chairperson, two
whole-time Members and part-time Members not exceeding four to
be appointed by the Central Government on the recommendations of
the Search Committees constituted for the purpose.
Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that a person shall
not be qualified for appointment as Chairperson of the Authority
unless he  is an Indian citizen and of outstanding ability, impeccable
integrity and standing and having distinguished professional record
and experience of at least twenty-five years in Government,
industry, academic institutions or national laboratories and is an
expert in one or more disciplines or areas of nuclear science and
technology, nuclear safety and regulation, operation and design of
nuclear power plants and fuel cycle facilities, radiation safety,
nuclear medicine, radiation therapy, radiation applications, industrial
and chemical plant safety, earth science, environmental science and
engineering, power plant engineering or materials science and
engineering or such other discipline or areas which may in the
opinion of the Central Government be relevant.
Sub-clause ( 3) of the said Act provides that a person shall not
be qualified for appointment as Member of the Authority unless he
is a citizen of India and of outstanding ability, impeccable integrity
and standing and having distinguished professional record and
experience of at least twenty years in Government, industry,
academic institutions or national laboratories and is an expert in one
or more disciplines or areas of nuclear science and technology,
nuclear safety and regulation, operation and design of nuclear power
plants and fuel cycle facilities, radiation safety, nuclear medicine,
radiation therapy, radiation applications, industrial and chemical plant
safety, earth science, environmental science and engineering, power
plant engineering or materials science and engineering or such other
discipline or areas which may in the opinion of the Central
Government, be relevant.
Clause 10.—This clause provides for constitution of Search
Committees. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause empowers the
Council to Constitute a Search Committee for the selection of

50
Chairperson and another Search Committee for the selection of
Members of the Authority. However, the said clause provides that
the Chairperson and members of the such Committees shall be
amongst persons of eminence having knowledge and experience in
the field of science, engineering and technology and that the
Chairperson of the Authority shall be a Member of the Search
Committee constituted for the appointment of Members.
Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that the Central
Government shall, within a period of three months from the date of
occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death, resignation or
removal of the Chairperson or a Member and six months before the
superannuation or completion of the term of the Chairperson or
Member, make a reference to the Search Committee for filling up
the vacancy. Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that no
appointment of the Chairperson or Member shall be invalid merely
by the reason of any vacancy in the Search Committees. Sub-clause
(4) of the said clause provides that the term of the Search
Committees and the manner of search of panel of names for making
recommendations for appointment of Chairperson or Member shall
be such as may be specified by the Council. Sub-clause ( 5) of the
said clause provides that the Search Committee shall regulate its
own procedure. Sub-clause ( 6) of the said clause provides that
before appointing any person as the Chairperson or Member of the
Authority, the Central Government shall satisfy itself that such
person does not have any financial or other interest as is likely to
affect prejudicially his functions.
Clause 11.—This clause provides for the term of office and
other conditions of service of Chairperson and Members. Sub-
clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that the Chairperson and
Members of the Authority shall hold office for a term of three years
from the date on which they enter upon their offices and shall be
eligible for reappointment for a further period of three years.
However, the Chairperson shall not hold office as such after he has
attained age of seventy years and a whole-time Member shall not
hold office as such after he has attained the age of sixty-five years.
Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that any person
holding any office (whether as an employee or an officer or a
director or managing director or secretary or manager or in any
other capacity) under the Central Government or State Government
or in a company (including Government company referred to in
section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956) or in any other institution,
organization, society or university or Board shall on his selection as
the Chairperson or a whole-time Member be required to seek
retirement or resign from the services of such Central or State
Government or company or institution or organisation or society or
University or Board, as the case may be, before accepting the
employment as such Chairperson or as the case may be, the
Member.

51
Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that the salaries
and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of
service of the Chairperson and Members shall be as such as may
be prescribed. However, the salary, allowances and other terms and
conditions of service of the Chairperson or a Member shall not be
varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. Sub-clause ( 4) of
the said clause provides that the Chairperson or Member may
relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central Government
a notice of not less than three months or be removed from his
office in accordance with provisions of section 14 of the Act.
Clause 12.—This clause provides for the financial and
administrative powers of Chairperson. The said clause provides that
the Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Authority
and shall exercise such financial and administrative powers as may
be prescribed. However, the Chairperson shall have authority to
delegate financial and administrative powers to any whole-time
Member or an officer of the authority subject to the condition that
such Member or officer shall while exercising such delegated
powers continue to act under the direction, control and supervision
of the Chairperson.
Clause 13.—This clause provides for certain restrictions on
Chairperson or Members of the Authority on their employment after
cessation of office.
Clause 14.—This clause provides for removal of Chairperson
and Members. The said clause provides that the Central Government
may, by order, remove from office the Chairperson or any Member
of the Authority under the circumstances specified therein.
Clause 15.—This clause provides for meeting of Authority.
The said clause provides that the Authority shall meet at such times
and places, and observe such rules of procedure in regard to the
transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at such
meeting) as may be specified by regulations.
Clause 16.—This clause provides for vacancies, etc., not to
invalidate proceedings of Authority. The said clause provides that no
act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalidated merely by
reason of any vacancy in or any defect in the constitution of the
Authority or any defect in the appointment of a person as a Member
of the Authority or any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority
not affecting the merits of the case.
Clause 17.—This clause provides for appointment of
Secretary and such other number of other officers, employees,
consultants or experts as the Authority considers necessary for the
efficient discharge of its functions and exercise of its powers under
the Act. However, no appointment of officers or employees shall be
made unless prior written approval of the Central Government has
been obtained by the Authority for creation of posts therefor.
However no appointment of officers or employees shall be made

52
unless prior written approval of the Central Government has been
obtained by the Authority for creation of posts therefor. Sub-
clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the salaries, allowances and
pensions payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of
the officers other employees of the Authority shall be such as may
be specified by the regulations.
Clause 18.—This clause provides for transfer of assets,
liabilities, etc., of the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board and saving of
its actions, etc. The said clause provides that the said Board shall
stand dissolved on establishment of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory
Authority and that all sums of money due to the Board immediately
before that date shall be deemed to be due to the Authority and that
all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have
been instituted by or against the Board may be continued or may be
instituted by or against the Authority.
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the Chairman and
Members of the Board shall be transferred as such to function as
Chairperson and Members under the Act and be deemed to be the
Chairperson and Members of the Authority under the Act until the
Chairperson and Members of the Authority are appointed in
accordance with the provisions of the Act.
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that every officer and
employee holding a post in Board shall hold the post in the Authority
by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of
service including remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and
other terminal benefits as he would have held such post as if the
Act had not been passed and shall continue to do so as an officer
or employee of the Authority for a period of three years unless he
within three years opts not to be an employee of the Authority or
until his tenure, remuneration or other terms and conditions of
service are altered by the regulations.
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that every person who
opts not to be an employee of the Authority shall be governed by
the rules and orders as are applicable to the Central Government
officers and employees of equivalent rank. Sub-clause ( 5) of this
clause provides that the tenure, remuneration and other terms and
conditions of service including pension of any employee of the
Authority shall not be altered to his disadvantage without the
previous approval of the Central Government Sub-clause ( 6) of this
clause provides that after the dissolution of the Board such of the
functions and powers of Board as are vested in the Authority shall
be carried out by the Authority after such dissolution.
Clause 19.—This clause provides for jurisdiction of Authority.
The said clause provides that save as otherwise provided in sections
25 and 27, the jurisdiction of the Authority shall extend to all areas
to which this Act is applicable and activities relating to production,
development or use of atomic energy and radiation in all its
applications, or transport (within India or outside India), transfer by

53
sale or otherwise import, export or storage or disposal of nuclear
and radioactive material.
Clause 20.—This clause provides for functions of Authority. Sub-
section ( 1) of this clause provides that the Authority shall, subject
to the provisions of this Act and the rules and regulations made
thereunder, take measures, within its jurisdiction, to ensure that the
use of radiation and atomic energy is safe for the health of the
radiation workers, members of the public and the environment
Explanation to this sub-clause clarifies that the functions of the
Authority shall be confined only to ensure the radiation safety and
nuclear safety during activities relating to production, storage,
disposal, transport, transfer by sale or otherwise, import, export and
use of any nuclear material, radioactive material or any other
substance or equipment, and physical security of nuclear material,
radioactive material, and radiation and nuclear facilities and in no
case shall extend to the functions or any other matter which the
Central Government is required to discharge under the Atomic
Energy Act, 1962.
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the Authority shall
also carry out other functions which inter alia includes ( a) devise
and implement policies and programmes for radiation safety and
nuclear safety to ensure that use of atomic energy or radiation in all
its applications is safe for the health of radiation workers and
members of public, and the environment; ( b) ensure high quality of
safety management at all places where nuclear and radiation related
activities are carried out; ( c) ensure transparency by systematic
public outreach on matters relating to nuclear safety without
disclosing sensitive information and compromising confidentiality of
commercially sensitive information of technology holders. Further, it
explains the expression “sensitive information” to mean information
pertaining to ( i) physical security of nuclear material and facilities,
or ( ii) reprocessing of spent fuel, enrichment of fissile material or
heavy water production technologies; ( iii) any information under
section 26 which has been accessed by the Authority or has come
to its knowledge or made available to it in the discharge of its
functions; ( d) strive to be a knowledge organisation with state of
the art scientific capabilities in the domain of its responsibilities,
arrange for and conduct research in areas relevant to its functions
and develop linkages with technical support organisations;
(e) interact with other bodies and international organisations engaged
in activities relevant to the functions of the Authority including
nuclear and radiation safety, physical security of nuclear material
and facilities, transportation of nuclear and radioactive materials and
nuclear and radiation safety and regulation. However, provided that
the Authority shall not interact with such bodies and international
organisations outside India without the prior approval of the Central
Government; ( f) advise the Central Government with respect to –
(i) safety of public and the environment; ( ii ) measurement
implement and co-ordinate a nationwide programme for
environmental surveillance to check any harmful build up of

54
radioactivity in the environment; (iii ) measures to ensure
establishment and maintenance of appropriate mechanisms and
plans for preparedness in response to nuclear and radiation
emergencies; ( g) notify the limits of radiation exposure to
radiation workers and the members of the public; ( h) specify by
regulations, the requisite qualification, the training required to the
persons for employment at premises or places where at any
activity relating to production, storage, disposal, transport and use
of any nuclear material, radioactive material or any other substance
or equipment used for production, or use of atomic energy is
carried out, and specify hours of work, minimum leave and
requirements of periodical medical examination of such employees;
(i) specify by regulations the requirement of approval to, or
licensing of, the persons referred to in clause ( h); (j) establish an
appropriate regulatory mechanism which shall provide for issue of
consents, monitoring of compliances, inspections and enforcement;
(k) develop and notify the standards and codes, and develop and
publish other supporting documents for safety in design, siting,
construction, commissioning, operation, quality assurance,
decommissioning, storage, transportation and other activities
related to plants, facilities, nuclear and radioactive wastes,
radiation sources and radioactive materials; ( l) issue, renew,
modify, suspend and revoke consents with specified conditions for
conduct of any activity which come under its jurisdiction for the
production, storage, disposal, transport (within and outside India),
transfer by sale or otherwise, import, export and use of any
nuclear material, radioactive material or any other substance, or
equipment used for production, or use of atomic energy; ( m) levy
fee, by regulation, for issue, modification and renewal of consents;
(n) take such measures as to enforce compliance of the provisions
of the Act by the holder of the consent; ( o) notify measures for
physical security within the area of main plant boundary, physical
protection of nuclear and radioactive materials under storage as
well as transport (within and outside India), and nuclear and
radiation facilities; ( p) engage with the consent of Head of
concerned bodies, the institutions, laboratories, agencies, technical
support organisations, industries, individual experts and
professionals of integrity and outstanding ability, who have
expertise in scientific, technical, sociological, legal and such other
disciplines related to nuclear, radiation and industrial safety to
assist the Authority in the discharge of its functions; ( q) discharge
its functions and powers in a manner consistent with the
international obligations of India; ( r) apprise, from time to time,
the National Disaster Management Authority established under
section 3 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 regarding nuclear
safety and radiation safety measures and management of disaster
arising from nuclear incident notified under section 3 of the Civil
Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010 and coordinate with the
said Authority in the case of such disaster; ( s) notify nuclear
incident as required by section 3 of the Civil Liability for nuclear
Damage Act, 2010.

55
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that the Authority may,
for reasons to be recorded in writing, exempt, by notification,
subject to such conditions as may be specified by it in the
notification, any radioactive material, any class or classes of
radioactive material or any radiation generating plant from the
applicability of any of the provisions of the safety related regulations
or orders issued under this Act.
Clause 21.—This clause provides for Authority to Act in
interest of sovereignty and integrity of India. The said clause
provides that the Authority while discharging its powers and
functions, shall not act against the interest of the sovereignty and
integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with
foreign States, public order, decency or morality.
Clause 22.—This clause provides for power of Authority to
give directions to owner of radioactive material, etc. The said clause
empowers the Authority to direct any owner of or holder of the
consent or any person dealing with radioactive material, radiation
source or facility to hand it over to the Central Government if in the
opinion of the Authority, continuation of such material or facility
under the control of its owner or the holder of the consent or any
such person is detrimental to the safety and physical security of
such material or facility or has a potential to be detrimental to the
safety of public or the environment. It also provides that the
Authority may advise the Central Government to take control of the
radioactive material or radiation source if owner thereof cannot be
identified.
Clause 23.—This clause provides for administration of
Factories Act, 1948. The said clause provides that notwithstanding
anything contained in the Factories Act, 1948, the Authority and
other regulatory bodies shall, subject to the rules made under the
Act, administer the Factories Act, 1948, and do all things for the
enforcement of its provisions, including the appointment of
inspecting staff, in any factory engaged in the development,
production and use of radiation and atomic energy, or any facility
engaged in research and development activities related to radiation or
atomic energy, and owned or administered by the Central
Government or any other authority or corporation established by it
or a Government company under the jurisdiction of the Authority or
the regulatory bodies, as the case may be. It further provides that
no authority under the Factories Act, 1948 shall have jurisdiction in
respect of the above functions.
Clause 24.—This clause provides for delegation of powers.
The said clause provides that the Authority may delegate to the
Chairperson or any Member or officer of the Authority or a State
Government or such officer or authority subordinate to the State
Government such of its powers and functions under the Act (except
the power to make regulations under section 51), as it may deem
necessary.

56
Clause 25.— This clause provides for establishment of
regulatory bodies. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that
the Central Government may, for the purposes of national defence
and security, exempt any nuclear material, radioactive material,
facilities, premises and activities, the premises, assets and areas
associated with material and activities from the jurisdiction of the
Authority.
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the Central
Government may, for the purposes of regulating the material,
facilities, activities referred to in clause ( a) or premises. assets and
areas referred to in clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1), by order, in
writing establish one or more regulatory bodies and demarcate
responsibility thereof to discharge one or more of the functions in
respect thereof which otherwise before such exemption were within
the jurisdiction of the Authority and such functions amongst other
things shall include to ( i) ensure that the use of radiation and atomic
energy is safe for the radiation workers, the members of the public
and the environment; ( ii) report to that Government release of
radiation or radioactive material exceeding specified limits from
facilities under its jurisdiction into any area falling within the
jurisdiction of the Authority.
Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that the Central
Government may specify that the provisions of the Act shall subject
to such modifications or conditions or adaptation as it may specify,
apply to such regulatory bodies.
Clause 26.—This clause provides for prohibition of disclosure
of information. Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that save as
otherwise provided in the Act, the regulatory bodies established
under sub-section ( 2) of section 25 of the Act shall not disclose to
any person the information relating to the activities falling unclear
their jurisdiction.
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that no Chairperson or
Member or officer or other employees or consultant or expert shall,
either during his employment with such regulatory bodies or after
cessation of such employment, disclose any confidential information
relating to activities falling under the jurisdiction of regulatory
bodies.
Clause 27.—This clause provides for power of Central
Government to carry out certain functions itself. The said clause
provides that notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any
other law for the time being in force, the Central Government may
for the purpose of national defence and security by order exempt
any area, nuclear material, radioactive material, nuclear facility or
plant from jurisdiction of the Authority or other regulatory bodies
under the Act and carry out those functions itself in relation thereto
which but for such exemption would have been carried out by the
Authority or other regulatory bodies under the Act.

57
Clause 28.—This clause provides procedure for grant of
consent for carrying out activities related to nuclear material, etc.
Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that every person shall, for
carrying out activity falling under the jurisdiction of the Authority
relating to production, storage, disposal, transport (within and
outside India), transfer by sale or otherwise, import, export and use
of any nuclear material, radioactive material or any other substance,
or equipment, etc., obtain the consent of the Authority and for that
purpose submit an application in the prescribed form and manner
along with such fee and accompanied by such documents and
information as may be specified by regulations. This clause also
provides the procedure for grant or refusal of consent.
Clause 29.—This clause provides for suspension and
cancellation of consent. This clause provides the grounds and
procedure fm revocation of consent granted under section 28 of the
Act. It also stipulates that where the Authority is satisfied that
pending the consideration of question of cancelling consent, it may
suspend the consent and require the grantee to show-cause as to
why the consent should not be cancelled.
Clause 30.—This clause provides for responsibilities of
grantee of consent. The said clause provides that every person who
has been granted consent shall be responsible for safety and
physical security of radiation and nuclear facility and radioactive and
nuclear material contained therein.
Clause 31.—This clause provides for power of Authority to
call for information, conduct investigation, etc. Sub-clause ( 1) of
the said clause provides that where the Authority considers it
expedient so to do. it may by order in writing, ( a) call upon any
owner or any person in charge of or managing director, director,
secretary or other officer of radiation or nuclear facility at any time
to furnish in writing such information or explanation relating to its
activities as the Authority may require to carry  out its functions
under this Act: or ( b) appoint one or more persons to make an
inquiry in relation to the affairs of any radiation or nuclear facility;
and ( c) direct any of its  officers or employees to inspect the books
or other documents of any radiation or nuclear facility,
Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provided that where any
inquiry in relation to the affairs of any person referred to in clause
(a) of sub-section ( 1) has been undertaken under that sub-section,
(a) every owner or managing director or director, manager,
secretary or other officer, if such person referred to in clause (a)
of sub-section (I) is a company; or ( b) every partner, manager,
secretary or other officer, if such person referred to in clause ( a)
of sub-section ( 1) is a firm; or ( c) every other person or body of
persons who has had dealings in the course of business with any
of the persons mentioned in clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub-section ( 1),
shall be bound to produce before the Authority making the inquiry,
all such books of account or other documents in his custody or

58
power relating to, or having a bearing on the subject-matter of such
inquiry and also to furnish to the Authority with any such statement
or information relating thereto, as the case may be, required of him
within such time as may be specified. Sub-clause ( 3) of the said
clause provides that every person referred to in clause (a) of sub-
section ( 1) shall maintain such records or other documents as may
be prescribed.
Clause 32.—This clause provides for power of Authority to
issue certain directions, The said clause provides that the Authority
may, for the purpose of discharge of its functions under this Act,
issue directions to the persons who have been granted consent
under the Act, as it may consider necessary.
Clause 33.—This clause provides for powers of inspection,
search and seizure. Sub-clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the
Authority or any other officer specially authorised by it in this
behalf may carry out such inspection or inquiry as may be
necessary, enter any building or place where the Authority has
reason to believe that any document or object relating to the subject
matter of the inquiry may be found, and may seize any such
document or object subject to the provisions of section 100 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 in so far as they may be applicable.
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the Authority shall
have power of access to premises and places, vehicle, vessel or
aircraft where radiation is present or used or proposed to be used;
and documents; drawings, photographs, plans, models or any other
form which relates to or represents or illustrates any existing or
proposed plant, used or proposed to be used far the purpose of
producing, developing or using atomic energy or radiation.
Clause 34.—This clause provides far review of order of
Authority. The said clause provides that any person aggrieved by an
order made by the Authority under sections 28 and 29 may file an
application to the Authority far review of that order within a period
of thirty days from the date of such order. However, the Authority
may entertain such application after the expiry of the said period of
thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not
filing it within that period. Further, notwithstanding the filing of an
application under this section, the aggrieved person shall abide by
the order in question, unless it has been stayed by a subsequent
order of the Authority in writing.
Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that every
application far review under sub-section ( 1) shall clearly state the
ground or grounds an which a review is sought.
Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that an application
for review filed before the Authority shall be heard and disposed of
as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to finally
dispose of the application within a period of ninety days from the
date of its filing.

59
Clause 35.—This clause provides far Appellate Authority. Sub-
clause ( 1) of this clause provides that the Council of Nuclear Safety
shall, as and when required, constitute by notification, an Appellate
Authority to hear appeals from any order or decision passed by the
Authority under section 28 or 29 or under sub-section ( 3) of section
34 as the case may be.
Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause provides that the Appellate
Authority shall consists of a Chairperson and not more than two
Members. Sub-clause ( 3) of this clause provides that the selection
of the Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Authority shall be
made by the Council in consultation with the Chief Justice  of India
or his nominee.
Sub-clause ( 4) of this clause provides that a person shall not
be qualified far appointment as the Chairperson or  a Member of the
Appellate Authority unless he in the case of Chairperson is or has
been a judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice  of a High
Court and in case of a Member, is an eminent scientist and has held
the past of Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent
post in the Department of the Central Government in the Ministries
or Departments or  an institution administered by that Government
dealing with science and technology.
Sub-clause ( 5) of this clause provides that the Central
Government or any person aggrieved by an order referred to in sub-
section ( l) may file an appeal before the Appellate Authority within
a period of thirty days from the date of such order. However, the
Authority may entertain such appeal after the expiry of the said
period of thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause
for not filing the appeal within that period. Sub-clause ( 6) of this
clause provides far the manlier of filing appeal and the fees. Sub-
clause ( 7) thereof provides that every appeal shall be heard and
dispose of as expeditiously as possible within a period of ninety
days from the date its filing.
Clause 36.—This clause provides far budget. The said clause
provides that the Authority shall prepare budget in each financial
year far the next financial year showing the estimated receipts and
expenditure of the Authority and forward the same to the Central
Government.
Clause 37.—This clause provides for grants by Central
Government. The said clause provides that the Central Government
may after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this
behalf, make to the Authority grants of such sums of money as are
required to be paid.
Clause 38.—This clause provides for annual statement of
accounts. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that the
Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may
be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.

60
Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that the accounts
of the Authority shall be audited by him at such intervals as may be
specified by him.
Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that the
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any person appointed
by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority
under this Act shall have the same rights, privileges and Authority
in connection with such audit, as the Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India generally has, in connection with the audit of the
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and
other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the
Authority. Sub-clause ( 4) of the said clause provides that the
accounts of the Authority, as certified by Comptroller and Auditor-
General of India or any other person appointed by him in this
behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded
annually to the Central Government and the Central Government
shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.
Clause 39.—This clause provides for furnishing of returns,
etc., to the Central Government. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause
provides that the Authority shall furnish to the Central Government,
at such time and in such form and the manner as may be prescribed
or as the Central Government may direct, such returns and
statements and such particulars in regard to any matter under the
jurisdiction of the Authority, as the Central Government may, from
time to time, require. Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that
the Authority shall also prepare once every year, in such form and
at such time as may be prescribed, an annual report, giving a
summary of its activities during the previous year and copies of the
report shall be forwarded to the Central Government. Sub-clause ( 3)
of the said clause provides that a copy of the report shall be laid
by the Central Government before each House of Parliament.
Clause 40.—This clause provides for offences and penalties.
The said clause provides that whoever discloses any information
prohibited under section 26, contravenes any condition subject to
which a consent is granted under section 28, contravenes any order
made under section 31, obstructs any person authorised by the
Authority under section 33 in the exercise of the powers under that
section, contravenes any rule or regulation made under the Act or
any requirement, prohibition or restriction imposed under any such
rule or regulation or fails to comply with any direction, order or
decision of the Authority or other regulatory bodies under the Act,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to five years or with fine or with both.
Clause 41.—This clause provides for offences by companies.
Sub-clause ( 1) of the said clause provides that where an offence
under the Act has been committed by a company, every person who
at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was

61
responsible to the company for the conduct of the business of the
company as well as the company shall be deemed to be guilty of
the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished
accordingly. However, nothing contained in the section shall render
any such person liable to any punishment if he proves that the
offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.
Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in sub-clause ( 1), where an
offence under the Act has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or attributable to any neglect on the part of, any
director, manager, secretary or other officer or employees shall also
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be
proceeded against and punished accordingly. The explanation to the
clause clarifies and explains the terms ‘company’ and ‘director’.
Clause 42.—This clause provides for directions by Central
Government. Sub-clause (l) of the said clause provides that the
Central Government may, from time to time, issue to the Authority
or other regulatory bodies, such directions as it may think necessary
in the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security
of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order,
decency or morality or in public interest.
Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that without
prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the Authority shall, in exercise
of its powers or the performance of its functions, be bound by
such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government
may give in writing to it from time to time. However, the Authority
shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its
views before any direction is given under this section. Sub-
clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that the decision of the
Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall
be final.
Clause 43.—This clause provides for Members, officers and
employees of Authority to be publish servants. It provides that the
Chairperson, Members, Secretary, officers and other employees of
the Authority shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in
pursuance of any of the provisions of the Act, to be public servants
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.
Clause 44.—This clause provides for bar of jurisdiction. The
said clause provides that no civil court shall have jurisdiction in
respect of any matter which the Authority or other regulatory bodies
are empowered by or under the Act to determine.
Clause 45.—This clause provides for obligations as to fidelity
and secrecy. The said clause provides that every Chairperson,
Member, adviser, consultant, Secretary, officer or any other
employee of the Authority or other regulatory bodies shall, before
entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and secrecy
in the form set out in the First Schedule.

62
Clause 46.—This clause provides for protection of action
taken in good faith. It provides that no suit, prosecution or other
legal proceedings shall lie against the Central Government or the
Authority or any Member, officer or other employees thereof for
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under
the Act or the rules and regulations made thereunder.
Clause 47.—This clause provides for cognizance of offence.
The said clause provides that no Court inferior to the Chief Judicial
Magistrate shall take cognizance of an offence under the Act except
upon a complaint in writing made by the Authority or any officer of
the Authority duly authorised by it where the offence relates to an
act falling within the jurisdiction of the Authority or the Central
Government or any officer of that Government duly authorised by
it in respect of any other offence.
Clause 48.—This clause provides for power of Central
Government to supersede Authority. Sub-clause ( 1) of the said
clause provides that the Central Government may, by notification,
supersede the authority for such period not exceeding six months,
extendable for a further term not exceeding six months, in certain
circumstances such as ( a) that the Authority has acted in a manner
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or rules and regulations
made thereunder; or ( b) that on account of circumstances beyond
the control of the Authority, it is unable to discharge the functions
and duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or
(c) that the Authority has persistently made default in complying
with any direction issued by the Central Government under this Act
or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or
under the provisions of this Act and as a result of which default,
the financial position of the Authority has suffered or the
administration of any radiation or nuclear installation has
deteriorated; or ( d) that circumstances exist which render it
necessary in the public interest so to do. However, only after giving
reasonable opportunity to the Authority to showcause as to why it
should not be superseded and considering explanations and
objections, if any of the Authority.
Sub-clause ( 2) of the said clause provides that on
supersession of the Authority, the Chairperson and other Members
shall vacate their offices and al1 powers, functions and duties of the
Authority be exercised and discharged by the Central Government or
such authority or persons as the Central Government may specify
in this behalf.
It also provides that all properties owned or controlled by the
Authority shall, until it is reconstituted, vest in the Central
Government.
Sub-clause ( 3) of the said clause provides that on the
expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification
issued under sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further term not

63
exceeding six months, as it may consider necessary; or ( b) re-
constitute the Authority by fresh appointment and in such case the
Chairperson and other Members who vacated their offices under
clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) shall not be deemed disqualified for
appointment. However, the Central Government may, at any time
before the expiration of the period of supersession, whether as
specified under sub-section ( 1) or as extended under this sub-
section, take action under clause ( b) of this sub-section.
Sub-clause ( 4) of the said clause provides that the Central
Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section ( 1)
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the
circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each House
of Parliament at the earliest.
Clause 49.—This clause provides that application of other
laws not barred. The said clause provides that the Act shall be in
addition to and not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law
for the time being in force. It further states that nothing in the Act
shal1 affect the provisions of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 and save
and except as otherwise provided, the provision of the Act shall be
in addition to and not in derogation of that Act.
Clause 50.—This clause confers upon the Central
Government the power to make rules for carrying out the provisions
of the Act. Sub-clause ( 2) of this clause enumerates the various
matters in respect of which such rules may be made the matters
specified in the said clause.
Clause 51.—This clause confers upon the Authority the
power to make regulations consistent with the Act and the rules
made thereunder to carry out the provisions of the Act. Sub-
clause ( 2) of this clause enumerates the various matters in respect
of which such regulations may be made by the Authority.
Clause 52.—This clause provides that every rule and
regulations made under the Act shall be laid before each House of
Parliament.
Clause 53.—This clause provides for amendment to certain
enactments. It provides that the specified in the Second Schedule to
this Act shall be amended in the manner specified therein and such
amendments shall take effect on the date of establishment of the
Authority.
Clause 54.— This clause provides for power to remove
difficulties. The said clause provides that if any difficulty arises
in giving effect to the provisions of the Act, the Central
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette,
make such provisions, not inconsistent with the provisions of the
Act, as appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty.
However, no such order can be made under this section after
expiry of three years from the date of commencement of the Act.
It further provides that every order made under this section shall,

64
as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each House
of Parliament.
The First Schedule to the Bill sets out the form of making
declaration of fidelity and secrecy.
Part-I of the Second Schedule provides for amendments to
the-Atomic Energy Act, 1962, Part-II thereof provides for
amendments to the Right to Information Act, 2005, Part-III thereof
provides for amendments to the Disaster Management Act, 2005 and
Part-IV thereof provides for amendment to the Civil Liability for
Nuclear Damage Act, 2010.

65
65
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 8 of the Bill provides for the
establishment of an Authority to be called the Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority by the Central Government. Sub-clause ( 3)
thereof provides that the head office of the Authority shall be at
such place as the Central Government may consider necessary. Sub-
clause ( 4) thereof enables the Authority to establish, with prior
approval of the Central Government, its offices at such other places
as may be considered necessary.
2. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 9 of the Bill provides that the
Authority shall consist of a Chairperson, two whole-time Members
and part-time Members not exceeding four to be appointed by the
Central Government. Sub-clause ( 3) of clause 11 of the Bill provides
that the Chairperson and Members of the Authority shall be entitled
to such salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of
service as may be specified by rules made by the Central
Government.
3. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 17 provides that the Authority
may appoint a Secretary and such number of other officers,
employees, consultants or experts as it considers necessary for the
efficient discharge of its functions and exercise of its powers. Sub-
clause ( 2) thereof provides that the salaries, allowances and
pensions payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the
officers and other employees of the Authority shall be such as may
be specified by regulations.
4. Clause 18 of the Bill provides that on and from the
establishment of the Authority, the existing Atomic Energy
Regulatory Board shall stand dissolved and the Chairman and
Members of the said Board shall stand transferred to the Authority
to function as its Chairperson and Members until the Chairperson
and Members of the Authority are appointed in accordance with the
provisions of the Bill. Further, sub-clause ( 3) thereof provides that
on and from the date of commencement of the Act, every officer
and employee holding a post in the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board
before that date shall hold the post in the Authority by the same
tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of service for a
period of three years from the date of the commencement of this
Act. Therefore, there may not be any immediate significant increase
in the financial implication on constitution of the Authority or in the
near future.
5. Sub-clause ( 2) of clause 25 of the Bill provides that the
Central Government may, by an order in writing, establish one or
more regulatory bodies.

66
6. Sub-clause ( 1) of clause 35 of the Bill empowers the
Council to constitute an Appellate Authority to hear appeals. Sub-
clause ( 2) thereof  provides that the Appellate Authority shall consist
of a Chairperson and not more than two Members.
7. Clause 37 of the Bill provides that the Central Government
may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law in this
behalf make to the Authority grants of such sums of money as are
required to be paid.
8. It is estimated that during the financial year 2012-2013, a
sum of rupees thirty-seven crores may be required for the
establishment of the Authority. In  addition, it is estimated that during
the Twelfth Plan, a sum of rupees one hundred and sixty-four
crores may be required for expanding and strengthening the
activities of the Authority. The said expenditure will be borne out of
the usual budget grants of the Department of Atomic Energy.
9. It is not practicable to make an exact estimate of the
expenditure both recurring and non-recurring at this stage as the
exact structure of the Council, other regulatory bodies and the
Appellate Authority would emerge later.

67
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Clause 51 of the Bill confers power upon the Central
Government to make rules for carrying out the provisions of the Act.
The matters in respect of which such rules may be made relate inter
alia to (a) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms
and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members under sub-
section (3) of section 11; (b) the financial and administrative powers
to be exercised by the Chairperson under section. 12; (c) the manner
of maintaining books of account and other documents under sub-
section (3) of section 31; (d) the manner and fees for filing appeal
under sub-section (6) of section 35; (e) the form and time for
preparing the budget under section 36; (j) the form for annual
statement of accounts under section 38; (g) the form and manner of
furnishing returns under sub-section (I) of section 39; (h) the form
and time for preparing the annual report under sub-section (2) of
section 39; (i) any other matter which is to be, or may be,
prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to be made by rules.
2. Clause 52 of the Bill confers power upon the Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority to make, with the previous approval of the Central
Government, regulations consistent with the Act and the rules made
thereunder to carry out the provisions of the Act. The matters in
respect of which such regulations may be made relate inter alia to (a)
the time, place, procedure for transaction of business and the quorum
of the Authority under sub-section (I) of section 15; (b) the salaries,
allowances and pensions payable to, and other terms and conditions of
service of the officers and other employees of the Authority under
sub-section (2) of section 17; (c) the requisite qualifications and
training required to persons under clause (h) of sub-section (2) of
section 20; (d) the requirement of approval to, or the licensing of,
persons under clause (i) of sub-section (2) of section 20; (e) levy of
fee for issue, modification and renewal of consent under clause (f) of
sub-section (2) of section 20; (j) the form and manner of application
for consent, the fee and documents and information to accompany it
under sub-section (I) of section 28; and (g) any other matter which is
required to be, or may be, specified by regulations.
3. The rules made by the Central Government and the regulations
made by the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority shall be laid as soon
as may be, after they are made, before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules and regulations may
be made or notification issued are generally matters of procedure
and administrative detail and it is not practicable to provide for them
in the Bill itself.
5. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a
normal character.
67

68
68
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS FROM THE A TOMIC E NERGY A CT, 1962
(33 OF 1962)
** * * *
16. The Central Government may prohibit the manufacture,
possession, use, transfer by sale or otherwise, export and import
and in an emergency, transport and disposal, of any radioactive
substances without its written consent.
** * **
26. ( 1) All offences under this Act shall be cognizable under
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, but no action shall be taken
in respect of any person for any offence under this Act except on
the basis of a written complaint made—
(a) in respect of contravention of section 8, 14 or 17
or any rule or order made thereunder, by the person
authorised to exercise powers of entry and inspection;
** * **
30. ( 1) * * * * *
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to an generality of the
foregoing powers, such rules may provide for—
** * **
(i) regulating the manufacture, custody, transport, transfer,
sale, export, import, use or disposal of any radioactive substance;
** * **
E
XTRACT FROM THE C IVIL L IABILITY FOR N UCLEAR D AMAGE A CT, 2010
(38 OF 2010)
** * **
CHAPTER II
LIABILITY FOR N UCLEAR D AMAGE
3. ( 1) The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board constituted under
the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 shall, within a period of fifteen days
from the date of occurrence of a nuclear incident, notify such
nuclear incident:
Control over
radioactive
substances.
Cognizance of
offences.
Power to make
rules.
Atomic Energy
Regulatory
Board to notify
nuclear incident.
5 of 1898.
33 of 1962.

69
Provided that where the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board is
satisfied that the gravity of threat and risk involved in a nuclear
incident is insignificant, it shall not be required to notify such
nuclear incident.
(2) The Atomic energy Regulatory Board shall, immediately
after the notification under sub-section (1) is issued, cause wide
publicity to be given to the occurrence of such nuclear incident, in
such manner as it may deem fit.
** * **

70
70
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to establish an Authority and such other regulatory bodies for regulation of radiation
safety or nuclear safety and achieving highest standards of such safety based
on scientific approach, operating experience and best practices followed by
nuclear industry and to ensure that the use of radiation and atomic energy in
all its applications is safe for the health of the radiation workers, members of
the public and the environment and also to establish a Council of Nuclear
Safety to oversee and review the policies relating to radiation safety and nuclear
safety and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
(Shri V . Narayanasamy, Minister of State in the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances
and Pensions)

71
MINUTES

72

73
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 16 th November, 2011 in Main
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Dr. Chandan Mitra
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Dr. Barun Mukherji
7. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
9. Shri Abdul Rahman
10. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
11. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
12. Shri Francisco Sardinha
13. Dr. Rajan Sushant
14. Shri Pradeep Tamta
15. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
16. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)
1. Dr. Srikumar Banerjee, Secretary
2. Shri S.S. Bajaj Chairman, Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB)
3. Shri R. Bhattacharya, Secretary, AERB
4. Shri Vijay Bhushan Pathak, Joint Searetary
5. Shri A.B. Awati, Scientific Officer
6. Dr. J. Kumar, Legal Adviser
7. Shri Sriram S., OSD
73

74
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy along
with his team of officials to the meeting of the Committee and informed that the meeting has been
convened to hear the views of the Secretary, DAE on “The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority
Bill, 2011”. He also informed that the comments of the Department on the memoranda received
from the public has already been circulated to the Members.
3. The Secretary, highlighting the need for the Bill stated that the Atomic Energy Regulatory
Board (AERB) which is responsible for regulating the safety aspects of atomic energy, reports to
the Atomic Energy Commission. However, the AERB which has been formed by an executive order,
presently, does not have a statutory status. The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority (NSRA) which
is proposed to be formed through this Bill, will have complete autonomy so far as its functioning
is concerned. In response to a query of the Chairman, regarding the autonomy of the Authority,
the Secretary, replied that though the Authority is completely autonomous, their policies will be
overseen by the Council and which shall have representatives of the concerned Ministries, headed
by the Prime Minister.
4. One of the Members pointed out that since the Chairperson of the Authority is not
represented in the Council, his views would not be reflected in the decisions of the Council. The
Secretary, clarified that the council will have three pronged function viz. formation of the Authority,
secondly, to overseeing and reviewing the policies and thirdly to create an appellate authority for
hearing appeal against NSRA.
5. The Secretary while further elaborating the objectives behind the creation of NSRA clarified
that the authority will examine all activities in Nuclear area including the reactor construction and
its setting up, fuel cycle activity including mining to reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel. He further
elaborated that clearance of a particular reactor design, site selection for setting up nuclear reactor
has to be given by the NSRA failing which no construction of nuclear plant can take place. This
means the regulatory authority will work as check point which will be imposed on the vendor from
the stage of construction of nuclear reactor to the stage of operation and each vendor will have
to undergo strict vigilance clearance at different levels of competence. He further added that Safety
Authority is not looking after the quantity of generation of electricity through nuclear power but
it will keep a strict vigilance over the safety aspect of the operation. If at any stage, any vendor
is found to have violated the stipulation laid down by the authority, the authority will take immediate
action against such erring vendor. At this stage, the Secretary further elaborated that India is in
constant touch with IAEA for taking feedback that India’s safety regulatory practice is in no way
falling short of the standing international best practices being followed in the field of nuclear safety
regulation.
6. While responding to some of the queries raised by the members of the Committee, the
Secretary clarified that the main function of the council is to hear people who will come to the
authority against any of its decisions which is the appellate part of the body. He also stated that
under clause 39 of the Bill there is provision regarding the annual reporting of the functioning of
the authority to the Parliament.
7. While responding to further queries, the Secretary, DAE informed the Committee that after
the Japanese accident, Prime Minister instructed that there should be a safety review and safety
audit of all nuclear plants in India and in response to that the NPCIL has divided the job of safety
review and audit into four independent committees which have given reports on the issue and the
same has been made public and recommendations of NPCIL in respect of safety audits is under
consideration. In the mean time, as told by the Secretary an independent assessment of safety audit
has been undertaken by AERB, NPCIL and the last one by BARC. All these assessments are in the
public domain. Secretary assured the Committee that the problem which the tsunami has caused
to Fukushima nuclear plant will not be possible in our system because additional cooling capability

75
is being incorporated in our plants with facilities of additional power supply etc. This will enhance
our safety system. He further added that two reactors of Tarapur are the oldest in their generations
and even much older than Fukushima and India is having much efficient safety systems vis-a-vis
Fukushima plant.
8. Responding to a concern raised by one of the Members regarding the nuclear waste
management, Secretary, mentioned before the Committee that volume of spent fuel is fairly large
in India and handling plutonium waste in terms of US safety measures is not good and America
is storing nuclear spent fuel in Yucca mountain which finally didn’t got clearance from environment
sector. In contrast to this in India, we use to separate fissile portion from the spent fuel part which
reduces the waste quantity to a very small portion. He also mentioned that high level radio active
waste is converted into a glassy form so that it cannot infect ground water, it is not dumped in
earth either but is stored in a canisters.
9. While pointing to the issue of responsibility of inspection, search and seizure, the Secretary
elaborated that the authority has full power in such field as narrated under clause 33 and no one
can do any activities without prior consent of the authority. He also mentioned that the NSRA’s
activities will be peer reviewed by the IAEA towards which India has agreed. In this connection,
he stated that World Association of Nuclear Operators is reviewing the plant of NPCIL and from
IAEA, a Committee called OSART, which is a Operation Safety Review Team, will review the
safety aspects of other nuclear plants in India. They will submit the report to the regulatory
authority and the same will take action about the seizure part, if necessary.
10. Clarifying the legal sanctity of clause 48 (I), in response to a query raised by Chairman,
the Secretary stated that text of the clause 48(1) will come into operation only in emergency
situations where it becomes impossible for the authority to function and superseding the authority
by the Central Government will only be for a period of six months and in normal situation the
clause 48(1) will remain inoperable.
11. The Chairman of the Committee informed the Committee that experts, will be called to
appear before the Committee alongwith the Chairman of the NPCIL for giving evidence on various
aspects of the Bill. During the closure of the discussion, one of the Member raised the issue of
radiation literacy, creating awareness, capacity building etc. which should also be an aspect which
the authority should handle. While responding to such suggestions, Secretary mentioned that
authority will insure transparency by systematic public outreach to nuclear safety and the authority
will have very high level of technical competence.
Witnesses then withdrew.
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. * * *
16. * * *
17. * * *
18. * * *
19. * * *
*** Relates to other matter.

76
20. * * *
21. * * *
22. * * *
23. * * *
24. * * *
25. * * *
26. * * *
27. * * *
28. * * *
29. * * *
30. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
31. The Committee adjourned at 4.27 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

77
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 5 th January, 2012 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Dr. Chandan Mitra
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Shri Jabir Hussain
7. Dr. Barun Mukherji
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ninong Ering
9. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
10. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
11. Shri Abdul Rahman
12. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
13. Shri Francisco Sardinha
14. Dr. Rajan Sushant
15. Shri Pradeep Tamta
16. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
17. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
18. Shri Kristapa Nimmala
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)
1. Shri Rahul Kulshreshth, Joint Secretary (ER)
2. Shri Ashok Chauhan, Associate Director, NPCIL
77

78
3. Shri S.K. Dhiman, Law Officer, NPCIL
4. Shri A.B. Awati, Scientific Officer
5. Dr. Jitendra Kumar, Legal Adviser
WITNESSES
1. Dr. G. Balachandran, consulting Fellow, Institute for Defence Studies & Analyses (IDSA)
2. Shri L.V. Krishanan, Former Director, Safety Group, IGCAR
3. Shri M.R. Madhwan, Head PRS, Legislative Research
4. Shri Prabir Purkayastha, Delhi Science Forum
5. Dr. D.N. Sharma, President, Indian Association of Radiation Protection
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, the Experts, and representatives of the
Department of Atomic Energy to the meeting of the Committee. He gave a brief outline of the
salient features of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011. While pointing out the
objective of the Bill, he said that it sought to establish a ‘Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority’ to
ensure that the use of radiation and atomic energy was safe for the radiation workers, public, and
the environment. He asked the experts not only to apprise the Committee of their views in general
on the various provisions of the Bill, but also to express their views on the potency of the
regulatory framework sought to be put in place to ensure safety of public and environment from
radiation hazards. He, thereafter, requested Head, PRS Legislative Research to express his views on
the Bill.
3. The Head, PRS, Legislative Research, while referring to Clause 25(2) of the Bill, pointed
out that the status of the Other Regulatory Bodies, which the Central Govt. might establish, by an
order in writing was not clear. Since, those bodies were proposed to be established under delegated
powers they could not be considered Statutory bodies. In case, they were not statutory bodies,
there was no real need for this Clause to be added in the Bill as the Central Govt. had inherent
powers to establish such bodies the way Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) was established
earlier. Moreover, detailed provision regarding finance, accounts and audit of the Authority as
provided from Clause 36 to 39 had not been made applicable to the Other Regulatory Bodies that
provided them blanket immunity from Parliamentary scrutiny.
4. He, further, opined that there was an inherent conflict in the Bill. While the Bill proposed
to create an independent regulatory body to replace. AERB, inclusion of the Chairman, Atomic
Energy Commission (AEC), who was the promoter of nuclear energy, in the Council of Nuclear
Safety as an Ex-officio Member compromised on the independence of the regulatory body. The
.provision that the Council shall oversee and review policies with respect to radiation safety as
provided in Clause 7 with Chairman, AEC as an Ex-officio Member on the Council blurred the line
of separation between the implementer and the safety inspector/regulator.
5. He also drew the attention of the Committee to the fact that while the Minister for External
Affairs and Home were included as Members of the Council of Nuclear Safety, the Defence
Minister had not been given a representation in the Council. He also pointed that while explanation
to Clause 8 emphasized on the autonomy of the Authority notwithstanding anything contained in
Clause 7 which provided that the Council shall oversee and review the policies. Therefore, there
seemed to be some contradiction in the way it had been phrased and it would be useful to clarify
this and remove the contradiction.
6. He was further of the view that inclusion of Chairperson of the Authority in the Search
Committee for selection of Members might adversely affect the independent functioning of the
Authority. This issue became more important, particularly, because as per Clause 15(3) of the Bill

79
the Authority would take its decision by a majority vote. While commenting on Clause 35 of the
Bill, he drew the attention of the Committee to the wordings “as and when required” and contended
that the Appellate Authority would be an adhoc and not a permanent body. He wondered as to how
the appeal could be filed within a time limit of 30 days as provided in Clause 35(5) when there
was no Authority to receive the Appeal. Commenting on the qualification of Members of the
Appellate Authority as provided in Clause 35(4)(b), he stated that the eligibility condition – that the
person who had held the post of Secretary to the Govt. of India or any equivalent post, precluded
eminent scientists, Directors of National Laboratories under CSIR, as well as, professors from
leading institutes, such as IITs, Indian Institute of Science, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
etc., from being appointed as Members of the Authority as they did not hold the rank equivalent
to the post of Secretary to the Govt. of India. Lastly, he pointed out that the penalties prescribed
in Clause 40 were not proportional to the offences, if seen in the light of other laws in the overall
legal perspective.
7. Former Director, Safety Group, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research was of the view
that if the Chairman, Atomic Energy Commission was going to be an Ex-officio Member of the
Council of Nuclear Safety, the Chairperson of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority should also
be included as an Ex-officio Member in the Council. Suggesting modifications in Clause 9(2)(b),
he desired that Experts from the field of electronics, computer science and Information
Technology, might be considered eligible for being Chairperson of the Authority. He stated that it
was desirable to include among the Members of the Authority, one Expert with life sciences
background and another with social sciences background. He was further of the view that the
explanation (ii) to Clause 20(c) was not needed as it might create an impression among the NGOs
that Government was hesitant to provide information to the public. He further desired that a
National Body of Experts needed to be established to look at radiation protection by constantly
reviewing the development of radiation effects on human and environment and advise the NSRA.
A separate body to look at radiation protection existed in Germany, France, U.K. and U.S.A. Taking
exceptions to Clause 20(2)(h) which provided that the Authority shall specify the hours of work,
minimum leave, etc., he stated that this was an antiquated prescription and was no more in practice
in any part of the world. Therefore, he suggested their deletion from the Clause. His other
suggestions included extending medical examination of the employees beyond their service period,
constant dialogue between the NSRA and the National Disaster Management Authority, even during
normal times, dialogue between the NSRA and the Claims Commissioner as provided in the Civil
Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, making the Appellate Authority a permanent body, creation of a
health data base in every district where there was a nuclear plant with the help of Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare.
8. Representative from Delhi Science Forum was of the view that the Cabinet in any case
oversaw and reviewed policies. There was therefore, no reason why under Clause 7, the powers
to oversee and review policy should again be vested in virtually a body which was a sub-body of
the Cabinet itself. Taking objections to the provision of an Appellate Authority to review the
decision taken by the Authority, he stated that there should not be any Appellate Authority. He was
of the view that safety was paramount and there should not be any Appellate Authority set up on
what was a decision regarding safety.
9. For bringing transparency and building faith and credibility in the domain of general public,
he added that in multilingual India, interaction of the Regulatory Authority with the public should
be done not just in English and Hindi but also in the vernacular languages so that, the rural people
also get the requisite information. Updated information put on website would be very useful in that
regard.
10. Consulting Fellow, IDSA was of the view that Clause 35 of the Bill, dealing with setting
up of an Appellate Authority needed to be reworked because apart from safety there were a number

80
of other notifications that would be issued by the Parliament to hear appeals from any order, or
decision passed by the Authority under Clause numbers 28,29 and 34(3). Commenting on
establishment of Other Regulatory Bodies for the purposes of national defence and security, he,
suggested that all facilities should be brought under the control of the proposed Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority as same level of radiation safety should be maintained following strictest
standard, irrespective of nature of the reactors. While responding to a query raised by the Chairman
regarding nuclear regulatory frameworks in other countries, he replied that there were no standard
and uniform rules for regulatory agency.
11. Presenting his views before the Committee, President, Indian Association of Radiation
Protection opined that the provisions prescribed in the sub-clause 2(h) of clause 20 of the Bill were
contradictory to the international practice and standards with far reaching consequences. Thus,
those provisions might be avoided in the Bill.
12. He, further, suggested that the Bill lacked clarity on the status of the employees of proposed
Authority as to whether they would be permanent employees of the Central Government and enjoy
all the facilities enjoyed by the Government employees or not. He said that this issue was important
because experienced officers of the current AERB might opt to go to other institutions under
Department of Atomic Energy and it would be difficult for NSRA to attract experienced officers.
Supporting the setting up of other Regulatory Bodies, as envisaged in the Bill for defence related
facilities, he stated that USA, UK and France, too, had different Regulatory Bodies.
The officials and witnesses, then, withdrew. Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
13. The Committee, then, adjourned at 12.46 
P.M.

81
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 6 th January, 2012 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Jabir Husain
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
7. Shri Abdul Rahman
8. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
9. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
10. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
11. Dr. Rajan Sushant
12. Shri Kristapa Nimmala
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE)
1. Dr. Srikumar Banerjee, Secretary
2. Dr. S.K. Jain, Chairman & Managing Director, NPCIL
3. Shri V .B. Pathak, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Rahul Kulshreshth, Joint Secretary (ER)
5. Shri Ashok Chauhan, Executive Director, NPCIL
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy along
with his team of officials to the meeting of the Committee and informed that the meeting has been
convened to hear his comments on the suggestions given and reservations made by the experts on
“The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011”. He recalled that in the meeting held on
81

82
5th January, 2012 there was a broad consensus amongst the experts on the need for having a
statutory Regulatory Authority; however, there were also reservations on certain clauses of the Bill.
Thereafter, he briefly made a mention of the suggestions given by the experts, which included-
scrapping of provision related to Appellate Authority; non-inclusion of Chairman, Atomic Energy
Commission in the Council; providing greater autonomy to the Regulatory Authority; extending field
of selection for appointment as Member of the Appellate Authority; etc.
3. The Secretary, while explaining the reasons behind creation of Appellate Authority as an ad
hoc body, expressed that it would be appropriate to have an issue specific non-permanent appellate
authority with relevant experts depending upon the nature of the appeal which the authority would
hear. Explaining the rationale behind the Appellate Authority to be headed by a Judge of the
Supreme Court, he stated that it had to be a high-level body to be supported by some eminent
scientists, due to scientific nature of the issue.
4. In response to a query of the Chairman, regarding the autonomy of the Authority, the
Secretary, replied that though the Authority was completely autonomous, its policies would be
overseen by the Council of Nuclear Safety with the Prime Minister as its Chairperson and, the
Union Ministers as its members, the Cabinet Secretary and the Chairman, Atomic Energy
Commission as ex-officio Members of the Council and such number of eminent experts as may
be nominated by the Centre to the Council as Members. As per the present status, the Atomic
Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) responsible for regulating the safety aspects of Atomic Energy,
reports to the Atomic Energy Commission. The AERB has been formed by an executive order and
do not have a statutory status where as proposed the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority (NSRA)
would be an autonomous body in its function with a statutory status.
5. He, further, elaborated that the in twenty eight years long history of AERB only one appeal
was filed against it that precisely was the reason why Appellate authority was not made a
permanent body. While elaborating on the NSRA, he mentioned that the Authority would be a
technical organisation in which the decision-making would not only be based on pure debate but
also be backed by research and detailed calculation as those things could not be done by a Judicial
body alone. The NSRA could always review the process, giving its consent only when the certain
conditions were fulfilled. Since NSRA would give its consent only after fulfilment of a long list
of conditions to be complied by the applicant, there would not be much necessity to go to the
Appellate Authority.
6. While commenting on composition of the Council, Secretary, Department of atomic Energy
clarified that the Council had three pronged functions viz. overseeing and reviewing of policies,
having a Search Committee to identify the Chairman and other Members and creating an Appellate
Authority for hearing appeals against NSRA depending on the type of appeal. On being asked by
the Chairman about the life of the appellate authority he clarified that once a particular appeal was
over, the authority that heard the said case also ceases to exist.
7. One of the members pointed out that the basic reasons behind having an authority, was
redressal of grievance against the authority and maintenance of transparency. He wanted to know
about the content of report prepared by nuclear experts appointed by the PM after the Fukushima
Disaster in Japan about the existing safety standards in nuclear plants of India. While commenting
on the composition of council, he asked the Secretary to compress the number of experts to be
nominated by the Executive in the Council of Nuclear Safety to a smaller number as a lengthy
oversized council would make it difficult to function.
8. Commenting on Clause 9, one of the Members desired to know the reason behind keeping
part-time members in majority. He observed that the area of responsibility and accountability of the

83
part-time members would not be as much as that of the full-time members. He, further, added that
number of members of the Council should be specified. While commenting on clause 25(2) dealing
with additional Regulatory Bodies, he said provision regarding the number of regulatory bodies was
not specified. He, further, pointed out that offences and penalties were also not specified. The law
must have in its jurisdiction the quantum of membership and the areas in which they were
supposed to be.
9. Commenting on the structure of the Bill, it was said that there were five stages - the
Council, the search committee, the authority, the appellate authority and the regulatory bodies
which had made the intended Authority’s structure a cumbersome structure.
10. He opined that the powers given to the Executive to supersede, to give directions to the
authority and under Clause 27, power to take over the responsibility for the purpose of National
Defence and security and carry out those functions in relation thereto indicated that the ultimate
responsibility, impartiality and freedom of the authority would be compromised.
11. While replying to query raised by the Members, the Secretary highlighted the fact that
safety was something which was constantly evolving to a higher and higher level. Commenting on
avoiding Fukushima like disasters in India, he said that all reactors in India were backed up by
what was known as the passive safety system using thermo siphon technique which did not require
electrical power.
12. Assuring the committee, he said that a very detailed evaluation both in the design aspect
and physical inspection was done by a Committee and existing Nuclear Plants qualified that test.
In addition to that, further, stipulations from time to time were given by Atomic Energy Regulatory
Board and were being implemented by the Nuclear Power Corporation. All those measures prove
that Indian Nuclear Plants were safe.
13. The Secretary welcomed any suggestion given by the Committee on specified number of
members in search committee. Replying to a query on status of part time members he clarified that
full time people were actually employees of the NSRA drawing their salaries from it. In order to
have independent members on the body, it was always better that salaried employees should not
have majority in the authority and non-salaried employees should not be a part of NSRA. He further
added that, though, part time members were in advisory capacity but their authority was at par
with full time members.
14. The members of the committee raised a number of questions about nomenclature, quantum
of responsibility and accountability on the part of part time members. Many alternatives such as
‘Special Members’/’expert members’ were suggested. The Secretary said that suggestion from the
members was welcome. On the number of members in Search Committee, he clarified that power
to decide the number of search committee lied with the ‘Council of Nuclear Safety’.
15. The Chairman observed that Search Committee was a livewire because it was authorised
to decide the members of the Authority and there should be clarity about the number of members
of the Search Committee responsible for preparation of panel. It was suggested by the members
to specify the number of members to ‘Five’ or ‘seven’ an odd number. The Secretary was in
favour of seven. While commenting on the question about setting up of one or more regulatory
bodies, the Secretary replied that the entire nuclear activity had two components: one was
nuclear power production; non-power plant application of nuclear energy in agriculture, health,
food preservation, and the other was strategic activities. The NSRA would look after all aspects
relating to the nuclear power production and the non-power application of radiation and nuclear
energy. However, strategic side was to be dealt by a separate authority under the National
Security Advisor (NSA).

84
16. Under the new arrangement, different Safety authorities would be converged into a
single body which was to be notified soon. After passage of the NSRA Bill, body for strategic
sector might be brought in the new law. He said that it was the reason behind the provision
for keeping one or more bodies. Basically, two bodies would be set up under the new law: one
under the strategic side and one for the reaming part and there could not be umpteen numbers
of bodies.
17. While commenting on provision of the criminal offences, he explained that it was a kind
of normal provision which was present in many other  legislations of similar nature, including the
existing Atomic Energy Act.
18. Replying to issue of empowering the authority by Central Government by issuing directions,
superseding the authority etc., he clarified that the said provision was made for unforeseen
situations such as a nuclear catastrophe. One of the Members wanted to know as to how the
Government could take over and whether executive had enough mechanism and structure to take
over the responsibility as it would entirely bank upon the existing structure of the Authority.
Replying to a query raised by the Member, Secretary said that the implementing authority would
be the Government department, laboratories such as BARC and not the NSRA. NSRA would not
be an implementing type authority. Implementation would be done by Technical Support
Organizations (TSOs)
19. While elaborating on provisions regarding transparency, the Secretary said that there was a
mechanism for transparency with regard to all decisions as well as information which were put
on the website. Clarifying doubts of one of the members that whether NSRA was under the control
of council, he explained three functions of NSRA. Further elaborating the point he added that in
explanation to clause 8 (1), of the Bill, the NSRA would be autonomous in exercise of its powers
and functions and clause 7 did not conflict with such autonomy. Council of Nuclear Safety would
ensure that the safety policy devised by the NSRA did not conflict with the overall national policies,
and not opposed to general public policy. According to him, drafting was done to ensure that the
NSRA was totally autonomous authority.
20. The committee desired to know about the conflict resolution mechanism in case of any
conflict or difference of opinion. The members were apprehensive that under clause 48 of the Bill,
transparency and freedom of the authority would be curved as the Executive could supersede the
Authority for a period up-to six months. Some members were of the opinion that except for
extreme situations that were beyond the control of the authority, the Executive should not be
permitted to supersede the authority as it might compromise with the transparency and functional
independence of the Authority.
21. One of the Members said that ‘public interest’ was a vague term and liable to be misused.
Allaying the fears, the Secretary replied that Clause 48 of the Bill was essentially for any
unforeseen situation.
22. It was suggested by the members that Authority needed to be strengthened. One of the
members of the committee wanted to know whether there was any dichotomy or not in a situation
when decision of the Appellate Authority was challenged in a court of law, replying to the query,
Secretary, DAE said that idea of keeping that provision was to place Council of nuclear safety at
a higher level in status compared to the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority.
23. It was suggested by one of the Members that as the decision were to be taken in the light
of scientific facts the search Committee was to be headed by a scientist rather than a High Court/
Supreme court judge. The Secretary clarified that reason behind representation of judiciary was to
make it a higher authority in status compared to NSRA.

85
24. Raising his doubt on the expression used in Clause 46, that no suit, prosecution or any
other legal proceedings shall lie against the official of Central Government or any other, a member
wanted to know as to what sort of legal action could be taken against an employee who had done
something wrong as the body was concerned with sensitive area of the integrity and security of
India. The Secretary replied that culprit could definitely be sent behind the bars and all other acts
would be applicable against any erring employee.

86
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 16 th January, 2012 in Room No. ‘63’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Saman Pathak
4. Shri Jabir Husain
5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
7. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
8. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
9. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
10. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
11. Shri Kristapa Nimmala
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Committee Members and apprised them hat the
Committee proposed to deliberate on the various provisions of the Nuclear Safety egulatory
Authority Bill, 2011, so as to crystallize its recommendations on the Bill. The hairman also informed
the Committee that Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha had extended he time for submission of the
Report on the Bill upto 15
th February, 2011. Thereafter, he invited Members to offer their
suggestions one by one on the various Clauses of the Bill. He, thereafter, particularly invited the
suggestions from the Members on Clause 5 of the Bill. He also informed the Members of the views
of the Department of Atomic Energy on Clause 5 which inter-alia stated that broad basing the
Council of Nuclear Safety was necessary in view of multi-disciplinary nature of the subject of
nuclear safety. One of the Members suggested that the Defence Minister needed to be included in
the Council for strategic issues like defence and security. The Member further pointed out that the
number of eminent experts to be nominated by the Central Govt. on the Council of Nuclear Safety
86

87
had not been specified and suggested that the number of such eminent experts should not exceed
five. The Committee broadly agreed to the suggestions.
3. One of the Members suggested that there was no need of a Council to oversee and review
policies devised by Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority because it was proposed to be a political
body without any technical know how. More so, because the proposed Regulatory Authority would
consist of eminent scientists and experts as Chairperson and Members. Raising an objection on
Clause 5, another Member stated that the Council would dilute the authority of the Authority and
compromise with its independent and autonomous character. However, no final view was taken by
the Committee in the matter.
4. Thereafter, the Committee had a detailed discussion on Clause 9 which provided that the
Authority shall consist of a Chairperson; two whole-time Members and part-time Members not
exceeding four and felt that having part-time Members in the Authority was not necessary and that
the nomenclature – ‘Part-time Members’ was not dignified. The Committee agreed to recommend
change of the nomenclature in its report. While deliberating on the Clause 10(1), the Committee
noted that the maximum number of Members to be included in the Search Committees needed to
be specified and broadly agreed to make a recommendation on this issue. On Sub-Clause 4 of this
Clause, one of the Members enquired if the Search Committee was intended to be a permanent
body or not, was not clear in the Bill and suggested that there had to be a Search Committee with
specific term and that it should be specified in the Bill. However, no final view emerged on these
issues.
5. While discussing Clause 11, one of the Members raised the issue that the provision for
reappointment of Chairperson and other Members of the Authority for a further period of three year
was a sort of allurement for the Members and the Chairman to function according to the sweet
will of the Government for seeking reappointment and suggested that they should be eligible for
reappointment for one more term of three years only and this should be mentioned in the Bill. The
Committee agreed to make a recommendation to this effect in its report.
6. One of the Members drew the attention of the Committee to Clause 21 which provided that
while discharging its powers and functions, the Authority shall not act against the interest of the
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States,
public order, decency or morality and similar words appearing in Clause 42 and wondered as to
how the Authority which was going to be appointed by the Council of Nuclear Safety headed by
the Prime Minister could be immoral or indecent. Other Members also shared this concern and
suggested that this Clause should be dropped and Government should reconsider retention of words
‘decency or morality’ in Clause 42(1).
7. After some discussion on certain issues, one of the Members proposed that Members of
the Committee needed to get more prepared to give their views on various provisions of the Bill
and, therefore, suggested that instead of going Clause by Clause today, we could broadly discuss
the provisions of the Bill and in the next meeting Members might come prepared and give their
views on the points they desired. He also suggested that Members should prepare a paragraph on
the point they desired to raise as it would help the Secretariat incorporate those points while
preparing the draft report. To this, the Chairman clarified that it was a preliminary and not a final
meeting. He further added that the Committee was not touching upon each and every Clause of
the Bill.
8. Thereafter, the Chairman invited suggestions/comments of the Members on Clause 35. One
of the Members pointed out that while on the one hand Clause 35(1) provided that the Council shall
be constituted as and when required, Clause 35(5) provided that any aggrieved person may file and
appeal ‘before the Appellate Authority’ within a period of 30 days from the date of such order.

88
These two Sub-Clauses, therefore, appeared to be self contradictory. The Committee agreed to
make a suitable recommendation in this regard. One of the Members also suggested that the
Appellate Authority instead of being headed by someone from judiciary should be headed by
eminent scientists; however, Committee did not take any view in this respect.
9. Making suggestions on Clause 47, one of the Members opined that instead of Chief Judicial
Magistrate, special courts should be set up to take cognizance of offences punishable under this
Act. A view was taken to suggest Government to consider the proposal.
10. Thereafter, Secretary, Deptt. of Atomic Energy was called to give clarifications on the
issues deliberated upon by the Committee. The following representatives from Deptt. of Atomic
Energy appeared before the Committee:
1. Dr. Srikumar Banerjee, Secretary;
2. Dr. S.K. Jain, Chairman and Managing Director, NPCIL;
3. Dr. R.B. Grover, Principal Advisor.
11. Secretary, Deptt. of Atomic Energy while clarifying on the issue of Part-time Members,
stated that, they would not be involved in day to day running of office of the Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority nor they would be regularly paid employees of the Authority. They would held
their posts in other offices, like they may be a Director of an IIT or Chairman of a CSIR
laboratory. They would come to the Authority for taking a decision on a given issue. They would,
however, have an equal right of voting and equal responsibility. When the Committee pointed that
the word ‘part-time’ did not appear dignified, the Secretary submitted that the Committee could
suggest a better word.
12. Responding on the issue of words like ‘decency and morality’ appearing in Clause 21 and
42, the Secretary submitted that probably these words were taken from some other Act. The
Committee, however, felt that the language of these two Clauses was such that it did not give
respect to the Authority. When the Committee desired to know as to how an appeal would be
decided within a period of 90 days, as the Appellate Authority shall be constituted as and when
required, the Secretary suggested that the word ‘preferably’ might be added before ‘within 90
days’. The Committee agreed to make a suitable recommendation to this effect.
13. One of the Members raised the issue of eligibility conditions provided for being a Member
of the Appellate Authority in Clause 35(4) of the Bill, whereby eminent scientists holding the post
of Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post could be eligible for being its
Members and asked as to why eminent scientists/university professors who might not have held
the post of Secretary or equivalent should also not be considered for being a Member of the
Appellate Authority. The Secretary, Deptt. of Atomic Energy stated that the Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority had been envisaged to be a supreme authority and then it was contemplated
to create an appellate authority to hear the appeals against the orders/decision of the NSRA. So we
had to provide somewhere that Members on the Appellate Authority were of a very senior level and
that was the only intention to provide for the Secretary level.
14. One of the Members further pointed out that in the Financial Memorandum and under
Clauses 36 to 39 expenditure of only the Authority had been covered but the expenditure on
account of the Council and the Appellate Authority had been left out. He, therefore, desired that
Department of Atomic Energy should look into this matter.
15. With regard to Clause 48(2)(b), the Committee asked the Secretary about the mechanism
that would be put in place to discharge the powers and functions of the Authority in case the
Authority was superseded. The Secretary admitted that the mechanism that the Central Government

89
could have at its disposal, in extreme kind of situations, should be outlined somewhere. On the
matter of setting up of special courts to try cases of violation of the provisions of this Bill as a
large number of cases were pending in lower courts, the Secretary assured the Committee to take
opinion of the Law Ministry in that regard.
16. Thereafter, one of the Members drew the attention of the Committee to Clause 51(1) which
provided that the Authority may, by notification in the official gazette, and with the previous
approval of the Central Government make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the Rules
made thereunder to carry out the provisions of this Act and expressed his reservation over the
word ‘previous approval of the Central Government’. The Chairman remarked that this was a
serious point, besides being highly objectionable. The Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy
stated that Atomic Energy Regulatory Board did not have such a clause and assured to check it
up.
17. One of the Members referring to a newsitem asked the Secretary as to whether, as reported
in the media, India was almost at the bottom in the world nuclear safety index. The Secretary
clarified that a careful reading of the entire paragraph showed that there was not a single word
of safety in it as it was entirely based on nuclear security. He further added that nuclear security
issue was completely different from nuclear safety. Nuclear security issue was related to nuclear
nonproliferation and basically related to nuclear material management. Every country was spying
over the other countries to find out how much nuclear material they possessed for the strategic
sector and whether they were totally transparent in that or not. He further added that a country
like ours, could not keep all these information in an open document and concluded by saying that
the whole paragraph was about nuclear security.
18. The Chairman asked the Secretary to send written replies to the questions put to him within
five days.
19. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee, then, adjourned at 1.16 
P.M.

90
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 31 st January, 2012 in Committee Room.
‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil H. Lad
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Dr. Chandan Mitra
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Shri Jabir Husain
7. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
9. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
10. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
11. Shri Francisco Sardinha
12. Shri Pradeep Tamta
13. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
14. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
15. Shri Kristapa Nimmala
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
At the outset, Chairman, welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and
informed them that Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha had referred the Regional Centre for
Biotechnology Bill, 2011 to the Committee for examination and report by 15
th March, 2012. The
Committee decided to issue Press Release on the Bill inviting Memoranda/suggestions of the
experts/organisations interested in the subject matter of the Bill within 15 days from the date of
its issue. Thereafter, the Committee took consideration of the draft report on Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011 which had been circulated to the Members on 27
th January, 2012.
2. Thereafter, Chairman read out recommendation portions contained in the Report. In the
process, he read out Paras 10.2, 10.4, 10.5, 10.7, 10.8, 10.10, 10.11, 10.12, 10.13 of the draft
90

91
report. No amendments to the aforesaid Paras were suggested and they were adopted as such in
the meeting. Chairman further read out Para 10.14 and suggested insertion of the following proviso
after this Para:–
“Provided that nothing contained in the section shall be construed to empower the Central
Government to interfere with the exercise by the Authority of its powers and functions
under this Act.”
3. The Committee agreed to the suggestion and the amendment was adopted.
4. Then Chairman read out recommendations contained in Para 10.15, 10.16, 10.17, 10.18,
10.19, 10.20, 10.21, 10.22, 10.23, 10.24 and 10.25 and they were adopted by the Committee
without any change.
5. Chairman suggested that after para 10.25, the following new Clause, i.e., Clause 39(A) may
be inserted between Clause 39 and Clause 40:–
“39(A) The provisions of the Chapter shall, as far as may. be, also apply to the Council
and the Appellate Authority”.
5.1 The suggestion was approved by the Committee.
6. Thereafter, he apprised the Committee that the two more proposals had been suggested by
Shri Jabir Husain, M.P. in Clause 20(2)(q) and Clause 25 of the Bill. The Chairman then read out
the above proposals suggested by Shri Jabir Husain, which were as follow:
(i) “Clause 25(2) provides that the Central Government may by order establish one or
more Regulatory Bodies for regulating the material, facilities, activities, premises, assets
and areas, etc. exempted from the jurisdiction of the authority for national defence and
security purposes. The Committee finds that the number of such Regulatory Bodies to
be established by Government has not been specified in the Bill leaving a scope of
establishment of as many Regulatory Bodies as desired by the Government. The
Committee feels that there is hardly a need for creating a number of other Regulatory
Bodies as it would unnecessarily burden the public exchequer. Ideally one or two other
Regulatory Bodies may be sufficient for the purpose. When asked to comment on this
issue, the Department of Atomic Energy clarified that at the moment the only other
regulatory body for nuclear safety is that which has been established for strategic
activities for which reason an enabling provision was envisaged in the legislation.
Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy categorically asserted that there could not be
umpteen numbers of Bodies. The Committee is satisfied with the clarifications given
by the Secretary and is of the opinion that the existing provision may be retained in
the Bill.”
(ii) “The Committee is of the view that while international obligations existing on the date
the Authority is established may, be respected, but after establishment of the Authority,
before undertaking any international obligations on any aspect within the jurisdiction of
the Authority, the Authority shall be consulted and its views taken into account.”
6.1 The Committee agreed to both the proposals and directed their insertion at the relevant
places in the draft report.
7. Then Chairman thanked all the Members for considering and adopting the draft report with
suggestions for insertions in the draft report as suggested above at the relevant places and
proposed that final copy of the report would be presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha
during the intersession period. The Committee agreed to the proposal and authorised him to present
the report on behalf of the Committee during the intersession period.

92
8. Two Members of the Committee, namely, Shri Saman Pathak and Dr. Anup Kumar Saha,
however, submitted that since they had disagreements on some points contained in the report that
had been adopted and hence they would give minute of dissent.
9. The Committee, thereafter, decided to undertake a study visit to Sriharikota (Andhra
Pradesh) some time during the end of March or in the beginning of April, 2012, to witness the
launch of an important satellite through its indigenously built Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle, from
the Satish Dhawan Space Centre of the ISRO under the purview of Department of Space. As the
aforesaid study-visit of the Committee is taking place during the Budget Session/recess of the
Parliament, when as per the directions of the Hon’ble Chairman, tours be avoided in view of the
important and time-bound business to .be transacted in Delhi in the Standing Committees, the
Committee authorized the Chairman to seek necessary relaxation as a special case in the said
directions of the Hon’ble Chairman for undertaking the stated visit. The Committee accordingly,
directed the Secretariat to take necessary action in the matter.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11. The Committee, then, adjourned at 11.36 
A.M.

93
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 14 th February, 2012 in Committee Room
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Anil H. Lad
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Dr. Chandan Mitra
6. Shri Saman Pathak
7. Shri Jabir Husain
8. Dr. Barun Mukherji
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
10. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
11. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
12. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
13. Shri Kristapa Nimmala
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives from the Survey of India, Dehradun
1. Dr. A. Gopalakrishnan, Former Chairman, Atomic Energy Regulatory Board; and
2. Shri Shivshankar Menon, National Security Advisor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and Dr. Gopalakrishnan to the meeting
of the Committee and recollected that the Committee had earlier heard Dr. Gopalakrishnan on the
“Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Bill, 2010”. He requested Dr. Gopalakrishnan to add further to
his written suggestions that had already been circulated to Hon’ble Members and taken note by the
Committee.
93

94
3. Presenting his views before the Committee, Dr. Gopalakrishnan emphasised that there was
a close connection between the independence of the AERB and transparency to attain public safety.
He said that India was aspiring to move forward in the nuclear sector like all advanced countries
in the world and hence it was expected that we not  only emulated the technologies of other
countries but  also their practices in regulation. According to him, there was a serious dichotomy
between what was given in the Bill and what other countries like USA, Canada and France were
practicing. He further stated that the exact nature of practices in these countries might differ but
we should aim for the similar levels of transparency, independence and freedom of action but these
were totally missing from the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill. He added that the Authority
being created through this Bill would be a much more constrained and a much more captive
organisation of the Government even compared to AERB.
4. He said that broadly his comments on the Bill were in two areas – it was a question of
autonomy and independence on the one side and on the other side, it was lack of transparency and
openness. Commenting on the composition and functions of the proposed ‘Council of Nuclear
Safety’ he said that it was doubtful as to what extent, focused guidance required for safety of a
nuclear system which was highly technical and a techno-managerial affair would be available in
such a group. He added that looking at the subsequent actions of the Council, it was clear that
it would be used more as a controlling agent to keep the regulator in line. He, therefore, suggested
that this Council should be altered to be a Council on Civil Nuclear Policy. He suggested that the
Clause 7 of the Bill be changed to read as, “The Council of Civil Nuclear Policy shall frame and
establish policies and directions for the civilian nuclear activities in the country including matters
related to nuclear power and its safety and security. The Council shall oversee and support
autonomous functioning of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority and facilitate its independent
decision making in nuclear radiation and safety related matter”.
5. He appreciated that the Bill intended to create separate regulatory agencies for defence
related nuclear facilities which had hitherto been directly under the Department of Atomic Energy
and not under AERB. He, however, felt that it should be made clear as to which facilities Nuclear
Safety Regulatory Authority would be responsible for. He, therefore, suggested that the facilities
which were currently under the AERB’s purview and supervision, should be transferred to the
proposed Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority. He added that if civilian and defence facilities were
mixed together in a bucket and only one agency was looking after them, level of overall
transparency and openness would be reduced.
6. Thereafter, expressing his views on the appointment and removal of the Chairperson of the
NSRA, he suggested that after having completed the selection process, there was a - need to have
concurrence of Parliament on the lines of USA and Canada. When one of the Members pointed out
that, we did not have a system where appointment of Chairperson of various bodies was presented
to the Parliament for ratification and as such, this suggestion would entail a drastic change in the
system of governance in the country. To this, Dr. Gopalakrishnan averred that if it, seriously
violated practices and provisions in our Constitution, he would leave it to the Committee. However,
he asserted that his concern arose out of the fact that there seemed to be a certain level of
arbitrary power in the hands of the executive to appoint and remove the Chairman and Members
of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority.
7. Commenting on the explanation to Clause 20(1) of the Bill, he drew the attention of the
Committee to the words ‘The functions of the Authority shall, in no case, extend to the function
or any other matter which the Central Government was required to discharge under the Atomic
Energy Act, 1962’. He elaborated that it was .somewhat vague because setting up a new power
station, etc., came under the Atomic Energy Act and this provision basically debarred the Authority
to get involved in the safety aspect of the new facility. That was really not a workable preposition

95
because having created a Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority, the Authority should have the
freedom to examine and advise the Government on purchasing of new reactors or new systems.
He cited the example of Westinghouse Reactor, an American reactor, which was put through a 3
year detailed examination by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, because it was the first of its
kind reactor and they wanted it to be absolutely sure that it was safe and only after their clearance,
Government could buy that reactor.
8. He wanted to know as to why our regulator should not have the authority of looking at
the safety of system before they were purchased. When asked to clarify as to what exactly he
wanted to be included in the Bill, he stated that “In case the Operator or the Government intends
to introduce, install or commission a new, first of its kind nuclear facility system, a major sub-
system or component, which could potentially have serious safety-related adverse consequence,
shall be first subjected to a National Design Certification and preliminary safety approval by the
Authority before permission is granted for initiation of any associated site activity and facility
creation. Such a design certification and safety approval by the Authority shall be mandatory
notwithstanding any certifications or safety approvals granted by a foreign nuclear safety regulator
or Government”.
9. Commenting on Clause 20(2) (e) of the Bill regarding interaction of the Authority with
international organisations, etc., with prior approval of the Central Government, he was of the view
that the Authority should not directly interact with the foreign entities only on the policy related
matters and not on the technical matters. He, therefore, suggested to add policy related matters to
the proviso of Clause 20(2) (e).
10. Submitting his view on Clause 20(2)(q) of the Bill, he stated that it was somewhat vague to
put the onus on the Authority that it should discharge its powers and functions consistent with
international obligations of India. With such a provision, questioning any international obligation
from the safety point of view could become difficult. He, therefore, gave the following suggestions
to modify Clause 20(2)( q) “the operator shall bring to the attention of the Authority any
international obligation or treaty, which they, or, the Government are likely to enter into or have
entered into, and, the Authority shall then examine the consequences thereof from the stand point
of impact of acceding to that obligation the safety of the public and the environment. Once the
Authority completes this assessment, it shall advise the Government of their comprehensive views
in writing on the safety consequences of having entered into or entering into such international
obligation. Thereafter, the Authority shall discharge its functions as directed by the Government.
However, in case, the Authority considers that the final Government decision is not in the best
interest of public safety, health and environment, the authority shall prepare and place on record
their dissenting note before the Council with a request to forward the same to both Houses of
Parliament and include the same in their Annual Report”.
11. However, the Committee felt that the above suggestions would set a precedent for others
at various levels and it would be an unending process with other organisations also coming up with
similar demands. Intervening in the matter, National Security Advisor stated that the assumptions
on which the discussion was being held, was not true. He made it clear that before entering into
any agreement with foreign countries, three conditions were made very clear. Firstly, that they
would have to be competitive with other sources of energy in India, secondly, that they could not
sell reactors which had not been certified in their respective countries and thirdly that the reactor
would go through our regulatory procedures and safety procedures. So the assumption through out
in all the agreements was that in India, the law of India applied.
12. On Clauses 21 and 42 of the Bill, he wondered how an Authority selected by a selection
committee appointed by a Council headed by the Prime Minister and senior Cabinet Ministers could
be indecent and would single handedly overthrow the sovereignty and integrity of India. He was

96
of the view that these two Clauses were superfluous and did not add any value to the Act. He,
therefore, suggested that these Clauses should be dropped. Commenting further on Clause 42, he
added that it was not clear in the Bill on which aspect Government felt the necessity to give
directions to the Authority. He suggested inclusion of two Clauses in the Bill ill case Government
felt it necessary to retain Clause 42 in the Bill. His suggestions read as follows:
(i) In case the Authority, upon a thorough evaluation of the implications of following a
Government directive, finds no potential adverse impact could arise on public safety or
environment, they may document the entire matter and proceed with implementing the
Government directive.
(ii) If they found that unacceptable and adverse impact could thereby arise on public
safety or the environment, the Authority shall document the entire matter along with
the detailed reasons for their conclusion and submit these to the Council for a
reconsideration of the directive given by the Government. The Authority shall prepare
a dissent note and then submit it to them.
13. National Security Advisor clarified that the need to give direction came from the incident
of radiation leak at Mayapuri, when the Government felt that it had to ask Atomic Energy
Regulatory Board (AERB) not only to look into the incident but also to devise an operating
procedure and do a census of all radiation sources, etc. The purpose, therefore, was positive and
it was not to tell the AERB not to do this or that. Former Chairman, AERB, however, asserted that
the directives for morality, decency, public interest, etc. should be dropped from Clauses 21 and
42.
14. Thereafter, he suggested that Clause 48(1)(d) was a vague statement and hence needed to
be dropped. He further suggested that if the Authority was superseded or Chairman or Members
of the Authority were thrown out, they could not be denied the principles of natural justice to
approach the courts. He remarked that it was all the more necessary in view of Clause 46 of the
Bill which provided that no legal proceedings against the Central Government or the Authority could
lie for anything which was done in good faith. However, it was brought to the notice of
Dr. Gopalakrishnan that the Constitution of India gave the right to writ jurisdiction and if any one
was dissatisfied or had any grievance he could go to a court and challenge that.
15. Emphasizing on the need for transparency and openness, he suggested three areas where
we could improve. One area was putting such information on the website on which considered
decision had been taken like minutes of the meeting or summaries of the action taken, summary
of the site selection process, etc. He asserted that this should be used as a means for building up
trust which was lacking in India with the atomic energy establishment in spite of their excellent
technological capability. The second area was of public hearings, whereby certain opportunities
were given to  the public to  put questions face to  face and these were answered after giving them
certain written material and the third aspect was creation of small local level committees having
representatives, from Panchayats, local college professors, etc., which would meet at least once
in three months and interact with the local people.
16. Chairman thanked Dr.  Gopalakrishnan for presenting his views before the Committee.
The witness, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
17. The Chairman, thereafter, informed the Members that National Security Advisor shall apprise
the Committee about the Strategic component of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Body and how
it was to be regulated after the enactment of the Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority
Bill, 2011.

97
18. NSA, thereafter, requested the Chairman for in-camera presentation given the sensitive
nature of the subject. Chairman directed that it would be an informal discussion.
19. Secretariat along with Reporters, then, withdrew and no record of the proceedings of the
Committee, thereafter, was kept.
20. The Committee adjourned at 01.16 P.M.

98
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 5 th March, 2012 in Room No. ‘63’, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Dr. Chandan Mitra
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Shri Jabir Husain
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
9. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
10. Shri Pradeep Tamta
11. Shri Francisco Sardinha
12. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
13. Shri Kristapa Nimmala
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
** *
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the meeting of the Committee and
informed them that the Committee would first consider and adopt its draft report on the Nuclear
Safety Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011, a copy of which had already been circulated to them. He
invited suggestions for modifications/amendments, if any, to the report from the Members. Except
for two Members, no other Member made any suggestion for make any change in the draft report
and the draft report was adopted by broad consensus. Two Members, namely Dr. Anup Kumar
Saha and Shri Saman Pathak, however had disagreements on some points contained in the Report
and submitted identical Minutes of Dissent.
98
*** Relates to other matter.

99
3. The Chairman then thanked all the Members for adopting the report and proposed that the
Report be presented to Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, the next day i.e. 6 th March, 2012. The
Committee agreed to the proposal and authorised him to present the report on behalf of the
Committee.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. * * *
16. * * *
17. * * *
18. The officials, then, withdrew.
19. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
20. The Committee, then, adjourned at 12.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.