TWO HUNDRED THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2012)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations Contained in the Two Hundred Twenty
Eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment 
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the 
Department of Biotechnology
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
 
REPORT NO. 
238
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations Contained in the Two Hundred Twenty
Eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Department of Biotechnology
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  20 th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  20 th December, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1-11
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 13-16

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2012-13)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil H. Lad
3. Shrimati Maya Singh
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri Alok Tiwari
6. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi
7. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
8. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
12. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
@13. Vacant
#14. Vacant
15. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
16. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase
17. Dr. Ajay Kumar
18. Shri O.S. Manian
19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
20. Shri Basori Singh Masram
21. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
22. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
23. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
25. Shri Yashvir Singh
#26. Vacant
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
30. Shri Ramakant Yadav
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
@ Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 14th December, 2012 on his resignation
from the Membership of the Committee.
# Shri Ninong Ering and Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon their
induction in the Union Council of Ministers w.e.f. 28
th October, 2012.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra,  Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Thirty Eighth Report on the Action Taken by the
Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations contained in Two Hundred Twenty Eighth
Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Biotechnology.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of
Biotechnology on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Sixth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Biotechnology which was
presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18
th May, 2012.
3. There were twenty-two recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Eighth
Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were
received from the Ministry on 20
th September, 2012.
4. In the meeting held on 17 th December, 2012, the Committee considered the Draft Action
Taken Report and adopted the same.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 17, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests

(iv)
ACRONYMS
BIRAC – Biotechnology Industry Research Accreditation Council
DBT – Department of Biotechnology
DCGI – Durg Controller General of India
ICGEB – International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology
NIH – National Institute of Health
MVDP – Malaria V accine Development Programme
PPP – Public-Private-Partnership

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of
Biotechnology on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Twenty Eighth Report
of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of
Biotechnology, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 18
th May, 2012. There
were twenty one recommendations in the Two Hundred and Twenty Eighth Report of the
Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the
Department on 20
th September, 2012.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee
on the Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology are set out in the subsequent paragraphs:-
Recommendation (Para 4.4)
The Committee is happy to note that the Department has developed a strong and potent
monitoring mechanism and commends it for being amongst the best three Ministries/Departments
in the financial year 2010-11 in the Government’s performance review. The Committee hopes that
the Department would not only continue to maintain at least the same level of performance but
would also endeavour to perform even better in the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Action Taken by Government
The Department while noting the appreciation by the Committee on the past performance,
would continue to perform as per directives given by the Committee through further strengthening
of project management and monitoring system.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.
Recommendation (Para 5.3)
The Committee observes that from the year 2007-08 onwards there is no significant
variation between financial allocation in BE and RE stages. The utilization also ranges from
93.65 per cent in 2010-11 to as high as 99.17 per cent in 2008-09. These figures are indicative
of effective financial planning and robust monitoring of expenditure by the Department. The
Committee commends the excellent financial performance made by the Department and hopes that
the Department would even better this performance in the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Action Taken by Government
The Department would continue perform in the direction suggested by the Committee
through further strengthening of project management and monitoring systems both in terms of
scientific and technical achievements and financial performance.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

2
Recommendation (Para 5.5)
The Committee expresses satisfaction with the overall performance of the Department
during the Eleventh Plan period. The Committee is happy to know that technology transfer
agreements facilitated by DBT in Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) mode will ensure availability of
the world’s cheapest vaccines against Pneumococcal pneumonia, rotavirus, HPV, Chikungunya and
Japanese encephalitis. The Committee would further like the Department to make concerted efforts
to complete the clinical trials of vaccines for malaria, dengue, cholera and rotavirus at an early date
and make these vaccines available in the market as soon as possible.
Action Taken by Government
Under the DBT Public Private Partnership Programme on BIPP Industry Research
Programmes have been supported for development of affordable vaccines and the efforts for
clinical trial are continuing. The Rota virus project has completed the Phase-III trial and JE vaccine
has already obtained marketing license. The dengue vaccine candidate is under. pre-clinical studies.
The two malaria candidate vaccines developed by ICGEB completed phase-I clinical trial. The
Malaria Vaccine Development Programme (MVDP) established as an independent society is
overseeing the further development on malaria vaccine. The organization is being funded by DBT,
Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, MVI, EMVI. Phase-III clinical trial of Cholera vaccine in human
subjects is in progress at NICED, Kolkata.
Comments
While appreciating the efforts made by the Department for development of vaccines
under Public Private Partnership mode, the Committee would like the Department to ensure
that results of these efforts become visible in near future with the availability of affordable
vaccines for the various diseases affecting the common man.
Recommendation (Para7.5)
The Committee expresses serious concern over the significant reduction of Rs.524.61
Crores between the Plan demand projected by the Department and the actual allocations made even
though Department maintains that it had projected reasonable demands. Due to this reduction in
allocation, the Department will need to re-prioritize allocation within various heads to initiate work
and will even have to defer some of the activities planned for that year to next year due to paucity
of funds. The Committee is of the view that considering the immense potential of Biotechnology
in providing affordable health care and increasing agricultural productivity as also India’s emergence
as one amongst the global leaders in biotechnology, adequate funds should be made available to the
Department so that our Research and Development activities are not adversely impacted. The
Committee, therefore, takes a very serious view of blind cuts made in the projected Demands of
the Department and recommends that the Government should provide adequate funds at R.E. stage
to the Department so that its important programmes and Research and Development activities are
vigorously pursued and our global competitiveness in biotechnology sector gets further
strengthened.
Action Taken by Government
The observations of the Committee have been taken-up with Planning Commission and
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. It was informed that Department may take-up the
additional demand for activities that could not be taken-up due to shortage of funds. Meanwhile,
DBT has entered into a collaboration with We llcome Trust, UK for development of affordable

3
healthcare products at a total cost of Rs. 330 crores with 50% contribution for each side. Several
such collaborations with international development agencies and countries have been agreed upon
in the areas of healthcare and agriculture which would offset the shortage of funds besides access
to advance technologies and training of young scientists.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and feels that the collaboration of the Department
with the various International development agencies/countries in the fields of healthcare
and agriculture is a step in the right direction as it would reduce dependence on the
Government for funding.
Recommendation (Para 8.5)
The Committee notes that the Plan allocation under the head of R&D for the year 2012-13
is to the tune of Rs. 455 crores which is significantly higher than B.E. Plan allocation of
Rs. 376.10 crores made in 2011-12. The Committee is of the view that higher allocation on R&D
are need of the hour and help India strengthen its position as one of the global leaders in
biotechnology.
Action Taken by Government
The Department has noted the views of the Committee for higher allocations to R&D.
Accordingly, the Department would take adequate steps for enhancing the allocation for R&D in
the subsequent years of Twelfth  Plan. The indicative budgetary allocation for Twelfth  Plan
communicated recently by Planning Commission is almost double the allocation of Eleventh Plan.
Therefore, the proposals of the Department in Twelfth Plan to launch major R&D programmes in
emerging areas such as system biology, synthetic biology, computation biology, RNAi biology and
nano-biotechnology would be adequately supported through increase in allocations and promote
R&D in universities and institutions to make India globally competitive in life sciences and
biotechnology.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation (Para 9.4)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government must ensure the functioning
of this important centre of research and quality of research being done there is not adversely
impacted due to reduction in financial allocation to the Centre and, if necessary, interim financial
assistance be provided to the Centre to tide over its immediate financial problems. The Committee
would also like the Centre to make concerted efforts so that it is able to meet its expenses from
its own income in a short time and it does not remain dependent on Government funds for its very
survival.
Action Taken by Government
Recognizing the significance of the observations of the Committee the Department of
Biotechnology, being the nodal agency of. ICGEB, New Delhi, is already holding elaborate
discussions with the ICGEB management and its governing body to work out a strategy and
modalities for support so as to address sustainability on long term. To tide over the current
situation, a special budget head has been introduced under the DBT plan budget of Twelfth Plan
in the scheme “support to autonomous R&D institutions” and the provision of Rs. 13.00 crores

4
has already been made for the year 2012-13. Out of which Rs. 650.00 lakhs has already been
released to ICGEB.
Comments
The Committee notes the opening of a separate budgetary head for autonomous R&D
institutions but reiterates that the Centre should make all out efforts to meet its expenses
from its own resources and should become self sustaining.
Recommendation (Para 10.2)
The Committee welcomes the decision to establish BIRAC with a view to support product
innovation and providing required infrastructure and services at different stages of the value chain
for promoting innovation and product development to public sector and private sectors through
facilitating bioindustrial growth. The Committee hopes that with the establishment of BIRAC, global
competitiveness of Indian biotech industry would increase and it would help us to increase our
market share in the global biotech products and services.
Action Taken by Government
BlRAC is now working closely with national and international agencies such as ICAR,
ICMR, DST, CSIR, Gates Foundation, WHO, World Bank to facilitate innovative product-orientated
research for development of affordable product and processes development. The required enabling
services such as Intellectual Property management, technology assessment, technology transfer,
legal and contractual agreements, processes for technology acquisition and licensing,
entrepreneurship development etc., are also being made available to facilitate the biotech industry
specially the startup’s and the SME’s.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that concrete results
of establishment of BIRAC would soon become visible.
Recommendation (Para 11.2)
The Committee feels that quality human resources forms the backbone of research activities
in a country and as such the Department needs to accord greater priority to lapping, nurturing and
involving talented students in biotechnology. The Committee is of the opinion that the Department
must play a pro-active role in this regard. The Committee appreciates the efforts being made by the
Department in creating capable human resource in the biotechnology sector and extending support to
students at the college level through fellowships, short term training courses, providing industrial
training to B.Tech./M.Sc./M.Tech biotechnology students. The Committee also commends that the
Star College scheme initiated by the Department, which aims towards strengthening of life sciences,
biotechnology education and training and provides experience to biotechnology students in the cutting
edge-technologies needed for modern biological studies at undergraduate level in life sciences. The
Committee hopes that these schemes would help creating sufficient scientists and technocrats needed
by the expanding field of biotechnology. The Committee recommends that the Department should
carefully work our future requirements of human resources in the Biotechnology sector and, if
necessary, expand its existing schemes, to ensure availability of required manpower in years to come.
Action Taken by Government
The Department is encouraged of the views and appreciations made by the Committee on

5
the ongoing programmes and benefits that are expected to be realized. The Department has
internally assessed and also commissioned studies on human resource requirements in future. Some
areas identified from these efforts for special programmes in human resource development included:
Intellectual Property management, technology assessment, technology transfer, operation of GMP
and GLP facilities for production and services, high-end bioinformatics, computation biology,
system biology, synthetic biology, advance toxicology, biotech regulation and regulatory science etc.
During the Twelfth  Plan, to meet the needs of continuous assessment of human resource needs
and to manage the wide array of programmes, action has also been taken to establish a Life
Sciences and Biotechnology Education Agency.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that concrete benefits would flow from the
programmes undertaken by the Department.
Recommendation (Para 12.3)
The Committee, however, expresses its serious concern over inadequate allocation for R&D
purposes made by the private sector. Funding provided by the private sector in India is significantly
lower as compared to international norms of 1.3-1.4 of GDP. In France, Industry performs over
63 per cent (of all R&D) and funds around 54 per cent projects while this figure is 69 per cent
in Japan. In India, contribution of private sector industries is estimated at around 25 per cent
of national R&D expenditure which needs to be enhanced to at least 50 per cent in the Twelfth
Plan.
Action Taken by Government
The Department noted the observations of the Committee for enhancement of industry
contribution in R&D from the current level to up to 50 per cent. The efforts of the Department
for the first time to launch in 2007 the Small Business Innovative Research Initiative programme
of Public Private Partnership for promoting proof of concept R&D has provided significant results
invigorating the industry contribution. The scheme has benefited more than 100 small and medium
biotech enterprises at the total cost of Rs. 316 crores which includes 48 per cent of industry
contribution. Encouraged by this programme several steps have been taken in promoting industrial
R&D through various Public Private Partnerships schemes. The Biotechnology Industry Partnership
Programme (BIPP) launched has so far benefited 51 companies undertaking research in futuristic
high risk technologies at a total cost of Rs. 116 crores including 60 per cent of industry
contribution. Other programmes of the Department in Twelfth Plan already announced such as
ignition grants scheme, incubators and establishment of translational research platforms for product
development and other shared and expensive research facilities would further enhance the
contributioon of industry in R&D in life sciences and biotechnology.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the schemes launched by the
Department would lead to enhanced the share of the private sector for Research and
Development purposes.
Recommendation (Para 13.4)
The Committee appreciates the Department for taking initiatives for encouraging youth
across various streams of Biotechnology through a range of scholarships such as Wellcome Trust

6
Fellowship, Rapid Young Grant scheme, etc. The Committee also commends introduction of
Ramalingaswami Fellowships aimed at attracting Indian scientists coming back to their mother land
and hopes that schemes like this will help check brain-drain.
Action Taken by Government
The Department remains encouraged for the appreciation by the Committee on the
programmes for preventing brain drain. As per the directives of the Committee, all the programmes
with enhanced numbers of fellowships shall be continued during the Twelfth Plan.
To maintain transparency and standards, all the schemes are advertised every year in
national dailies, science magazines both at national and international level (Current Sciences,
Biospectrum, Technology Review, Nature, Science) and applications are invited from candidates
across the world.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 13.5)
The Committee, however, would like the Department to follow a transparent and objective
criterion for award of these scholarships/fellowships so that only deserving and talented persons
get them. The Committee would also like the Department to devise ways and means so that talented
students coming from rural background, belonging to deprived sections of society and women
scholars could also be encouraged to join the stream of Biotechnology.
Action Taken by Government
The applications received are scrutinized by a high level expert committee duly constituted
by the Department. Track record of applicant such as work experience after Ph.D/MD/equivalent
degree; Awards/Honors-National/International, Extramural research grants raised during the last
five years — National/International; Number of Patents/Varieties/Hybrids; Technologies developed;
Number of first author papers published during 5 years; Number of papers in which
the candidate is the corresponding author; quality and impact of publications; Scientific merit of
the research proposal to be carried out during the tenure for the fellowship; Comments/
Recommendations of the Host Institute, the overall assessment on the suitability of the candidate
for this award.
The Department has initiated a Biocare scheme for providing research grant opportunity to
women scientists who have not received research grant earlier. This is mainly to help women
scientists to be able to undertake independent research programme for enhancing their capacities
and giving them an opportunity to work with mentors and establish research institutes in
scientifically important research area. Similarly, the Department has scheme for biotechnology based
programmes for rural development and SC/ST population under which several training programmes
are conducted for the purpose. As suggested by the committee action has been taken to strengthen
these efforts.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply. The Committee would like the Department
to carry periodic review of its schemes and commission an independent study to assess  the
actual benefits flowing from its schemes.

7
Recommendation (Para 14.4)
The Committee appreciates the fact the Department has been contributing to societal
development by making use of biotechnology processes and tools and notes that during Eleventh
Five Year Plan, 4500 rural, SC/ST and women were benefited from this programme. The
Committee is of the view that Department should expand its programme significantly to provide for
skill development, employment and income generation in the field of agriculture, sericulture, etc.
The Committee, also feels, that the Department should particularly focus on extending help to Self
Help Groups, Cooperatives etc. so that larger number of people could be benefited from its
programmes. The Department must also try to focus finding innovative opportunities for income
generation by using biotechnology tools and processes on locally available resources.
Action Taken by Government
As suggested by the Committee, division has expanded its activities/programmes on skill
development, employment and income generation in the field of agriculture, sericulture etc. The
priority of the programme area has been set well  leading to the promotion of agro-technologies with
introduction of hybrids, new crops, disease/stress resistant varieties. Project activities are also
supported for  integrated farming through introduction of animal husbandry, horticulture and various
other allied activities. Emphasis was given on utilization of local bio-resources in a  sustainable and
eco-friendly manner through SHGs and entrepreneurship development and also focusing on creation
of innovative opportunities in different income  generation activities using biotechnological tools
through utilization of local bio-resources.
Comments
The Committee appreciates the initiative taken by the Department to uplift weaker
segment of the Society using Biotechnological tools and processes and hopes that concrete
results would flow in the near future from the programmes launched by the Department.
Recommendation (Para 15.3)
The Committee is happy to note that introduction of break-up of budget will not adversely
impact this programme. The Committee considers the programme as of great importance for
common man and would like the Department to make all out efforts to ensure that the programme
achieves its objectives. The Committee would particularly like the Department to ensure that
cheaper vaccines for ailments of common man become quickly available in the market.
Action Taken by Government
The suggestions made by the Committee have been noted. During the year 2012-2013,
based on past experience and actual assessment of requirements, care has been taken to
rationalize the break-up of budget into capital cost (non-recurring) and grant-in-aid (recurring) so
that such mandatory breakup may have minimal impact on implementation of the programmes.
For effective translational research of healthcare and agriculture products, Department during the
year 2012-2013 has already operationalised following platforms which would accelerate various
steps in product development. These platforms include clinical development and service agency
for human vaccines and diagnostic, platform for veterinary biological for animal vaccines and
development.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, however, would like the Department

8
to ensure that its efforts actually result in development of affordable healthcare and
agriculture products, in a fixed time-frame, which may benefit the common man.
Recommendation (Para 16.6)
The Committee would like the Department to pursue with the Planning Commission and
Ministry of Finance for allocation of higher funds for this programme at the RE stage 2012-13 so
that the objective of establishment of new Centres of Excellence in life Sciences, Biotechnology and
Bioinformatics during 2012-13, as originally planned by the Department could be achieved. The
Committee recommends Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission to make sufficient funds
available for establishment of sufficient number of Centres of Excellence for carrying out research
in advance and cutting-edge areas of Biotechnology and Bioinformatics so that country not only
maintains its competitive edge in Biotechnology but further strengthens it.
Action Taken by Government
The Department has taken up the suggestions of the Committee with Planning Commission
during the discussions for finalization of Twelfth Plan budget. Adequate justification was given for
higher allocation to promote important programmes such as centres of excellence in cutting edge
areas of life science and biotechnology. Accordingly, the indicative budgetary allocation for Twelfth
Plan communicated recently by Planning Commission is almost double from the allocation of
Eleventh Plan. This would facilitate to implement the proposals of the Department in the Eleventh
Plan to setup more centres of excellence, inter-institutional centres, Advance centre for
bioinformatics and computation biology and DBT partnership centres in leading areas of global
importance. Already action has been taken for preparation of five such proposals.
Comments
The Committee is happy to note that the Department has got an indicative budgetary
allocation almost double to the allocation of the Eleventh Plan which would help setting up
of more Centres of excellence, and Bioinformatics centres which it hopes would be gainfully
utilised.
Recommendation (Para 17.3)
The Committee welcomes the step taken by the Department to merge the schemes with
overlapping mandates particularly as it would provide larger scope for implementation of more
programmes. The Committee also feels that special attention needs to be given to promote
women scientists to forefront in order to bring gender equality in the field of biotechnology.
All women Biotech Park can be a step in this direction. The Committee recommends that under
the head of I&M Sector considerable investment should be made in collaboration with private
sector for setting up of more women’s Biotechnology parks in other areas of the country such
as in Jammu and Kashmir which is having considerable number of women Muslim science
graduates.
Action Taken by Government
The Department has initiated a Bio-care scheme for providing research grant opportunity to
women scientists who have not received research grant earlier. This is mainly to help women
scientists to be able to undertake independent research programme for enhancing their capacities
and giving them an opportunity to work with mentors and establish research institutes in
scientifically important research area.

9
The Department is already implementing 22 R&D programmes relevant to the needs of J&K
State. Some major initiatives include participation in network programme to improve apple and
saffron. A repository on apple germ plasma has also been supported. Five slots in the DBT
overseas fellowship scheme have been reserved for the applicants of the State. As suggested by
the Committee, a meeting to explore possibilities of strengthening life science and biotechnology
programmes has been scheduled in the month of October 2012. Secretary, DBT along with key
officials of the Department are participating. All the heads of institutions and universities from the
State of J&K are participating in the meeting.
Comments
The Committee notes that the Department is implementing twenty-two R&D
programmes relevant to the needs of Jammu and Kashmir State and would like Department
to get the actual benefits flowing from these programmes to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir assessed by an independent agency.
Recommendation (Para 18.6)
The Committee feels that huge investment needed in Science and Technology research can
only be mobilized by introducing significant changes in current interaction of publicly owned S&T
establishment with industry both in public and private sectors. The Committee feels that if India
has to emerge as a scientifically developed nation, private sector investment in Science and
Technology has to increase substantially from the present levels and Public Private Partnership can
prove to be a great source of resource mobilization.
Recommendation (Para 18.7)
After going through the details of SBIRI and BIPP programmes, the Committee is of the
opinion that these are well intended and useful programmes. It notes that BIPP has diverse
components covering health, environment and industry, etc. and the utility of the scheme stands
established by breakthrough research concepts which have already led to commercialization of
various projects benefiting 51 companies apart from leading to development of H1N1 vaccine which
was recently approved by Drug Controller General of India (DCGI) for marketing. The Committee
strongly recommends that this scheme must continue during the Twelfth Plan as proposed by the
Department since such investment may; bring out sea change in the entire scenario of health,
environment and industry combined.
Action Taken by Government
During the Twelfth Plan all the public private partnership schemes (SBIRI and BIPP) shall
be continued with improved administrative and governance to accelerate the process of funding and
management. In addition, a new PPP scheme such as ignition grants, technology incubators, setting
up of shared infrastructure facilities will also be implemented to promote overall development of
R&D and innovation in biotech industry.
Comments
The Committee is pleased to learn that both SBIRI and BIPP programmes would be
continued during the Twelfth Plan period also. The Committee hopes that the Department
would further encourage other private sector Companies to join Public Private Partnership
mode of funding for R&D and innovation in biotech industry.

10
Recommendations (Para 19.3 and 19.4)
The Committee is happy at increased international collaboration with various countries. The
committee notes that there has been an increase of allocation amounting of Rs. 8.50 crores under
this head. Mutually beneficial international collaboration in the field of Biotechnology needs to be
encouraged so as to boost the pace of progress and growth in the key areas of Biotechnology and
recommends accordingly.
The Committee is particularly happy at the result of international collaboration under
Biodesign Alliance Programme being run with the support of the Stanford University, USA. The
Committee notes that DBT has been able to mobilize through international collaborations funding to
the tune of Rs. 1000 crores out of which National Institute of Health (NIH), USA and Wellcome
Trust, UK have contributed 50 per cent of the money. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
in view of the mutually beneficial potential of international collaborations in Biotechnology, increase
in allocation beyond Rs. 8.50 crores be made in the subsequent years of Twelfth Five Year Plan
so as to adequately fund the programme.
Action Taken by Government
The budget allocated for international collaboration is basically meant for providing seed
money for launching of programmes meeting expenditure on travel, workshops and conferences
and R&D in bilateral projects costing up to Rs. 2.00 crores. Wherever collaborations require major
investments, the provision is made out of the other relevant operational schemes under the budget
heads such as R&D and I&M Sector. For example the contribution for W ellcome Trust DBT
partnerships as well as biodesign are met out of sub budget head “Medical Biotechnology and
Related Areas” of the scheme ‘Research and Development’. Similarly, major investment required for
agriculture R&D collaborations are budgeted under the sub head “Agriculture Biotechnology and
Allied Areas” of the scheme of ‘Research and Development’. Since the indicative budget outlay for
Twelfth Plan is substantial, as suggested by the committee the allocation will be increased under
the head “International Collaboration” during the subsequent years of the Twelfth  Plan.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that international
collaborations will help boost growth in the key areas of Biotechnology.
Recommendation (Para 20.6)
The Committee is happy to note that the programme is bringing positive transformation in
North Eastern states and Sikkim. Keeping in view of the good performance of the programme, the
committee not only feels that mandatory 10 percent allocation should continue for the programme
but budgetary allocations to the extent possible should be leveraged to bring more funds in North
Eastern states through PPP mode for biotechnology applications. The Department should also Plan
towards cooperation with other scientific Departments to boost pace of growth in this region. The
Committee, further, wants the Department to explore that possibility of earmarking certain percent
mandatory allocation for other backward regions of the country such as the Himalayan Region as
well.
Action Taken by Government
As suggested by the Committee, the Department has taken action to implement several
industry oriented and entrepreneurship development programmes in the north-east to promote public
private partnership. The ongoing programmes are already implemented through active involvement

11
of ICAR, CSIR and DST along with state Government agencies and S&T Council. As suggested
by the Committee such collaboration will be strengthened further to avoid duplication and bring
value addition.
To explore the possibility of earmarking certain per cent mandatory allocation for other
backward regions in life sciences and biotechnology, Department has constituted the Committee to
work-out the strategy and programmes for implementation in 2013-2014.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the Department
will ensure that Himalayan, North-eastern and other backward regions of the country get
benefited by its proposed projects.
Recommendation (Para 20.7)
The Committee commends the fact that in successive years the Department has been able
to utilize the progressively increasing allocations in Plan outlays. The Committee also notes that the
Department has been able to utilize an amount of Rs. 1376.70 crores, out of total allotted 1426.92
crores in the year 2011-12. For the financial year 2012-13 period, it is hoped that the Department
will be able to optimally utilize the total outlay of Rs. 1500.39 crores. After considering the
Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology, the Committee is of the view of that the
Department of Biotechnology, by and large, is making good use of the public money and hopes
that the Department would continue making proper use of public funds in future also.
Action Taken by Government
The Department is encouraged of the appreciation made by the Committee for its financial
performance and the recommendation made for 2012-2013. The views of the Committee on making
good use of the public money has been communicated to all divisions and task forces of DBT for
implementation.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that the Department
would make unwavering efforts to fulfill the goals set for the Twelfth Five Year Plan.

MINUTES

14

15
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the 17 th December, 2012 in Committee Room
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri M. Rama Jois
3. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
LOK SABHA
4. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
5. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
6. Shri O.S. Manian
7. Shri Basori Singh Masram
8. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
9. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
10. Shri Pradeep Tamta
11. Shri Joseph Toppo
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and
informed them that the Committee would consider and adopt its draft 232
nd to 238 th Reports on
the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 222 nd to
228th Reports on Demands for Grants (2012-13), pertaining to the Ministries/Departments of Atomic
Energy, Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, Space, Earth Sciences, Scientific and
Industrial Research and Biotechnology respectively.
2. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration, one by one, the Draft Action Taken
Reports and adopted the 232
nd to 238 th Reports without any amendment.
15

16
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Committee, thereafter, decided to present/lay on the table of both the Houses of the
Parliament its 232 nd to 238 th Reports on 20 th December, 2012. The Committee authorised its
Chairman and in his absence Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra to present the Report in Rajya Sabha and
Shri Pradeep Tamta and in his absence Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde to lay the copy of the Report
on the Table of Lok Sabha.
The Committee, then, adjourned at 10.35 
A.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.