ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
 
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2003-2004) OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF SPACE
 (DEMAND NO. 86)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE  2ND MAY, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE   2ND MAY, 2003)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2003/VAISAKHA, 1925  (SAKA)
 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Website: http://parliamentofindia.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
   
1.        COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                         
2.        INTRODUCTION                                                                            
3.     REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4.        SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                                                                             
5.        ANNEXURE                                                                          
6.        MINUTES  OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                          
 
 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2003)
 
 
1.
                  Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
            RAJYA SABHA
 
2.                  Shri C. Apok Jamir
3.                  Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
4.                  Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharma
5.                  Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
6.                  Shri B.P. Singhal
7.                  Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
8.                  Smt. Savita Sharda
9.                  Smt. S. G. Indira
10.              Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
11.              Shri Lalit Suri
12.              Shri T. S. Bajwa
   * 13.Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
   * 14.Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
  @15.Vacant
LOK  SABHA
15. Smt. Margaret Alva
16. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                     
17. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
18. Chowdhary Talib Hussain
19. Adv. Suresh Ramrao Jadhav                         
20. Shri G.J.Javiya
21. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
22. Shri C. Kuppusami
23. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
24. Shri Kailash Meghwal
25. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
26. Shri Rupchand Murmu
27. Shri S. Murugesan                              
28. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                
29. Shri B.K. Parthasarathi   
30. Shri Suresh Pasi                                         
31. Dr. Ashok Patel                                        
32. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel    
33. Shri Shriniwas Patil
34. Prof. R.R. Pramanik
35. Shri Naresh Puglia  
___________________________________________________________________________
      *      Nominated w.e.f. 23
rd Janaury, 2003.
@  Dr. Vijay Mallya ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 27th February, 2003 consequent upon his 
 nomination to the Committee on Defence.
 
     
36. Shri Ganta Sreenivasa Rao     
37. Prof. I.G. Sanadi
38. Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
39. Shri Vishvendra Singh   
40. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
41. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
42. Shri Balram Singh Yadav
          #44. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
            45. Vacant      
 
      SECRETARIAT
 
      Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
      Shri S.N. Sahu, Director

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary   
      Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
      Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
 
#            Nominated w.e.f. 7
th April, 2003.
 
INTRODUCTION
      I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment
 & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred-
Fourteenth Report of the Committee.  This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of the
 Department of Space (Demand No.86).
 
2.  In the meeting of the Committee held on the 31
st March, 2003 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of
 Space gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on various
 aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
 
3.  The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the
 Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the
 Department of Space.
 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on 29
thApril, 2003.
 
NEW DELHI
April 29, 2003
C. RAMACHANDRAIAH
Chairman,
Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 
R E P O R T
 
INTRODUCTION
One of the most exciting and spectacular developments in the recorded history of mankind is the exploration of
 space and application of space technology for solving the complex social, economic and environmental problems
 confronted by mankind.  Since ancient times infinite space fired the imagination of Indians and their minds soared high to
 unravel its mysteries.  In more modern times pioneers of India's space programme considered space research and space
 technology as essential and indispensable for national reconstruction. While space technology has emerged as a proven
 means of successfully transforming society in a cost effective and limited time frame, the investment involved has
 prompted skeptics to question its relevance. Dr. Vikram Sarabhai the founder of our space programme when asked about
 the necessity of India venturing into such high profile scientific quest against the background of our resource crunch and
 social and economic backwardness had said,
There are some who question the relevance of space activities in a developing nation... we are
 convinced that if we are to play a meaningful role nationally and in the community of nations, we must
 be second to none, in the application of advanced technologies to the real problems of man and society
 which we find in our country. 
2.         One of the first astronauts of the USA John Glenn who subsequently  became a Senator justified the huge
 expenditure on space programmes by saying "Every dollar we put into the space programme gives us seven dollars worth
 of new technology".  In 1995 while delivering the annual K. R. Narayanan Oration, established by the Australian National
 University, Professor U. R. Rao, former Chairman of the Space Commission focused on the theme “Space Technology
 for  Sustainable Development in Asia” and stated that space technology could transform stagnant societies within less
 time and money.
3.         Today India is nothing short of a role model in space research and application  of space technology for

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
 transforming and improving our social, economic and environmental conditions and for reaching the "the high peaks of
 development in the fields of science and technology". 
4.         During four decades of India's space programme which commenced with the formation of the Indian National
 Committee for Space Research in 1962 our country has reached many milestones and scaled unprecedented heights in
 applying space technology for nation building.  Beginning with the launch of the first sounding rocket from Thumba
 Equatorial Rocket Launching Station in November 1963 the Indian Space Programme has progressed with many restraints
 imposed on it and is rightly described as "Success under Embargoes".
5.         The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) was established in 1969 under the Department of Atomic Energy. 
 The Government of India gave a fillip to the space activities by formally setting up the Space Commission and the
 Department of Space (DOS) in June 1972, and bringing ISRO under DOS.  The primary objective of DOS is to promote
 the development and application of space science and technology for the socio-economic benefit of the nation.  The
 programme is executed through ISRO, National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA), Physical Research Laboratory (PRL),
 National Mesosphere-Stratosphere-Troposphere Radar Facility (NMRF), North Eastern-Space Applications Centre (NE-
SAC) and other agencies.  The Antrix Corporation, a wholly owned Government  company,  which was established in
 1992, is  engaged
in commercial marketing of space products and services.  The establishment of space systems and their utilization are
 coordinated by national level committees, namely, the INSAT Coordination Committee (ICC), Planning Committee of
 National Natural Resources Management System (PC-NNMS) and Advisory Committee on Space Sciences (ADCOS). 
 Five Regional Remote Sensing Service Centres (RRSSC) help in undertaking remote sensing application projects relevant
 to the region.
6.         The Secretariat of DOS and the Headquarters of ISRO are located at Antariksh Bhavan in Bangalore.  Programme
 offices at ISRO Headquarters coordinate the overall programmes like satellite communication, earth observation, launch
 vehicle, space science, space-industry coordination, disaster management   support, international cooperation, publications
 and public relations, budget and economic analysis and human resources development.
7.         The Indian space programme was initially directed towards demonstrating the efficacy of space systems for
 national development through development of experimental satellites, launch vehicles and conduct of application
 experiments.  While the Satellite Instructional Television Experiment (SITE), was conducted during 1975-76, the Satellite
 Telecommunication Experimental Project(STEP), was conducted during 1977-79. These were the two important steps
 undertaken in this direction to gain experience in the use of satellite for developmental communications and domestic
 telecommunications.
8.            Simultaneously, space hardware was developed for experimental missions which would ultimately lead to
 indigenous operational space systems.  Aryabhata, the first  Indian satellite launched in April 1975, provided experience
 in design, fabrication and operation in space of a satellite system.  It was followed by two experimental remote sensing
 satellites, Bhaskara-1 and Bhaskara-2, launched in June 1979 and November 1981, respectively.  The Bhaskara satellites
 gave hands-on experience in building and operating space-based remote sensing system.  APPLE (Ariane Passenger
 Payload Experiment), an experimental communication satellite launched in June 1981, besides, enabling continuation of
 telecommunication experiments that had earlier been conducted under STE provided inputs in orbit raising and in-orbit
 maintenance of a geo-stationary satellite.  India’s first satellite launch vehicle, SLV-3, was launched successfully on July
 18, 1980.
9.         The experiments and demonstrations of the 70’s were consolidated to evolve operational space systems.  In this
 direction, over the years, India has established two operational space systems – the Indian National Satellite (INSAT)
 System providing services for telecommunications, TV broadcasting and meteorology including disaster warning support
 and the Indian Remote Sensing Satellite (IRS) System for resource monitoring and management.  The Polar Satellite
 Launch Vehicle (PSLV) is well proven through six successive successful flights. The successful launch of the first
 developmental flight of Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle, GSLV-D1, in 2001 was a major land mark in the
 Indian space programme making India the sixth country in the world to demonstrate capabilities for launch of geo-
stationary satellites of INSAT type.
10.       The constellation of Indian Remote Sensing Satellites comprises of five satellites including India’s first
 oceanographic satellite (IRS-P4).  They, besides, provide data worldwide, through a network of international ground
 stations serve as  a  main  stay of the  National Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS).  The Vital applications
 such as identifying zones which could yield ground water, suitable locations for recharging water, monitoring command
 areas estimating crop areas and yields, assessing deforestation, mapping urban areas for planning
purposes, delineating ocean areas with higher fish catch potential and monitoring of environment are being pursued

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
 actively by users with the space based data.  In the field of space communication and meteorology, the INSAT system,
 currently consisting of four satellites, viz, 2DT, 2E, 3B and 3C, is one of the largest domestic communication satellite
 systems in the world.  METSAT, a satellite exclusively for meteorology, was launched in September 2002.  It has been
 renamed after Kalpana Chawla, the Indian born space scientist, who lost her life after the space shuttle Columbia
 disintegrated during its return journey to earth.    INSAT contributes significantly to a variety of services in
 telecommunications and television broadcasting including meteorological observations, disaster communications, distance
 education, telemedicine and training.  The Department of Space has taken initiatives to pilot a Satellite Communication
 Policy in 1997 paving the way for the use of INSAT capacity by private users.  The new Satellite Communication
 (Satcom) Policy has also opened the possibilities for private Indian Satellite Systems in India.  A comprehensive Remote
 Sensing Data Policy on acquisition and distribution of satellite remote sensing data from Indian and foreign satellites for
 civilian users in India has been formulated and approved by the Government which ensures that users are not denied
 access to valuable satellite data for developmental purposes.
11.            Significant  scientific investigations are being carried out in the fields of astronomy, atmospheric sciences and
 long term climatic research using satellites, balloons, sounding rockets & ground instruments.  The Indian space
 programme has played a critical role for our industrial sector for augmenting their capabilities.  A strong bond with
 academic institutions exists through extensive research partnerships.  Unique organizational systems have been evolved in
 the national space programme for fulfilling diverse functions like development, operations and applications of complex
 space systems.  The space programme has enabled significant technology growth in multiple disciplines as spin-off
 benefits.
12.       Indian capabilities in space thus represent a wide spectrum of expertise ranging from the conceptual design to
 building and operating a variety of space systems, which are matched only by a few nations in the world.  In view of these
 multiple dimensions and capabilities, India is recognised as a leader in application  of space technologies.  The end-to-end
 capability in space for vital application in communications, broadcasting, meteorology and natural resource information,
 which are of direct relevance for national development, has secured India a unique place in the International community. 
 The diverse roles of space technology/services in various fronts – social, commercial, economic and strategic – have made
 the space systems an important component of our national infrastructure.
When the Committee asked the Department to spell out projects/ programmes to be taken up during  10
th Five year
 plan the Department informed that, in addition to the ongoing programmes, the following programmes have also been
 taken up.
(a)    Fourth generation INSAT-4 satellites (INSAT-4A/4B) to augment the INSAT system capacity with Ku band and C
 band transponders.
(b)   Radar Imaging Satellite (RISAT) with active microwave sensor which provides all-weather capability for acquiring the
 data on natural resource management applications.
(c)    Advanced satellites for Oceanographic studies (Oceansat-2) and Resource management applications (Resourcesat-2)
 to ensure continuity of data for the users.
(d)   Advanced Geosychnronous Satellite Launch Vehicle GSLV Mk III capable of launching 4T satellite into GTO, the
 first launch of which being targeted for 2007-08.
(e)    PSLV and GSLV Continuation programmes to meet the launch requirements of 10th plan.
(f)     Development of multi-wavelength Astronomy Satellite ASTROSAT.
(g)    Development of GSAT-3 (Edusat) and GSAT-4 satellites to be flown on GSLV.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
13.       It was stated that the plan outlay approved for the Department of Space for the Tenth Plan is Rs.13, 250 crores.  
 The estimated Non-Plan outlay during the Tenth Plan is Rs.2000 crores.  Thus, the total outlay for 10th plan is expected to
 be Rs.15,250 crores.
14.       The Budget Estimates  for the year 2003-04 in Rs.2368.89 crores with a Plan component of Rs.2050.40 crores and
 Non-Plan component of Rs.318.49 crores.
The details of the non-plan and plan break-up of the provision for B.E 2003-04 is as follows;                              
                                                                                  (Rupees in crores)

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
                       Non-Plan Plan Total
Budget Estimates 2003-04 (Gross) 318.49 2050.40 2368.89
Budget Estimates 2003-04 (Net) 318.47 2050.00 2368.47
           
The Detailed breakup of the budgetary allocation is given in Annexure-I
15.       The Committee was informed that the Department has been rigorously following the Zero Base Budgeting
 methodology for formulation of Annual Budgets.  Detailed reviews are carried out at various levels in the organistion to
 arrive at the minimum essential cash flow for each Project, Programme and Centre/unit, based on the programme
 priorities, total cost, scheduled targets, progress achieved so far and the milestones planned for the budgeting period.
16.            Consistent with the programme directions and targets envisaged for the 10 th Five Year Plan period, the specific
 activities/projects to be undertaken and the performance milestones to be achieved have been carefully prioritized while
 arriving at the Budget Estimates for 2003-04.
17.       The Second Launch Pad (SLP) is being built at SDSC SHAR in order to provide a backup for the existing launch
 pad as well as to cater for future launchers like GSLV Mk III.  The Budget Estimate amounting to Rs.45 crores for the
 project was enhanced to Rs.70 crores in R.E. during the year 2002-2003 due to additional requirements on account of
 work contract tax, custom duty and design improvements as approved by Government in September 2002. The current
 approved cost of Second Launch Pad Project was Rs.349.69 crores and Cumulative expenditure of the project till end
 March 2002 was Rs.256.95 crores i.e. 74% approximately.  Of the remaining budget, Rs.70 crores was provided in RE
 2002-03 and Rs.20.47 crores has been provided BE 2003-04. A detailed assessment on the revised cost estimate for the
 project is under preparation and additional budget requirement will be projected in RE 2003-04.
INSAT
18.       INSATis a multipurpose satellite system for telecommunications, broadcasting, meteorology and search & rescue
 services.  Commissioned in 1983, INSAT is the largest domestic communication system in the Asia-Pacific Region.  It
 now comprises of five satellites – INSAT-2DT, INSAT-2E, INSAT-3B, INSAT-3C and METSAT – with a total capacity
 of over
hundred transponders in C, Extended C and Ku-bands. Besides it has got meteorological instruments.
19.       It carried twenty four transponders – twelve operating in the normal C-band frequency, six in Extended C-band and
 six in Ku-band.  Nine of the twelve normal C-band transponders provide expanded coverage and the remaining three have
 India coverage beam.  All the extended C-bands as well as the Ku-band transponders have India coverage beam.  INSAT-
3A also carried a Ku-band beacon.
20.       For meteorological observation, INSAT-3A carried a three channel Very High Resolution Radiometer (VHRR)
 with 2 km resolution in the visible band and short wave infrared bands providing a spatial resolution of 1 km.  A data
 Relay Transponder (DRT) operating in UHF band is incorporated for real-time hydro meteorological data collection from
 unattended platforms located on land and river basins.  The data is then relayed in extended C-band to a central location.
21.            INSAT-3A also carried another transponder for Satellite Aided Search and Rescue (SAS & R) as part of India’s
 contribution to the international Satellite Aided Search and Rescue programme.
22.            INSAT-3A is launched by European Ariane-5 Launch Vehicle into a Geosynchronous Transfer Orbit (GTO)
 with a perigee of 200 km and an apogee of 35,980 km.  The satellite is manoeuvered to its final orbit by firing the
 satellite’s apogee motor.  Subsequently, the deployment of solar array, antennae and the solar sail is carried out and the
 satellite is commissioned after in-orbit checkout.
23.            INSAT-3A is the third satellite in the INSAT-3 series. INSAT-3B and ISNAT-3C were launched in March 2000
 and January 2002 respectively by the Ariane launch vehicle and both the satellites are now providing regular service. 
 INSAT-3A is to be located at 93.5 deg east longitude in the geostationary orbit and was launched by Ariane-5 launch
 vehicle of Arianespace in the early hours of April 10, 2003 (as per IST), from Kourou in French Guyana.
24.       The Committee congratulates the Department for the successful launch of the INSAT-3A and records its
 appreciation for the abilities and talents of our scientists who have further enhanced the glory of our nation through this
 splendid performance.  The Committee hopes that the other satellites in the INSAT series would be launched as planned
 without any cost escalation.  Proven abilities of our scientists have now to be used to develop the cryogenic technology
 which has been subjected to many experiments.  The Committee feels that the indigenous development of cryogenic
 engines is critical to the development of our own geostationary satellite launch vehicles.  It expresses full faith on our
 space scientists and hopes that they will accomplish the mission.
GSLV

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
25.       In its maiden test flight on April 18, 2001, GSLV successfully placed a 1540 kg experimental satellite, GSAT-1,
 into Geo-synchronous Transfer orbit.  GSLV is a three-stage vehicle, 49 m tall and weighing 401 tonne at lift-off.
26.       The second test flight, GSLV-D2, is planned in the first half of 2003.  A major milestone during the year towards
 the improvement of GSLV capability was the successful testing of the up-rated version of the liquid propellant Vikas
 engine.  The up-rated version develops higher chamber pressure than in the current version.  This new engine uses UH25
 (a mixture of unsymmetrical Di-methyl Hydrazine and hydrazine hydrate) as fuel and nitrogen tetroxide as
oxidizer.  The new engine has the potential to increase the payload capability of GSLV by about 150 kg in the Geo-
synchronous Transfer Orbit (GTO) and the GSLV-D2 can carry a mass of 1,800 kg in GTO.
27.       All mission related studies/simulations including trajectory design, payload optimization configuration of flame jet
 preventor, thermal analysis, etc, for the second test flight, GSLV-D2 have been completed during the year.
GSLV Mk-III Project
28.       The development of an advanced version of ISRO’s Geo-synchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle, known as GSLV
 Mk-III, which will have a capability to launch four tonne satellites into GTO, was approved during the year.  The
 development is expected to take about six years.  GSLV Mk-III will be a three-stage vehicle with a 110 tonne core liquid
 propellant stage and strap-on stage with two solid propellant motors, each, with 200 tonne propellant.  The upper stage
 will be a cryogenic stage with a propellant loading of 25tonne and will be 42.4 m tall.  The payload fairing will have a
 diameter of 5 metre and a payload volume of 100 cubic metre.
29.       During the year, plans for S-200 motor production, static test and vehicle integration facilities, earth storable and
 cryogenic propellant storage and servicing facility and range instrumentation systems for GSLV Mk-III have been
 completed.  L-110 realisation plan has also been prepared.  C-25 engine and stage development plan, hardware realization
 plan and schedules have also been prepared.
30.       The objective of this Project is to develop a Launch Vehicle capable of launching 4 tonne class communication
 satellites in to GTO. The GSLV Mk–III project was approved in May 2002 at an estimated cost of Rs.2498.00 crores, and
 envisages development of a number of technologies which include 200 tonne solid stage booster, 25 tonne cryogenic
 engines, cluster of two vikas engines as core booster, vehicle characterization, etc. Realisation of the vehicle is targeted in
 about 6-7 years.
31.       The Committee was deeply appreciative of the sincerity of purpose prevailing in the Department and hopes that
 GSLV Mk-III would open new areas of industrial participation including private capital investments.
METSAT (KALPANA-1)
32.            KALPNA-1 is the first in the series of exclusive meteorological satellites built by ISRO. Earlier, meteorological
 services were combined with telecommunication and television services in the INSAT system.  This meteorological
 satellites are named after the Indian born American astronaut Dr. Kalpana Chawla, who died on February 1, 2003 in the
 US Space Shuttle Columbia.  KALPANA-1 is a precursor to the future INSAT system that will have separate satellites for
 meteorology and telecommunication & broadcasting services.  This will enable large capacity to be built into INSAT
 satellites, both in terms of transponders and their radiated power, without the design constraints imposed by
 meteorological instruments, which are also expected to become heavier with advanced features.
33.       For meteorological observation, KALPANA-1 carries a Very High Resolution Radiometer (VHRR) capable of
 imaging the Earth in the visible, thermal infra-red and water vapour bands.  It also carries a Data Relay Transponder
 (DRT) for collecting data from unattended meteorological platforms. KALPANA-1 will relay the data sent by these
 platforms to the meteorological Data Utilisation Centre at New Delhi.  Such platforms have been installed all over the
 country.
34.       At the time of launch, KALPANA-1 weighed 1060 kg, which included about 560 kg of propellant.  The propellant
 carried by Kalpana-1 was mainly required to raise the satellite from the Geosynchronous Transfer Orbit to its final
 Geostationary Orbit.  KALPANA-1 is located at 74 deg. East longitude. 
35.       The main objective of METSAT is to support the India Meteorological Department (IMD) in ensuring
 meteorological data and weather imageries on a continuous basis.  The sanctioned cost of the project is Rs.75.00 crores. 
 (DRT).  Satellite was successfully launched on September 12, 2002, on-board PSLV-C4 and the performance of the
 satellite is satisfactory. 
36.       The Committee hopes that with the launch of METSAT, the input for climatic/numeric weather prediction model
 studies would be better and this would improve the quality of prediction for accurate weather forecasts.

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
GRAMSAT Pilot Projects (GPP)
37.       The GRAMSAT Programmes is an initiative to provide communication networks at the state level, connecting the
 state capitals to districts and blocks.  The networks provide computer connectivity, data and TV broadcasting for applications
 in E-governance, national resource information system, development information, tele-conferencing, disaster management,
 telemedicine and distance education.   The status of implementation of the GPP in various states is as follows:
Madhya Pradesh:  The network comprising the terminals installed under TDCC and JDCP with hub and studio at Bhopal, is
 already functioning.  The nodal agency is MPAA/Govt. of Madhya Pradesh.  In Gujarat the network is operational with hub
 at Gandhinagar.  More than 360 ITPs have been conducted.  In addition, the network is also utilised for connecting the
 engineering colleges on a daily basis.  The nodal agency is RESECO/Govt. of Gujarat.  In Karnataka the network is
 operational with uplink facility at Mysore.  The ITPs are presently being conducted from Mysore.  In Andhra Pradesh, the
 Government has set up an integrated satellite network (Mana TV) for the purpose of distance education, healthcare and rural
 development.  The network is operational with the hub at Hyderabad.  In Orissa the ITPs are being conducted regularly using
 a  Fly-Away Terminal (FAT) located at Cuttack.  More than 110 ITPs have been conducted.  The network is proposed to be
 upgraded with studio and hub.  The nodal agency is ORSAC/Govt. of Orissa.  In the North Eastern Region twelve Direcet
 Reception Sets (DRS) have been installed at selected locations in the NE states.  The network will soon be made operational
 by NE-SAC.  In Rajasthan a pilot DRS network covering 17 locations of Jhalwad and Baran districts was inaugurated in
 September, 2002.  The total network proposal for the entire state is under planning.  The network proposals for Andaman &
 Nicobar Islands, Himachal Pradesh, Chhatisgarh and Jharkhand are being studied.
38.       The Committee hopes that by the end of the 10
th Plan period the GRAMSAT programme would cover all the rural
 areas of India.  The Committee also hopes that local bodies, district offices and all those involved in planning at the rural
 level would be given the data for their use. Since we have constitutionally guaranteed 33% reservation for women in
 Panchayat bodies the Committee recommends that special focus should be given to women’s development issues through
 GRAMSAT. Lest all this effort goes waste the Committee strongly urges the government to launch a scheme to equip every
 village of the country with the equipment necessary to utilise the service that will be given through GRAMSAT.
LAUNCH VEHICLE INFRASTRUCTURE
39.       The Launch Vehicle Infrastructure at Satish Dhawan Space Centre, SHAR, supported the launch   of  PSLV-C4 
 during  the  year.   The   second  launch  pad  at  SDSC, SHAR  has  made
substantial progress with the completion of the vehicle assembly building.  This project is being executed by Industry on a
 turnkey basis.  Mobile launch pedestal including bogie system erection at site has been completed.  Jet deflector work is in
 progress and  Structural erection for umbilical tower has been completed.  Control system modules have been realized. 
 Most of the civil works, procurement of equipment for propellant servicing and check-out and safety system have been
 completed.  The launch pad is targeted for commissioning during 2003-2004.
40.       The Committee commends the Department for making significant progress in completion of second launch pad and
 hopes that it would be ready for commissioning by the end of this year with out any further delays.
SPACE CAPSULE RECOVERY EQUIPMENT
41.       Space Capsule Recovery Experiment (SRE) envisages development of 500 kg recoverable capsule.  It is intended
 to develop and demonstrate technologies related to conducting microgravity experiments in space, recovery from orbit
 through re-entry into earth’s atmosphere and recovery of the capsule on sea or land. It is proposed to be launched along
 with a passenger through one of the forthcoming launches of PSLV into polar sun-synchronous orbit during 2004/05.  The
 main objective is to carry out micro-gravity experiments in orbit and demonstrate technology of de-boost from orbit for
 re-entry and recovery from sea using floatation system.  Development of basic technologies needed for future Reusable
 launch Vehicles (RLV) is also envisaged.
42.       SRE capsule has four major hardware: aero-thermo structure (ATS), spacecraft platform, declaration and flotation
 system and micro-gravity payloads.  Two micro-gravity experiments – Quasi crystal growth experiment and biomimetic
 material synthesis experiment have been selected. 
43.       The design and development work of SRE is progressing well. The spacecraft design has been completed and the
 procurement action for components and materials has been initiated. The aerothermal studies and the wind tunnel test are
 in progress.  The detailed design for deceleration and flotation system and the recovery module are nearing completion
 and several ground tests like airdrop test, lid plate ejection test, water impact test, etc. for design validation have been
 conducted. The microgravity experiments to be conducted onboard have been identified and the work related to the
 development of experimental packages have also been initiated. The launch of the SRE onboard PSLV-C7 is planned for

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
 2004-05 The sanctioned cost of the project is Rs.46.20 crores.
ISRO-GEO SPHERE BIOSPHERE PROGRAMME
44.       Global climate change is of great concern to the world scientific community UN and many others.  Realising the
 importance of scientific studies to arrive at specific migration strategies for the Indian sub-continent, the Department
 initiated the ISRO Geosphere-Biosphere Programme 10 years back which has contributed significantly in understanding
 various issues related to climate change using space-based and convention systems.  This programme encompasses the
 study of land-air-ocean interaction, past climate, changes in atmospheric composition, aerosols, carbon cycle, bio-mass
 estimation, bio-diversity and other related areas of scientific investigation.  The ISRO-GBP is aimed at using maximum
 data from ISRO’s own satellites.  Data from balloon-borne experiments are also used for studying the climate change
 processes.
45.       ISRO-GBP contributed significantly to Indian Ocean experiments (INDOEX-I) during 1998-1999.  Investigation
 on the aerosol distribution and spatial variability of AOD using the network of observations is continuing.  Satellite
 observations of the regional aerosol loading, aerosol transport and the clear sky aerosol rediative forcing over the oceanic
 areas around the Indian subcontinent are being carried out.  The studies  are being made on the impact of El Nino related
 south Asian forest fires on the regional aerosol distribution over the Indian Ocean.
46.       The Committee hopes that the ISRO-GEO sphere programme would be helpful in predicting, the arrival of
 monsoon with greater precision. It also hopes that the programme would be useful to study the recent phenomenon like
 Asian Brown cloud. 
LUNAR MISSION
47.       In order to promote space exploration, discussions had been held under the auspices of Indian Academy of
 Sciences and Astronautical Society of India to study the feasibility of undertaking an unmanned Lunar Mission.  These
 studies were primarily related to definition of possible scientific objectives, conceptualization of mission including the
 spacecraft and the feasibility of using Indian launch vehicles to place a spacecraft into lunar orbit.  Based on the inputs
 from discussions, ISRO has set up a Lunar Mission Task Force, to study the various possibilities for undertaking a
 scientific mission to the moon.  The National Task Force has submitted its report.  After considering various options, the
 team has recommended that it is feasible to launch a lunar polar orbiter at an altitude of 100 km using the existing
 PSLV/GSLV capabilities of ISRO.  The main objective of such a mission would be to realize the technological goal for
 planetary missions.  In addition, the first lunar mission may have the following scientific objectives:
(i)
                 Preparing a 3-dimensional atlas (with a high spatial and altitude resolution of 5-10m) of regions of
 scientific interest on the moon.
(ii)                Chemical mapping of the entire lunar surface for exploring elemental abundance of Mg. Al, Si, Ca, Fe and
 Ti with a spatial resolution of abut 10km and distribution of high Z elements such as 222Rn, U, Th, etc,
 with a spatial resolution of about 20 km on the lunar surface. At present, the report of the Task Force
 (Study Group) is being examined for further action.
48.       In reply to the Committee Question whether the Department has any plans to send the man to the moon in the near
 future the Committee was informed that the Department of Space has no immediate plan for sending a manned expedition
 to the Moon. However some studies are being carried out to explore the possibility for launching an unmanned lunar
 probe in the near future.
49.       ISRO had constituted a Lunar Mission Study Task Force for considering and making an assessment of the possible
 configuration and feasibility of taking up such a mission. The task force has submitted its report identifying the potential
 scientific objectives of the mission, the payload options, the spacecraft configuration, the launch vehicle requirements and
 the mission related aspects.
50.       In order to review and formulate the recommendations on the Indian Mission to Moon programme based on the
 study group report, Chairman, ISRO/Secretary, DOS has convened a peer review meeting in the first week of April 2003.
 The feedback and recommendations of the review meeting would be used for deciding the further course of action.
51.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that our Space programme is progressing and generating momentum of its
 own to boost the confidence of our space scientists.   These missions if completed successfully will help our space
 programmes take great strides and bring glory to the entire nation.
SPONSORED RESEARCH
52.            Sponsored Research (RESPOND) programme is aimed at strengthening the academic interaction with colleges,
 universities, institutes of technology and research institutions.  The activities supported under RESPOND include (a)

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
 research and development project in space sciences, applications and technology (b) space technology cells (c) space
 science and applications cells (d) space education programmes (e) ISRO chairs and (f) conferences, symposia, publication
 and promotional activities relevant to the Indian space programme.  The sponsored projects are reviewed by DOS.
 RESPOND has enabled establishment of a strong academic and infrastructure base, provided a forum for interaction
 between scientists of DOS and academic institutions and helped generate human resources at the academic institutions to
 support the space programme.
53.       The Committee was informed that during the year, 12 projects under RESPOND were successfully completed. 
 The projects were related to (1) use of remote sensing data for optimum utilization, conservation and development of land,
 mineral and water resources of Rayalaseema region in Andhra Pradesh (2) development and characterization of optical
 fibre amplifiers for communication systems (3) coastal processes off Mangalore Coast through an integrated approach (4)
 metalisation of fabrics as shield against electromagnetic interference (5) study of quasihorizontal and vertical transport of
 air from tropical upper troposphere and stratosphere (6) membrane separation techniques for purification of liquid
 propellants (7) application of fuzzy neural networks to fault diagnosis in rocket engines (8) development of ferro-electric
 ceramic polymer composites for strain sensor applications (9) electrochemical studies on hydrogen electrodes for nickel-
hydrogen batteries (10) development and evaluation of gelled propellant rocket motor (11) preparation and
 characterization of magnesium silicon carbide short fibre metal matrix composites and (12) software for transonic
 dynamic aero-elastic analysis of launch vehicles.
54.       When the Committee asked the Department the reasons for the budgetary allocation of Rs.10.00 crores during the
 current year for the programme and the activities to be carried out, the Department replied that the budgetary allocation
 has been sought to support the following three major activities under the programme:
(i)
                  The R&D projects covering a wide range of topics in Space Sciences.  A total of 94 Research projects involving
 53 Academic institutions / universities are envisaged which have been provided an allocation Rs. 400 lakhs.
(ii)                About 56 Advanced Research projects in selected Space Technology cells at IITs and Six Premier Technology
 Institutions to be carried out with a  Budget of  Rs.400 Lakhs.
(iii)            Support for Conference/Symposia, Seminars, Educational activities such as fellowships, ISRO chairs and
 Publication activities of importance to ISRO projects and programmes have been allocated an amount of Rs.200 Lakhs.
55.         During 2002-2003, 29 new projects and 28 renewals and extensions at the academic institutions and R&D
 institutions, in addition to the 7 Space Technology Cells & 4 Educational
Programme, have been supported. Financial support was also extended to 44 conferences / symposia and other scientific
 publication & promotional activities.
56.       The Committee recommends that apart from initiating the research projects in the academic institutions, the
 Department should develop a mechanism for constant monitoring of the performance of the projects to ensure their timely
 completion.
TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER
57.       There has been a considerable progress in the transfer of technologies by the Department during the year.  Know-
how for eight new technologies has been licensed to private industries for commercialization.  These include technologies
 for Polyurethane Foot, Coaxial Resonator Oscillator (CRO), Polyurethane Sach foot, thin film coating processes, Burst
 Demodulator, Earth station antenna with mono-pulse tracking feed and subreflector and Digital Sound and Data Broadcast
 (DSDB) Receiver for distance education application.
58.       The polyurethane foot technology to manufacture artificial foot prostheses and limbs for the benefit of disabled
 was transferred to a social organization, which will manufacture them in large numbers and make them available to the
 poor and needy amputees.
59.       More technologies in an advanced stage of licensing include; SAW filters and delay lines, EPLD-based Scrambler,
 Descrambler, Differential Encoder and Convolution Encoder, Ku-band Receiver, 15W-SSPA, Instrumented Coin-Tap
 debond detection system and Opto-mechanical assembly for Star Sensor Assemblies.  ISRO is interacting with industries
 for adapting a bonded film lubrication process to meet the requirements of the textile industry.  During the year know-how
 for PARAS Software was licensed to more entrepreneurs to meet the growing market demand.  Software packages
 developed by ISRO for different applications, are also being identified for licensing.
60.       There has been considerable progress in the production of hardware based on the technologies licensed, so far.  The
 opto-electronic apparatus for static and dynamic measurements is being commercialized by the technology transferred. 

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
 Efforts are being made to develop a low cost version of the system to meet the needs of educational institutions.  The
 production of ISROFLEX heaters crossed a major milestone during the year, with the successful completion of batch
 qualification.  Flight worthy heaters were supplied by the film, which  will be used in the GSAT-2.  The recipient of
 OLFEX technology  has set up production facilities and started supplying the product to major users in the country. 
 Similarly a company , to whom Slip Ring technology was transferred, has set up a dedicated facility to undertake different
 types of slip rings.
61.            Production of heat pipes by a private sector company with support from ISRO, is an important achievement of
 the year.  The qualification models of the heat pipes have been produced which have undergone all the qualification tests
 successfully.  Besides these, ISRO’s requirement of propellants and binders HTPB, UDMH/MMH, etc. continue to be
 sourced through industry.
62.       The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department for transfer of technologies to the Industry;
 however, the Committee recommends that the Department should acquire patents of the technologies transferred to
 prevent exploitation.  The Department should assess such technology transfers from the commercial point of view and
 generate the maximum revenue out of it.  The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department is  bringing  in more 
 and  more participation  from  industry in conducting the space programme.  The Committee hopes that through greater
 transfer of technology, participation of industry will be further broadened. 
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
63.       The Committee was informed that the Department is emphasizing working together with other countries and
 international bodies in promoting the development and use of space technology for different applications.  The four major
 facts of international cooperation in which Department is taking part are (a) working with other space agencies in
 programmes of mutual interest, (b) participating in international committees and other forums dealing with space policies
 and coordination of space operations, (c) seeking support from other countries for India’s space activities and (d)
 providing expertise and services to other developing countries in the applications of space technology.
64.       At present, Department of Space and ISRO have formal Memoranda of Understanding (MOU) or Agreement with
 Australia, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Canada, China, EUMETSAT-1, European Space Agency (ESA), France, Germany,
 Hungary, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Mauritius, the Netherlands, Norway, Peru, Russia, Sweden, Syria, Thailand, U.K.,
 Ukraine, and USA.  During the year umbrella MOUs were signed between ISRO and the Brazilian Space Agency (AEB),
 and ISRO and the National Institute for Aeronautics and Space (LAPAN) of Indonesia.  An agreement was also signed
 between ISRO and the Israel Space Agency (ISA).  The MOU between Department of Space (DOS) and the Department
 of Science and Technology (DST) of India and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the
 National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) of USA on co-operation in earth and atmospheric
 sciences was renewed during the year.
65.       A major event of international co-operating during the year was the Space Summit organized in Bangalore as a part
 of the 90
th Indian Science Congress, High level representatives of French Space agency, CNES, European Space Agency,
 the geoinformatics and Space Development Agency (GISTDA) of Thailand, the Malaysian Centre for Remote Sensing
 (MACRES), NASA & NOAA of USA and the US Department of State participated in the summit where they outlined
 their vision on the future trends in space technology and applications.
66.       When the Committee asked the Department about the efforts being made to promote cooperation to launch
 satellites in agreement with other universities abroad, the Department stated that an agreement between Antrix
 Corporation Limited, the commercial arm of the Department of Space and the Nan yang Technological University (NTU),
 Singapore was signed in January, 2003 to launch a 100 kg class microsatellite, X-sat during the year 2005-06, on PSLV.
67.            Necessary technical developments to accommodate wide range of satellites and multiple number of satellites in
 a single launch have been undertaken to increase versatility of our launch vehicles.  The payload capacity of PSLV is
 enhanced from about 1000 Kg to 1400 Kg in sun synchronous orbits.  A number of potential micro and small satellite
 customers around the world are identified and they have been contacted and provided with relevant information on the
 capabilities of our launch vehicles suiting their launch needs.   These include, among others Swedish Space Corporation,
 OHB Systems A.G. Germany, Verhaert Design & Development, N.V. Belgium and Alenia Spazio, Italy.
68.       Antrix has also taken the steps to create greater awareness by advertising in reputed aerospace magazines and
 professional journals and making presentations in prestigious forums like International Astronautical Congresses. 
 Capabilities have also been projected at the exhibitions, including that of Worldspace Congress in USA in 2002.
69.       The Department stated that Indian Remote Sensing Satellite data is being used by 21 countries including USA viz.,
 (1) Argentina, (2) Bhutan, (3) Canada, (4) Ecuador, (5) Europe, (6) Iran, (7) Japan, (8) Kazakhstan, (9) Malaysia, (10)
 Myanmar, (11) Nepal, (12) Oman, (13) Republic of Korea, (14) Russia, (15) Saudi Arabia, (16) Sri Lanka, (17) Taiwan,

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
 (18)  Thailand, (19) UAE, (20) Yemen. 
70.       The international marketing of IRS data is facilitated by a robust network of international ground stations
 established in USA, Germany, Japan, Russia, Republic of Korea, Argentina, UAE, Myanmar, Spain and Iran.  In order to
 undertake worldwide marketing, Antrix has an alliance with Space Imaging, USA, which explores new market
 opportunities to undertake international marketing and to expand commercial operations.
71.       The Department through Antrix Corporation has encouraged development of low cost ground systems in
 cooperation with companies in Russia and Canada for facilitating further expansion of market.  It has also endeavoured to
 promote undertaking of value added services by Indian companies in new markets such as Botswana, Mauritius etc.,
 which will enhance further use of IRS data.
72.       As part of our national program, the Department has undertaken development of state-of-art satellites such as
 Resourcesat & Cartosat, which can provide data with enhanced quality. These data will also be offered to international
 community commercially, which will strengthen our position in the market. 
73.       The Committee feels that India’s expertise in space technology can be further shared with many other developing
 countries. The Department should explore opportunities for launching of more satellites and marketing of remote sensing
 data to many other countries.
74.       The Committee feels that intense competition is on to capture the limited market of space industry and India can
 innovate design concepts for small as well as large payloads and by doing so can offer competitive prices to the interested
 countries for availing of India’s technologies.  The Committee recommends that the Department may explore the
 possibility of developing low cost space technologies which would be useful to developing countries.
TELEMEDICINE
75.       The Committee was informed that  telemedicine is an emerging area where there is a lot of scope to successfully
 apply space technology.  Most of the States are interested to adopt telemedicine practices to extend medical facilities to
 people inhabiting remote and inaccessible areas.  Doctors are showing keen interest to offer their services to patients
 through telemedicine. Tele-medicine mainly consists of customized medical software integrated with computer hardware,
 along with medical diagnostic instruments connected to the commercial VSAT (Very Small Aperture Terminal) at each
 location, which is turn, is linked to a super specialty hospital through satellite.  The medical records of the patient like
 medical images and outputs from medical devices are sent to the specialist, who in-turn study them, diagnose and advice
 on the course of treatment through videoconference with the doctor or a paramedic at patient’s end.  The
specialist could even guide the junior doctor at the patient’s end during a surgery.  Thus the patients in distant and rural
 areas can avail timely consultations of specialists without the ordeal of travelling long distances and spending a large
 amount of money.
76.       DOS undertook tele-medicine demonstrations with the involvement of selected super specialty hospitals located in
 major cities and smaller health centres in remote areas during the year.  They include Tele-medicine links between Port 
 Blair and Car Nicobar and Chennai benefiting the inhabitants of Andaman & Nicobar Islands,  Kavaratti in Laksha
 Dweep linked to Cochin and Karnataka tele-medicine project connecting a specialty hospital for heart care in Banagalore
 with District Hospital at Chamrajanagar and a rural hospital at Sargur in H D Kote taluk.  Apart from these, telemedicine
 facilities were set up in remote areas like Tripura, Assam and Leh. 
77.       The Committee commends the Department for bringing high quality medical care to patients transcending the
 barriers of geography, distance, time and costs.  It believes that this can be a boon for countries like India where the
 majority population lives in remote areas without access to even basic health care.   The Committee however hopes that
 the poor quality of internet/telephone services will not come in the way of effective functioning of telemedicine services.
78.       The Committee also hopes that in the next few years there will be telemedicine kiosks throughout the length and
 breadth of suburban and rural India. It is hoped that the government scheme to provide such kiosks will go hand in hand
 with the spread of telemedicine facility.
DISASTER MANAGEMENT SUPPORT (DMS)
79.       As part of the continuing support to Disaster Management in the country, DOS has initiated several actions towards
 operational use of space data.  The disaster management support programme encompasses following aspects:
Flood Monitoring: Near real-time monitoring of major floods is being continued using data from IRS and RADARSAT. 
 The information generated is being disseminated to State administrations.  They propose to use the digital database for
 generating village level information on flood inundation and affected population.
80.       During the year, recent flood waves of Bihar and Assam were monitored and inundation maps prepared.  These
 maps were disseminated in near real-time (by e-mail) to the Control Room on disaster Management, of the Ministry of
 Home Affairs, Central Water Commission and Relief Commissioners of Bihar and Assam States.  14 States in the country
 (AP, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan,

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
 Tamil Nadu, Uttaranchal, and UP) have been covered under the project .  In addition to state-wise reports, monthly
 summary report for the whole country and information at sub-district level for Karnataka and AP have also been issued.
81.            National Agricultural Drought Assessment and Monitoring (NADAMS): Under the National Agricultural
 Drought  Assessment & Monitoring System, ISRO is using space data to derive normalized vegetation index, which is a
 measure of the vegetation vigour and water stress.  Regular drought assessment reports are being generated and provided
 to State governments.  NADAMS has been providing near real time information on agricultural conditions at district/sub-
district levels on a biweekly/monthly basis through regular issue of bulletins during the kharif season.
82.            Landslide Hazard Zonation Mapping: An atlas containing landslide  hazard and management maps was brought
 out for the pilgrim routes of Himachal Pradesh and Himalays at 1:25,000 scale.  These atlases were supplied to the various
 implementing agencies and user workshops were conducted at Dehra Dun and Shimla for familiarizing them in their use. 
 Also, during the year some validation exercises were conducted using major, actual landslide data and it was found that
 most of these landslides occurred in the high and very high risk zones identified in the atlas.
83.            Communication Support to Disaster Management:  Towards formalizing the ISRO’s support to major disasters
 in terms of emergency communication, a Team of experts has studied the various equipment, coverage required, mode of
 operation, etc, and an action plan has been worked out, identifying the primary nodes, trigger mechanism, requirement of
 equipment, mode of interaction with state Governments, role of NGOs/HAMs, maintenance schedule, etc.  The various
 follow up actions have been identified for implementing the system.
84.            Airborne Survey Facility: To meet the information needs of disaster mitigation in terms of flood-plain zoning
 and damage assessment, an airborne survey facility is planned to be set up in NRSA, consisting of Airborne Laser Terrain
 Mapping system (ALTM) and Digital Camera.  Actions have been initiated to procure suitable systems.
85.       Digital Database Creation: One of the critical requirements to provide spatial information on floods and other
 disasters is the availability of digital database.  A Technical Committee has worked out the database requirements in terms
 of themes, spatial scale, updating cycle, methodology and priority districts.  Based on these inputs, a major project has
 been formulated to create digital database for selected districts in five states on a priority basis.  The project is being
 carried out with support from RRSSC’s, State Centres and NRSA.  Work for nine districts in Assam has been completed.
86.            International Charter on Space & Major Disasters:   As a follow-up to signing the international Charter on Space
 & Major Disasters, which was initiated by major space agencies in August 2001, ISRO is taking several steps to
 participate in the Charter effectively.  Personnel were identified from various ISRO Centres to support the Charter.  After
 successful completion of the Qualification Exercise in August 2002, ISRO has been operationally integrated to the
 Charter.  For realizing this goal, necessary capacity building measures such as digital database creation, close contour data
 using airborne laser terrain mapper, airborne Synthetic Aperture Radar development, querry shell development, etc. have
 been initiated.  Besides coordination with the user departments have been further strengthened.
87.       The Committee feels that the remote sensing data is not being used to its full potential. With regard, to the
 landslide hazard zonation, the Committee feels that standardized landslide inventory maps would be helpful. Besides,
 accurate slope stability studies  may be made by using space technology so as to understand the possible locations where
 landslides could occur.  The Committee feels that special attention should be given to North-East and Uttaranchal where
 landslides during rainy season block roads for days together. An internet image transferring system may be of help for
 local bodies and relief agencies for emergency response in affected areas.
NATIONAL NATURAL RESOURCES MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
88.       When the Committee asked the Department to explain the higher allocation of Rs.54.80 crores on National Natural
 Resources Management system for  the year 2003-04 and the activities
planned or proposed to be carried out with the enhanced budgetary support, the Department replied that the proposed
 increase during BE 2003-04, is primarily towards the new activities identified in the 10
th five year plan such as the
 periodic conduct of Natural Resources Census (NRC) and establishment of the National Spatial Data Infrastructure
 (NSDI) in the country as well as for Large Scale Mapping activities.
89.       The inventory and the monitoring of the natural resources of the nation on a periodical basis planned under the
 Natural Resources Census is expected to lead to the generation of a ‘State of the Country’s Environment Report’. The
 NRC will also lead to the identification of Natural Resources Hotspots that are a cause for concern and which need urgent
 conservation / management actions.
90.       The NSDI at the national level is envisaged as a spatial data infrastructure encompassing various national map
 holdings of survey agencies and also satellite images and would, thus, be a standardised national repository of spatial

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
 information for decision making.  With the availability of high-resolution satellite imageries, it is also planned to take up
 Large Scale Mapping for meeting the basic needs of large-scale maps for implementation of developmental plans in the
 country.  It is envisaged that the above activities will enable maximising the outreach of the natural resources information
 in support of various developmental efforts of the Government, industry and the voluntary agencies.         
91.       The Committee is of the opinion that a periodic census of the available natural resources would help assessing the
 utilization of such resources so as to formulate a plan for sustainable development.
NORTH EAST SPACE APPLICATION CENTRE.
92.       The North Eastern Space Applications Centre (NE-SAC) aims to provide developmental support to the region by
 undertaking projects in remote sensing and satellite communications.  The Space application activities undertaken by NE-
SAC include Deforestation study of Sonitpur District in Assam, Bamboo resource mapping for Meghalaya, Erosion hazard
 assessment in catchment area of Umiam Hydel Project, Meghalaya , Decision support system for early warning of
 outbreak of Japanese Encephalitis in Dibrugarh District, Assam , Forest working plan preparation for East Assam Forest
 Circle, Brahmaputra river channel changes study to identify stable river islands (char) and locations for flood control
 measures, Providing flood inundation coverage map in near real-time for damage assessment, Identification of areas for
 extending cashew nut crop in East Garo Hills District of Meghalaya under Technology Mission for Integrated
 Development of Horticulture in NER, Supporting the development of the database on National Resource Information
 System (NRIS) which will be an important tool for developmental planning in the region, Installation of Data Receiving
 Systems (DRS)  in selected places for experimental telecast of programmes on the development of the region, Connecting
 Guwahati Medical College Hospital to All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi through the satellite
 for telemedicine services (nearing completion).
93.       The Committee appreciates the Department for undertaking projects in the North-East, which merits concentrated
 attention. The Committee hopes that bamboo resource mapping, erosion hazard assessment etc would cover the whole of
 the Northeast so that the data could be used for meaningful  planning for development.
94.       The Committee is of the view that India is emerging as a water stressed country with millions of  its  people 
 without  access to safe drinking water.  The Committee deeply
Appreciates that the Department has applied Space Technology to prepare 1500 maps in respect of six States for the
 purpose of ground water exploration.  While the Committee notes that the Department is mapping for few of the States it
 recommends strongly that such efforts of the Department must be extended to all States, giving special priority to those
 which have been severely affected by drought and shortage of rainfall.
95.       The Committee notes that the Department is proposing to prepare National Resource Information System in Nine
 states.  Earlier the Department had set up such a system in 30 districts in different States.  The Committee recommends
 that such systems beestablished as soon as possible in all the States of the country to enable the Government, people and
 larger civil society to have access to such information for national development.
96.       The Committee takes note of the large-scale developmental activities undertaken by the Government agencies
 throughout the length and breadth of the country.  The Committee feels that Space Technology should not only be used as
 an input and a strategy for development but also for monitoring the developmental work.  Therefore, the Committee
 strongly recommends that the application of space technology should be made an integral element in assessing and
 monitoring the success and effectiveness of various developmental schemes being implemented in the country.  The
 Committee feels that the Governments both at Union and State levels must take the help of the Department in making this
 possible.  The States need to be educated about the potential available in this direction through the efforts of  the
 Department of Space.
97.
              After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Space and assessing the progress of various
 programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of
 Rs.2368.47 crores, as sought by the Department of Space for the year 2003-2004, under Demand No.86, may
 be approved. 
 
SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS
 
1.         The Committee congratulates the Department for the successful launch of the INSAT-3A and records its
 appreciation for the abilities and talents of our scientists who have further enhanced the glory of our nation through this
 splendid performance.  The Committee hopes that the other satellites in the INSAT series would be launched as planned
 without any cost escalation.  Proven abilities of our scientists have now to be used to develop the cryogenic technology
 which has been subjected to many experiments.  The Committee feels that the indigenous development of cryogenic
 engines is critical to the development of our own geostationary satellite launch vehicles.  It expresses full faith on our
 space scientists and hopes that they will accomplish the mission.
(Para 23)

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
 2.        The Committee was deeply appreciative of the sincerity of purpose prevailing in the Department and hopes that
 GSLV Mk-III would open new areas of industrial participation including private capital investments.
(Para 31)
3.         The Committee hopes that with the launch of METSAT, the input for climatic/numeric weather prediction model
 studies would be better and this would improve the quality of prediction for an accurate weather forecasts.
(Para 36)
4.         The Committee hopes that by the end of 10 th Plan period the GRAMSAT programme would cover all the rural
 areas of country.  The Committee also hopes that local bodies, district offices and all those involved in planning at the
 rural level would be given the data for the use.   Since we have constitutionally guaranteed 33% reservation for women in
 Panchayat bodies the Committee recommends special focus may be given to women’s issues through GRAMSAT. Lest
 all this effort goes waste the Committee strongly urges the government to launch a scheme to equip every village of the
 country with the equipment necessary to utilise the service that will be given through GRAMSAT.
(Para 38)
5.         TheCommittee commends the Department for making significant progress in completion of second launch pad and
 hopes that it would be ready for commissioning by the end of this year with out any further delays.
(Para 40)
6.         The Committee hopes that the ISRO-GEO sphere programme would be helpful in predicting, the arrival of
 monsoon with greater precision. It also hopes that the programme would be useful to study the recent phenomenon like
 Asian Brown cloud. 
 (Para 46)
7.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that our Space programme is progressive and generating momentum of its
 own so as to boost up the confidence of our space scientists to reach out to the extra terrestrial bodies. Such missions if
 completed successfully will be helpful to our space programmes and bring greater glory to the entire nation. 
(Para 51)
 
8.         The Committee recommends that apart from initiating the research projects in the academic institutions, the
 Department should develop a mechanism for constant monitoring of the performance of the projects to ensure their timely
 completion.
(Para 56)
9.         The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department in transfer of technologies to the Industry;
 however, the Committee recommends that the Department should acquire patents of the technologies transferred to
 prevent exploitation.  The Department should assess such technology transfers from the commercial point of view and
 generate the maximum revenue out of it.  The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department is bringing in more
 and more participation from industry in conducting the space programme. The Committee hopes that through greater
 transfer of technology, participation of industry can be further broadened. 
(Para 62)
10.       The Committee feels that India’s expertise in space technology can be further shared with many other developing
 countries. The Department should explore opportunities for launching of more satellites and marketing of remote sensing
 data to many other countries.
(Para 73)
11.       The Committee feels that intense competition is on to capture the limited market of space industry and India can
 innovate and design concepts for small as well as large payloads and by doing so can offer competitive prices to the
 interested countries for availing of India’s technologies.  The Committee recommends that the Department may explore
 the possibility of developing low cost space technologies which would be useful to developing countries.
 (Para 74)
12.       The Committee commends the Department for bringing high quality medical care to patients transcending the
 barriers of geography, distance, time and costs.  It believes that this can be a boon for countries like India where the
 majority of population lives in remote areas without access to even basic health care.   The Committee hopes that the poor
 quality of internet/telephone services should not come in the way of effective functioning of telemedicine services.

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
(Para 77)
14.       The Committee hopes that in the  next few years there will be telemedicine kiosks throughout the length and
 breadth of suburban and rural India. It is hoped that government scheme to provide such kiosks will go in hand in hand
 with the spread of telemedicine facility.
(Para 78)
15.       The Committee feels that the remote sensing data is not being used to its full potential. With regard, to the
 landslide hazard zonation, the Committee feels that standardized landslide inventory maps may be helpful. Besides,
 accurate slope stability studies  may be made by using  space technology  so  as to understand the possible locations
 
where landslides could occur.  The Committee feels that special attention may be given to North-East and Uttaranchal
 where landslides during rainy season block roads for days together. An internet image transferring system may be of help
 for local bodies and relief agencies for emergency response in affected areas.
(Para 87)
16.       The Committee is of the opinion that a periodic census of the available natural resources would help assessing the
 utilization of such resources so as to formulate a plan for sustainable development.
(Para 91)
17.       The Committee appreciates the Department for undertaking projects in North-East, which merits concentrated
 attention. The Committee hopes that bamboo resource mapping, erosion hazard assessment etc would cover the whole of
 the Northeast so that the data could be used for a meaningful  planning for development.
(Para 93)
18.       The Committee is of the view that India is emerging as a water stressed country with millions of its people without
 access to safe drinking water.  The Committee deeply appreciates that the Department has applied Space Technology to
 prepare 1500 maps in respect of six States for the purpose of ground water exploration.  While the Committee notes that
 the Department is mapping for few of the States it recommends strongly that such efforts of the Department must be
 extended to all States, giving special priority to  those which have been severely affected by  drought and shortage of
 rainfall.
(Para 94)
19.       The Committee notes that the Department is proposing to prepare National Resource Information System in Nine
 states.  Earlier the Department had set up such a system in 30 districts in different States.  The Committee recommends
 that such systems be established as soon as possible in all the States of the country to enable the Government, people and
 larger civil society to have access to such information for national development.
(Para 95)
20.       The Committee takes note of the large scale developmental activities undertaken by the Government agencies
 throughout the length and breadth of the country.  The Committee felt that Space Technology should not only be used as
 an input and a strategy for development but also for monitoring the developmental work.  Therefore, the Committee
 strongly recommends that  the application of space technology should be made an integral element in assessing and
 monitoring the success and effectiveness of various developmental schemes being implemented in the country.  The
 Committee feels that the Governments both at Union and State levels must take the help of the Department in making it a
 success. The States need to be educated about the potential available in this direction through the efforts of Department of
 Space. 
(Para 96)
 
21.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Space and assessing the progress of various
 programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs.2368.47
 crores, as sought by the Department of Space for the year 2003-2004, under Demand No.86, may be approved. 
(Para 97)
ANNEXURE
ANNEXURE - II
REVISED ESTIMATE S 2002-03 AND BUDGET ESTIMATES 2003-04

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
(Rs. in Crores)
SL. PROGRAMMES/PROJECTS BUDGET REVISED BUDGET
NO.  2002-03 2002-03 2003-04
 (A)       SPACE TECHNOLOGY    
I LAUNCH VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY    
1 Geo-Synchronous Satellite Launch    
Vehicle (GSLV) Project
101.13 85.13 70.00
2 Cryogenic Upper Stage  (CUS) Project                      16.38 19.38 16.70
3 PSLV-Continuation Project 60.28 64.00 67.00
4 GSLV MK-III Development 180.00 175.00        280.00
5 Space Capsule Recovery Experiment 20.00 8.65 31.43
6 GSLV-Continuation             25.00 34.80 100.00
7 Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC) 176.79 174.15 173.55
8 ISRO Inertial Systems  Unit (IISU)
                      
   10.13 10.51 11.79
9 Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre (LPSC)                73.90 69.20 78.99
 Sub-total-I       663.61  640.82 829.46
 II SATELLITE TECHNOLOGY    
10. IRS-P5 (Cartosat) 17.20 30.54 10.41
11. IRS-P6 (Resourcesat)                17.00 17.64 10.43
12. IRS-IIA(Cartosat-2) 60.56 48.38 76.49
13. IRS-II B/C (Oceansat-2/ Resourcesat-2)           5.00   0.00 20.00
14. G.SAT-2 10.00 13.00 10.00
15. G.SAT-3(Edusat) 10.00 7.00 75.00
16. G.SAT-4 0.00 0.00 25.00
17. METSAT 35.00 30.00 5.00
18. RISAT-1 30.00         0.00    50.00
19. ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC)            104.40 94.06 152.35
20. Laboratory for Electro Optics Systems (LEOS) 14.19 12.42   10.44
 Sub-total-II 303.35 253.04 445.12
     
LAUNCH SUPPORT, TRACKING NETWORK & RANGE FACILITIES
21. Satish Dhawan Space Centre SHAR     101.34 111.31 123.39
22. ISRO Telemetry, Tracking & Command Network
 (ISTRAC)             
35.27 36.16 34.79
23. Second Launch Pad & Common Facilities 45.00 70.00 20.47
24. Radar Development Cell                        1.58 1.22                       
                            
1.13
 Sub-total-III 183.19 218.69    179.78
 TOTAL : (A) – SPACE TECHNOLOGY 1150.15            1112.55             1454.36
                                                                                        
                       
  (B)  
            SPACE APPLICATIONS    
1 Space Applications Centre (SAC) 112.48 100.33 116.98
2 Development & Educational Communication Unit
 (DECU)
34.92   17.55   37.73
3 Remote Sensing Applications Mission (RSAM) 8.10 5.32 8.00
4 National Natural Resources Management System
 (NNRMS)
40.13 26.63   54.80
5 Regional Remote Sensing Service Centres
 (RRSSCs)
5.70     5.66 5.67
6 National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) 10.02 10.02 9.02
7 North Eastern Space Application Centre 5.00 5.00 5.00
8 Disaster Management Support 10.00 2.80 10.00
 Total-B: Space Application 226.35 173.31 247.20
(C) SPACE SCIENCES    

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
1 Physical Research Laboratory(PRL)         2.50 2.30 3.90
2 ISRO Geosphere-Biosphere Programme 16.40 2.15 28.15
3 Sensor Development 5.35 2.13 5.20
4 Megha Tropiques Project 0.00 0.00 10.00
5 Astrosat    
6 National MST Radar Facility(NMRF) 2.98 2.98 3.50
7 Sponsored Research (RESPOND)         8.00   7.00 10.00
8 Other Schemes 7.70 5.70 4.31
 TOTAL :(C)-SPACE SCIENCES                      69.45       48.89      94.97              
(D) DIRECTION & ADMINISTRATION/
 OTHER PROGRAMMES
   
1 Department of Space (DOS)   3.85 4.03 4.15
2 Indian Space Research  
Organisation (ISRO)Headquarters                 
14.00 14.69 14.50
3 Civil Engineering Division (CED)          14.25 13.72 14.16
4 International Cooperation                  4.40 2.90   4.40
5 Others 26.46 13.17 33.60
 TOTAL:(D)  - DIRECTION &
 ADMINISTRATION/OTHER
62.96                48.51            70.81
 PROGRAMMES    
(E) INSAT OPERATIONAL    
1 INSAT-3 Satellites 194.70 194.59 175.00 
2 INSAT-3 Launch Services 100.00 14.00 100.00
3 INSAT -4 Satellites 100.00 50.00 150.00
4 INSAT –4 Launch Services 335.00 496.27 35.00
5 Master Control Facility (MCF) 26.38 27.31 41.55
 TOTAL: (E) – INSAT OPERATIONAL 756.08 782.17         501.55
 GRAND TOTAL : GROSS 2264.99                2165.43                  2368.89
                                                                                
 
MINUTES
 I
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 1 st April, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
           
PRESENT
 
1. Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
3. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
4. Shri B.P. Singhal
5. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
6. Smt. S. G. Indira
7. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
8. Shri T. S. Bajwa
9. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
LOK  SABHA
10. Smt. Margaret Alva

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
11. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                     
12. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
13. Chowdhary Talib Hussain
14. Shri C. Kuppusami
15. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
16. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
17. Shri Suresh Pasi                                         
18. Dr. Ashok Patel                                        
19. Shri Prahlad Patel    
20. Shri Shriniwas Patil
21. Prof. R. R. Pramanik                                
22. Shri Ganta Sreenivasa Rao
23. Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
24. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
25. Shri Balram Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT         
                        Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
                        Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
                        Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIO-TECHNOLOGY
1.
      Dr. (Mrs.) Manju Sharma, Secretary
2.      Dr. V. K. Vinayak, Adviser
3.      Dr. S. N. Natesh, SG
4.      Dr. V. P. Gupta, SG
5.      Dr. (Mrs.) Seema Wahab, SG
6.      Dr. K. K. Tripathi, SG
7.      Shri Arun Sharma, JS & FA
8.      Shri S. L. Bhat, JS
9.      Shri Ajay Kumar, Director
10.  Shri M. P. Banga, DS
11.  Dr. (Ms) Kana Talukdar, DS
12.  Dr. (Ms.) Renu Swarup, SF
13.  Dr. K. S. Charak, SF
14.  Dr. S. R. Rao, SF
15.  Dr. Mohd. Aslam, SE
16.  Shri Sham Lal, US
17.  Shri K. K. Khattar, US
18.  Shri O. P. Rastogi, US
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT 
1.      Dr. Harsh K. Gupta, Secretary
2.      Shri D. P. Singh, AS & Financial Adviser
3.      Shri S. K. Das, Scientist
4.      Dr. B. R. Subramaniam, Scientist
5.      Shri V. Ravindranathan, Scientist
6.      Shri Ajai Saxena, Director
7.      Dr. V. Sampath, Scientist
8.      Prof. M. Ravindran, Director, NIOT
9.      Dr. K. Radhakrishnan, Director, INCOIS, Hyderabad
10.  Shri R. K. Sharma, Scientist
11.  Shri Rakesh Kumar, DS
  

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
12. Dr. M. P. Wakidikar, Scientist
13.  Dr. K. Somasundar, Scientist
14.  Shri P. Madeswaran, Scientist
15.  Shri K. V. Sharma, Scientist
16.  Dr. S. Rajan, Scientist, NCAOR
17.  Dr. S.A.S. Naqvi, Scientist
18.  Shri A. B. Chaudhury, Scientist
19.  Shri K. Narayanan, US
20.  Shri B. L. Kureel, US
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM OTHER OFFICES/ORGANISATIONS
 
1.      Dr. R. R. Kelkar, DG, Indian Meteorological Department, New Delhi
2.      Shri P. C. Mandal, DG, GSI, Kolkata
3.      Dr. M. D. Zingde, Scientist-in-charge, Regional Centre for NIO, Mumbai
4.      Dr. E. Desa, Director NIO, Gao
5.      Dr. C. M. Gupta, Director, CPCB, Lucknow
6.      Shri R. C. Trivedi, AD, CPCB, New Delhi
7.      Shri P. K. Sen, GM, EIL, New Delhi
 
2.         At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the Department of Bio-technology
 and requested them to make a brief presentation on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department.  The Secretary
 made visual presentation on the activities and achievements of the Department of Bio-technology and briefly explained
 the budgetary allocations on different heads as also the functioning of the Department.
3.   The Secretary requested the Committee to recommend more budgetary allocation especially in the non-plan side to
 take care of the requirements of the demands of the Institutes/Organisations under the Department. She also pointed out
 that during the year 2002-2003 at R.E stage, a drastic cut was made on the allocations of the Department which hampered
 the progress of its scientific activities.  Then, the Committee decided to meet Finance Minister to impress upon him to
 make more financial allocation for the Scientific Departments and not to reduce plan allocations at R.E stage. 
4.   Thereafter, Members sought clarifications on points relating to the Demands for Grants of the Department.  The
 Committee also decided to hold a separate meeting to understand and assess the policies and achievements of the
 Department and the institutions under its control.
            The witnesses then withdrew.
5.         The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 02.00 P.M. for lunch and re-assembled at 3.00 P.M. to hear the Secretary,
 Department of Ocean Development.
6.         The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Department of Ocean Development. Chairman then
 requested the Secretary to make a brief presentation regarding the Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department. 
 Thereafter, the Secretary made a visual presentation regarding the major activities and achievements of the Department.  The
 Secretary also explained briefly the budgetary allocations on different heads as also the functioning of the Department. 
 Thereafter Members sought clarifications on the points that emerged out of the presentation of the Secretary.  The Secretary
 replied to the questions.
                        The witnesses then withdrew.
            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 05.30 P.M.
 
 
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 23
rd April, 2003 in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
           
                  PRESENT
 
1. Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
3. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
4. Shri B.P. Singhal
5. Smt. S. G. Indira
6. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
7. Shri Lalit Suri
8. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
       
         LOK  SABHA
9. Smt. Margaret Alva
10. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
11. Chowdhary Talib Hussain
12. Shri G.J.Javiya
13. Shri C. Kuppusami
14. Shri S. Murugesan
15. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
16. Shri Naresh Puglia
17. Prof. I. G. Sanadi
18. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
 
SECRETARIAT
                       
                        Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
                        Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
                        Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee considered the draft 112
th Report pertaining to Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of the Ministry of
 Environment & Forests.   A Member of the Committee, Shri B.P. Singhal, has suggested some amendments in the report. 
 While discussing the recommendations on Ganga Action Plan in the report, some members raised the issue of proper
 monitoring system of the Action Plan.  Accordingly, the Committee constituted a Two-member Core Group comprising of
 Shri B.P. Singhal and Shri Lalit Suri to monitor the implementation of Ganga Action Plan (GAP).
            After some discussion, the Committee directed the Secretariat to incorporate the suggestions made by Shri Singhal
 in all the reports on Demands for Grants.  The Committee also requested three of its Members, Shri Manoj Bhattacharya,
 Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’Souza and Smt. Margaret Alva, to go through the reports to suggest further amendments, if any.  The
 Committee decided to meet for consideration and adoption of the reports after these were received from the above
 Members.
3.         The Committee also decided to send a congratulatory letter to Shri K. Kasturirangan, Secretary, Department of
 Space and his team of scientists on the successful launch of India’s communication and meteorological satellite INSAT-
3A on 10
th April, 2003.
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 04.00 P.M.
 
 
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
     
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 29 th April, 2003 in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
           
                  PRESENT
 
1. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya   –– In the Chair*
 
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C. Apok Jamir
3. Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
4. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharma
5. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
6. Shri B.P. Singhal
7. Shri T. S. Bajwa
8. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
       
          LOK  SABHA
9. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
10. Shri G. J. Javiya
11. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
12. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
13. Shri Suresh Pasi
14. Prof. I. G. Sanadi
15. Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
16. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
17. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
 
SECRETARIAT
                       
                        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
                        Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
                        Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
2.   The Committee took up consideration of Draft 112
th, 113th, 114th, 115th, 116th and 117th Reports of the Committee on
 Demands for Grants (2003-2004) pertaining to Ministry of Environment & Forests, Department  of  Scientific  & 
 Industrial  Research, Department of Space, Department of Ocean Development, Department of Biotechnology and
 Department of Science & Technology respectively.  The Committee considered and adopted each of the above reports.
 ____________________________________________________________________________
* In the absence of Chairman, Shri Manoj Bhattacharya was voted to the Chair.
 
 
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri Manoj Bhattacharya and Shri B. P. Singhal to
 present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Charan Das Mahant and in his absence Shri Suresh Pasi  to lay the Reports on
 the table of the Lok Sabha.
4.         The Committee placed on record its deepest appreciation for the officers and staff attached with the Committee for
 their painstaking effort in drafting quality reports. It further referred to the style of writing of the Reports and noted that these
 blended substantive information on science and environment with literature.
5.         Thereafter, the Committee decided to undertake a study visit, tentatively in the month of June 2003, to different
 institutes / bodies / centers etc., within the administrative control of the Ministries / Departments falling under the purview
 of the Committee to acquaint itself with their working and problems being faced by them.  It was also decided that while
 in the first phase, the Committee would visit Srinagar & Leh, in the second phase it would visit Delhi, Gurgoan &
 Dehradun. The Committee also directed that detailed tour programme may also be chalked out for subsequent approval by

ONE HUNDRED-FOURTEENTH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/114threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:24:49]
 the Committee.
6.         The Committee then adjourned at 03.30 P.M.
 