PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA     177 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE & 
TECHNOLOGY,  
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY - SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED 
SIXTY SECOND REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON 
DRUGS & 
PHARMACEUTICALS RESEARCH PROGRAMME 
INCLUDING HERBAL MEDICINES 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 27TH NOVEMBER, 2007) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON THE 27TH NOVEMBER, 
2007) 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
NOVEMBER, 2007/AGRAHAYANA, 1929 (SAKA) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY,  
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY - SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED SIXTY 
SECOND REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON 
DRUGS & 
PHARMACEUTICALS RESEARCH PROGRAMME 
INCLUDING HERBAL MEDICINES 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 27TH NOVEMBER, 2007) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON THE 27TH NOVEMBER, 2007) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
NOVEMBER, 2007/AGRAHAYANA, 1929 (SAKA) 
 
 

CONTENTS 
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE....................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................... (iii) 
3. R EPORT OF THE COMMITTEE .............................................................................................. 1-26 
4. M INUTES OF THE MEETING ................................................................................................ 27-32 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY,  
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS (2007-08) 
 1.  Dr. V. Maitreyan   ––   Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2.  Dr.Prabha Thakur 
 3.  Shri Sury akantbhai Acharya 
 4.  Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
 5.  Shri Kamal Akhtar 
 6.  Shri Saman Pathak 
 7.  Shri Jabir Husain 
 8.  Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
 9.  Dr. Barun Mukherjee 
 *10.  Shri D. Raja 
  LOK  SABHA 
 11.  Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad  
 12.  Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
 13.  Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
 14.  Shri Pankaj Chowdhary 
 15.  Shri Francis Fanthome 
 16.  Shri Babubhai K. Katara 
 17.  Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
 18.  Shri Brahmananda Panda 
 19.  Shrimati Neeta Pateriya 
 20.  Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil  
 21.  Shri Pratik Prakashbapu Patil  
 22.  Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat  
 23.  Shri K. C. Singh “Baba” 
 24.  Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
 25.  Shri Rakesh Singh 
 26.  Shri Rampal Singh 
 27.  Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar 
 28.  Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli  
 29.  Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
 30.  Shri Mitrasen Yadav 
 31.  Shri Sita Ram Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary  
  Shri S. Jason, Joint Director 
  Shri V.S.P. Singh, Deputy Director  
  Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & 
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report 
on its behalf, present this One Hundred Seve nty-seventh Report on the Action Taken by the 
Department of Science & Technology on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred Sixty-
second Report of the Committee on Drugs & Pharmaceu ticals Research Programme including Herbal 
Medicines. 
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Science & 
Technology on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred Sixty-second Report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Comm ittee on Science & Technology, Environment & 
Forests, which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 14
th December, 2006. 
3.  There were thirty-one recommendations contained in the One Hundred Sixty-second Report of 
the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the reco mmendations of the Committee were received from 
the Ministry on 8th May, 2007. 
4.  In the meeting held on 15th November, 2007, the Committee considered the draft Action Taken 
Report and adopted the same. 
 
 
 
DR. V. MAITREYAN 
NEW DELHI ;                   C h a i r m a n ,  
November 15, 2007 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
   on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
 The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Science and 
Technology on the Recommendations contained in the One Hundred Sixty-second Report of the 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Comm ittee on Science & Technology, Environment & 
Forests on the Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Resear ch Programme including Herbal Medicines, 
presented to both Houses of Parliament on 14th December, 2006. There were thirty-one 
Recommendations in the Report. Action Taken No te on those Recommendations was received from 
the Department on 8th May, 2007. 
 The Committee’s Recommendations, Action Taken thereon by the Department of Science & 
Technology, and comments of the Committee thereon are set out in the succeeding paragraphs:– 
1. Recommendation  
 The Committee is of the opinion that central focu s of drug research should be to develop drugs 
mainly to fight common diseases like tuberculosis, le prosy, kala-azar, malaria, diarrhoea, dysentery, 
stress related disorders, thoracic diseases, cholera, etc., particularly prevalent among poorer sections 
of society lacking purchasing power. The Committee feels that strategic public investment by 
Government in the field will be the right answer since such investment in drugs will primarily be 
undertaken with the objective of providing drugs to the poor at low cost without profit motive. (Para 8.1) 
Action Taken by the Department 
 Various Ministries / De partments / Agencies of Government of India like DST, DBT, AYUSH, 
ICMR and CSIR are actively involved in drug resear ch with a focus on development of drugs to fight 
the common diseases. For example, the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has set up its 
research priority on all diseases relevant to th e people of India which includes both communicable 
diseases as well as life style chronic diseases. Th e Council is also interacting with a number of 
industries and international agencies with regard to access of the drugs to the economically weaker 
sections of the society of the country. 
 Diseases like Malaria, “Filaria, Urinary prob lems, Memory disorders and health problems 
commonly affecting poor people are included in th e list of gap areas identified for research and 
development of Ayurvedic medicines under Golden  Triangle Partnership (GTP) scheme of AYUSH 
CSIR laboratories, notably CDRI, Lucknow, NCB, Kolkata focused themselves for the past many 
years on developing drugs for tropical, infectious and other common diseases. During the Tenth Plan 
period CSIR has initiated programmes related to Drug Development for common parasitic diseases 
and microbial infections covering Malaria, Filaria, Leishmaniasis, Kala-azar, Tuberculosis etc. which 
would continue as priority programmes during IXth Plan also. DBT has given emphasis on 
development of newer drugs and biomolecules and accordingly R&D projects have been initiated 
towards development of new drugs for HIV / AIDS, ka la-azar, tuberculosis, malaria, cancer etc. The 
Department has recently supported two Virtual Centres of Excellence in tuberculosis research. The 
DBT has launched a collaborative effort with ICMR towards development of novel microbicides 

targeting HIV / AIDS and other STDs. A novel antimalarial compound has been transferred to M/s 
Shreya Life Sciences, Mumbai by National Centre for Cell Sciences (NCCS), Pune. 
 Under the Drugs & Pharmaceuticals research programme of DST projects have been sanctioned 
for development of new anti-tubercular compounds, novel anti-cancer agents, development of 
potential adjuvants for Vaccines, new chemical entities as potential anti-fungal agents, novel anti-
asthma agents, Evaluation of the toxicity and Anti Leishmanial efficacy of Liposomal Amphotericin-B 
(KALSOME). 
Comments 
 The Committee notes that CSIR laboratories have focussed themselves on developing drugs 
for common diseases covering Malaria, Filaria,  Kala-azar, Tuberculosis, Cancer, Asthma, etc. 
which mostly affect the poorer sections of the society. 
2. Recommendation  
 During the course of evidence, the Committee has been informed by the Secretaries of 
Departments of Biotechnology and Scientific and Industrial Research that despite India being a low 
cost hub for drug development, drugs remain unaffordable by the poor. This requires further 
intervention by the Government.         (Para 8.2) 
Action Taken by the Government 
 Government is making constant efforts to enhanc e accessibility of drugs to the poor. In order to 
make Ayurvedic, Siddha, Unani & Homoeopathic Medicines freely available in the State dispensaries, 
the Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has implemented a Centrally 
Sponsored Scheme through which States are supported @ Rs. 25,000/- per dispensary per year for 
supply of essential medicines to AYUSH dispensaries . The rate of support for supply of essential 
medicines to State dispensaries is proposed to be enhanced from Rs.25,000 to Rs.50,000 per 
dispensary per year by AYUSH. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and its Departments have 
come out with a number of schemes to facilitate access to drugs for the poor population. The National 
Rural Health Mission envisages availability of essential drugs at the primary health centers. 
Comments 
 The Committee takes note of the reply but feels that Medicines provided to State 
dispensaries are grossly inadequate. Even the su m of Rs. 50,000 per dispensary per year, which 
is proposed is insufficient keep ing in view the rising cost of basic medicines and increase in 
population. The Committee would like the Department to be  more realistic so that the efforts 
which are being made by them to enhance ac cessibility of drugs to the poor address the 
requirements. 
3. Recommendation 
 The Committee also notes that major chronic dis eases like blood pressure, diabetes, asthma etc. 
have treatments in the nature of control and not cure. With the growing incidence of young population 

getting affected by such life style diseases and the continuation of life-long medication to control such 
diseases, the Committee, even while recognizing the complexity of the affliction, is of the view that 
we should start looking for cures, keeping in mind the increasing number of such patients, their 
decreasing quality of life and the side-effects of the medicines. (Para 8.3) 
Action Taken by the Government 
 Various concerned Ministries / Departments of Government of India are actively involved in 
R&D in the pharmaceuticals sector including herbal  medicines for development of drugs for chronic 
diseases like blood pressure, diabetes, asthma etc. As a result, a number of projects have been 
mounted related to R&D for development of drugs for chronic diseases like blood pressure, diabetes, 
asthma etc. besides the drugs for life style diseas es like Cancer, Diabetes, Gastric Ulcer, Dementia 
etc., As of now 28 new IND molecules developed within the country are undergoing Phase-I Clinical 
trials. There are also efforts to validate treatment from Traditional Systems of Medicine so that cost 
effective therapy with minimum or no side effects ca n be made available to the people, As there are a 
number of alternate therapies claiming cure for many conditions, guidelines for recognizing any new 
system of therapy have been developed by the Standing Committee on Alternate System of Medicine 
under the Chairmanship of DG, ICMR. 
 AYUSH systems are unique in having holistic approach for treatment of life style related 
diseases, AYUSH-based guidelines of healthy lifest yle and preventive & promotive health care are 
being propagated through Information Education & Communication (IEC) programme of AYUSH. In 
fact general as well as disease-specific guidelin es for healthy life-style are envisaged in AYUSH 
Systems aimed at improving quality of life of diseased individuals. 
 CSIR laboratories are working on programmes on new drug development for life style diseases 
such as diabetes, stroke, thrombosis, dyslipidemia, stress, gastric ulcer, dementia etc. A programme on 
Diabetes Mellitus will be specifically initiated during the XIth
 Plan. 
 DBT has supported various R&D (Multi-centric interactive) projects for chronic diseases and life 
style disorders such as cancer, car diothoracic disorder, diabetes, neurological joint disease etc. The 
department has also taken up an initiative to start clinical trial using Curcumin for various cancers 
such as oral pre-cancerous lesions, head and neck cancer and cervical cancer. 
Comments 
 The Committee, while taking note of the reply  is of the view that the Department should 
intensify its efforts to develop cu rative medicines to effectively fight chronic diseases like blood 
pressure, diabetes etc. which are very common now a days. 
4. Recommendation  
 The Committee hopes that the procedural complexities will become thing of the past. Drug 
research being a long-drawn and costly affair, the funds should be provided on a long-term basis and 
without spreading them too thin. Collaboration with industry is a good idea in not only sharing of risk 
but also for commercial viability of the product. Besides, there is a need to continue focus on diseases, 
which acquire epidemic proportions in backward areas. (Para 8.4) 

Action Taken by the Government 
 Various concerned, Ministries/departments of Government of India are focusing on funding 
projects related to diseases which acquire epidem ic proportions in backward areas like Kala-azar, 
Japanese encephalitis etc. The details are as follows:– 
(i) Drug development is a major priority area under ICMR. The council is looking into 
establishing facilities for various aspects of drug development process including industry 
collaboration, Kala-azar being the disease of  low socio economic status population in the 
State of Bihar. Council has collaborated with industry and WHO to make available oral 
miltofosine as a treatment of this condition–Council is also looking into the need for 
treatment for different diseases in the north east population, tribal population and people 
living in desert areas through its regional me dical research centers located at Dibrugarh, 
Jabalpur and Jodhpur. 
(ii)  CSIR laboratories have already started working in collaboratio n with private sector 
industries for new drug develo pment for establishing the proof  of efficacy and safety in 
lower animal experimental models and the findings are protected under IPR. After this 
stage, the collaborative-cum-licensing agreem ents are entered into with private sector 
industries for further development studies like toxicity studies in higher animals, regulatory 
pre-clinical studies etc. with regard to diseases acquiring epidemic proportions in backward 
areas, such as leishmaniasis, Kala-azar etc. 
(iii)  The Department of Biotechnology (DBT) has initiated efforts to develop an interactive 
programme towards development of Anti-Viral agents with emphasis on Hepatitis-C. 
Comments 
 The Committee reiterates its reco mmendation that funds shou ld be provided on a long- 
term basis to ongoing projects without spreading them too thin on too many projects. 
5. Recommendation 
 During the course of evidence, Secretaries of the Department of Biotechnology and the Ministry 
of Ocean Development highlighted the need for m eaningful networking, besides focused research. 
The Committee, after hearing officials of various Departments, has felt the need for a more focused 
approach. What is required is concentration on our  core competencies and focus areas where results 
can be excellent rather than doing too many things without fruitful achievements. The Committee is of 
the view that due to lack of Coordination between different departments and inter departmental 
research groups/institutes, repetition of work often results wastage of time and money. The 
Committee, therefore, emphasizes for strong coordination among the various departments/research 
institutes to increase efficiency in drug research.  
    (Para 8.5) 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The programme being implemented by various Departments are guided by the Advisory 
Committees. While constituting the Committees, it is generally ensured that representation to the 
concerned departments is given in order to avoid duplication. 

 CSIR which has a chain of laboratories, has initiated certain network programmes to increase 
efficiency of drug related research based upon core competencies of various CSIR laboratories in 
Tenth Plan Period. The same approach will be continued in XIth Five Year Plan. 
 DBT and ICMR have signed an MoU and collaborative programmes have been initiated with 
multicentric and interactive approach towards development of newer microbicides of HIV/AIDS and 
STDs (Sexually transmitted diseases). DBT has also  signed MoU with “International AIDS Vaccine 
Initiative” towards initiating R&D activities on neutralizing antibodies and new antigen design. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply and would lik e to be apprised of the progress made. 
6. Recommendation  
 The Committee was informed that development of a new molecule involves about US $1 billion 
and Ten-Twelve years time, with  lot of uncertainties. So, considering the current pharmaceutical 
scenario, strategies must be designed to have medi cines for common diseases within a short time span 
and for this Government should concentrate on developing new molecules as a long-term strategy.  
    (Para 8.6) 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The concerned Ministries / Departments / Agencies of Government of India have initiated 
various schemes for R&D in the drugs and pharmaceuticals sector including herbal medicines. 
 These schemes have been launched with an aim to develop new molecules for common diseases. 
As of now, 28 IND developed within the country are under phase-I of clinical trial. Development of a 
new molecule as a drug takes ab out 10-15 years. Efforts are being made to reduce this time by 
introduction of combichem synthesis and high throughput screening methods using state of art 
equipments. In addition herbal formulations and single molecules are being developed by adopting the 
reverse pharmacology approach, which may result in a significant reduction in cost and duration of 
development. 
Comments 
 The Committee is of the view that Comb ichem synthesis & high throughput screening 
methods would be introduced at the earliest to  ensure availability of new drugs within a short 
span of time. The Committee also recommends th at herbal formulations  and single molecule 
formulations be prepared to reduce the cost and duration of development. 
7. Recommendation  
 On herbal research, as a short-term strategy, ther e is a need to develop medicines to combat most 
prevalent diseases like Gastric problems, Arthr itis, Diabetes, Stress Related Disorders, Thoracic 
Diseases, etc., for which a well thought strategy requires to be evolved. Time bound research on 
herbal drugs may be a suitable option. It was informed that a large number of ISM drugs are being 
used for a long time; having no acute toxicity. But long-term toxicity on these drugs must be 
established. A few more experiments could be done in scientific manner to make it more meaningful. 
Public sector units may be utilized for production of these drugs for mass consumption. (Para 8.6.1) 

Action Taken by the Government 
 Studies related to scientific validation along with toxicity and efficacy studies of certain herbal 
formulations besides certain herbo-mineral formulations are being carried out under various 
programmes of Government of India. 
 The Indian Council of Medical Research (IC MR) has already signed an agreement under the 
Golden Triangle Partnership (GTP) scheme with  Department of AYUSH and CSIR to validate the 
safety and efficacy of the identif ied traditional formulations from the different Indian Systems of 
Medicine certain chronic diseases, which do not have effective remedies in conventional medicine viz. 
joint disorders, diabetes, irritable bowel syndrome, bronchial allergy, memory disorders, sleep 
disorders, malaria, filarial, MIV / AIDS have been identified by AYUSH for collaborative research. 
This exercise has been initiated by AYUSH to ach ieve safe, effective and standardized classical 
Ayurvedic products. In this project, each identified formulation will be subjected to standardization of 
ingredients, manufacturing process, shelf life and dose by CSIR and Safety & Toxicity evaluation and 
clinical trials by ICMR. 18 formulations have been taken up in the first phase of GTP. 
 The Department of Biotechnology (DBT) has supported various R&D projects towards 
developing efficacious, standardized and safe herbal formulations for diseases such as Amoebic 
dysentery, Diabetes type 2, Left Ventricular dysfunction, Atherosclerosis, Osteoporosis etc. Pre- 
clinical toxicity studies are an integral component of the above R&D projects. Efforts have been 
initiated to associate industries with the programme towards converting research leads into potential 
drugs. Attempts are being made to initiate a pr oject on identifying anti-viral agents from herbal 
sources against Dengue infection in collaboration with M/s Ranbaxy, Gurgaon. 
 Efforts are under progress for development of new drugs from natural resources by CSIR. 
Actually some CSIR laboratories are working on network programmes on chemical and 
pharmacological investigations of indigenous plants including traditional medicines and marine flora 
and fauna for development of therapeutic agents. Under Golden Triangle Partnership scheme, a joint 
initiative of AYUSH, ICMIR and CSIR, a number of  Ayurveda and herbal formulations for common 
diseases are being standardized using modem S&T tool s. The toxicity of these formulations is also 
under investigation. 
Comments 
 The Committee is of the opinion that more e fforts should be made to make alternative 
system of medicines successfully fill in the gap  in areas where conventional cures are not 
available. The Committee feels that  research in Traditional/Alternative systems should focus on 
areas where conventional cures are either inadequate or too costly. 
8. Recommendation  
 Compilation of a compendium & conducting clinical trial, which is a long term strategy, must 
also be evolved. Although work is progressing in different parts of India, in a bid to search and isolate 
effective plant medicines, there is a lack of co-ordination among the groups. This often leads to many 
miscommunications, work repetitions, use of different contradictory methods of study, and missing 
out on important information. By having good networking among these groups much time, effort and 

cost could be saved. For this, there is a need for a standard data bank on the study conducted on 
traditional medicine and information gathered. It would be useful to compile a compendium of plants 
and herbs of traditional medicinal value for easy reference and standard data. More emphasis should 
be given on herbal research focusing on developmen t of drugs for the diseases commonly prevailing 
in the country. (Para 8.6.2) 
Action Taken by the Government 
 ICMR has already initiated a programme for setting  up Clinical Trial Registry in India (CTRI) in 
which all Clinical Trials both in the modern medicine and traditional medicine will be entered so that 
the data base will be available on all Clinical Trials  conducted in India. This programme is funded by 
the DST and the WHO. 
 Pharmacopoeial standards of 671 medicinal Plants parts have been developed and published in 
the form of Ayurvedic & Unani Pharmacopoeia of India by AYUSH. Pharmacopoeial work for 100 
Ayurvedic compound formulations is about to complete and pharmacopoeial standards of about 50 
formulations are expected for publication by May, 2007. 20 laboratories are engaged in the 
pharmacopoeial work of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs supported under a Central project 
Similarly, development of Standard Operational Pr ocedures (SOPs) for manufacture of Ayurvedic, 
Siddha and Unani formulations and their shelf life study is also under way in 20 laboratories. National 
Formularies containing standardized composition of 1696 multi-ingredient classical formulations of 
Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani systems are also published as official documents for industry to follow. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
9. Recommendation  
 On the Non-Herbal research, isolation of a new lead molecule and designing of Novel Drug 
Delivery System (NDDS) can be done. Also, the classical methods involving extraction, isolation, 
identification, characterization, pre-clinical & clin ical trials could be considered. As a short term 
strategy, Developing NDDS is the easiest way to co mpete in the present patent regime involving low 
capital investment Patent expired drugs could be considered for developing NDDS to enhance its 
bioavailability, safety and efficacy. It will take lesser time than that of developing new molecule.(Para 8.6.3) 
Action Taken by the Government 
 A good amount of work is being carried out by the concerned departments related to Novel Drug 
Delivery System (NDDS) which are listed as follows: 
 Under the DPRP programme of DST financial gr ants have been sanctioned for conducting R&D 
in the Pharma sector related to development of new drug delivery systems for sustained release of 
tubercular drugs, Development of PLG for nanoenca psulation of tuberculosis drugs for sustained 
release drug delivery systems, Poly Lactide-co-glycolide nano particle based oral sustained release 
drug delivery system for treatment of MDR tuberculosis. 

 Novel drug delivery system has been identified as one of the priority research area by ICMR 
under the Council. Clinical Trials are ongoing with contraceptive implants and measles vaccine as 
nasal spray. Proposals are being invited for funding on priority basis. 
 The DBT has also supported various R&D projects towards development of novel delivery 
systems for vaccines, drugs and other biomolecules. 
 As a short term strategy CSIR is also planning to take up work on off patented drugs so as to 
improve their efficacy though CSIR scientists are already working on novel drug delivery systems. 
Comments 
 The Committee is of the view that the in itiative taken under th e Novel Drug Delivery 
System (NDDS) by various research institutes will bear fruit and help tackle disease like 
Tuberculosis which afflict mostly the lower strata of society. 
10. Recommendation 
 In the Long term strategy emphasis should be given for the development of new molecule. 
Though this is the area to compete in the world market, it is a tough process and only a few companies 
could venture out for this project. However, it is a fact that some of the Indian companies are investing 
even 10 per cent of the turnover in drug research. A few successes have already been achieved in this 
regard. Government funded laboratories should frame long-term research schemes for developing new 
molecules.  
    (Para 8.6.4) 
Action Taken by the Government 
 Efforts are already being made by Government  funded laboratories towards developing new 
molecules. The details are as follows: 
(i) Under the Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Research Programme (DPRP) of DST funds have been 
provided for carrying out R&D towards developing new and novel drugs for diseases of 
relevance to the country. In this process, nearly thirty institutions/ Laboratories-have 
formed alliances with Industries in various  collaborative projects funded under the 
Programme. 
(ii) The DBT is implementing various R&D projec ts on isolation and characterization of new 
bioactives/ therapeutic agents from herbal sources. Many lead  molecules / active principles 
have been identified having anti-cancer, anti-diabetic and anti- amoebiasis activities. 
(iii) CSIR laboratories are working for development of new molecules as a long term strategy 
since some laboratories of CSIR have state of art combinatorial chemical synthesis and 
high through put screening facilities. Laboratories are working for development of new 
molecules through chemical synthesis as well as their isolation from natural sources using 
both conventional and combichem facilities. 
(iv) Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) has framed a long term research scheme through a 
national co-ordinated research programme entitled “Drugs from the Sea” which has been 
launched with the aim of harnessing the bio-active compounds of marine organisms ( flora 

& fauna) collected from Indian waters including “Andaman & Nicobar”. coasts – for the 
purpose of human therapeutic purposes. 
 Under this scheme several new molecules have reached the product development stage i.e. 
new molecules as potential anti-diabetic from mangrove Plant, new molecules having dual 
properties of anti-hyperglycemic and anti-hype r-lipidemic are in adva nced stages of drug 
development. At present the Ministry has been implementing this programme under the 
leadership of Central Drug -Research-Institute (C DRI), Lucknow, with active participation of 7 
reputed laboratories including Universities, namely, (i) Central Salt and Marine Chemicals 
Research Institute, Bhavnagar; (ii) National Institute of Oceanography, Goa; (iii) National 
Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai; (iv) Indian Institute of Chemical Technology, 
Hyderabad; (v)Andhra University, Visakhapatnam;” (vi) Regional Research Laboratory, 
Bhubaneswar and (vii) Calcutta University; Kolkata. 
 Recently, the Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) has initiated action for expansion of the 
programme activities and inducted (i) Central Institute of Fisheries Education, Mumbai; (ii) Centre of 
Advanced Studies in Marine Biology; Annamalai University, Parangipetta; (iii) Department of 
Fisheries, Government of West Bengal, Kolkata for collection, identification and extraction of marine 
samples; (iv) Advanced Centre for Treatment, Research and Education in Cancer, Mumbai for 
developing anti-cancer drugs; University of Madr as, Chennai to develop anti-HIV drugs from the 
marine organisms and (v) Department of Clinical Pharmacology, TN Medical College & BYL Nair 
Ch. Hospital, Mumbai to carryout pharmacology test ing and early Clinical development of candidate 
molecules under “Drugs from sea”. 
Comments 
 The Committee is of the view that the resources spent on the development of new molecule 
would result in production of ne w products and would lik e to be apprised of their launch in the 
market. 
11. Recommendation  
 The Committee recommends that an audit-report on drug development be prepared. The audit 
should include the organizational structure, time taken and expenditure since inception of the 
project/research and the outcome of the research including productivity and effectiveness of the 
product. This audit be completed within eight months and a report be made available by 
August/September 2007. (Para 8.7) 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance by the concerned 
department. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the non-compliance of it s recommendation that Audit Report be 
made available by Septemb er 2007 and reiterates its earlier recommendation that the 
Department should place the same before it for consideration at the earliest. 

12.  Recommendation  
 The Committee is concerned about safety of herbal preparations as far as their metallic 
components and toxicity is concerned. The problem of standardization and validation of drugs has not 
been resolved yet. This needs to be done as early as possible so as to avoid recent instances which 
highlighted that some of the Indian medicines, samples of which were collected in foreign countries, 
contained metallic contents above permissible limits. Such instances underline the importance of 
regulatory mechanism and genuine certification. (Para 8.8) 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The problem of standardization and validation of drugs besides the safety of herbal preparations 
as far as their metallic components and toxicity is concerned are being looked at on priority basis. 
Necessary steps have been initiated by the various Government agencies for resolving these issues 
which are as follows: 
(i) In order to ensure that Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani medicines made of herbal ingredients 
may not prove hazardous to human health, it has been made mandatory for all exporting 
manufacturers to certify presence of heavy me tals within permissible limits after testing 
from an accredited laboratory. Office orders in this regard have been issued as per the 
provisions of Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 defining the permissible limits of Arsenic, 
Lead, Mercury and Cadmium in herbal prod ucts. AYUSH has carried out this exercise. 
Export certification mechanism for Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani medicines is being 
evolved under the aegis of Pharmaexcil. Department of AYUSH has allotted eight 
commonly used Ayurvedic herbomineral prepar ations to CSIR under GTP for safety & 
toxicity studies. 
 When acute and sub acute toxicity studies were conducted by Central Council for Research 
in Ayurveda & Siddha ( CCRAS ) on nine Ayurvedic medicines reported to have high heavy 
metal contents in the article published in the Journal of Medical Association (JAMA) in 2004, 
none of the tested drugs was found to have any toxic effect on laboratory animals. 
 Department of AYUSH has been supporting State Drug Testing Laboratories for 
strengthening on infrastructure and analytical capacity. Pharmacopoeial Laboratory of Indian 
Medicine (PLIM), Ghaziabad has been directed to test 50 market samples of Ayurveda, Siddha 
and Unani drugs every month. State Drug Controllers have been advised to get Ayurvedic, 
Siddha and Unani (ASU) drugs tested from NABL accredited laboratories for strengthening 
enforcement. 
(ii) Under the Golden Triangle Programme (GTP) the subject of metal based herbal drugs and 
their safety profile is being looked into by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). 
The toxicology centre at the National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad has taken up the 
toxicity studies of the identified Bhasmas from the Department of AYUSH. 
(iii) The detailed investigations on safety and metallic toxicity of identified herbal preparation is 
in progress in CSIR laboratories under Golden Triangle Programmes and results are 
expected to be available shortly. 

Comments 
 The Committee is of the view that the Depa rtment should ensure th at the standard of 
Export certification is as per in ternational norms/specifications. It also feels that the safety and 
toxicity studies of Ayurvedic h erbo-mineral preparation to be conducted by CSIR be completed 
at the earliest. 
13. Recommendation  
 Quality control of raw materials is the prime concern in manufacturing herbal products. Quality 
control of finished products especially polyherbal products is a great concern, which requires to be 
resolved. Quality of medicines of herbal origin mainly depends on quality of raw materials. Presently, 
a major part of the raw materials are procured from wild origin, having almost no control on 
parameters of cultivation, collection and content of  active constituents etc. Controlled cultivation 
could be a crucial parameter of the quality control. If Good Cultivation Practice and Good Harvesting 
Practices are developed and implemented raw materials of good quality can be ensured. European 
Guidelines for Good Agricultural Practice (GAP) of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Good 
Agricultural and Collection Practice for Medicinal Plants (GACP), Japan, Good Agricultural Practice 
for Traditional Chinese Medicinal Materials, People’s Republic of China etc. have been published for 
this purpose. Recently World Health Organization has also published Good Agricultural and 
Collection Practice (GACP) which could be practi sed in case of cultivation and collection of 
medicinal plants. (Para 8.9) 
Action Taken by the Government 
 Quality control of polyherbal Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani products is taken care of in four 
ways. 
(a) Standardized composition of classical formulations has been published in the form of 
National Formularies; 
(b) Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeial Committee has formulated guidelines for developing Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) of manufacturing process on the basis of which scientific 
work to be carried out in a standard format on certain clas sical formulations has been 
allotted to laboratories; 
(c) Development of pharmacopoeial standards of 100 Ayurvedic compound formulations per 
year has been taken up; and 
(d) Various measures for conservation, proper ha rvesting, cost-effective cultivation, research 
and development, processing and marketing of medicinal plants are undertaken by the 
National Medicinal Plants Board for ensuring availability of quality raw materials for the 
user industry. 
(ii) Evolving guidelines for Good Agricultural and Collection Practices for medicinal 
plants for ensuring quality raw material for herbal medicines is also under 
consideration in the National Medicinal Plants Board. 32 medicinal plants of high 
demand in domestic and international markets have been prioritized for large-scale 

cultivation and development. Agro-techniques of commonly used medicinal plants 
have been developed and technical know-how and financial assistance is provided for 
contract farming of medicinal plants. 
Comments 
 The Committee is of the view that the guidelines for Good  Agricultural and collection 
practices for medicinal plants shou ld be formulated soon so as to ensure good raw material for 
medicinal preparations. 
14. Recommendation 
 The Committee is of the view that quality control of herbal drugs has not been developed 
sufficiently, especially for combination products . Research on developing standardization methods 
involving modern instrumentation is urgently required. Though a few attempts have already been 
made, more emphasis is required in this area Monographs of more plants require to be incorporated in 
the existing Ayurvedic Pharmacopoiea. More stringent specifications, including use of sophisticated 
instruments, are to be incorporated. Research & development of marker compounds & Metabolomics 
are the order of the day and stress must be laid In this area. (Para 8.1 0) 
Action Taken by the Government 
Research & Development of marker compounds & Metabolomics is the order of the day and in 
order to ensure quality herbal drugs several initiatives have been taken by the concerned agencies. 
These are: 
(i) ICMR has been publishing monograph on medicinal Plants and quality standards of 
identified medicinal Plants. These volumes contain all the information regarding the 
medicinal Plants including the marker compounds. These are on single Plants. 
(ii) Department of AYUSH is pursuing the job of developing quality control of Ayurveda, 
Siddha and Unani drugs including multi-ingredient and formulations through different 
agencies. Both traditional and modern scientific parameters are used for quality testing and 
Standardization of raw materials as well as finished products.  
  Organoleptic standardization of drugs, chemical analysis, and biological assaying for 
testing of heavy metals, pesticides and microbial load are being developed for quality 
control and standardization of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani drugs. Ayurvedic 
Pharmacopoeia is being augmented with inclusion of Chromatographic fingerprint profiling, 
identification of active therapeutic ingredients and marker compounds of medicinal Plants. 
  Thrust has been given to evolve pharmacopoeial standards of multi-ingredient 
formulations covering 100 formulations per year. Standards of commonly used fifty 
Ayurvedic formulations have been worked out and these would be published within 2-3 
months as successive volumes of Pharmacopoeia. 
(iii)  R&D efforts are in progress towards develo pment of marker compounds in the extracts of 
various medicinal Plants by Department of Biotechnology (DBT). The department has 

already organized a “Consultation Meeting on Genomics and Metabolomics Initiatives on 
Medicinal and Aromatic Plants” on 27th April, 2005 with an aim to generate a well-
focussed programme on genomics & metabolomics of selected medicinal and aromatic 
Plants”. 
  As a result of this, various R&D projects have been supported on generating genomic 
resources in medicinal Plants such as Artemisia annua, Papaver somniferum, Santalum 
album, Picorrhiza kurrooa, Podophyllum hexandrum and Catharanthus roseus alongwith 
identifying regulatory steps associated with production of desired metabolites I therapeutic 
compounds 
(iv) CSIR laboratories have strengthened R&D activities for the development of marker 
compounds and metabolomic research in the ar ea of medicinal & aromatic Plants. CSIR 
laboratories are also participating in the programme of Department of AYUSH and ICMR 
for preparation of monograph on medicinal Plants including certain poly herbal 
formulations. CSIR labs are taking up poly herbal formulations under the NMITLI 
programme. 
Comments 
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the progress made. 
15. Recommendation 
The Committee also feels that ISM products are generally compared with herbal products from 
abroad. The Committee is of the opinion that lack of adequate scientific data has been a serious lacuna 
in the field of such comparisons. Hence, there is a need, in the opinion of the Committee, for 
developing comprehensive database for providing a strong impetus to promote research in ISM plants 
and raw materials as finished products. The Department of Science and Technology, therefore, should 
initiate a plan to control the quality and rigours of such work so that the standard of ISM medicines 
could be sufficiently raised to bring them in a comparable position with the herbal medicines from 
abroad and could be popularised in the Indian pharmaceutical market. (Para 8.11) 
Action Taken by the Government 
The Central Drugs Standard Control Organisation (CDSCO) under Drugs Controller General 
(India) Directorate General of Health Services ( DGHS), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is 
responsible for ensuring the safety, efficacy and quality of drugs and Therapeutics as per provision 
under Drugs & Cosmetics Act, 1940 and Rule 1945. The recent initiatives taken by the Office of DCG 
(I) to streamline the procedures co ncerning develo pment of new drug molecules, clinical research, 
new drug delivery system and product development etc. are: 
(a) Amendment in Rule 122A to E under Drugs and Cosmetics Rule to specify different 
categories of new drug applications, nature of data to be provided along with fees etc. 
(b) Amendment in schedule Y of Drugs and Cosmetics Rules in 2005, which provides detailed 
requirement for preclinical, toxicological and clinical status of new drug as per international 
standards. 

  Amendment also provides simultaneous or parallel drug research trial  i.e.  Phase II, 
Phase III and Phase IV clinical studies in the country, 
(c) Guidelines of Good Clinical Practices (GCP) have been published in order to ensure quality 
of clinical investigation data and adherence to ethical norms etc., 
(d) In October 2005, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, under Gazette Notification 
declared Ten sterile medical devices to be cons idered as Drugs under Section 3 (b) (iv) of 
Drugs and Cosmetics Act. 
(ii) The issues concerning quality control and standardization of Ayurveda, Siddha and 
Unani drugs are very complex and different from those concerning regulation of single 
molecule based products produced under controlled laboratory conditions. 
  Department of A YUSH, apart from laying down Pharmacopoeial standards and issuing 
guidelines under Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules from time to time, has initiated a process 
of consultation with experts of Botany, Phyt o-chemistry, Biochemistry and pharmaceutical 
science and with Ayurvedic drug industry for ma king the regulatory framework responsible to 
the developments in the field of Science and Technology. 
Comments 
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the progress made. 
16. Recommendation  
The Committee is further given to understand that a number of countries like Germany, France, 
Canada, U.S.A. and China are registering standardised plant extracts of proven clinical efficacy and 
safety option from natural source as herbal drugs or dietary supplements. However, in spite of the fact 
that India has a vast resource of drugs of natural origin, the country is unable to tap effectively the vast 
world market primarily because it is not having a satisfactory system of quality control and 
registration of ISM and herbal drugs. The Committee is, therefore, of the opinion that on account of 
the increasing number of herbal drugs, multiple proc edures and practices including registration of the 
patenting, etc., it may be necessary to create a sepa rate division/cell to regulate the quality of such 
drugs and provide proper focus on related aspect s of drug development. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that a proper system of registration with acceptable standards and quality control needs 
to be put in position in order to derive the maximum benefit from herbal drugs. (Para 8.12) 
Action Taken by the Government 
At present, the entire implementation programme under Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules as 
thereunder is with the State Drug Control/Licensing Authorities. In order to streamline the licensing 
procedures for uniform implementation throughout the country and to ensure that quality drugs are 
available, Government has approved establishment of a Central Drug Authority like the USFDA, 
which would also ‘deal with the regulation of Ayurvedic, Siddha and Unani drugs. Such a proposal 
has been put forward and the Cabinet has approved this proposal. 
Comments 

The Committee is of the view that to implement quality control the licensing and patenting 
procedures be streamlined. 
17. Recommendation 
When the Committee enquired from the Departme nt of AYUSH about procedure/mechanism to 
get feedback about the efficacy of a medicine for a particular disease, the Committee was informed 
that Central Council for Research in Ayurveda & Siddha (CCRAS), is adopti ng good clinical practice 
guidelines and WHO guidelines along with Ayurveda and Siddha guidelines for standardized research 
for evaluation of efficacy of treatment of all the patients for a particular disease. The Committee was 
further informed that as far as the Central Coun cil for Research in Unanai Medicine (CCRUM) is 
concerned, there is a third party assessment system about the efficacy of different drugs in clinical 
research and general OPD programme. Each Clinical Research Unit has been provided with the 
services of bio-statistician. Central Council for Rese arch in Homoeopathy has an elaborate system for 
‘Drug Proving’ which is the essence of Homoeopathy. It is now observing the effect of a particular 
homoeopathy drug on the health of individuals. The Committee is not satisfied with the procedure 
adopted by various Departments regarding feedbacks on efficacy of drugs developed by them. The 
Committee would like the concerned Departments to generate easily comprehensible and effective 
data regarding the efficacy of various developed drugs which might be of help both to the medical 
practitioners as well as to the patients while making a choice regarding administration of drugs. (Para 8.13) 
Action Taken by the Government 
AYUSH will pursue with the various research Councils to generate and publish efficacy data of 
R&D drugs for the use of medical practitioners an d patients. Under the Golden Triangle programme 
the formulations identified by the Department of AYUSH will go through standardization, quality 
control and pre-clinical safety studies by CSIR and then Clinical Trials will be taken up by the ICMR. 
The data regarding safety and efficacy of these formulations once developed will be brought to 
the public domain so that patients and the public will be aware of the nature of these drugs. 
Comments 
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the progress made. 
18. Recommendation 
The Committee observes that with the introduc tion of patent laws, the Indian pharmaceutical 
companies and research organizations have been pr ompted to speed up their research activities for 
development of new drugs. However, there were complaints from the scientific community regarding 
restrictions on the use of animals for research purpose. With the inordinate delay and unrealistic 
demands in the process of getting clearance for an imal experimentation, the research activity has 
become a victim of animal activism. The guidelines laid down by the Committee for the Purpose of 
Control and Supervision of Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA) have in some cases stalled major 
research in the field. While some of the institu tes and private pharmaceuti cal companies have done 
their studies abroad at higher cost, the government funded institutes find it difficult to pursue their 
research. The CPCSEA should initia te steps to provide quick approvals and make the system more 

transparent. The Committee hopes that this will be effective in checking irrational delays and saving 
precious man-hours of quality research. (Para 8.14) 
Action Taken by the Government 
The CPCSEA overseas the regulation of animal  experimentation in the country under the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests. The Breeding and Experimentation Rules 1998, which was very 
stringent regarding animal experimentation, have been revised and the notification issued in January, 
2006 has relaxed number of conditions laid down earlier such as permitting import of experiment 
animals, contract animal testing etc. with the a pproval of Institutional Animal Ethics Committee for 
small animals. However, for large animal experimentation the large animal Sub-Committee which was 
giving approvals on behalf of CPCSEA has now been  abolished as all the backlog have been cleared 
and now after the IAEC clearance the applicati ons are directly handled by the CPCSEA main 
committee which meets every 3 months on the specific day as part of the Good Practices issued by the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests. Hence, the earlier inordinate delays in getting approval for large 
animal experimentation has now been taken care of with the above changes. 
Comments 
The Committee expects that the relaxed norms will help cut down delays in procuring animals 
for research, while ensuring minimum necessary standards for animal experimentation. 
19. Recommendation 
The Committee also recommends that if the abov e-mentioned guidelines are found effective, 
they should be incorporated in the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act and in the relevant rules 
thereunder. The Committee also feels that the scientific community need to be adequately informed 
about the new guidelines so that projects which have been hanging in balance for want of approval can 
be taken up in right earnest. Moreover, it was reported to the Committee that restriction on the use of 
animals is putting inordinate delay in research activi ties. The Committee, therefore, feels that there is 
a need for rethinking about the composition of CPCSEA. More representa tives from scientific 
community needs to be inducted which can lead to finding a rational solution of eliciting maximum 
scientific results with minimal animal specimen usage considering animal welfare. (Para 8.15) 
Action Taken by the Government 
As of now, the CPCSEA has been reconstituted with a number of members drawn from scientific 
departments and experts on animal experimentation. Projects submitted for consideration of CPCSEA 
are generally cleared within a period of three months. 
Comments 
The Committee notes the reply. 
20. Recommendation 
The Committee feels that in-vitro experimentations  should be encouraged more to avoid testing 
of drugs on animals and use of 3-D computer graphi cs by downloading lead molecule structures from 
protein data bank and then modifying the same accord ingly to the software to design new treatments 
through new drugs should be given more emphasis so that minimum number of animals are used for 

drug testing. The in-vitro method and computer simulation could be taken as a preliminary test for 
drugs prior to their confirmation on animals. (Para 8.16) 
Action Taken by the Government 
Initiatives in this direction have already started at various institutions concernedand the details are as follows: 
(i) Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has given importance to the use of alternative 
ways for testing so that the number of animals used can be reduced to the minimum 
possible.  
 A proposal for setting up an Institute for Alternatives to Animal Experimentation has been 
proposed for establishing during the 11th Plan period. 
(ii) DBT has made efforts to develop in vitro screening system for screening Plant extracts 
having anti-cancer, anti-diabetic, anti-amoebiasis, anti- leishmaniasis, osteogenic etc. 
activities before testing on animal models. 
(iii) CSIR laboratories have already establis hed high throughput’ screening, QSAR and 
molecular modeling facilities and all initial screening are under taken on in vitro models. 
Only those entities which are found active on in vitro studies are taken up for in vivo 
studies. In silico simulati on of interaction of biomol ecules (DNA/ proteins) with 
drugs/xenobiotics for elucidation of possible mechanism of toxicity is under development. 
In fact development of comprehensive in-silico tool for effective clinical trial has also been 
planned to be taken up during 11th Plan period. 
Comments 
The Committee commends the proposal for setting up an institute for alternatives to animal 
Experimentation. The Committee also takes note of various initiatives taken and techniques/ methods 
adopted by the concerned Departments to reduce the number of animals used in experiments for drug 
research. 
21. Recommendation 
The Committee would, therefore, like to conclude that since thousands of animals suffer and die 
during drug development testing every year and while experiments on animals cannot be 100 per cent 
relied upon to produce valid results, particularly about the toxicity effects on humans, the drug testing 
policy needs to be reviewed in such a manner as to devote more attention and resource to alternative 
forms of drug testing instruments like in-vitro experimentation. (Para 8.17) 
Action Taken by the Government 
Animal testing for drug development is a regulatory requirement and cannot be replaced unless 
the methods have international acceptance. Recently some tests accepted by the international 
regulatory authorities has also been accepted by the Drug Controller General of India to replace 
animal testing. Efforts are on to develop in vitro tests which can replace animals. 

In order to avoid excess use of animals in experimentation, CSIR has already started work on 
animal models and animal substitute technologies. A few animal models have been developed during 
10th Plan period which would be validated during XIth Plan period. 
Comments 
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the progress made. 
22. Recommendation 
The Committee is of the view that an ideal regime of intellectual property rights has to strike a 
balance between the private incentiv es for innovators and the public interest of maximizing access to 
the fruits of innovations. This balance is reflected in article 27 of the 1948 Universal Declaration of 
Human Rights, which recognizes that “Everyone has the right to the protection of the moral and 
material interest resulting from any scientific, literacy or artistic production of which he is the author” 
and that “Everyone has the right to share in scientific advancement and its benefits”. (Para 8.18) 
Action Taken by the Government 
The Committee’s observation is noted for guidance and will be complied with while deciding the 
sharing of intellectual property generated under various projects funded by the 
Government/Government agencies. 
Comments 
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the progress made. 
23. Recommendation 
The Committee feels the need to promote public private partnership in order to increase funding 
for frontier areas of scientific and technological research in drug development. The Committee is of 
the view that in the world of stiff competition and expensive nature of research activity, Industry has 
to be involved at least at the late stage which is  much more expensive than the principal research 
stage. Public research has to strike a balance betw een Principal research and late stage research. The 
Small Business Research Initiative (SBRI) model ha s been a huge success in US and Israel and the 
same could be experimented in India. (Para 8.19) 
Action Taken by the Government 
Industry-Institution Partnership programmes have been launched by vanous departments for 
promoting R&D in the country. These are listed as follows: 
(i) The Department of Biotechnology (DBT) has initiated the scheme “Small Business 
Innovation Research Initiative (SBIRI)” to en courage companies in the biotech sector. The 
programme aims to build and capture a leadership position for India among the top most 
countries of the world in biotech sector. The SBIRI scheme operates in two phases. 
 Under Phase I highly innovative, early stag e, pre-proof-of-concept re search is supported 
while under Phase II, the funding is provided for late development and commercialization 
of innovative research leads. The proposals that address important national needs are given 

preference. This scheme marks a new phase, in  public-private partnerships in a way that 
combines the strengths of the public sector with creativity and efficiency of the private 
sector. Effective linkages between the indus try and academia are forged for upscaling and 
validation of laboratory research to facilitate commercialization. 
(ii) CSIR is already followin g the practice of involving industry after initial screening and 
protection of IPR for active leads. 
(iii) An Extramural Research Programme is implemented as a Central Scheme in the 
Department of AYUSH for supporting project based R&D studies undertaken by medical 
scientific institutions both in public and private sectors. Through this scheme financial 
assistance up to Rs 30 lakh per project for a period of three years is provided. 
(iv) Department of Science and Technology (DST) involves invariably industry while 
supporting R&D projects in the institutions  under it’s Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Research 
Programme (DPRP). 
Comments 
The Committee takes notice of the various steps taken by various Departments to involve 
Industry in research. The SBIRI model adopted in the bio-tech sector can also be replicated in other 
Departments and efforts in that direction should be made. 
24. Recommendation  
The Committee is of the view that inculcating scientific temper among the school children is the 
need of the hour to attract more students in opting science as their career, which may bring more 
human resource in the research field. Moreover, to check the declining trend in students’ preference to 
opt science as their career, the curriculum for science at all levels should keep pace with developments 
in the sphere of science education, particularly experiment based and skill based learning strategies. 
Besides, there is a need for more interaction between the Universities and public funded research 
institutes so that the supply and quality of human resource needed for high-end research is maintained. 
The Committee strongly recommends improving and integrating the university system and improving 
the quality of human resource in research. Moreover,  the present funding for research activities is 
limited only to few universities involved in drug research. The Committee is of the opinion that more 
universities should be funded to bring more talent in the field of scientific research. (Para 8.20) 
Action Taken by the Government 
Inculcating research spirit in the undergraduate and postgraduate medical students has been a 
priority area under the Council. At Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), a short term summer 
studentship for medical under- graduates exposes them to research methodology. A scheme in this 
regard is in position since 1979. Council’ also has a fellowship programme as well as short term and 
long term training programmes for human resource development in the area of drug research. 
(i) The Department of Biotechnology (DBT) is implementing a scheme for the award of 25 
biology scholarships to students in Biology/Biotechnology at the CBSE 10+2 level 
examination. This scholarship is awarded to encourage them to take up Biology as a 

career. Each scholarship carries a cash amount of Rs. 15,000/- a gold plated medal and a 
certificate of merit. 
(ii)  CSIR institutes are regularly organizing the program of Youth for Leadership in Science 
(CPYLS). This programme is meant to attract students to science subjects and adopt these 
as a career choice. A number of other measures are also in pl ace to attract student to adopt 
science as career. 
(iii) CSIR was the first organization in idea to initiate extra mural funding to university 
researchers and also award research fellows hips to post graduate students to pursue 
research careers. Thousands of students have benefited from CSIR’s in itiatives in creating 
a human resource in research. 
(iv) The Department of Science and Technology (DST) has been supporting a large number of 
schemes for promoting R&D in University, including schemes for attracting students to 
adopt Science as a career. These schemes include: 
(a) Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana (KVPY) : This is a programme initiated by the 
Government of India to encourage students of the Sciences, Engineering and 
Medicine to take up careers in research in  these fields. In this scheme a generous 
scholarship is provided (up to the pre-Ph. D. level) to selected students. In addition, 
summer programmes in prestigio us research and education in stitutions in the country 
are organized and preferential access to the various facilities such as libraries, 
laboratories, museums will be provided to these selected students. 
 The Kishore Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana (KVPY), being coordinated by Indian 
Institute of Science (IISc) , Bangalore on behalf of DST has gained increased 
popularity as the most attractive scholarship and training scheme for young students in 
the country. So far 318 fellowships have been awarded. 
(b) Children’s Science Congress scheme of National Council for Science & Technology 
Communications (NCSTC): This is an opp ortunity for brilliant young scientists 
(between 10 and 17 years of age) to work  in teams under a guide on an identified 
theme, select a problem from the neighborhood, develop a hypothesis and conduct 
field research, see patterns in data and pr epare a report and present findings before 
peer group in one’s own language. 
 Innovative projects are selected for di strict congress, stat e congress and national 
convention. Each state also sends two delegates to the Annual Session of the Indian 
Science Congress. 
Comments 
The Committee notes the reply and desires that more and more 
programmes/schemes/scholarships should be initiated in future to keep young people interested in 
Science as a career. The Committee is also of the view that such programmes/schemes be also taken to 
rural areas so as to attract talented and promising students from backward areas. 

25. Recommendation 
The Committee is of the considered view that the Human resource development policy for the 
Science & Technology sector should be to create sc ience leaders in diverse disciplines and to make it 
easy for Indian Post Doctoral and mid career scientis ts to return home. The way to address this could 
be to create a National pool of at least 1000-1500 ce ntral pool of jobs with central support to attract 
the best scientists from overseas and retain the good scientists who are attracted overseas. These 
scientists could be placed at the Centers of Excellen ce, University Science Centres, etc. based on their 
area of specialization and could be engaged in research full time. The details regarding their cadre 
controlling authority, career growth, mobility/remuneration pattern etc. need examination. (Para 8.21) 
Action Taken by the Government 
(i) DST has supported setting up of some Centres of Excellence (National Facilities) in various 
fields for the purpose of retaining Indian Scie ntists in the country as well as to attract 
scientists from abroad. The noteworthy facilities are: 
(a) National Facility for High Field NM R (TIFR, Mumbai & IISc., Bengalore) 
(b) National Facility for Photo labelling and Peptide. Sequencing in Biomolecular System 
(lIT, Mumbai) 
(c) Materials Science Beam Line Facility (Nuclear Science Centre, New Delhi)  
(d) Strengthening of Pharmacological testing facilities (CDRI, Lucknow) 
(e) Combinatorial Chemistry-cum Medium Throughput Screening (CDRI, Lucknow) 
(f) National Facility on Pharmacokinetic and Metaboloic Studies (CDRI, Lucknow) 
(g) National Facility on Transgenic and Gene Knock-out mice (CCMB, Hyderabad) 
(h) National Facility on Genomics Rese arch for Drug Discovery (IGIB, Delhi)  
(i) National Facility on Pharmaco informatics (NIPER, Chandigarh) 
(j) National Facility on Bio-availability (NIPER, Chandigarh) 
 Under the Nano Science & Technology In itiative (NSTI) also a number of shared 
facilities have been established and an impressive array of instruments have also been 
put in place so as to facilitate in characterization of the synthesized materials 
(nanomaterials). Overall 9 Centres of Excellence have been established in different 
regions of the country under the Nano Science & Technology Initiative (NSTI) of 
DST. 
(ii) Indian Council of Medical Research (IC MR) had a scheme of Supernumerary research 
cadre to attract Indian scientists from abroad ba ck to the country to pursue research in their 
field. The scheme had minimum success and was abolished. The Council is now looking 
into the possibilities of developing new models for attracting Indian scientists from abroad 
back to this country either by offering research positions in the permanent institutes or in the 
project mode. 
(iii) Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR) has already taken initiative to put in 
place such schemes in its 11th Plan. 

Comments 
The Committee is of the view that not much has been achieved in attracting back our scientists 
lost to the west either on account of remuneration differentials or better work environment and job 
satisfaction. The committee is of the opinion that a lot has to be done not only to win back scientists 
working overseas but also to hold back the present scientist working in the country. 
26. Recommendation 
The Committee also feels the need of devising flexible ways of hiring young scientists and 
reversing brain drain. During its interaction with the Departments of Biotechnology and A YUSH and 
Ministry of Ocean Development the Committee was in formed about the need for creating incentives 
for scientists who presently worked on fixed salaries and lacked good promotion scheme. Different 
methods/criteria were being presently followed by ICMR, CSIR etc. in promotional schemes which 
needed to be streamlined.  
  (Para 8.22) 
Action Taken by the Government 
The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
Comments 
The Committee reiterates that the Departments sh ould make all out efforts to attract young 
scientists and contain brain drain. More flexible ways of hiring, which are in tune with world 
standards, should be adopted. 
27. Recommendation 
The Committee during its interaction with officials of Department of Biotechnology and 
Ministry of Ocean Development has been informed  about the prevailing red-tape and regulatory 
bottle-necks which delay commercialization of drug products. The Committee is of the opinion that 
de-bureaucratization of Science & Technology institutions should be ensured and their academic 
autonomy assured.  
  (Para 8.23) 
Action Taken by the Government 
The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. 
Comments 
The Committee is of the view that a time-bound plan should be made to ensure 
debureaucratisation of Science & Technology institutions and their academic autonomy. 
28. Recommendation 
The Committee while agreeing with the observation of Regional Research Laboratory (RRL) 
Jammu on Drug Delivery System feels that knowledge in the field of Proteomics, Genomics and Bio-
Technology should be harnessed in such a manner that could be designed for developing impressive 
drug delivery mechanism with precision. Drug Delivery Technique can enable patients to derive 
optimum benefits from different drugs administration. The Committee feels that innovative Drug 
Delivery System will not only increase the safety and efficacy level of the drugs but it can also 
improve the overall performance of a drug. 

The precision drug delivery system can offer add itional advantages, such as easy administration 
of drugs, increased patient compliance, decreased side effects and considerable reduction in the cost of 
the development of drugs. The Committee is of the opinion that emphasis should be given on 
developing Novel Drug Delivery Systems (NDDS) e.g., Nanotechnology, Liposome, Transdermal 
Drug Delivery System (TDDS) etc. which is a feasible  area for India to play in the Global market in 
the new patent regime, apart from its therapeutic advantages. (Para 8.24) 
Action Taken by the Government (Para 8.24 & 8.25) 
Concerted efforts are being made on a continued basis for carrying out R&D for developing 
innovative Drug Delivery System (DDS) keeping in view the advantages associated with the system. 
The details are as follows: 
(i) R&D projects have been supported by DBT towards development of Novel Delivery 
Systems for vaccines, drugs and other biomolecu les at IICB, Kolkata, AIIMS, New Delhi; 
Hari Singh Gour University, Sagar, M. P. and Central Leather Research Institute (CLRI), 
Chennai. 
(ii) CSIR laboratories have started working on Novel Drug Delivery System as per the facilities 
and expertise available. During 11th Plan nano-technology approach would be attempted 
towards the development of novel drug delivery system. 
(iii) Under the DPRP programme of DST financial grants have been sanctioned for conducting 
R&D in the Pharrna sector related to development of new drug delivery systems for 
sustained release of tubercular dugs, Development of PLG for nanoencapsulation of 
tuberculosis drugs for sustained release drug delivery systems, Poly Lactide-co-glycolide 
nano-particle based oral sustained release drug delivery system for treatment of MDR 
tuberculosis. 
(iv)  Novel drug delivery system has been identified as one of the priority research area by ICMR 
under the Council. Clinical Trials are ongoin g with contraceptive implants and measles 
vaccine as nasal spray. Proposals are being invited for funding on priority basis. 
 The Nano Science and Technology Mission (NSTM) has been launched by the Department 
of Science & Technology (DST) to give the desired thrust to research and technology 
development in this important area. So far DST has sanctioned Eleven Units on Nano 
Science across the country. During the Year 2005-2006 in order to enhance the visibility of 
India in Nano Science & Technology a Nano Science and Technology Mission (NSTM) has 
been launched. 
 Under the DPRP programme of DST financial grants have been sanctioned for conducting 
R&D in the Pharma sector related to development of new drug delivery systems for 
sustained release of tubercular dugs, Development of PLG for nanoencapsulation of 
tuberculosis drugs for sustained release drug delivery systems, Poly Lactide-co-glycolide 
nano-particle based oral sustained release drug delivery system for treatment of MDR 
tuberculosis. During 11th Plan nano-technology approach would be attempted towards the 
development of novel drug delivery system by CSIR laboratories also. 

Comments 
The Committee notes the reply. It is of the opinion that research on novel drug delivery systems 
should be given high priority as it holds immense potentialities for better drug administration and 
effectiveness of drugs. 
29. Recommendation 
The Committee feels that following two things need to be done to deal with the adverse drug 
reaction cases: 
(a) A comprehensive Adverse Drug Reaction Pharmaco Vigilance Monitoring Programme 
should be formulated and should be implemented under capacity building project; and 
(b)  The adverse Drug Reaction Monitoring should be of high quality, done through a special 
unit manned by experts. (Para 8.25) 
Action Taken by the Government (Para 8.26) 
(i) National Pharmacovigilance Programme has been initiated in year 2005 by CDSCO with 
specific aims to: 
(a) Contribute to the regulatory assessment of benefit, harm, effectiveness and risk of 
medicines encouraging their safe rationale and more effective including cost effective 
use. 
(b) Improve Patient Care, and safety in relation to use of medicines, and all medical and 
para medical and interventions. Improve Public Health and safety in relation to use of 
medicines. 
(d) Promote Understanding education and clinical training in pharmacovigilance and its 
effective communications to the public. 
(ii) DST has funded one national facility related to “Pharmacovigilance” under the Drugs & 
Pharmaceuticals Research Programme (DPR P) entitled “National facility for 
Pharmacovigillance on Drug Residue and other toxic Xenobiotics in Veterinary products” to 
Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences University (TANUV AS), Chennai. 
(iii) The Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has conducted a national study on adverse 
drug monitoring in India at 12 centres in which 86,000 patients were screened and the report 
indicates the common drugs and the adverse effects. Council is also funding individual 
projects on ADRs at number of centres. The National pharmacovigilance programme 
initiated by the CDSCO envisages 25 centres to collect data on ADRs and the number of 
centres is planned to be increased by 25 every year in the next couple of years. 
Comments 
The Committee notes the reply. 
30. Recommendation 

The Committee would like to draw the attention of the Department of Science and Technology to 
the important role of nano-technology in the fi eld of drug development and research. The Committee 
strongly feels that under the aegis of the Department of Science and Technology, Institutes like 
Agarkar Research Institute, Bose Institute, Adva nced Research Centre and Powder Metallurgy and 
New Materials, Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute of Medical Sciences and RRL, Jammu should try to 
develop, in joint collaboration, national nano-missions so that the basic tools of nanotechnology could 
be beneficially exploited and utilized in a productive way for developing new drugs with precision 
technology. (Para 8.26) 
The Committee would like to draw the attention of the Department Science and Technology that 
the Ministry of Earth Sciences has essentially worked on shoreline mangrove plantation and puffer 
fish extracts. These research projects could be handled by the CSIR and the Ministry of Earth Sciences 
focus on Ocean flora/fauna for research studies and examine whether organism found in the deep sea 
and remote areas, (arctic region) could be the source of medicinal products. The Ministry of Earth 
Sciences may prepare a feasibility study report for this project based on data available from various 
sources located in remote region. (8.27) 
Action Taken by the Government (Para 8.27) 
The Nano Science and Technology Mission (NSTM) has been launched by the Department of 
Science and Technology (DST) to give the desired thrust to research and technology development in 
this important area. More coordi nated R&D programmes can be launched by the DST on the lines of 
the programme of Earth Sciences i.e. like “Drugs from Sea” So far DST has sanctioned Eleven Units 
on Nano Science across the country and during 11th Plan nano-technology approach would be 
attempted towards the development of novel drug delivery system. 
MOES has a specific programme on “Drugs from O cean”. Under this project some leads have 
been developed for diabetes, anti-hyperglycemic and anti-hyper-lipidemic activities. At present the 
Ministry has been implementing this programme under the leadership of Central Drug Research 
Institute (CDRI), Lucknow, with active participation of 7 reputed laboratories including Universities. 
The Ministry has noted the observations of the Committee for compliance. 
Comments 
The Committee would like to see the leads developed by Ministry of Earth Science for diabetes 
etc. to be taken to their logical conclusion so that those afflicted by such disease could have a choice 
of more effective cure. 
31. Recommendation 
The Committee appreciates the Golden Triangle Partnership Scheme, which is a new initiative 
by AYUSH, CSIR and ICMR. This scheme should be pursued with all seriousness to:  
 Develop safe, effective and standardized herbal products for identified diseases, 
 Develop new herbal medicines effective in disease conditions of national/global concern, 

 Utilize appropriate technologies to develop single and poly-herbal mineral products.        
(Para 8.28) 
Action Taken by the Government 
The observation of the Committee has been noted for guidance and compliance. 
Comments 
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the progress made. 
32.  Recommendation  
The Committee in its 146th report opined “that the traditional medicine is popular, accepted and 
used by most of the country’s population. Moreover , there is growing importance in traditional health 
systems in providing health care for wider population. Inspite of the Department’s efforts in 
formulating Golden Triangle, there is a need for giving boost to the herbal medicines. The Committee 
feels that with the abundant resources of medicinal plants all over the country, there is a need to set up 
an Herbal Research and Development Institute in a location where all the variation of our biodiversity 
can be tapped.” The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation and feels that development of 
drugs of herbal origin needs specialized manpower having a modern mind set. This Institute will not 
only depend on classical theory of ISM, but will also have scientific basis and approach. (Para 8.29) 
Action Taken by the Government 
(i) Recommendations made by the Committee is noted for guidance and compliance, it may 
however be mentioned that CSIR has put in a renewed focus on RRL-Jammu and has 
christened (named) it is Indi an Institute of In tegrative Medicines (IIIM) to bring more 
emphasis on herbal research. The priority R& D areas of IIIM include development of drugs 
of herbal origin through the use of modem tools and techniques and institute is working 
towards the development of drugs of herbal origin for cancer, hepato-protection, immuno-
modulation, tuberculosis etc. 
(ii) A proposal is under consid eration in the Department of AYUSH to set up an institute for 
documentation and scientific validation of folk medicine in North East during XIth Plan, 
though the Department of AYUSH has set up Research Councils for focused research in 
Indian Medicine. 
(iii) Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) has set up a Regional Medical Research Centre 
at Belgaum which is being developed into an Institute for Herbal Medicine which will look 
into both traditional and modern medicine methodologies. It will be the nodal centre to 
interact with the traditional pr actitioners as well as the modern medicine physicians. It also 
will have a medicinal Plant garden where the common medicinal Plants will be grown and 
supplied to the people with proper educational materials. 
Comments 
The Committee takes note of the various in itiatives taken by the various concerned 
Departments and their affiliated Institutes. 

33. Recommendation 
The National Institute of Pharmaceutical Educ ation and Research (NIPER) an autonomous body 
set-up under the aegis of Ministry of Chemicals an d Fertilizers, is a national level Institute in 
pharmaceutical sciences with the objective of becomi ng centre of excellence for advanced studies and 
research in pharmaceutical sciences and toning up the level of phar maceutical education and research 
by training the future teachers, research scientis ts and managers for the industry and profession. The 
Committee feels that the potential of this premier Institute should be utilized efficiently for drug 
research in the country. (Para 8.30) 
Action Taken by the Government 
Facilities available at NIPER are being used  for drug research for carrying R&D in the 
Pharmaceuticals sector. These are as follows: 
(i)  Department of Science and Technology (DST) has also provided funds to NIPER for 
collaborative project with Ranbaxy Laborato ries Ltd., Gurgaon for the development of 
novel anti-Asthma agents and has also provided grants for setting up of the following 
National Facilities namely: 
(a)  National Facility on Regulatory Toxicology : development of 6-LP certified facility for 
toxicological screening of new chemical entities. 
(b)  National Centre for Safety Pharmacology 
(c)  National Facility on Pharmaco-informatics 
(d)  National Facility on Bio-availability 
(ii) Department of Biotechnology (DBT) has provided funds to NIPER for development of 
novel microbicide formulations under the DBT - ICMR collaborative effort. A project has 
been supported at NIPER to improve the oral bio-availability of cyclosporine. 
Comments 
The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

V 
FIFTH MEETING 
 The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 6th November, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1.  Dr. V. Maitreyan   ––   Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2.  Shri Suryak antbhai Acharya  
 3.  Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
 4.  Shri Kamal Akhtar 
 5.  Shri Saman Pathak 
 6.  Dr. Barun Mukherjee 
  LOK SABHA 
 7.  Shri Jashubhai Dhanabhai Barad  
 8.  Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
 9.  Shri Francis Fanthome 
 10.  Shri Brahmananda Panda 
 11.  Shrimati Neeta Pateriya 
 12.  Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil  
 13.  Shri Bachi Singh Rawat 
 14.  Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar 
 15.  Shri Mitrasen Yadav 
 16.  Shri Sita Ram Yadav 
 17.  Shri Rampal Singh 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary  
  Shri S. Jason, Joint Director 
  Shri V.S.P. Singh, Deputy Director 
  Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director 
2. The Committee took-up for consideration its draft 177th ***, ***, ***, ***, *** and *** 
Reports pertaining to the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
162
nd Report regarding the Drugs and Pharmaceuti cals Research Programme including Herbal 
Medicines; and ***, ***, ***, ***, ***, ***, ***, ***, ***, ***, ***, ***. After some discussion, the 
Committee decided to further consider the aforesaid draft Action Taken Reports in its next meeting. 
The Chairman requested the Members to furnish their suggestions/ comments, if any, on the aforesaid 
reports to the Secretariat latest by 12th November, 2007 so as to incorporate the same in the reports. 
*** Relate to other matters. 
 

3. The Committee, thereafter, decided to meet at 3.00 P.M. on the 15th  November, 2007. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

VI  
SIXTH MEETING 
 The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 15th November, 2007 in Committee Room 
‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1.  Dr. V. Maitreyan    —    Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA 
 2.  Shri Bhagirathi Majhi  
 3.  Shri Kamal Akhtar  
 4.  Shri Saman Pathak  
 5.  Shri Jabir Husain 
 6.  Dr. Barun Mukherjee  
 7.  Shri D. Raja 
  LOK SABHA 
 8.  Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
 9.  Shri Thupstan Chhewang  
 10.  Shri Francis Fanthome 
 11.  Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli  
 12.  Shri Mitrasen Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary  
  Shri S. Jason, Joint Director 
  Shri V.S.P. Singh, Deputy Director 
  Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director 
2. The Committee took-up for further consideration its draft 177th, ***, ***, ***, ***, *** and *** 
Reports pertaining to the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 
162nd report regarding the Drugs and Pharmaceu ticals Research Programme including Herbal 
Medicines; and ***, ***, ***, ***, ***, *** ***, ***, ***, ***, ***. The Committee adopted all the 
reports with minor changes as suggested by some Members. 
3. The Committee decided to present all the seven reports i.e.177
th to 183rd  on the 27 th November, 
2007. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in  his absence Dr. Barun Mukherjee to present the 
reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Francis Fanthome and in his absence Dr. Sujan Chakraborty to lay the 
copies of the reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
 
*** Relate to other matters. 
 
 

 
4. * * * 
5. * * * 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 3.40  P.M. 
 
 