PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
  
  
  
ONE HUNDRED THIRTIETH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-2005) 
      OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY 
 (DEMAND NUMBERS- 5 & 6) 
  
  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE  26TH  AUGUST, 2004) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 26TH  AUGUST, 2004) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
  
AUGUST, 2004/BHADRAPADA, 1926  (SAKA) 
                      
             
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
Website : http://parliamentofindia.nic.in 
  
  
C O N T E N T S 
                                                
1.     COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE              
2.     INTRODUCTION                                                                                                              
3.     REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                    
4.     SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                                                                            
5.     ANNEXURE                                                                                                              
6.    MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                             
  
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,  
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2004) 
  
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Prof. Saif-u d-Din Soz  
Page 1 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

3. Dr.Prabha Thakur  
4. Shri Jaswant Singh  
5. Shri Dilip Singh Judev  
6. Dr Biplab Dasgupta  
7. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav  
8. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
9. Smt. Kum Kum Rai  
10. Shri Birabhadra Singh  
  
LOK  SABHA 
  
11. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal  
12. Shri Jasubhai D. Barad              
13. Shri Sujan Chakraborty  
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhery  
15. Shri Mohan S. Delkar                
16. Shri Anantrao Gudhe  
17. Shri Babubhai Katara  
18. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik             
19. Shri Brahmananda Panda  
20. Smt. Neeta Pateriya  
21. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                          
22. Shri K.C.Singh Baba     
23. Smt. Jayaben  Thakkar  
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                                
25. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh                             
26. Shri D. Venugopal  
27. Shri Sita Ram Yadav  
28. Shri V.Aruna Kumar  
    *29. Shri Rakesh Singh          
    #30. Shri Shivajirao A.Patil 
   @31. Vacant 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
      Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
      Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary  
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
    * Nominated w.e.f. 13th August, 2004. 
    #  Nominated w.e.f. 20th August, 2004. 
   @ Shri Atma Singh Gill ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 20th August, 2004 consequent 
upon his nomination to the       
       Committee on  Food, Consumer Affairs & Public Distribution. 
INTRODUCTION 
  
      I, the Chairman of the Department-rel ated Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
Page 2 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

its behalf, present this One Hundred  Thirtieth Report of the Committe e.  This Report deals with the 
detailed Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Department of Atomic Energy (Demand No. 5 & 6). 
  
2.  In the meeting of the Committee held on 11 th August, 2004 the Secretary and other Offi cers of the 
Department of Atomic Energy gave an overview of the various activi ties of the Department and the
Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the De partment to enable it to
scrutinise the Demands for Grants. 
  
3.  The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the
clarifications sought by the Memb ers and placing before it the re quired material to enable the
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Atomic Energy. 
  
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on  24th August, 2004. 
  
  
  
REPORT 
  
The Atomic Energy Commission (AEC), created by a Governme nt of India Resolution on
August 10, 1948, is the apex body for formulation of pol icies and direction of the programmes relating
to peaceful uses of atomic energy in electricity generation, medicine, agriculture industry and research.
The Commission implements its polic ies and programmes that are mult idisciplinary in nature through
the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE), wh ich was formed on August 3, 1954. This year the
organisation is celebrating its Golden Jubilee year. From the si ngle unit, namely, the Atomic Energy
Establishment, Trombay (AEET) in  1957, today DAE comprises five Re search Centres, five Public
Sector Undertakings, three Industria l Organisations and three service organisations and seven out of its
eight fully funded institutes are engaged in basic research. In addition, the Department ’s Board o f 
Research in Nuclear Sciences (BRNS) and the National Boar d for Higher Mathematics (NBHM)
promote research in nuclear and allied fields, and mathematics. 
  
2.         The programmes being pursued by DAE emanate from the following mandate: 
  
¾      Increasing share of nuclear power through deployment of indigenous and other proven
technologies, along with devel opment of fast breeder react ors and thorium reactors with
associated fuel cycle facilities; 
¾      Building and operation of res earch reactors for production of  radioisotopes and carrying
out radiation technology applications in the field of medicine, agriculture and industry; 
¾      Developing advanced technologies such as  accelerators, lasers, supercomputers, 
advanced materials and instrumentation, and encouraging transfer of technology to
industry; 
¾      Support to basic research in nuclear ener gy and related frontier areas of science; 
Interaction with universiti es and academic instituti ons; Support to research and
development projects having a bearing on DAE ’s programmes, and International 
cooperation in related advanced areas of research; and 
NEW DELHI; 
August 24, 2004 
P.G.NARAYANAN, 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on  
 Science & Technology, Environment & 
Forests
Page 3 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

¾      Contribution to national security. 
  
3.         The atomic energy programmes comprise  three sectors, namely, ‘Nuclear Power Sector’, 
‘Industries & Minerals Sector (I & M Sector)’ and ‘Res earch & Development Se ctor(R & D Sector)’. 
The Plan and Non-Plan outlays of  the Department are formulated  under power sect or, industries an d
minerals (I&M) sector and Research and Development sector. The financial supports for the activities of
the Department are provided by budge tary support. The public sector undertakings of the Department
provide Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (I EBR) in addition to budgetary support to the capital
and infrastructural developments.         
  
4.         The Nuclear Power Sector of the De partment deals with design, construction and operation o f
commercial power reactors with a ssociated safety in all its phase s.  This comprises building o f 
Pressurised Heavy Water Reactors  (PHWR) and development of Fa st Breeder Reactors (FBR) and
Thorium Reactors on commercial s cale.  Associated waste manage ment and environment monitoring
and technology development relating to operation and maintenance of the reactors also form part of the
programmes. 
  
5.         Industries & Minerals Sector is involved in industrial application of  technologies developed in 
the R&D facilities and includes- pr ogrammes related to nuclear fuel cycle covering design, construction 
and operation of industrial plants for refining ores, fabrication of  fuel, production of heavy water,
instrumentation and control, etc. needed for sustai ned operation of the power reactors; and applications
of radioisotopes, radi ation, laser and accelerator  technology for developmen t in industry, medicine,
agriculture and food preservation. 
  
6.         Research & Development Sector pr ovides R & D support to the Nuclear Power Programme o f 
the Department.  The R & D effort s of DAE are in multidisciplinar y high technology areas.  Significant 
achievements have been made in building technical capabilities in the design, construction and operation
of Pressurised Heavy Water Reactors (PHW R); exploration, mining ex traction, purification and
conversion of nuclear mate rials; production of fuel element for nuclear reactors; pr oduction of heavy
water; health and safety research; development and application of lasers and accelerators; development
of Fast Breeder Test Re actors and related instrumentation; re processing of spent fuels; waste
management and production and use of  radioisotopes, besides basic re search in frontier areas of S&T,
particularly radio-astronomy, molecular biology, condensed matter physics, computer science, etc. 
  
7.         Demands for Grants of DAE are covered under two heads viz. – 
  
            1.  Demand No. 5 - Atomic Energy 
            2.  Demand No. 6 - Nuclear Power Schemes 
  
  
Demand No.-5- Atomic Energy 
  
          This Demand covers provisions for the expenditure of Secretariat of  the Department and Atomic
Energy Regulatory Board (AERB).  The expenditure on Research, Indus trial projects and Scientific 
Services are carried out in the Units as detailed below: 
 
 
Research & Development Institutions: 
  
            -   Bhabha Atomic Research Centre  (BARC), Mumbai 
            -   Indira Grandhi Centre for Atomic Research (IGCAR), Kalpakkam 
            -   Centre for Advanced Technology (CAT), Indore
Page 4 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

            -   Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre (VECC), Kalkota 
            -   Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research (AMD), 
    Hyderabad. 
  
            Industrial Institutions : 
  
            -   Nuclear Fuel Complex (NFC), Hyderabad 
            -   Heavy  Water Projects 
            -   Board of Radiation and Isotope Technology (BRIT), Mumbai 
  
            Common Services Organisations : 
  
            -   Directorate of Purchase & Stores (DPS), Mumbai. 
            -   Directorate of Construction, Services & Estate Management (DCS&EM), 
                Mumbai 
            -   General Services Organisation (GSO), Kalpakkam
 
  
Aided Institutions : 
  
            -  Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Mumbai 
            -  Tata Memorial Centre (TMC), Mumbai 
            -  Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics (SINP), Koltaka 
            -  Institute of Physics (IOP), Bhubaneswar 
            -  Institute of Mathematical Sciences (IMS), Chennai 
            -  Harish-Chandra Research Institute (HRI), Allahabad 
            -  Institute for Plasma Research (IPR), Gandhinagar 
            -  Other Institutes receiving Grants-in-aid 
  
            Public Sector Undertakings 
             
-   Indian Rare Earths Ltd. (IREL),  Mumbai 
            -   Uranium Corporation of India Ltd. (UCIL), Jaduguda 
            -   Electronics Corporation of India Ltd. (ECIL), Hyderabad 
  
  
  
Demand No. 6 – Nuclear Power Schemes 
  
          This Demand covers provision for expenditure in respect of: 
  
-   Operation and maintenance of Rajasthan Atomic Power Station  
                Unit-I (RAPS-I) 
            -   Waste Management Facilities 
            -    Fuel Inventory 
            -    Heavy Water Pool Management 
  
            Expenditure for the capital projec ts of BARC and IGCAR and pr ovisions for investment in 
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd. (NPCIL) a nd Bhartiya Nabhikiya  Vidyut Nigam Ltd.
(BHAVINI), at Chennai, Tamil Nadu is included under this demand. 
  
8.         Plan Outlay 2004-05 (Demand No. 5 – Atomic Energy)
Page 5 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

  
(a)        Atomic Energy Research 
  
            The Plan Outlay for 2004-05 is Rs. 703.58 Cror es (Outlay in 2003-04 was                 Rs. 464.00 
Crores)  for Research and Devel opment Sector  which is for cont inuing Research and Development o f 
Technologies and for pursuing the New Schemes of the Xth Plan  Schemes of the Atomic Energy  
Research and Development Program me at the Bhabha Atomic Res earch Centre, Variable Energy
Cyclotron Centre, Atomic Minerals  Directorate for Exploration a nd Research, Centre for Advanced
Technology, Tata Institute of Fundame ntal Research, Tata Memorial Ce ntre, Saha Institute of  Nuclea r 
Physics, Institute of Physics, Ins titute for Plasma Research, Harish-C handra Research Institute, Institute 
for Mathematical Sciences and other institutions like Board of Research in Nuclear Sciences, National
Board for Higher Mathematics, etc. for conducting res earch in the field of nuclear science, carrying out
national programmes and also fo r providing housing and infrastruc tural facilities for the various
Research and Development Units and Aided Institutions of the Department. 
  
(b)        Atomic Energy Industries 
  
            The Outlay for 2004-05 is Rs. 722.54 Crores (O utlay in 2003-04 was                   Rs. 472.10 
Crores) for the I & M Sector.  The Plan Outlay consists of Rs . 550.80 Crores by way of budgetary
support and Rs.  171.74 Cror es by way of Internal  Resources of Indian Rare Earths Ltd. (IREL),
Electronics Corporation of India Ltd. (ECIL) and Ur anium Corporation of India Ltd. (UCIL), the Public
Sector Undertakings of the Department.  The budgetary suppor t includes provisions for majo r
modifications in the Heavy Water Plant, Baroda and minor modifi cations for other operating Heavy
Water Plants of the Heavy Water Board.  In addi tion, the provisions are fo r two things, namely fo r 
ongoing projects and the other for newly conceived sc hemes of Bhabha Atomic  Research Centre and
Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic  Research.  This apart, the budgetary support is to take care o f
completion of continuing and new Xth Plan schemes by Nuclear Fuel Complex.  Other Projects include 
development works as well as su rvey, prospecting and exploration being pursued by Atomic Minerals
Directorate for Exploration and Re search.  The outlay also includes provision for execution of projects 
by the Board of Radiation and Is otope Technology relating to producti on of radioisotopes and nuclea r
medicines for supply to various hospitals and industries incl uding processing faci lity for cyclotron
produced radioisotopes and radiopharmaceuticals.  From the budgetary sup port, investment in Equity in 
the Public Sector Undertakings of  the Department viz. Electronic s Corporation of India Ltd., Indian
Rare Earths Ltd.  and Uranium Corporation of India Ltd., are also granted.   
  
  
9.         Plan Outlay 2004-05 ( Demand No. 6 – Nuclear Power Schemes) 
  
            The total outlay under Power Sect or for 2004-05 is Rs 4168.62 Cror es (Outlay in 2003-04 was 
Rs. 3170.00 Crores) .  The Plan outlay consists  of Rs. 2257.62  Crores (2003-04 was Rs. 2000.00 
Crores) by way of budgetary s upport and    Rs. 1911.00 Crores (2003-04 was Rs. 1170.00 Crores)  by 
way of Internal and  Extra Budgetary Resources.  Of the total budgetary support, the provision for 
investment in equity in Nuclea r Power Corporation of India Ltd. (NPCIL) to the tune of Rs. 1283.00
Crores (Rs. 1200.00 Crores during 2003-04) for the ongoing power projects. and  Rs. 253.30   Crores for 
the newly constituted  Bharatiya Nabhikiya Vidyut  Nigam Ltd. (BHAVINI), at  Chennai, Tamil Nadu  
for  construction  of Pr ototype Fast Breeder Reac tor.  The provision also  includes budgetary support o f 
Rs. 700.00 Crores (Rs. 700.00 Crores during 2003-04) for the Externally Aided Project at  Kudankulam 
being executed by the Russian Federa tion for the Nuclear Po wer Corporation of I ndia Ltd.   Projects o f 
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre su ch as Additional Upgrading Facili ty for Nuclear Power Plant, Hot
Cell Facilities for PIE and Advanced Heavy Water Reactor and that of  Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic
Research to provide R&D Su pport for the Protot ype Fast Breeder React or are also bein g funded out o f
Page 6 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

the budgetary support.  
  
 Budgetary Allocation 
  
            The Budget Estimates (BE) and Actuals for the year 2002-03, Budget Estimates (BE) and Revised
  
Power Sector 
  
10.       The Committee was informed that in di stribution of funds, share of power sector has been
reduced from 56% to 52% during 2004-2005. The budgetary support for Power Sector which comprises
of both Plan and Non-Plan categories has in fact  marginally been reduced in BE for the year 2004-05.  
The total budgetary support of DAE being Rs. 6913.40 Cr ores, the Power Sector has been allocated Rs.
3570.63 Crores in 2004-05 against Rs.3466.58 Crores in 2003-04.  There is marginal reduction in Power 
Sector in the Non-plan budget.  The Plan allocation has actually been increased from Rs. 2000.00 Crores
in BE 2003-04 to Rs. 2257.62 Crores in  BE 2004-05.  There is also  significant increase in IEB R 
allocation from Rs. 1170 Cr ores in 2003-04 to Rs. 1911 Crores in 2004-05.  However, as there is no 
reduction in the Plan budgetary support as well as in overall annual Plan allocation, there will not be any
adverse effect on the progress of Plan schemes. 
  
11.       The Committee was informed that out of  Plan outlay of Rs. 5498.50 Cr ores for the Power sector 
in IXth Plan, the outlay for Nuclear Power Cor poration of India Ltd. (NPCIL) was Rs. 5187.43 Crores.  
The actual utilization at Rs. 4933.87 Crores fell short of the ou tlay by Rs. 253.56 Crores, which
amounted to about 95% utilization.  The major areas  of under utilization had been in respect of the 
TAPP-3&4, Kaiga-3&4 projects and MAPS-1 Coolant Channel Replacement (CCR) works.  
  
12.       TAPP-3&4 project was kept in abeyance since 1991 and was to be launched in 1997-98 as pe r 
IXth Plan proposals.  However, th e project could be revived only in  1998 after approval of the revised 
cost estimates by the Government of India.  The revival of many orders for long delivery items too k 
longer time.  The expenditure (Rs.1363.44 Crores) in  IXth Plan was less than the Plan outlay
(Rs.1973.17 Crores) as it took time to pick up the project work. 
  
13.       The Committee was informed that Ka iga-3&4 project was planne d for launching in the 1999-
2000 as per IXth Plan proposals but  the financial sanction could be  accorded only in May 2001 and
hence the major part of the expenditure on this proj ect shifted to Xth Plan.  Actual expenditure was 
Rs.212.31 Crores against outlay of Rs.300.00 Crores. 
  
14.       The coolant channels of  earlier reactors have a life of 8 to  10 effective full power years afte
r
which these are to be replaced through an ancillary scheme designated as “En mass Coolant Channels 
Replacement (EMCCR)”.  EMCCR of MAPS was include d in IXth Plan proposal s.  However, based on 
detailed in-service inspection of c oolant channels of MAPS-1, it wa s decided that the operations coul d 
be continued for some more time before taking up EMCCR.  Accordingl y, the expenditure in respect o f 
EMCCR works was Rs.42.79 Crores against the out lay of Rs.258.46 Crores as the project was
intentionally postponed to Xth Plan. 
  
15.       The Department informed the Committee that in anticipation of obt aining financial sanction, a
provision of Rs. 82 Crores was made in the IXth Plan in Indi ra Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research
(IGCAR) towards the setting up of the “Prototype  Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR) – 500 MWe” at 
Kalpakkam.  The financial sanction was receive d only in September 2003, af ter getting the various
statutory clearances, which took much  longer time than an ticipated and the entire amount of outlay was
surrendered.  In the other project of “Setting up of a Prot otype Fast Breeder R eactor – Raw Material 
Development” with outla y of Rs.118.00 Crores, slow progress of work for manufacturin g technology 
Page 7 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

development of critical component s of the reactor and delays in qualification of welding and othe r
forming procedures involving trials and developmental work, contributed to lower utilization of funds.  
The consultancy contract for PFB R could be awarded only by Novemb er 2000, as the finalization and
approval of financial sanc tion had to be channelled through various agencies and the process involved
satisfaction of stringen t terms and conditions.  He nce, there was surrender of funds and the actual
utilization was Rs.55.67 Crores.  
  
16.       The Committee is happy to note that in X th Plan, out of total outl ay of Rs. 23,283 Crores fo r 
NPCIL, Rs. 21569 Crores (92.6%) is for schemes fo r which the Government  has already accorded
financial sanctions.  The work on these schemes ha s commenced and is progressing as per schedule.  
The Committee is of the view that with the current physical and financial progress of projects, utilization
for these schemes of the NPCIL is certain.  However the Department should ensure regular review of the
status of procurement and close follow-up at every level to avoi d the increase in gestation period.  The 
PFBR (Pressurised Fast Breeder Reactors) project that is being undertaken through a newly formed PSU
namely Bharatiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Ltd. (BHAVINI) should also be closely monitored. 
  
  
17.       In reply to the Committee’s query regarding what are the objectives of enhancing the plan outlay 
exponentially and which were the ne w schemes to be undertaken duri ng the current pl an period the
Committee was informed that the approved Xth Plan envisages a capacity addition of 1300 MWe by the
end of the Plan period and 2660 MWe by December 2008 pr ogressively.  In addition, the Xth plan also 
envisages commencing new schemes and pre-project activi ties on future projects to be completed 
towards the end of XIth Plan and beginning of XIIth Plan.  Due to these reasons, in respect of NPCIL, 
the outlay for the Xth Plan has been fixed at Rs.23823 Crores against Rs.5187.43 Crores in IXth Plan. 
  
  
18.       The outlay in the Xth  Plan for projects under construction (TAPP-3&4, Kaiga-3&4, 
Kudankulam Unit 1&2 and RAPP-5&6) is Rs. 20585 Crores.  In addition, there is a provision of Rs. 630 
Crores for MAPS Coolant Channel Replacement and upgradation; Rs. 1 68 Crores for operating stations
towards schemes like integrated in formation system, office building and quarters, office equipment and
R&D.  Xth  plan also envisages setting up of LWR 3&4 (Rs. 619 Cror es), 7 NP-1&2 (Rs. 355 Crores), 
pre-project activities of LWR-5&6 (Rs.150 Crores) and pre-project activitie s of 7 NP-3&4 (Rs. 150 
Crores), NAPS CCR and upgradation (Rs. 256 Crores) and TAPS- SSG replacement (Rs. 73 Crores).  
  
19.       The Committee was also informed that Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) comprise 
of borrowings and internal surpluses and Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) has been
able to borrow from the market, during the year 2003-04, funds at comp etitive rates considering “AAA”
rating of the company.  Due to the lower interest  rates and high level of operating performance o f 
NPCIL in the recent past, the Nucl ear Power Corporation of India Li mited has been possible to raise
adequate funds from the debt market to the tune of the extra budgetary resources of Rs. 9807 Crores that
comprise of borrowings from the market in the form of bonds (tax free, taxabl e and infrastructure) and
internal surplus.  Better performance of nuclear pow er stations coupled with optimal realization of dues 
from State Electricity Boards as per Ahluwalia committee reco mmendations have contributed in
enhancing the internal surplus.  
  
20.       The Committee recommends that the Depa rtment should initiate th e process of mid-term 
appraisal about the performance of schemes in Power sector as fina lization of such schemes and thei r
approval from competent authority are considerably delayed resulti ng in re-allocat ion of outlays 
amongst the approved and on-going schemes. 
   
Industries and Minerals Sector (I&M Sector)
Page 8 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

  
21.       In reply to the Committee’s observation from the data that during 2002-2003 and 2003-2004, the 
non-plan expenditure out of the budgetary support component has been shor t of the plan budgetary
allocation in I&M Sector to the tune of Rs.54.12 Cror es and Rs.14.03 Crores  respectively.The
Department informed the Committee that the shortfal l in 2002-03 was mainly in three areas: Feed Stoc k 
Material (Rs.33.88 Crores), Heavy Water Production  (Rs.6.20 Crores) and BARC (Rs.7.39 Crores). 
  
22.       The head of account ‘Feed Stock Materi al’ is operated for accounti ng the cost of heavy wate r
produced by the Heavy Water Plants  including the heavy water acquire d from M/s NFL, Nangal.  The 
shortfall is due to the reduction in O&M expenditure and also due to less payment to M/s NFL pending
finalization of fair pri ce for the year 2002-2003 and settlement of account with NFL due to closure o f
Nangal plant.   
  
23.       In Heavy Water Production, the reasons for s hortfall could be attributed  to sudden stoppage o f
M/s. SPIC Ammonia Plant when HWP (Tuticorin) ha d to take forced shut  down resulting in non-
utilization of utilitie s and consequential reduction in O&M expenditure.  Non-payment of gri d 
supporting charges to M/s APTRANSCO pending stay order from High Court, Andhra Pradesh and less
receipt of coal from M/s SCCL  by HWP Manuguru due to unexpect ed strike for three weeks also
contributed to the lower level of expenditure.  
  
24.       The shortfall in expenditure in BARC was mainly due to surre nder of provision made fo
r
payment of overtime allowance esti mated at higher rate, including ar rears, on implementation of Vth
Pay Commission Report.  For re-processing plants, the shortfall under Materials & Supplies and Mino r
Works occurred as the plant maintenance work in  Hot areas could not be taken up and due to re-
tendering of certain works.  Reduc tion in requirement of furnace oi l and consumables added to the
savings.  Economy measures under domestic travel and office expenses also contributed to the savings.   
  
25.       In 2003-04, the reasons for shortfall in HW B are attributed to less c onsumption of power/steam 
and other utilities by HWP Ko ta due to frequent outages of RAPS-II,  reduction in unit rate of electricity 
than estimated due to withdrawal  of transmission and distribution charges by MSEB.  In BARC, the 
shortfall in expenditure is mainly due to similar reasons as happened in the previous year. 
  
26.       Explaining the reasons for wide gap in Budget Estimates and Actuals during 2002-2003, the 
Department informed the Committe e that in 2002-03 th e shortfall between actua l expenditure and Plan 
BE comprised of two segments, IEBR and budgetary support.  The overall shortfall of Rs. 179.16 Crores 
included a deficit of Rs. 83.07 Crores in IEBR and Rs. 96.09 Crores in budgetary support. 
  
27.       In IEBR, for Uranium Corporation of Indi a Limited (UCIL) payment to  Central Reserve Police 
Force against the residential complex to be taken ove r from them for the Turamdih Mines Project could
not be made, as the deal could not be finalized during the year  2002-03.  Also IEBR could not be
realized due to delay in getting various clearances for ot her new projects contemplated for Xth Plan
period.  For Indian Rare Earth L imited (IREL), the shortfall in IE BR resulted because due to the
prevailing recession in the market, the expansion of Phase-I of Chav ara, Manavalakuruchi and OSCOM 
was kept in abeyance till the market is improved. 
  
28.       The Committee was informed that in the ar ea of budgetary support, the s hortfall is significant in 
ECIL, UCIL, BARC and IGCAR.  Th e detailed reasons for the lower ut ilization of budgetary resources 
in UCIL, where the shortfall is to the tune of  Rs. 35 Crores was due to delay in getting various
clearances for commencement of new mining projects.  This wa s in consonance with lower IEB R 
utilization in related project investments. 
             
Page 9 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

29.       In ECIL, a provision of  Rs.29.00 Crores was made for the Vo luntary Retirement Scheme (VRS) 
as per the existing scheme for reduction of establis hment on financial restructuring of the company.  
Since the employees did not opt for the scheme as anticipated, the amount could not be utilized resulting
in shortfall of Rs.29.00 Crores. 
  
  
30.       In BARC, the shortfall of Rs. 14.10 Crores was mainly on account of delay in processing of Xth  
Plan projects for obtaining financial sanction from the competent au thorities.  In IGCAR also two new 
projects were sanctioned towards the fag end of the financial year, resulting in overall saving of Rs. 7.77
Crores. 
  
31.       For the year 2003-04, the gap between BE and RE has reduced.  Here also the overall shortfall of 
Rs. 77.21 Crores is almost equally distributed between shortfalls in IEBR  of Rs. 38.24 Crores and Rs.
38.97 Crores in budgetary support.  Th e shortfall in IEBR is only in re spect of IREL, the reason being
identical to that in the previous year. 
  
32.       In budgetary support, the deficit is in IGCAR,  BARC and BRIT.           In BARC, BE for the 
year 2003-04 was Rs.140.00 Crores ag ainst which RE 2003-04 was Rs.131 Crores, the shortfall being 
Rs.9 Crores.  The delay in award of Procurement & Construction (P &C) contracts for Additional Wate r
Tank Farms (AWTFs) and Spent Fuel  Storage Facilities (SFSFs) was th e main reason that resulted in
non-utilization of budget provision. 
  
33.       In IGCAR, for the project “Fabrication of U-Pu MOX Fuel Pins fo r the first cores of PFBR”
processing, technical evaluation of the bids and cl earances at various stages took more time than
anticipated. Increase in price of steel  also contributed to delays in processing of items like glove boxes.
For “PFBR Fuel Cycle Facili ties (PFCF)”, the project proposals prep ared were being integrated for the
facilities to be co-located. Delivery of some of the major equipm ent such as XRD and vacuum hot press 
etc. was doubtful due to embargo. The submission of the proposal for the project on “Refurbishment o f 
Fire water system” was delayed. The shortfall of Rs .12.00 Crores in IGCAR is due to reasons explained 
above. 
  
34.       In BRIT, Memorandum of Understandi ng (MoU) for execution of the project “Development o f 
Radiation Equipment & Test Facility”  with “Automotive Research Asso ciation of India” (ARAI), Pune 
could be finalized only in Februa ry 2004.  The procurement of mach inery & equipment and civil works
were to be rescheduled resulting in savings  of Rs.2.44 Crores in the project “Revamping & 
Augmentation of Infrastructure Facilities”. 
  
35.       The Committee observes that the Non-utilization of fund in the first two years was largely due to
delay in sanction of new projects. The Committee hopes that   with al most all the projects now having 
received sanction of the competent authority, su ch shortfall should not be envisaged in 2004-05. 
However, the Committee recommends  that closer monitoring of pr ojects at higher level must be
undertaken to remedy the situation.   
  
R&D Sector 
  
36.       To a specific question regarding adequate  provisions under R & D sector of the Department o f 
Atomic Energy for the year 2004 – 05 to meet the requirement of th e Department under, Plan and non-
plan allocations; the Committee was informed that in Non-plan category, compared to Rs. 852.91 Crores 
in RE 2003-04, the provision in BE 2004-05 has been made for Rs. 911.51 Crores.  This compares well 
with the past trend of actual expenditure of Rs. 811.97 Crores in 2002-03. 
  
Page 10 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

37.       In the Plan component, the Department considers that there is significant increase in allocation to 
take care of the growing demand fo r execution of projects that are now  in full swing.  The provision has 
been kept at Rs. 703.58 Crores in  BE 2004-05 against Rs . 427.97 Crores in RE 2003- 04.  It has to be 
observed that the actual expenditu re in the first year of the Pl an period was Rs. 405.56 Crores only.  
Thus with the substantial larger allocation in BE 2004-05, the pace of  accelerated progress of on-going 
schemes and undertaking of new sche mes will be achieved and ther e will be no financial crunch in
pursuing R&D schemes.   
  
38.       The Department informed the Committee that  the major shortfall could be attributed to the units
like BARC, IGCAR, TIFR, IPR and allocation under Housing projects.  In TMC as well as allocation 
under grants-in-aid, the actual ex ceeded BE provision and additional  amounts were to be provided 
through re-appropriation.  In BARC,  the saving of Rs. 85.27 Crores o ccurred due to recasting/ re-
working the project reports after di scussion in various forums.  Keepi ng this in view the provision was 
significantly reduced at RE stag e.  The provisions against conti nuing schemes of IXth Plan were 
successfully utilized.  Out of total 45 new scheme s, financial sanction was accorded for 24 schemes 
during the last four months of the year 2002-03 and out of them as many as 9 schemes were cleare d
during the last week of March 2003.  Delay in sanction of new projects  contributed to the shortfall in
expenditure.  
  
39.       There was sizeable saving in Housing pr ojects and this comprise d of projects undertaken by
DCS&EM as well as by other units and autonomous bodies directly. So far as  DCS&EM is concerned,
the purchase of ready-built flats from Air India could not be made  due to non-clear ance from CIDCO 
and the renovation of OYC building could not be ta ken up due to delay in clearance from various
statutory bodies, leading to shortfall of Rs.16.55 Crores.  In CAT, due to contractual problem, there was 
delay in award of work for construc tion of 60 Nos. type II I quarters. Also occurrence of weak strata fo r
resting foundation of fort y-eight nos. Efficiency Apartments resu lted in re-design of foundation and 
delay in execution of construction work.  These resulted in shortfall of Rs.5.40 Crores. 
  
  
40.       In IPR, the shortfall was due to delay in  the manufacture of some cr itical equipment for SST1, 
because of which certain deliverie s could not be made in time.  In addition to this, under the new 
schemes of Xth plan, infrastructure project expenditure coul d not be realized due to legal problems in
purchase of building for FCIPT at Gandhinagar.  The shortfall was Rs. 12 Crores for the unit. 
  
41.       In IGCAR, the project “3mgd water supply to DAE projects at Kalpakkam” is being executed as 
a deposit work through Tamilnadu Govt.  In spite of best efforts made at  the highest levels to expedite
the works, due to resistance from the villagers for the scheme and also  due to delay in award of contract
for laying of 12 km pipe lines, the expected progres s in the project could not be achieved.  “Pulsed 
Magnetic Field Facility - PUFF” and “INDUS2 experiments” under basic research could not be utilized, 
as the projects were dropped from th e Xth Plan.  However, efforts were  made to expedite various items 
of procurement, under othe r projects and the shortfal l was reduced. This has re sulted in a shortfall o f
Rs.9.38 Crores. 
  
42.       In 2003-04, the gap between BE and RE provisions is mainly in BARC, TMC and AMD.  In 
BARC, the shortfall of Rs.40 Crores is  due to delay in finalization of drawings and tendering work etc.  
The delay in procurement of high value items is mainly attri butable to embargo imposed on imported
items by major supplying countries that has significantly contributed to the shortfall. 
  
43.       In TMC, some of the supplies had not materi alized at the fag end of the previous year for which 
fund was released from the Department resulting in accumulation of unspent balance at the close of the
year.  To utilize the uns pent amount, lower amounts were released in 2003-04 resultin g in shortfall at 
Page 11 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

RE stage. 
  
44.       In AMD, the deferment of procurement of  machinery and equipment, spares for labs and lowe r
expenditure in civil works under the scheme ‘Technology Demonstration and Infrastructure 
Development’ due to delay in finali zation of architectural a nd structural designs, re sulted in a shortfall 
of Rs.5.00 Crores. 
             
45.       In AMD, the deferment of procurement of  machinery and equipment, spares for labs and lowe r
expenditure in civil works under the scheme ‘Technology Demonstration and Infrastructure 
Development’ due to delay in finali zation of architectural a nd structural designs, re sulted in a shortfall 
of Rs.5.00 Crores. 
  
  
46.       For optimum utilization of Plan allocati ons and achieving targeted progress of schemes, the
Committee recommends that the Department should immediately take following actions:- 
a)                  Monitoring Committees should be appointed  at various levels to monitor the
quantifiable targets with a pr imary objective to assess the possibility of reaching the
targets of the Xth  Plan. 
  
b)
                  At the unit level, individual ex perts should assist the monito ring Committees so formed 
to continuously monitor to expedite civil and other related works.  
  
  
c)                  Projects implementation should be monitored at higher leve l to ensure utilization o f
provisions vis-à-vis projected targets. 
  
  
47.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that in its fiftieth year DAE has mastered a host of highly
complex technologies particularly in  the field of medical radiology; nuclear agriculture; desalination;
food irradiation; radio as tronomy; holography; partic le accelerators, plasma and cryogenics which no
country would share with India. True to the visions of Dr. Homi J. Bhabha and Jawaharlal Nehru,
envisaging the usage of Atomic Ener gy to make a difference to the so ciety, the DAE should now strive
to scale it up and take it to a much higher level. For instance, currently, nuclear power accounts nearly 3
per cent of our total electri city generation and the Depa rtment should strive to ma ke it ten times larger.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Department should now move towards Compact High
Temperature Reactors so that in the coming years the Nation looks at nuclear energy as a primary
energy source. There are othe r applications of atomic  energy and they contribut e a small fraction to the 
Indian economy. The Department shoul d identify the key drivers that would form the basis of pushing
its programme to make them big. 
  
  
Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai 
  
48.       The Committee was apprised of the ach ievements of the Tata Me morial Hospital, Mumbai
(TMH) under the Department in th e area of tackling Bone Cancer  through the indigenous Prosthesis
(New Indigenous Customised Endoprosthes is) developed by them which costs 1/10 th of the imported 
Prosthesis i.e. Rs 35,000/- and that allows patients to opt for “Limb-Salvage Surgeries” thereby not only 
saving a patients life but also avoiding amputation of their limb. The Secretary also informed the
Committee that there are several regional cancer treatment  centres, which have  their own satellite
hospitals and rural outreach facilities for diagnosing and treating cancer. With the cooperation of Union
Health Ministry and the Department of Space, Tata Memorial Centre under DAE throu gh “telemedicine 
Page 12 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

link” is networking with different hospitals in the country.  
  
49.       The Committee recommends that th is facility of li nkage through “telemed icine” as has been 
done with the Cancer Centre at Guwahati should also be done with  other 19 Cancer centres in the
country. This should be expedited and completed at the earliest so that the regional centres are benefited
by exchange of opinion, transfer of  data, training programmes and servic e to patients thereby increasing
the outreach facilities of the Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai.  
  
  
Nuclear Waste Management and Disposal 
  
50.       The Committee has been given to unde rstand that there are two main options for the 
management of spent nuclear fuel. The first option is to use the fuel  in reactor only once.  After its 
removal from the reactor, the spent fuel is declar ed high level waste as such.  Another option is to 
recycle spent nuclear fuel by reproc essing.   Spent fuel contains Uran ium and Plutonium.   They can be 
reused in the manufacture of nuclear fuel.  In or der the separate Uranium and Plutonium from spent 
nuclear fuel, it is reprocessed at  reprocessing plants.  Reprocessi ng does not solve the waste problem 
because the remaining high level liquid waste generate d by reprocessing must be  disposed of in some
places.  The liquid is solidified in glass for final disposal. 
  
51.       There are five more or less possible alternativ es for final disposal of hi gh-level waste.  They are 
monitored long-term storage, final disposal deep in bedrock, embedding in th e bottom sediments of the
ocean, final disposal in deep bore holes and transmutation.  
  
52.       In monitored long-term storage, wastes are stored temporar ily within the Power Plant areas in
ground or near surface storage structur es.  The justification for this alternative is that technological 
development may bring with it better methods of arranging the waste management.  The most significant 
draw back of indefinite interim storage is that it assumes that future societies will remain stable and
capable of maintaining the stores. 
  
53.       The Committee was also  informed that, nowadays, most of the countries that use nuclear energy
have a programme for the final dispos al of high level wastes in bedroc k.  As a host rock for disposal, 
granite, salt, clay, clay stones and tuff  formations are being invest igated.          In ‘direct final disposal’, 
encapsulated fuel rod assemblies are disposed of as such.  In ‘reprocessi ng’, high-level waste is 
solidified in glass before final disposal.  
  
54.       Other alternatives for the geological dispos al of high-level waste are final di sposal in deep 
boreholes or in the seabed.  These alternatives are practically permanent solutions unlike facilities in 
bedrock.   High-level waste could be brought back on the surface from deep repositories if required.  
However, the Committee feels that this would be very costly. 
55.       The Committee is of the opinion that bedroc k or seabed at a depth of  several kilometers would 
probably isolate radioactive substances effectively.  However, th e Committee feels th at afterwards it 
would be difficult to  verify the safety of thes e disposal methods.  There is no certainty that waste 
canisters would remain intact in the depths of ocea n or bedrock.  Besides, it would most probably be 
difficult to win international approval for final disposal of wastes in seabed. 
56.       There are two fold spent nuclear fuel canisters.  The inner canister of nodular cast-iron is 
surrounded by external canister made  up of copper that is about 5 cm. thick.  The canisters are lowered 
into the final disposal repository.    The repository  comprises a network of tunnels.  The tunnels are 
excavated in bedrock at a depth of 400 to 700 meters. 
57.       Spent nuclear fuel is isolated from the environment by multiple safety  barriers.  For example, 
corrosion resistant waste canisters and the surroundin g bentonite cla y isolate nuclear waste from
Page 13 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

bedrock for a very long time.  The bedrock of the final disposal site must be of good quality and suitable 
for the safe final disposal of radioactive substances. 
58.       For minimizing the high level nuclear waste volume for pe rmanent storage and eventually
determining what happens to the ma terial when it leaks out of th e tank, the Committ ee feels, it is
necessary to decrease the waste volume by evaporating as much water as possible from the crusty
sludge.  This will make the transport of the waste easier and storage less costly.   
59.       Since there is a clear relationship between chemical composition of th is waste material and the 
data from the spectrometer, Ra man spectrometer method could be developed into a fiber optic
instrument that would allo w testing of materials in the tanks fr om a distance.  The Raman spectromete r 
method possibly could act as a sophisticated type of l itmus paper, or a colour coded pH sensor to detect
undesirable chemical composition. The high level nuclear waste such as spent fuel from nuclear reactors
could be stored in containers that hold up for approximately hundred years but stowing nuclear waste for
the long run will require containm ent materials that can resist leaching and radiation damage fo r
thousands of years. 
60.       Typically, radioactive emissions jostle the at oms out of their careful ly ordered arrangements
within the storage material.  The material eventu ally becomes unstable and thus prone to cracking,
swelling or structural change. 
61.       The key seems to be that atoms in the stru cture of the material are re latively disordered and can 
shift positions with ease, thereby tolerating minute defects caused by radiatio n.  Therefore, looking fo r 
better storage materials li ke ceramics which are called ‘complex oxide’ are proper because it shares a 
basic chemical formula i.e. two di fferent pairs of metallic cations i.e. positively charged ions and 7
Oxygen atoms.  Depending on their size, the cation pairs may give these materials either a highly 
ordered or a somewhat disordered st ructure.    Pyrochlore, which is a brown material, is extremely ideal 
because atoms within it cannot easily trade places.  Brown pyrochlore structures are promising for use in 
waste containment because th ey are chemically compatible candidate with waste constituents.  Purple 
fluorite structure also does well u nder irradiation because atoms within this mate rial can shift around to
accommodate the defects with little effort.  Except  pyrochlore and fluorite type crystalline materials, 
other crystalline materials with rela tively disordered struct ures may be resistant to radiation damage as
well.  In many countries including Ja pan, Russia and some countries in  Europe, crystalline materials are 
preferred as candidate for nuclear waste storage containers.  However,  in USA vitreous glass like an d 
cemented materials are used for storage of nuclear material. 
62.       The Committee is of the view that ‘Fluorite Ceramic’ materi als show promise as  safe, radiation 
proof materials and should be further developed to contain nuclear wastes. 
63.       The highly radioactive wastes are either extracted by a solution that does not mix with the waste 
solution; a process called solvent extraction or is re moved by ion exchangers.  The high level wastes are 
then to be immobilized in a special glass, placed inside steel drums and buried about 1000 ft. deep in salt
mines, in sites to be designate d.   The remaining low-level waste may then be encased in cement an d 
stored on site. 
64.       Inorganic ion exchangers can also be used  in nuclear medicines.  Radioactive elements with 
short half lives currently are used to determine blood flow or to locate a tumor.   With the ion exchanger, 
it might be possible to be tter target the tumor by sparing surr ounding healthy cells.  Inorganic materials 
exchange ions more efficiently than organic materials and they can withstand radiation better. 
65.       In transmutation, very long-lived radio active substances could be separated from waste and 
destroyed.  Transmutation means that radioactive sour ce material is transforme d stable, short lived or 
fissile.   Transmutation would be used to destr oy those substances of spent nuclear fuel that have very
long half-lives, even of millions of years.  Among these substa nces there are Iodi ne-129, Technetium-
99, Caesium-135, Selenium-79 and ma ny substances heavier than Uranium which are also known as
‘Transuranic’nuclear substances. 
66.       The Committee is of the opinion th at transmutation is researched all the time.  It seems to be 
difficult to develop industrial scale transmutation processes for nuclear waste management.  In any case, 
transmutation would be onl y a partial solution sinc e it does not destro y a l l  n u c l e a r  w a s t e s .  T h e  
Page 14 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

Committee feels that final disposal  of nuclear waste must  not ever cause hazar dous radiation or othe r
damage to the environment or property. 
67.       Unlike at Nuclear Power Plants, there are no high temperatures or pre ssures at the encapsulation
plant. Spent nuclear fuel cannot expl ode by itself.   They are not eas ily flammable substances in the 
encapsulation chambers, either.   The Committee is of  the opinion that vandal ism or terrorism must be
taken into account in the planning and operation of the facility. 
68.       Temporary storage of high-level waste in a cement concrete that binds together small particles to
make concrete should be used.   Concrete in turn is used to encase steel containers holding the waste.  
69.       In a process akin to Osteoporosis, conc rete can weaken overtime w ith water leaches calcium 
from the material.  Just as in bones the calcium is what  gives concrete its strength. The challenge in 
studying this is that concrete aging is a very slow process.   It could take a c ouple of hundred years to 
really dissolve a concrete structure, the time scale over which the structural integrity of concrete applied
in nuclear waste containment must be ensured.  
70.       The Committee has been given to unders tand that the Universal Extraction, or UNEX, process 
which is being studied in USA by Idaho National Engineering and Environmental Laboratory (INEEL)
engineers which is a subsidiary of US Department of Energy has developed the first demonstrated
technology of its kind capable of removing multiple radio active elements from high level nuclear waste
in one step.  Just a sprinkling of  radioactive elements turns volume of a largely harm less waste into 
‘high level radioactive waste’ subject to rigorous and expensive storage standards.   
71.       Such waste is a byproduct of nuclear en ergy and weapons developmen t and usually contains a 
mixture of intensely radioact ive fission products like Stront ium-90, Cesium-137 and long lived 
radioactive elements like plutonium and Americium plus hazardous and toxic materials. Separating most
of the radioactive elements  from the other materials can shrink volume of high-leve l waste, reduce the 
total disposal cost and minimize potential harm to the people and the environment surrounding it.  The 
Committee is of the opinion that an extractant is required that works in one step and removes radioactive
strontium, cesium and other Actinides at once. 
72.       Using the UNEX process, trimming the vol ume of high level waste at  least twenty fold, each
gallon of waste shrinks to less than a cup and the twenty fold vol ume reduction leads to a corresponding
reduction in disposal costs.   The majority of the waste left ove r after a   UNEX separation is far less 
expensive to treat and store than the highly radioactive portion. 
73.       The Committee would like to suggest that this unique UNEX process of squeezing the volume of
enormous nuclear waste to  size less than a cup should be studi ed to depth by DAE and Atomic Energy
Regulatory Board (AERB) so that the benefit of the reduction of disposal cost could be enjoyed by the
Department as an economy measure for treating, managing and storing all types of radioactive waste e.g. 
low level, intermediate level and high level nuclear waste etc., and a subsequent  feasibility report could
be submitted before the Committee for perusal and examination, partic ularly keeping in view the cost
effectivity aspect  of the project. 
74.       The Committee has noted that in India,  in principle, the Atomic Energy Regulatory Boar d
(AERB) envisages three distinct modes of final disposition in respect of radioactive wastes:- 
a)      Near surface engineered extended storage for low and intermediate level wastes;   
  
b)      Deep geological disposal for high level and Alpha bearing wastes; and 
  
c)      Adoption of Closed Fuel Cycle for processing spent fuel to recover fissile materials like 
Plutonium and Uranium for reuse as fuel in Fast Breeder R eactors. Closed Fuel Cycle is
environment friendly. 
  
  
75.       High-level liquid wastes from reprocessing plants are initiall y stored for an in terim period in 
high integrity stainless steel vessels prior to their conditioning.  These wastes are then vitrified to yield a 
solidified matrix.  Solidified waste products are provided with interim storage in near surface engineered
Page 15 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

facilities.  The interim storage allo ws reduction in heat level and also facilitates quality assurance of the
waste products prior to their transportation and emplacement in a centralized repository. 
76.       Conditioned high level wastes and alpha b earing wastes are disposed off in a suitable deep 
geological formation constituting the centralized repository.    Vitrified waste is stored in a specially 
designed solid storage and surveillance facility for about 30 y ears prior to its disposal in a deep
geological formation.  
77.       The Committee is happy to note that as a na tional policy in India each nuclear facility in the
country has its own N ear Surface Disposal Facility  co-located with waste ge nerating facilities like 
nuclear reactor, re-processing plant and fuel fabrication facility so  as to avoid any undue radiation 
exposure during transportation of waste from one place to another. 
78.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that DAE in order to avoid any possibility of accident in a
nuclear facility or during tr ansport, which could lead to a radiat ion emergency partic ularly in a dense
anthropogenic area, has adopted holis tic arrangements for multiple safe ty systems and defence in-depth 
measures in these areas.  This has made the probability of happening of a nuclear accident quite remote.  
The Committee appreciates that for handling any emergent situation, the response system are in place in
these facilities and are constantly tested to ensure that there is no radiological hazards from any nuclea r
activities.   
79.       The Committee further notes with satisfac tion that to ensure emergency plans in high state o f 
readiness in major nuclear faciliti es like nuclear power stations, pe riodic emergency exercises are being
carried out as on going basis by the DAE like Communica tion exercises, Fire emergency exercises,
Plant emergency exercises, Site emergency exercises and Off site emergency exercises as preventive
measures. 
80.       The Committee appreciates the adoption of Closed Fuel Cycle te chnology for dealing with 
Nuclear Wastes Management and Disp osal by DAE. Since this technol ogy is environment friendly, the
Committee is in favour of this technology and also feels that this  would lead to economical and
functional use of vast thorium resources in the country. 
81.       One of the path breaking an d promising scientif ic discovery of 20 th century was the man’s 
investigation into the structure of this tiny element of nature----the ATOM.  Scientists with their untiring 
effort ventured into this unknow n of nature and discovered the enormous amount of energy hidden
within the nucleus of this tiny particle in the name  of ATOM.  Albert Einste in had proved the existence 
of this unimaginable sour ce of power through his mo st famous equation of 20 th century E=mc2, on o f 
the greatest and unchallenged truth of the past hundred years.   
82.       Keeping this extraordinary addition to human knowledge in the fiel d of nuclear physics, the
Committee would like to congrat ulate the DAE on completion of it s 50 long years in harnessing this
nuclear energy for the purpose of its peaceful applicati ons in national reconstruction in a most
impeccable manner.  
83.       Since, the Committee is well aware of the fact  that the national aggr egate quantum of waste
being generated by all nuclear instal lations in the country is signifi cantly less than the corresponding
size of waste being gene rated by all nuclear facili ties in USA or Russia, two of the world’s most 
powerful nuclear giants, it  strongly feels that the implementation of ongoing sa fety systems, in-depth 
defence measures and hi gh state of readiness to meet any type of untoward happening is quite
sufficiently designed by DAE under the aegis of AERB to effectively a ddress the requirements fo r
prevention of a killer nuclear fall out of the size and dimension of ‘C hernobyl’ or ‘Har risburg’ type .  
The Committee hopes that this ade quacy of steps adopted by DAE in  storing, managing and disposing
nuclear waste in an immaculate ma nner is beyond debate and hopefully wi ll never bring the fate of the
civil population residing near all nuclear facilities in the country face to face with any killer radiological
catastrophe in future.  
84.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Atomic Energy and assessing the 
progress of various impor tant programmes and projects administ ered by it, the Committee recommends
that the budgetary allocation of Rs.2504.38 Croress, under Demand No.5 (Atomic Energy) and Rs.
1965.59 under Demand No. 6 (Nuclear Power Schemes) as sought by the Department for the year 2004-
Page 16 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

2005 may be approved. 
  
SUMMARY  OF  RECOMMENDATIONS 
  
  
1.         The Committee is happy to note that in X th Plan, out of total outl ay of Rs. 23,283 Crores fo r 
NPCIL, Rs. 21569 Crores (92.6%) is for schemes fo r which the Government  has already accorded
financial sanctions.  The work on these schemes ha s commenced and is progressing as per schedule.  
The Committee is of the view that with the current physical and financial progress of projects, utilization
for these schemes of the NPCIL is certain.  However the Department should ensure regular review of the
status of procurement and close follow-up at every level to avoi d the increase in gestation period.  The 
PFBR (Pressurised Fast Breeder Reactors) project that is being undertaken through a newly formed PSU
namely Bharatiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Ltd. (BHAVINI) should also be closely monitored. 
  
(Para 16)
 
2.         The Committee recommends that the De partment should initiate the process of mid-term 
appraisal about the performance of schemes in Power sector as fina lization of such schemes and thei r
approval from competent authority are considerably delayed resulti ng in re-allocat ion of outlays 
amongst the approved and on-going schemes. 
     (Para 20)
  
3.         The Committee observes that the Non-utilization of fund in the first two years was largely due to
delay in sanction of new projects. The Committee hopes that   with al most all the projects now having 
received sanction of the competent authority, su ch shortfall should not be envisaged in 2004-05. 
However, the Committee recommends  that closer monitoring of pr ojects at higher level must be
undertaken to remedy the situation.   
(Para 35)
  
4.         For optimum utilization of Plan allocat ions and achieving targeted progress of schemes, the
Committee recommends that the Department should immediately take following actions:- 
d)                  Monitoring Committees should be appointed  at various levels to monitor the
quantifiable targets with a pr imary objective to assess the possibility of reaching the
targets of the Xth  Plan. 
  
e)                  At the unit level, individua l experts should assist the m onitoring Committees so forme d
to continuously monitor to expedite civil and other related works.  
  
f)                    Projects implementation should be monitored at higher leve l to ensure utilization o f
provisions vis-à-vis projected targets. 
(Para 46)
5.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that  in its fiftieth year DAE has mastered a host of highly
complex technologies particularly in  the field of medical radiology; nuclear agriculture; desalination;
food irradiation; radio as tronomy; holography; partic le accelerators, plasma and cryogenics which no
country would share with India. True to the visions of Dr. Homi J. Bhabha and Jawaharlal Nehru,
envisaging the usage of Atomic Ener gy to make a difference to the so ciety, the DAE should now strive
to scale it up and take it to a much higher level. For instance, currently, nuclear power accounts nearly 3
per cent of our total electri city generation and the Depa rtment should strive to ma ke it ten times larger.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Department should now move towards Compact High
Temperature Reactors so that in the comin g years the Nation looks at nuclear ener gy as a primary
Page 17 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

energy source. There are othe r applications of atomic  energy and they contribut e a small fraction to the 
Indian economy. The Department shoul d identify the key drivers that would form the basis of pushing
its programme to make them big. 
 
 
(Para 47)
6.         The Committee recommends that this f acility of linkage  through “telemedicine” as has been 
done with the Cancer Centre at Guwahati should also be done with  other 19 Cancer centres in the
country. This should be expedited and completed at the earliest so that the regional centres are benefited
by exchange of opinion, transfer of  data, training programmes and servic e to patients thereby increasing
the outreach facilities of the Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai.  
  
(Para 49)
  
7.         Other alternatives for the geological dis posal of high-level  waste are final disposal in deep 
boreholes or in the seabed.  These alternatives are practically permanent solutions unlike facilities in 
bedrock.   High-level waste could be brought back on the surface from deep repositories if required.  
However, the Committee feels that this would be very costly. 
(Para 54)
  
8.         The Committee is of the opinion that bedr ock or seabed at a depth of  several kilometers would 
probably isolate radioactive substances effectively.  However, th e Committee feels th at afterwards it 
would be difficult to  verify the safety of thes e disposal methods.  There is no certainty that waste 
canisters would remain intact in the depths of ocea n or bedrock.  Besides, it would most probably be 
difficult to win international approval for final disposal of wastes in seabed. 
(Para 55)
9.         For minimizing the high level nuclear  waste volume for permanent storage and eventually
determining what happens to the ma terial when it leaks out of th e tank, the Committ ee feels, it is
necessary to decrease the waste volume by evaporating as much water as possible from the crusty
sludge.  This will make the transport of the waste easier and storage less costly.   
(Para 58)
10.       Since there is a clear relationship between chemical composition of th is waste material and the 
data from the spectrometer, Ra man spectrometer method could be developed into a fiber optic
instrument that would allo w testing of materials in the tanks fr om a distance.  The Raman spectromete r 
method possibly could act as a sophisticated type of l itmus paper, or a colour coded pH sensor to detect
undesirable chemical composition. The high level nuclear waste such as spent fuel from nuclear reactors
could be stored in containers that hold up for approximately hundred years but stowing nuclear waste for
the long run will require containm ent materials that can resist leaching and radiation damage fo r
thousands of years. 
(Para 59)
11.       The Committee is of the view that ‘Fluorite Ceramic’ materi als show promise as  safe, radiation 
proof materials and should be further developed to contain nuclear wastes. 
(Para 62)
12.       The highly radioactive wastes are either extracted by a solution that does not mix with the waste 
solution; a process called solvent extraction or is re moved by ion exchangers.  The high level wastes are 
then to be immobilized in a special glass, placed inside steel drums and buried about 1000 ft. deep in salt
mines, in sites to be designate d.   The remaining low-level waste may then be encased in cement an d 
stored on site. 
(Para 63)
13.       Inorganic ion exchangers can also be used  in nuclear medicines.  Radioactive elements with 
short half lives currently are used to determine blood flow or to locate a tumor.   With the ion exchanger, 
it might be possible to better tar get the tumor b y sparing surrounding healthy cells.  Inorganic materials 
Page 18 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

exchange ions more efficiently than organic materials and they can withstand radiation better. 
(Para 64)
14.       The Committee is of the opinion that transm utation is researched all th e time.  It seems to be 
difficult to develop industrial scale transmutation processes for nuclear waste management.  In any case, 
transmutation would be only a part ial solution since it does not de stroy all nuclear wastes.   The 
Committee feels that final disposal  of nuclear waste must  not ever cause hazar dous radiation or othe r
damage to the environment or property. 
(Para 66)
15.       Unlike at Nuclear Power Plants, there are no high temperatures or pre ssures at the encapsulation
plant. Spent nuclear fuel cannot expl ode by itself.   They are not eas ily flammable substances in the 
encapsulation chambers, either.   The Committee is of  the opinion that vandal ism or terrorism must be
taken into account in the planning and operation of the facility. 
(Para 67)
16.       The Committee has been given to unders tand that the Universal Extraction, or UNEX, process 
which is being studied in USA by Idaho National Engineering and Environmental Laboratory (INEEL)
engineers which is a subsidiary of US Department of Energy has developed the first demonstrated
technology of its kind capable of removing multiple radio active elements from high level nuclear waste
in one step.  Just a sprinkling of  radioactive elements turns volume of a largely harm less waste into 
‘high level radioactive waste’ subject to rigorous and expensive storage standards.   
(Para 70)
17.       Such waste is a byproduct of nuclear en ergy and weapons developmen t and usually contains a 
mIXthture of intensely radioactive fission produc ts like Strontium-90, Cesium-137 and long live d 
radioactive elements like plutonium and Americiam plus hazardous and toxic materials. Separating most
of the radioactive elements  from the other materials can shrink volume of high-leve l waste, reduce the 
total disposal cost and minimise potential harm to the people and the environment surrounding it.  The 
Committee is of the opinion that an extractant is required that works in one step and removes radioactive
strontium, cesium and other Actinides at once. 
(Para 71)
18.       Using the UNEX process, trimming the vol ume of high level waste at  least twenty fold, each
gallon of waste shrinks to less than a cup and the twenty fold vol ume reduction leads to a corresponding
reduction in disposal costs.   The majority of the waste left ove r after a   UNEX separation is far less 
expensive to treat and store than the highly radioactive portion. 
(Para 72)
19.       The Committee would like to suggest that this unique UNEX process of squeezing the volume of
enormous nuclear waste to  size less than a cup should be studi ed to depth by DAE and Atomic Energy
Regulatory Board (AERB) so that the benefit of the reduction of disposal cost could be enjoyed by the
Department as an economy measure for treating, managing and storing all types of radioactive waste e.g.
low level, intermediate level and high level nuclear waste etc., and a subsequent  feasibility report could
be submitted before the Committee for perusal and examination, partic ularly keeping in view the cost
effectivity aspect  of the project. 
(Para 73)
20.       The Committee has noted that in India,  in principle, the Atomic Energy Regulatory Boar d
(AERB) envisages three distinct modes of final disposition in respect of radioactive wastes:- 
d)      Near surface engineered extended storage for low and intermediate level wastes;   
  
e)      Deep geological disposal for high level and Alpha bearing wastes; and 
  
  
f)        Adoption of Closed Fuel  Cycle for processing spent fuel to recover fissile materials like
Plutonium and Uranium for reuse as fuel in Fast Breeder R eactors. Closed Fuel Cycle is
environment friendly. 
Page 19 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

  
(Para 74)
21.       The Committee is happy to note that as a na tional policy in India each nuclear facility in the
country has its own N ear Surface Disposal Facility  co-located with waste ge nerating facilities like 
nuclear reactor, re-processing plant and fuel fabrication facility so  as to avoid any undue radiation 
exposure during transportation of waste from one place to another. 
(Para 77)
22.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that DAE in order to avoid any possibility of accident in a
nuclear facility or during tr ansport, which could lead to a radiat ion emergency partic ularly in a dense
anthropogenic area, has adopted holis tic arrangements for multiple safe ty systems and defence in-depth 
measures in these areas.  This has made the probability of happening of a nuclear accident quite remote.  
The Committee appreciates that for handling any emergent situation, the response system are in place in
these facilities and are constantly tested to ensure that there is no radiological hazards from any nuclea r
activities.   
(Para 78)
  
23.       The Committee further notes with satisfac tion that to ensure emergency plans in high state o f 
readiness in major nuclear faciliti es like nuclear power stations, pe riodic emergency exercises are being
carried out as on going basis by the DAE like Communica tion exercises, Fire emergency exercises,
Plant emergency exercises, Site emergency exercises and Off site emergency exercises as preventive
measures. 
(Para 79)
  
24.       The Committee appreciates the adoption of Closed Fuel Cycle te chnology for dealing with 
Nuclear Wastes Management and Disp osal by DAE. Since this technol ogy is environment friendly, the
Committee is in favour of this technology and also feels that this  would lead to economical and
functional use of vast thorium resources in the country. 
(Para 80)
  
25.      Since, the Committee is well aware of th e fact that the national a ggregate quantum of waste
being generated by all nuclear instal lations in the country is signi ficantly less than the corresponding
size of waste being generated by al l nuclear facilities in USA or Russia, two of the world’s most 
powerful nuclear giants, it  strongly feels that  the implementation of ongoing safety systems, in-depth 
defence measures and high state of readiness to meet any type  of untoward happening is quite
sufficiently designed by DAE under the aegis of AERB  to effectively address the requirements fo r
prevention of a killer nucle ar fall out of the size and dimension of ‘Chernobyl’  or ‘Harrisburg’ type .  
The Committee hopes that this adequacy of steps adopted by DAE in stori ng, managing and disposing
nuclear waste in an immaculate manne r is beyond debate and hopefully wi ll never bring the fate of the
civil population residing near all nuclear facilities in the country  face to face with any kille r
radiological catastrophe in future.  
(Para 83)
  
ANNEXURE 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
Page 20 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

 
                                              A N N E X U R E
 
  
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
  
            The Budget Estimates(BE) and Ac tuals for the year 2002-03, Bud get Estimates(BE) and 
Revised Estimates(RE) for the year 2003-04 and BE for the year  2004-05 in respect of the 
Department of Atomic Energy are as under: 
(Rs. in  Crores)
  
IEBR  - Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources 
I & M - Industries & Minerals 
R & D - Research and Development 
BS       - Budgetary Support 
  
  
  
                                                            M   I   N   U   T   E    S 
  
III 
  
THIRD MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 11 th August, 2004 in Committee Room 
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
  
PRESENT 
  
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman  
  
Sector     BS         BE 2002-2003 ACTUALS 2002-2003 BE 2003-2004
  IEBR Plan Non-
Plan 
Total Plan Non-
Plan
Total Plan Non-
Plan
To
          
Power BS 1595.00 1665.60 3260.60 1929.96 1412.05 3342.01 2000.00 1466.58 34
  IEBR 121.00 0  121.00 336.46 0 336.46 1170.00 0 11
           
I&M BS 370.00 1239.41 1609.41 273.91 1185.29 1459.20 336.00 1113.47 14
  IEBR 119.60 0 119.60 36.53 0 36.53 136.10 0 1
           
R&D BS 535.00 775.27 1310.27 405.56 811.97 1217.53 464.00 852.30 13
           
           
Total  BS 2500.00 3680.28 6180.28 2609.43 3409.31 6018.74 2800.00 3432.35 62
  IEBR 240.60 0 240.60 372.99 0 372.99 1306.10 0 13
           
Grand 
total 
  2740.60 3680.28 6420.88 2982.42 3409.31 6391.73 4106.10 3432.35 75
Page 21 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav  
3. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
4. Smt. Kum Kum Rai  
5. Shri Birabhadra Singh  
  
LOK  SABHA 
  
6. Shri Sujan Chakraborty  
7. Shri Anantrao Gudhe  
8. Shri Babubhai Katara  
9. Shri Brahmananda Panda  
10. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                          
11. Shri K.C.Singh Baba     
12. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh                             
  
SECRETARIAT
 
             
            Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer 
  
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY  
  
1.
                  Dr. Anil Kakodkar, Secretary 
2.                  Prof. S.P. Sukhatme, Chairman, AERB 
3.                  Dr. R.B. Grover, Director, SPG, AERB 
4.                  Shri S.K. Jain, CMD, NPCIL 
5.                  Shri V.P. Raja, Joint Secretary 
6.                  Ms. Archana Arora, Joint Secretary 
7.                  Smt. Sudha Bhave, Joint Secretary 
8.                  Shri Rahul Asthana, Jt. Secretary, DAE 
9.                  Shri A,K. Das, Chief Controller of Accounts 
10.              Dr. (Smt.) K.A. Dinshaw, Director, TMC 
11.              Shri K. Muralidhar, Head, MSG 
12.              Shri P.N. Mohanan, BPO 
13.              Shri Kanwar Raj, Asstt. Director, BARC 
14.              Shri G.D. Pungle, IFA, BARC 
15.              Shri Arun Srivastava, Sr. Scientist, DAE 
16.              Shri Gautam Mukherjee, Protocol Officer 
17.              Shri K.S. Sankara Rao, OSD 
  
2.         ***                  ***                  ***                  ***                  ***                  *** 
  
3.         The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 11.15 a.m. for tea break a nd re-assembled at 11.30 a.m. 
to hear the Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy. 
4.   The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Department  of Atomic Energy and 
requested the Secretary to make a brief presentation  regarding the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the 
Department.   
Page 22 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

  
5.         Thereafter the Secretary made a vi sual presentation regarding the major activities an d
achievements of the Depa rtment.  The Secretary also explaine d briefly the budgetary allocations on 
different heads as also the functioning of the Department. The Members then sought clarifications on the
points that emerged out of the presentation of the Secretary.   
                        The witnesses then withdrew.  
  
6.         ***                  ***                  ***                  ***                  ***                  *** 
  
            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 02.05 p.m. 
  
***      Relates to other matters. 
  
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 24 th August, 2004 in Room No. 63, First 
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.  
       
PRESENT 
  
1.   Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Prof. Saif-ud-din Soz  
3. Dr. Prabha Thakur  
4. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav  
5. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
6. Shrimati Kum Kum Rai  
  
LOK  SABHA 
 
 
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty  
8. Shri A.Vankatesh Naik  
9. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                          
10. Shri Sita Ram Yadav  
11. Shri V. Aruna Kumar  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
             
            Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer
 
  
2.   The Committee took up for consideration the Draft 128 th, 129 th, 130 th and 131 st Reports of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) pertaining to Depart ment of Ocean Development, 
Department of S pace, De partment of Atomic Ener gy and Ministr y of Environment & Forests,
Page 23 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm

respectively.  After discussion and suggesting some changes, the Committee considered and adopte d
each of the above reports.  
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy to 
present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri  Bachi Singh Rawat and in  his absence Dr. Sujan
Chakraborty to lay the Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha. 
  
4.         ***                  ***                  ***                  ***                  ***                  *** 
  
The Committee then adjourned at 10.50 A.M. 
  
  
***      Relates to other matters. 
  
Page 24 of 24130threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/130threport.htm