Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
REPORT NO.
319
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on nd January, )2 2018
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on nd January, )2 2018
THREE HUNDRED NINETEENTH REPORT
January, 2019/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)
Action taken by the  Government  on the  Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Three Hundred Eleventh Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for
Grants (2018-19) of the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

21
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED NINETEENTH REPORT
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Three Hundred Eleventh Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for
Grants (2018-19) of the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd January, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2019/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-14
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government............................. ................................................. 2-6
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations which the committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies........................... 7-12
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee........................ 13
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies
of the Government are still awaited............................. ........................ 14
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A G LANCE ........................................................... 15
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 17-19

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2018-19)
 ( Constituted on 1st September , 2018)
1. Shri Anand Sharma   —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri Anil Baluni
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
 6. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
     7. Dr. Raghunath Mohapatra
     8. Shri Parimal Nathwani
    9. Shri Sharad Pawar
    10. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
LOK  SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
  13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
  14. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
15. Kumari Sushmita Dev
16. Shri Ninong Ering
17. Shri Laxman Giluwa
18. Dr. K. Gopal
   19. Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar
20. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
21. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
22. Shri Daddan Mishra
23. Shri Chirag Paswan
24. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
25. Shri Hari Narayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Vikram Usendi
29. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
#30. Vacant
#31. Vacant
(i)
# Shri Raghu Sharma and Shri Nagendra Singh ceased to be  members of the Committee consequent upon their resignation from the
Lok Sabha w.e.f. 21 st December, 2018.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati  Sunita Sekaran, Joint  Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
Shri Harish Kumar, Assistant Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present  the Report on
its behalf, present this Three Hundred Nineteenth  Report on Action Taken by the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred and Eleventh
Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research, which was presented/laid in both the Houses of Parliament on 13th March, 2018.
2. There were 23 Recommendations/Observations in the Three Hundred Eleventh Report of the
Committee. Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations  of the Committee were received
from the Department on 20th June, 2018.
3. In the meeting held on 27th December, 2018,  the Committee considered the draft Report and adopted
the same.
ANAND SHARMA
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
27th December,  2018 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Pausa 6 , 1940 ( Saka)  Science and Technology, Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

ACRONYMS
AT N : Action Taken Note
AT R : Action Taken Report
B.E. : Budget Estimate
CDC : Consultancy Development Centre
CEL : Central Electronics Limited
CSIR : Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
CSIR-NEERI : CSIR-National Environmental Engineering Research Institute
CSIR-NEIST : CSIR-North-East Institute of Science and Technology
DBT : Department of Biotechnology
DSIR : Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
DST : Department of Science and Technology
EDP : Engineering Design Package
FTC : Fast Track Commercialization
FTT : Fast Track Translation
GDP : Gross Domestic Product
HAL : Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
ICMR : Indian Council of Medical Research
MHRD : Ministry of Human Resource Development
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding
MSDE : Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship
MSMEs : Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
NML : National Metallurgical Laboratory
NRDC : National Research Development Corporation
NSFDC : National Scheduled Caste Finance Development Cooperation
PACE : Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research and Technology Development
R&D : Research & Development
R.E. : Revised Estimate
SDGs : Sustainable Development Goals
SIROs : Scientific and Industrial Research Organizations
TKDL : Traditional Knowledge Digital Library
PFRIs : Public Funded Research Institutions
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research on the Recommendations/Observations contained in Three Hundred Eleventh
Report of the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2018-2019) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research’. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on the 13th
March, 2018.
2. Action Taken Note (ATN) has been received from Department of Scientific and Industrial Research’
in respect of all the twenty three Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Eleventh
Report. This has been categorized as follows:-
Chapter I : Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
Para: 3.2, 5.7, 7.5, 9.4, 9.7, 9.14, 9.15, 11.3, 12.3, 13.4, 13.6 and 15.5.
    (T
OTAL – 12)
Chapter II : Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of
the Government’s replies:
Para: 4.10, 5.6, 6.6, 8.7, 9.16, 10.7, 10.8, 14.7, 15.3 and 15.4.
(T
OTAL – 10)
The Committee is convinced with the explanation furnished by the Department and, therefore, does
not want to pursue above-mentioned recommendations further.
Chapter III : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have  not
been accepted by the Committee:
Para:  (TOTAL - Nil)
Chapter IV : Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are
still awaited:  Para: 16.4.
(TOTAL - 1)
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish the updated information regarding the
paragraph mentioned in Chapter IV of the Report.
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the succeeding pages.

CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH  HA VE  BEEN  ACCEPTED
BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 The Committee finds that financial performance of the Department has been by and large
satisfactory in the past years. However, the Committee notes that during 2017-18, the Department
could utilize only 
` 3759.04 crore as on 31st January, 2018 against the allocated amount of  ` 4629.70
crore (RE 2017-18) , which means that an amount of ` 870.66  crore still has to be utilized with two months
left in the current financial year. The Committee therefore recommends that with periodic monitoring on
quarterly basis, optimum utilization of allocated funds may be ensured.      (Para 3.2)
Action Taken
1.2 The Department takes note of the Committee’s recommendation of periodic monitoring on quarterly
basis for optimum utilization of allocated funds. It is submitted that against a RE (2017-18) allocation of
` 4629.70 crore, actual utilization during 2017-18 was ` 4618.83 crore.
PUBLIC  SECTOR  UNDERTAKINGS - NATIONAL  RESEARCH  DEVELOPMENT  CORPORATION
(NRDC)
Recommendation/ Observation
1.3 The Committee notes that only 
` 1.74 crore (up to 31.01.2018) has been utilized against the allocated
amount of ` 3.75 crore (RE 2017-18) and hence expresses its deep concern over underutilization of allocated
amount during 2017-18. The Committee hopes that proper planning would be done for optimum utilization
of allocated amount during 2018-19.       (Para 5.7)
Action Taken
1.4 The Department released an amount of ` 1.74 crore to NRDC on 25
th September, 2017 but
no further amount was released till 31.01.2018 since approval for continuation of the scheme till
end of 14
th  Finance Commission was obtained in February, 2018. Thereafter, the balance amount
of ` 2.01 crore was released and the RE was completely utilized.  The department will optimize the
utilization of allocated amount during 2018-19 by quarterly monitoring of physical and financial
progress.
AUTONOMOUS  INSTITUTIONS - CONSULTANCY  DEVELOPMENT  CENTRE  (CDC)
Recommendation/Observation
1.5 The Committee hopes that no cut or reduction in the allocated amount would be done during 2018-19
at RE stage for smooth & effective functioning of CDC. (Para 7.5)
Action Taken
1.6 The department will plan CDC activities during 2018-19 with quarterly monitoring of physical and
financial progress and ensure that there is no cut in allocation at RE stage.
2

3
NATIONAL  LABORATORIES  SCHEME
Recommendation/Observation
1.7 The Committee appreciates the Department for launching major initiatives on Mission Mode such as
CSIR Aroma Mission, Phytopharmaceuticals Mission, Mission on Sickle Cell Anemia, Mission on Catalysis
for Sustainable Development etc. These initiatives would certainly benefit the citizens of the country in
general and farmers, industries, entrepreneurs and the children who are suffering from Sickle Cell Anemia in
tribal areas in particular. The Committee hopes that with the concerted and co-ordinated efforts of the
Department would yield desired results and immensely benefit the various stakeholders. The Committee is
also of the view that these mission initiatives would generate employment opportunities and also add to the
cause of self-employment for the youths of the country. (Para 9.4)
Action Taken
1.8 These missions are progressing as per planned objectives and deliverables.
Recommendation/Observation
1.9 The Committee feels that collaboration/partnership with international agencies of the different countries
in various fields of science would go a long way in terms of knowledge sharing & gathering experiences as
well as attracting funding for R&D of the CSIR. Hence, the Committee recommends that Department
should make earnest efforts to have more and more collaboration/partnership with the scientific institutions
of the developed countries. (Para. 9.7)
Action Taken
1.10 Committee’s observations on International Partnerships provided a stimulus to the Department.
Accordingly, CSIR has forged/furthered institutional level S&T partnerships with several developed countries
including France (CNRS), Australia (CSIRO), Taiwan (ITRI), Germany (BMBF), Italy (CNR), Japan (AIST,
Hiroshima University), USA (NIEHS). Also, collaboration advantage is being explored in Africa, Asia, South
Korea, among other nations.
CSIR institutes are encouraged to develop topical collaborations with their international peers.
Several CSIR institutes concluded twinning arrangements with S&T institutions in the developed nations
including Australia (CSIR-CECRI – Deakin University, CSIR-NAL-University of New South Wales), France
(CSIR-NIO-IRD, CSIR- IICT-CNRS) and UK (CSIR-IICB/CDRI/IMTech - Durham University). Also,
CSIR institutes were encouraged to actively participate in the available joint research project funding
mechanisms operated by DST, DBT, ICMR and the bilateral S&T Centers of India with France, Germany
and USA.
Recommendation/ Observation
1.11 The Committee appreciates the role of CSIR labs in improving lives of citizens of the country through
scientific advancement and its R&D efforts which are aligned to the needs of the domestic industry and the
social needs of the nation, exemplified by the Government Mission Programs and Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs). The Committee feels that it is necessary to keep & maintain pace with the latest technological
developments in the world and keeping in view the fact that CSIR infrastructures ( with regard to labs) were
built or acquired quite earlier, building of new infrastructures and upgradation of the existing ones are of
utmost importance and should be taken up in right earnest. Therefore the Committee recommends that

4
modernization process of CSIR labs should be started at the earliest. However, the Committee is of the view
that since modernization of CSIR labs require huge amount of money, it should be done in phased manner
and after prioritizing the services of the labs i.e. after determining the order of preference of the labs on the
basis of their high value to the citizens and analysing its criticality and necessity. For this, the Department
should prepare a blue print and thereafter approach Ministry of Finance for additional allocation of funds
in order to modernize CSIR labs.   (Para 9.14)
Action Taken
1.12 The Department is thankful for the appreciation indicated by the Committee and also takes note of the
recommendation.
Recommendation/Observation
1.13 The Committee notes that an Innovation Fund of Rs 400.00 crores has been created for the purposes
of seed funding of S&T based entrepreneurs and for the hand holding of S&T based start-ups. The CSIR
Innovation Fund will be deployed to enable commercialization of high-risk high-reward cutting edge
technologies as well as for technologies with high socio- economic impact but long-term commercial payback.
The Committee recommends that this fund may be utilized substantially in rural & far flung areas of the
country especially in the backward States such as Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Madhya
Pradesh etc. in order to augment employability in these places.      (Para 9.15)
Action Taken
1.14 The Department notes the observations and views of the committee. The Department wishes to
submit that the fund would operate on all India basis in a transparent mode. On one hand, it supports
and nurtures ideas at nascent stage coming from large pool of scientists and technologists that have
application potential and on the other hand it supports innovative High-tech Start-ups based on Science
and Technology in the areas where the Ministry of Science and Technology is engaged.  In addition, it
would also support socially relevant technologies and technology based micro entrepreneurs in rural
areas. Whilst preference will be given to the CSIR proposals, it would be open for S&T proposals from
outside also.
FILING  AND  GRANT  OF  PATENTS
Recommendation/Observation
1.15 The Committee commends the efforts of CSIR in obtaining patents in India and abroad. The Committee
hopes that the Department would maintain its position. However, the Committee feels that with a good
number of patents, CSIR should make efforts to help Indian industries in order to develop more and more
globally competitive products, for that alone will determine usefulness of patents earned by CSIR scientists.
Further, the Committee also hopes that quality of the patents should be given utmost importance than
quantity and CSIR will remain vigilant to safeguard our age old indisputable rights over our traditional
knowledge. (Para 11.3)
Action Taken
1.16 The Department is thankful for the appreciation indicated by the Committee and also takes note of the
recommendation. The Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) unit of CSIR play an important role in
safeguarding the traditional knowledge of the country.

5
WORLD  RANKING  OF  CSIR
Recommendation/Observation
1.17 The Committee appreciates that CSIR has improved its world ranking in Government institutions as
well as its overall global Ranking. However, the Committee is of the view that CSIR’ s global ranking of 75
among scientific institutions is not very encouraging or satisfactory and is still far behind amongst the
globally benchmarked scientific organisations in the world. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier
recommendation made in 297th Report that in order to place India in the list of the top country in the
scientific world, CSIR should aim to improve its place in ranking in its field and it should strive hard to
achieve that ranking.                           (Para 12.3)
Action Taken
1.18 The Department is thankful for the appreciation indicated by the Committee and takes note of the
recommendation.
PROJECTS/SCHEMES  IN  NORTH - EASTERN  STATES
Recommendation/Observation
1.19 The Committee notes that many initiatives have been taken up by the Department in the form of
various projects/schemes being run in the North-Eastern States of the country through one of the CSIR’ s
constituent laboratory namely CSIR- North East Institute of Science & Technology located at Jorhat in the
State of Assam. The Committee is aware that this institute has been engaged in pursuing focused R&D
activities in various areas such as affordable healthcare products, Nutraceuticals and functional foods,
exploration and sustainable utilization of plants and microbes, development of high yielding varieties of
medicinal and aromatic plants, bioremediation and restoration of degraded environment, development of
formulations/technologies for supporting MSMEs, advance materials for water and air purification, carbon
based composite materials, heterogeneous catalysts for-organic transformations, eco-friendly pulping for
paper industry, S&T solution to geo-hazards, safe & sustainable exploitation of geo-resources & climate
change; and membrane technology for separation etc. (Para 13.4)
1.20 However, the Committee feels that lot more is needed to be done in this region as the whole region is
bountifully endowed with rich minerals, forest wealth, water bodies, agro-biodiversity and rich traditional
knowledge besides diversified flora and fauna including many varieties of herbal and medicinal plants. The
Committee is of the opinion that the potential of the diversified natural resources of the region has not been
fully tapped. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all out efforts be made for R&D in various
scientific fields specific to the North- East region to the extent possible which will certainly go a long way
in order to augment the incomes and improve the quality of lives of millions of people geographically spread
across the North-Eastern States of the country.  (Para 13.6)
Action Taken
1.21 The Department takes Note of the recommendation.
CSIR’S  ROYALTY  AND  EARNINGS  OF  DEPARTMENT  BY  TECHNOLOGY  TRANSFER
Recommendation/Observation
1.22 The Committee further feels that States should also play an important role by making contribution in

6
the R&D of the country. The Committee is also of the view that CSIR should focus R&D in its various labs
keeping in view of market oriented/demand related research in order to easily commercialize the research
output and augment the earnings of the Department. The Committee, therefore, recommends that earnings
of the Department should be further reinvested in the R&D Sector in addition to allocation from the
Government side. (Para 15.5)
Action Taken
1.23 The Department like to inform the Committee that CSIR laboratories are in the path of augmenting
their external revenue by increasing the commercialization of their technologies  and part of it being utilized
for R&D purpose.

CHAPTER – II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  WHICH  THE  COMMITTEE
DOES  NOT  DESIRE  TO  PURSUE  IN  VIEW  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT’S
REPLIES
SCHEMES  OF  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF  SCIENTIFIC  AND  INDUSTRIAL  RESEARCH
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 The Committee observes that there has been persistent underutilization of allocated funds in all the
above mentioned four Schemes, not only during 2017-18 but also in the previous years too. The Committee
expresses its deep concern over the underutilization of fund with regard to P ACE Scheme in 2017-18 in
particular where only  ` 0.67 crore (upto 31.01.2018) have been utilized against allocation of  ` 3.00 crore
(RE 2017-18). The reasons for underutilization of allocated funds have also not been given by the Department.
Because of underutilizations, allocation at RE stage for 2017-18 in some of the said schemes has been
reduced substantially. The Committee, therefore, insists that the Department should strengthen its administrative
and monitoring mechanism for utilizing the allocated resources and evaluation in respect of expenditure is
done on quarterly basis. The Committee hopes that the Department would utilize the funds allocated under
all said Schemes and achieve the projected targets during 2018-19. (Para 4.10)
Action Taken
2.2 The main reason for under-utilization of funds in the four sub-schemes of umbrella scheme – “Industrial
Research and Development”  during 2017-18 was that approval for their continuation beyond 31
st March,
2017 was obtained on 9th October, 2017, thereby limiting financial releases during the first half of 2017-18.
The utilization under PACE scheme has been particularly low because of slow progress of project work at
industries end in spite of rigorous follow up by the Department and inability on part of IMPRINT (MHRD)
projects to raise demands.
The Department takes note of the Committee’s recommendation to strengthen its administrative and
monitoring mechanism for optimum utilization of allocated resources and undertake quarterly evaluation of
expenditure. The Department will be using NITI Aayog’s Output- Outcome dashboard for quarterly monitoring
of physical & financial progress of schemes.
PUBLIC  SECTOR  UNDERTAKINGS - NATIONAL  RESERCH  DEVELOPMENT  CORPORATION
(NRDC)
Recommendation/ Observation
2.3 The Committee appreciates the efforts of NRDC in acting as a link between scientific laboratories
and industrial establishments for transferring technologies. However, the Committee feels that a lot more is
needed to be done to reach out to people living in rural areas by developing appropriate technologies for
those areas which will improve their living conditions. (Para 5.6)
Action Taken
2.4 The Department and NRDC is thankful to the Committee for appreciating its efforts in transferring
technologies from scientific laboratories to industrial establishments. NRDC supports the endeavor of local
voluntary agencies in implementing rural technology based projects by way of organizing demonstration-
7

8
cum-training programmes in different parts of the country. Some of the training programmes conducted in
the recent past are:
1. Engineering Design Package (EDP) on CSIR-NEERI Zar- low cost water purification system
at Rangpo, East Sikkim.
2. EDP training on Hand made paper at CSIR-NEIST Jorhat
3. Solar energy solution in remote tribal areas by tribal youth at Sri Kakulam, Andhra Pradesh
4. Skill training on brass melting furnace for production of brass artifacts, home décor items and
ornaments at NML Jamshedpur
As suggested by the Committee, NRDC will develop appropriate technologies and reach out to a larger no.
of people living in rural areas with a view to improve their living condition.
CENTRAL  ELECTRONICS  LTD.  (CEL)
Recommendation/Observation
2.5 The Committee notes that only 64.10% (upto 31.01.2018) amount was utilized by CEL during
2017-18. The Committee fails to understand that why CEL sought funds at BE and RE stage during 2017-
18 on higher side but was unable to utilize that optimally. The Committee observes this trend for the last
three years. The Committee hopes that Department would be able to utilize the allocated amount of 
` 5.00
crore (BE 2018-19).CEL also should try to find out the reasons responsible for not utilizing the funds fully
and take preventive action in the next financial year i.e. 2018-19 . (Para 6.6)
Action Taken
2.6 The Department released an amount of ` 6.25 crore to CEL on 29
th September, 2017 out of the
allocation of  ` 9.00 crore but no further amount was released till 31.01.2018 since approval for continuation
of the scheme till end of 14th Finance Commission was obtained in February, 2018. Later on, CEL submitted
a proposal in March, 2018 for release of balance amount but it could not be approved by the Department due
to certain shortcomings in the proposal.  During the last three years i.e. 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17,
fund utilization by CEL has been  has been 100%, 91% and 72% of RE, respectively. The reason for this has
been that during 2015-16, disbursement of loan to PSUs was stopped by Government and during 2016-17,
CEL could not get approval of the competent authority before end of F.Y. 2016-17 for an envisaged project.
The Department will optimize the utilization of allocated amount during 2018-19 by quarterly monitoring of
physical and financial progress.
COUNCIL  OF  SCIENTIFIC  AND  INDUSTRIAL  RESEARCH  (CSIR)
Recommendation/Observation
2.7 The Committee appreciates the efforts of CSIR in publishing large number of research papers in
International SCI journals every year. The Committee notes that CSIR was able to publish 5277 papers
in SCI journals in the year 2017 with an average impact factor per paper as 3.217. However, the
Committee observes that good work done by the CSIR in the form of research papers do not translate
into sustainable technologies for use of the masses. Hence, the Committee reiterates its earlier
recommendation made in its 297
th  Report that the Department should make all out efforts so that

9
researches & inventions may be translated into sustainable technologies and also for undertaking more
original research work. (Para 8.7)
Action Taken
2.8 The Department is thankful for the appreciation indicated by the Committee. The Department likes to
inform the Committee that the translation of published papers into technologies takes time.  The Department
is now pursuing technological  developments through Fast Track Translation (FTT) and Fast Track
Commercialization (FTC) mode of its promising R&D leads.
NATIONAL  LABORATORIES  SCHEME
Recommendation/Observation
2.9 The Committee has observed that maximum of BE 2018-19 has been allocated for CSIR for its two
Schemes, one is National Laboratories and second one is National S&T Human Resource Development. The
Committee also notes that during 2017-18 only 
` 3504.72 crore was utilized under National Laboratories
Scheme till 31.01.2018 against the allocation (RE) of ` 4357.12 crore which was enhanced at RE stage.
The Committee fails to understand that the Department had sought more money at RE stage but could spent
only 
` 3504.72 crore. This shows the lack of proper planning and monitoring on the part of the Department.
The Committee is of the view that at one hand the Department is contemplating the additional amount for
its various projects and for upgradation of its labs, but on the other hand the Department could not utilize
the allocated amount. Therefore, the Committee recommends that Department should have a robust, proper
monitoring and planning mechanism in place so that allocated amount is utilized fully during 2018-19.
(Para 9.16)
Action Taken
2.10 The Department takes note of the recommendation for having a proper monitoring and planning
mechanism for full utilization of the allocated amount during 2018-19. It is submitted that against the RE
2017-18 allocation of ` 4357.12 crore under National Laboratories, CSIR utilized ` 4348.85 crore, i.e.
99.81% as on 31-03-2018.
NATIONAL S & THUMAN  RESOURCE  DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
2.11 The Committee welcomes the enhancement in allocations for this Scheme from 
` 225 crore in
2017-18 (RE) to ` 300 crore in BE 2018-19. However , the Committee expresses its concern over the fact
that during 2017-18, an amount of ` 325 crore (BE 2017-18) was initially allocated under this Scheme
which was reduced to ` 225 crore (RE 2017-18) which clearly reflects that physical targets set for 2017-18
could not have been achieved fully and many of the deserving students might have been denied the
opportunities to get the fellowships/ Scholarships. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in future,
the Department should ensure that no reduction is done in the allocated amount at RE stage in the
important Scheme like this.                                                           (Para 10.7)
Action Taken
2.12 The Department takes note of the recommendation. However, it is important to apprise that the
budget during a financial year is sought on the basis of estimated number of fellows joining during a financial

10
year and the number of students already availing the fellowship and will continue to get their fellowship in a
particular financial year. During the year 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17, a total of 2876, 2846 and 4870
fellowships (doctoral and postdoctoral) were awarded and out of these only 1178, 1205 and 1172, respectively
joined the fellowship in the respective period. In 2017-18 an upward trend in terms of joining the fellowship
is being seen and by 25th March 2018, a total of 1815 fellows have joined the fellowship. Further, in 2017-18,
a total 2029 JRF-NET candidates through CSIR-UGC NET held in June-2017 have been declared qualified
and not a single fellow could join as the matter is subjudice and is before the Honorable High Court of Punjab
and Haryana. It is further, apprised that the tenability of JRF-NET certificate was enhanced to 2 (two) years
from 1 (one) year and therefore the NET qualified JRFs have a flexibility of joining the fellowship within 2
years from the effective date of fellowship and thus the number of fellows joining the JRF-NET may vary
from year to year.
Recommendation/Observation
2.13 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department for stimulating interest and awareness
among young students towards scientific research. However, the Committee notes that most of the Scholarships/
Fellowships are provided to students at the higher level i.e. PhD/ Research levels except few like Junior
Research Fellowships through CSIR-UGC National Eligibility Test etc. The Committee feels that Scholarships/
Fellowships may be provided at entry level i.e. graduation level or even Senior Secondary level to attract
youth of the country to opt for science studies. (Para No. 10.8)
Action Taken
2.14 The Department is thankful for the appreciation indicated by the Committee and also takes note of the
recommendation. CSIR-UGC NET JRF scheme is open to science and engineering graduates in order  to
attract them at an early stages of their career.
SKILL  DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation/Observation
2.15 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department in the field of skill development. The
Committee is hopeful that efforts of the Department would yield desired results in generating employment
opportunities for the youths of the country. However, the Committee feels that linkages in the form of MoUs
etc. must be done with the various private industries/Public Sector industries along with the Ministry of
Skill Development which also runs various programmes so that these skilled persons are engaged optimally.
The Committee, keeping in view of the above recommends that a system be put in place to have a constant
vigil and to facilitate the unemployed youths of the country in order to integrate them in the industries after
attaining their respective skill development courses. (Para 14.7)
Action Taken
2.16 The Department is thankful for the appreciation indicated by the Committee and also takes note of the
recommendation. Many of the CSIR Integrated Skill programs implemented by the Department are in touch
with local as well as relevant industries to enhance employability/skill upgradation of trained persons. The
programmes are also industry relevant with entrepreneurial prospects.
The Department is already connected with eight Sector Skill Councils (Leather, Agriculture, Capital
Goods, Life Sciences, Automotive, Paint & Coating, Mining and Aerospace) to align with National Skill

11
Mission. MoUs have been signed with National Scheduled Caste Finance Development Cooperation
(NSFDC), State Skill Development Councils, ITIs etc. by CSIR laboratories. The Department is also in
touch with Ministry of Skill Development & Entrepreneurship (MSDE) for possible collaboration. The
Department is in the process of putting in place a system to monitor the programs implemented for their
possible employability.
CSIR’S  ROYALTY  AND  EARNINGS  OF  DEPARTMENT  BY  TECHNOLOGY  TRANSFER
Recommendation/Observation
2.17 The Committee during the meeting had observed that income of the Department from royalty
component is very low as compared to the huge investment of the Government on account of research/
innovations/ R&D etc. vis-a-vis profit earned by the private companies/industries by making commercial
use of technologies developed by the Department.  In view of this, the Committee reiterates its earlier
recommendation made in 297th Report and recommends that Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
should be signed with the companies/industries for fixing royalty component while making technology
transfer/inventions for allowing its product for commercial utilization so that Department could be financially
self reliant and also invest in R&D. (Para 15.3)
Action Taken
2.18 The Department thankfully notes the observations of the Committee. MoUs signed with companies/
industries at the time of sanctioning technology development and commercialization projects do fix the
royalty percentage to be paid by industries but the amount of royalty realized depends upon the actual
commercialization and the earnings made by companies, which varies as per the prevailing market and
technology scenario. CSIR has also put in place new guidelines for technology transfer and Utilization of
Knowledgebase-2017. The Department endeavours to maintain a balance between its objectives of promotional
role for technological upgradation of industry and to ensure that more and more royalty accrues to Government,
which can be ploughed back into further R&D.
Recommendation/Observation
2.19 The Committee has observed that investment in Research and Development (R&D) from the
Central Government is 0.6 % of GDP which is a fraction of GDP whereas in other countries investment
in R&D is US (2.8), China (2.1), Israel (4.3), and Korea (4.2). As per Economic Survey 2017-18, in
most countries, the private sector carries out the bulk of R&D even though the Government play an
important role in the area. However, in India, the Government is not just the primary source of R&D
but also the primary user of the funds, thus Government expenditure on R&D is undertaken almost
entirely by the Central Government. Private investments in research have lagged in India. According to
one analysis (Forbes, 2017) there are 26 Indian companies in the list of the top 2,500 global R&D
spenders compared to 301 Chinese companies. 19 (of these 26) firms are in just three sectors:
pharmaceuticals, automobiles and software. India has no firms in five of the top ten R&D sectors as
compared to China that has a presence in each of them. In view of the above, the Committee is of the
view that investment in R&D in the country is required to be enhanced substantially by the Central
Government. The Committee feels that Department must evolve some institutional mechanism to involve
private companies/ industries for investing towards R&D by providing them some kind of incentives
like tax benefits etc. (Para 15.4)

12
Action Taken
2.20 The Department takes note of the observations of the Committee. In order to increase the expenditure
on R&D by Public and Private sector, the Department implements a number of fiscal incentives for scientific
research, available from the Government. Fiscal incentives available to DSIR recognised in-housed R&D
units of industry, Scientific and Industrial Research Organizations (SIROs) and Public Funded Research
Institutions (PFRIs) are:
z 100% write-off of revenue expenditure on R&D under section 35(1)(i) of I.T. Act, 1961.
z 100% write-off of capital expenditure on R&D in the year the expenditure is incurred under
section 35(1) (iv) of I.T. Act, 1961.
z Weighted Tax deduction @150% on expenditure incurred in approved in-house R&D facility,
to companies engaged in business of biotechnology or in any business of manufacture or
production of any article or thing ( not being an article or thing specified in the list of the
eleventh schedule) under section 35(2AB) of I.T. Act, 1961. Provision is valid till 31-03-2020.
z Weighted tax deductions@150% for sponsored research programmes in approved National
laboratories, Universities and IITs (Section 35(2AA) of I.T. Act).
z Accelerated depreciation allowance upto 40% on investment on new plants and machinery
based on indigenous technology as per rule 5(2) of I.T. Rules.
z Customs duty exemption in terms of Government Notifications No. 51/96-Customs dated
23.07.1996; No. 24/2007-Customs dated 01.03.2007; No. 43/2017-Customs dated 30.06.2017;
No. 45/2017-Central Tax (Rate) & 47/2017-Integrated Tax (Rate) dated 14.11.2017;
No. 9/2018-Central Tax (Rate), No. 09/2018-Union Territory Tax (Rate) & No. 10/2018-Integrated
Tax (Rate) dated 25.01.2018; and State Tax (Rate) as applicable and all notification, as amended
from time to time.

CHAPTER – III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  IN  RESPECT  OF  WHICH  REPLIES
OF  THE  GOVERNMENT  HA VE  NOT  BEEN  ACCEPTED  BY
THE  COMMITTEE
Nil
13

14
CHAPTER – IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  IN  RESPECT  OF  WHICH
FINAL  REPLIES  OF  THE  GOVERNMENT  ARE  STILL  AWAITED
NATIONAL  CIVIL  AIRCRAFT  DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAMME  (NCAD)
Recommendation/Observation
4.1 The Committee is unable to understand that why this project is making no headway for the last many
years. The Committee also expresses its deep concern over the fact that we have mastered the space technology
indigenously but still not been successful in making civil aircraft for the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that proper and realistic planning be made for this project along with adequate budgetary
provision so that this project could take off. Further, the Committee also recommends that the
nodal Ministry/Department for taking the whole responsibility be identified and decision on the commercial
partner be taken for strategically launching the project at the earliest .      (Para 16.4)
Action Taken
4.2 The Department like to inform the Committee that CSIR through its constituent laboratory is pursuing
R&D programmes on 19 seater aircraft and 70-90 regional transport aircraft. However, the formation of a
Special Purpose Vehicle between Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. (HAL) and CSIR-National Aerospace Laboratories
has been agreed in-principle is yet to be made operational. The nodal Ministry/Department for taking the
whole responsibility needs to be identified. Also a commercial partner for co-development needs to be
decided for strategically launching the project.
Further Recommendation/Observation
4.3 The Committee observes that the Department has not responded to the recommendation of
the Committee for identifying the nodal Ministry/Department for the project and decision on the
commercial partner for strategically launching the project.  The Committee recommends that action
taken in the matter may be communicated to the Committee.

RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
NATIONAL  CIVIL  AIRCRAFT  DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAMME  (NCAD)
The Committee observes that the Department has not responded to the recommendation of
the Committee for identifying the nodal Ministry/Department for the project and decision on the
commercial partner for strategically launching the project.  The Committee recommends that action
taken in the matter may be communicated to the Committee. (Para 4.3)
15

MINUTES

19
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 27th December, 2018 in Committee Room No.4,
‘A’ Block, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma    —    Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri Anil Baluni
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK  SABHA
5. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar
8. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
9. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
10. Shri Daddan Mishra
11. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
12. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
13. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He informed
the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 317th, 318th, 319th,
320th, 321st, 322nd and 323rd reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in reports of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2018-19) of the Ministries/Departments of Biotechnology; Science and Technology; Scientific and
Industrial Research; Space; Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Atomic Energy; and Earth Sciences
respectively. The Committee, then, considered the draft 317th to 323rd reports and adopted the same.
3. The Committee decided to present/lay its 317th to 323rd reports in both the Houses of Parliament on
the 2nd January, 2019. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to decide the names of the Members
for presentation/laying of the reports in both the Houses of Parliament.
4. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3.25 
P.M.