PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY FOURTH REPORT
Status of Forests in India
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12th February, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12th February, 2019 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2019/Magha, 1940 (Saka)
324
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY FOURTH REPORT
Status of Forests in India
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 12th February, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 12th February, 2019 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2019/Magha, 1940 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(iv)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (vi)-( viii)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-37
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS—AT A GLANCE ........................................................ 38-44
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 45-57
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 59-68

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2018-19)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri Anil Baluni
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
6. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
7. Dr. Raghunath Mohapatra
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani
9. Shri Sharad Pawar
10. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri P. P. Chauhan
15. Kumari Sushmita Dev
16. Shri Ninong Ering
17. Shri Laxman Giluwa
18. Dr. K. Gopal
19. Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar
20. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
21. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
22. Shri Daddan Mishra
23. Shri Chirag Paswan
24. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil

(ii)
25. Shri Hari Narayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Vikram Usendi
29. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
#30. V acant
#31. V acant
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
# Shri Raghu Sharma and Shri Nagendra Singh ceased to be members of the Committee consequent upon their resignation
from the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 21st December, 2018.

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
(As on 2nd June, 2018)
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
5. Shri C. P. Narayanan
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Sharad Pawar
8. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
9. Shri Anil Baluni
10. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri P. P. Chauhan
16. Kumari Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
21. Shri Daddan Mishra
22. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
23. Shri Chirag Paswan
24. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
(iii)

25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
*30. Dr. Raghu Sharma
#31. Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
(iv)
*Nominated w.e.f. 14th March, 2018.
@Nominated w.e.f. 27th April, 2018.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report
on its behalf, present this Three Hundred Twenty-fourth Report on "Status of Forests in India".
2. In its meetings held on the 9th April, 14th May and 10th October, 2018, the Committee heard the
views of the representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Ministry of
Tribal Affairs and non-official witnesses from WWF-India, Environment Support Group, The Energy and
Resources Institute (TERI), Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment and Bombay
Natural History Society (BNHS). During its study visits, the Committee also visited the Tadoba-Andhari
Tiger Reserve, Chandrapur, Maharashtra on the 25th April, 2018 and Corbett Tiger Reserve, Uttarakhand
on the 1st June, 2018 and held discussions with the representatives of some local NGOs, Governments
of Maharashtra/Uttarakhand and Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change on the
environmental issues specific to the Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve and Corbett Tiger Reserve.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change, Ministry of Tribal Affairs, State Governments of Maharashtra and Uttarakhand and the
non-official witnesses for placing before the Committee the required material and replying to the
clarifications sought by the Members on the subject.
4. In its meeting held on 8th February, 2019 the Committee considered the draft report and adopted
the same.
  N
EW D ELHI; ANAND SHARMA
8 February, 2019 Chairman,
Magha 19, 1940 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha

ACRONYMS
A A Y : Antyoday Anna Yojana
A TREE : Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and Environment
BNHS : Bombay Natural History Society
BPL : Below Poverty Line
BSI : Botanical Survey of India
CAMPA : Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning
Authority
CDV : Canine Distemper Virus
CTPS : Chandrapura Thermal Power Station
DNFP : Draft National Forest Policy
DPAP : Drought Prone Area Programme
FCA : Forest (Conservation) Act
FDAs : Forest Development Agencies
FRA : Forest Rights Act
FSI : Forest Survey of India
GA : Geographical Area
GDP : Gross Domestic Product
GIM : Green India Mission
GIS : Geographic Information System
GS : Growing Stock in Forests
IAPS : Invasive Alien Plant Species
ICFRE : Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education
IIFM : Indian Institute of Forest Management
IIRS : Indian Institute of Remote Sensing
IRS : Indian Remote Sensing Satellite
ISFR : India State of Forest Report
IWMP : Integrated Watershed Management Programme
IWST : Institute of Wood Science & Technology
(vi)

(vii)
JFMCs : Joint Forest Management Committees
LISS : Linear Imaging Self-Scanning System
M Ha : Million Hectares
MBC : Most Backward Classes
MODIS : Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
MSP : Minimum Support Price Scheme
MSTrIPES : Monitoring System for Tigers Intensive Protection and
Ecological Status
NAP : National Afforestation Programme
NBA : National Biodiversity Authority
NDC : Nationally Determined Contributions
NDMA : National Disaster Management Authority
NE : North East
NFP : National Forest Policy
NGOs : Non Government Organisations
NPV : Net Present Value
NRSC : National Remote Sensing Centre
NTCA : National Tiger Conservation Authority
NTFP : Non-Timber Forest Produce
OSB : Oriented Strand Board
PESA : Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas Act
PF : Protected Forests
PMA Y : Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana
PMUY : Pradhanmatri Ujjwala Yojana
PPP : Pubic Private Partnership
RF : Reserved Forests
RE : Revised Estimate
RF A : Radio Frequency Ablation
SECC : Socio-Economic Caste Census

SFDA : S tate Forest Development Agency
SMS : Short Message Service
STPF : Special Tiger Protection Force
TERI : The Energy and Resources Institute
TOF : Trees Outside Forest
UF : Unclassed Forests
UNESCO : United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation
UNFCCC : United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UT : Union Territories
VSS : Van Sanrakshan Samiti
WCL : Western Coalfields Limited
WWF : World Wildlife Fund
ZSI : Zoological Survey of India
(viii)

REPORT
Introduction
1.1 The natural environment is the basis of all life on earth; we derive most of our basic needs from
the natural environment. A lot of these needs such as clean air, water and fertile soil directly affect our
everyday lives. Forests are an integral part of the natural environment and are crucial for the maintenance
of the ecological balance necessary for human life. After oceans, forests are the world's largest storehouses
of carbon. They provide ecosystem services that are critical to human welfare, which include absorbing
harmful greenhouse gasses that produce climate change; providing clean water for drinking, bathing, and
other household needs; protecting watersheds and reducing or slowing the amount of erosion and
chemicals that reach waterways; serving as a buffer in natural disasters like flood and rainfalls; providing
habitat to more than half of the world's land-based species etc.
1.2 Forests are a boon for the mankind. Forests have enormous environmental, social, cultural and
economic value. India especially has been blessed with some of the most beautiful forests that are home
for many rare species of birds and animals. In India, forests are viewed as being a part of our natural
and cultural heritage and they have a great significance for most Indians. However, in recent times, our
forests have come under threat from a wide variety of sources. Rising demand of rapid economic growth
has often come at the expense of the environment, especially forests.
1.3 Forests have borne the brunt of unsustainable development practices. Pressure on forests and forest
lands have grown manifold due to demands of industry and agriculture alike. Various natural and mineral
resources are found within forest areas, further increasing the pressure on forests. Furthermore, a very
large number of people are directly and indirectly dependent upon forests for their sustenance. Increasing
demand for fuel wood and other forest produce has meant that forests have to be carefully nurtured and
conserved. Another major challenge facing us in the long and short term is Climate Change. India is at
the forefront of the global fight against climate change and as part of its various international commitments
against climate change, forests have a crucial role to play. In light of these facts, it becomes imperative
to understand the nature of challenges that we currently face.
1.4 The challenges facing the environment, especially by forests and the status of forests in the country,
attracted the attention of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests. The Committee, therefore, took up the subject 'Status of Forests
in India' for detailed examination. During the examination of the subject, the Committee noted that the
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change had come out with a revised draft of the National
Forest Policy namely, Draft National Forest Policy, 2018 which was placed in public domain for a month
till 14th April, 2018 for comments. Since the policy, when finalised, would have a direct bearing on the
state of forests in the country, the Committee decided to look into the Draft National Forest Policy, 2018
too to assess its impact on the status of the forests in the country. The Committee, accordingly, held
meetings on the subject on the 9th April, 14th May and 10th October 2018 and heard the views of the
representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change, Ministry of Tribal Affairs and
non-official witnesses from WWF-India, Environment Support Group, The Energy and Resources Institute
(TERI), Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment and Bombay Natural History Society
(BNHS).

2
General Facts about Forests in India
2.1 In its first meeting held on the subject on the 9th April 2018, the Committee heard the representatives
of the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change on the subject. In their background note
submitted to the Committee on the subject, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
informed the Committee as under:
2.2 "Forest in India is a tract of land that is legally proclaimed to be one under Indian Forest Act, 1927.
There are three types of forests: Reserved forests (RF), Protected Forests (PF) and Unclassed Forests
(UF). Besides RFs and PFs, the recorded forest area may also include all such areas, which have been
notified as forests in the revenue records or have been constituted so under any State Act or local laws.
India has a notified forest area of 76.79 million hectares (m ha), comprising 43.47 m ha of Reserved,
21.94 m ha of Protected and 11.38 m ha of Unclassed (unclassified) Forests.
2.3 The Reserved Forest is an area notified under the Indian Forest Act or a State Forest Act enjoying
a higher degree of protection (human activities are prohibited unless expressly permitted); Protected
Forests are also notified under the Forest Acts but the restrictions are less stringent (human activities
are permitted unless expressly prohibited). Unclassed Forests are forests which have not been included
in reserved or protected forest categories. The tenurial status of such forests varies widely. The State/
UT-wise details of Reserved Forests (RF), Protected Forests (PF) and Unclassed Forests are at
Annexure-I.
Definition of Forest
2.4 The Ministry informed that as far as the "definition of forest" is concerned, the Ministry has
followed the definition as given in the order of Hon'ble Supreme court dated 12th December 1996 in W.P.
(C) No.202/1995. According to which the word forest must be understood according to its dictionary
meaning. The description covers all statutorily recognized forests, whether designated as reserved,
protected or otherwise for the purpose of section 2(i) of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. The term
"forest land" occurring in section 2, will not only include "forest" as understood in the dictionary sense,
but also any area recorded as forest in the Government record irrespective of the ownership. This is
how it has to be understood for the purpose of section 2 of the Act.
Types of Forest in India
2.5 The forests of the country have been grouped into 5 major categories and 16 types according to
biophysical criteria by Champion and Seth (1968). The distribution of these groups indicates 38.20%
subtropical dry deciduous, 30.30% tropical moist deciduous, 6.7% subtropical thorn and 5.8% tropical
wet evergreen forests. Other categories include subtropical pine (5%), tropical semi-evergreen forests
(2.5%) and other smaller categories. Temperate and alpine areas cover about 10% of the forest areas
in the Himalayan region. From the point of view of forest utilization value, the important forest regions
include the Central Southern region with predominantly teak forests, the Eastern region with Shorearobusta
(sal) dominated forests and the Western Himalayan region with coniferous species like pine, cedar, spruce
and fir. The northern plains and foothills of the Indian Himalayan region support Shorea, Dalbergia,
Terminalias Gmelina, Albizzias, etc. while the North-Western arid areas bear Prosopis and Anogeissus
dominated vegetation, interspersed with grassy rangelands. The North-Eastern region of the country is
rich in tropical and subtropical moist forests with much diversity of hardwood and softwood species.

3
Similar composition of forests in the Western Ghats and in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands has been
an important source of wood and wood products. Other specific ecologically important regions include
sandalwood habitats in the southern dry belt, red sanders in Andhra Pradesh, shola forests in Nilgiris,
mangroves in the Sundarbans in West Bengal, rain forests in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and
Himalayan alpines.
Forest Cover Assessment
2.6 India is one of the few countries of the world to have a robust and scientific system of periodic
forest and tree cover assessment and inventory of forest and Trees Outside Forest (TOF). Forest Cover
assessment is done on a two-year cycle and results are published in biennial report of Forest Survey of
India (FSI), Dehradun as India State of Forest Report (ISFR). The result of the latest 15th cycle of
assessment has been published in the ISFR-2017.
2.7 Forest cover assessment is carried out using a remote sensing based exercise in which wall to wall
mapping is done using Indian remote sensing satellite data supported by intensive ground verification and
field data from national forest inventory. The wall to wall mapping of forest in the entire country is based
on the image interpretation of the indigenous IRS-LISS III sensor. The tree cover estimation is a
sampling based exercise and estimated partly through High Resolution Satellite data and partly through
field inventory data of Trees Outside Forest (TOF). The information on growing/carbon stock and other
important characteristics are estimated through field inventory data of forest and TOF under the regular
inventory programme.
Forest Cover and Recorded Forest Area
2.8 The term 'Forest Cover' as used in ISFR refers to all lands more than one hectare in area with a
tree canopy of more than 10 %, irrespective of land use, ownership and legal status. It may include even
orchards, bamboo, palm etc and is assessed through remote sensing. On the other hand, the term
'Recorded Forest Area' refers to all the geographical areas recorded as 'Forests' in Government records
as Reserved Forests (RF) and Protected Forests (PF), which have been notified under the provisions of
Indian Forest Act, 1927 or its counterpart State Acts. Besides RFs and PFs, the recorded forest area
may also include all such areas, which have been recorded as forests in the revenue records or have
been constituted so under any State Act or local laws.
2.9 Recorded forests may have blank areas with tree density less than 10 % such as degraded lands,
wetlands, rivers, riverbeds, creeks in mangroves, snow-covered areas, glaciers and other snow covered
areas, alpine pastures, cold deserts, grasslands etc. As per the definition of forest cover, such areas are
excluded from the assessment of forest cover. On the other hand, there are areas outside the recorded
forests with tree patches of one hectare and more with canopy density above 10%. For example,
plantations on the private/community lands, road, rail and canal sides, rubber, tea, and coffee plantations
etc. Such areas also constitute forest cover and are included in the forest cover assessment.
Forest Cover of India as per ISFR-2017
2.10 The total forest cover of the country, as per current assessment is 7,08,273 sq. km. which is
21.54% of the geographical area of the country. The tree cover of the country is estimated to be 93,815
sq km which is 2.85 percent of the geographical area. The total forest and tree cover of the country
is thus 8, 02,088 sq km which is 24.39% of the geographical area of the country. In the current

4
assessment, there is an increase of 6,778 sq km in the Forest Cover and 1,243 sq km in the Tree Cover
of the country as compared to 2015 assessment. Therefore, the total Forest and Tree Cover of the
country has increased by 8,021 sq km (1%). The density class-wise forest cover, as per ISFR-2017,
is as under:-
Class Area (sq km) Percent of
Geographic
Area
Very Dense Forest (> 70 % canopy density) 98,158 2.99
Moderately Dense Forest (40-70% canopy density) 3,08,318 9.38
Open Forest (10 to 40% canopy density) 3,01,797 9.18
Total Forest Cover* 7,08,273 21.54
Scrub 45,979 1.40
Non-Forest 25,33,217 77.06
Total Geographic Ar ea 32,87,469 100.00
*Includes 4,921 sq km under Mangrove Cover.
The State/UT-wise details of forest cover, as per ISFR-2017, are at Annexure-II"
Definition of Forest
3.1 The Committee noted that the word "Forest" has not been defined anywhere in the Draft National
Forest Policy, 2018. The Committee desired to know as to why the Ministry was not working towards
a clear definition of Forest and whether any difficulty was being faced by the Ministry on this count.
In response, the Ministry in its written reply to the Committee stated that as far as the "definition of
forest" is concerned, the Ministry has followed the definition as given in the landmark judgment of
Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 12th December 1996 in Writ Petition (C) No.202/1995 in T.N. Godavarman
Thirumulkpad vs Union of India & Ors. The order of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India stated that:
"The word 'forest' must be understood according to its dictionary meaning. This description covers
all statutorily recognized forests, whether designated as reserved, protected or otherwise for the
purpose of Section 2(i) of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. The term "forest land", occurring
in Section 2, will not only include "forest" as understood in the dictionary sense, but also any area
recorded as forest in the Government record irrespective of the ownership. This is how it has to be
understood for the purpose of Section 2 of the Act. The provisions enacted in the Forest (Conservation)
Act, 1980 for the conservation of forests and the matters connected therewith must apply clearly
to all forests so understood irrespective of the ownership or classification thereof".
3.2 The Ministry further brought out that since the various legal issues related to forests are being
adequately addressed by the Indian Forest Act, 1927, Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and related orders
of Hon'ble Supreme Court, Ministry is not facing any difficulty for want of a definition of forest at
present.

5
3.3 During the meeting of the Committee held on 10th October 2018, the representative of Bombay
Natural History Society (BNHS), while presenting her views on the subject, opined that the definition of
'forest' needed to be broadened to include the natural areas i.e. ecosystems which don't always have
forest-like attributes, which include wetlands, grasslands, alpine meadows and underwater forests, like
those of Sargassum species.
3.4 Responding to the concerns of the representative of BNHS, the Director-General (Forest) and
Special Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, who was also present during
the meeting held on 10th October 2018, clarified as under:
"Sir, actually, if we define 'forests', it could create many loopholes that may be exploited. So, right
now, we are going by the definition given by the Supreme Court. As of now, 'forest' means any area
that is recorded as forest in any Governmental record irrespective of whether it is having a forest
growth or not. So, it has to be recorded. The second aspect is that it includes any land area,
irrespective of whether it is recorded as forest or not, if it is supporting natural forest as per the
dictionary meaning of the term. So, this was the definition given by the Supreme Court, and the
hon. Court wanted all the States to give their affidavits in 1996. Most of the States have given
them; some are still in the process. But once we define forests, saying that forest is a community
of trees, then these alpine meadows, etc., would go out of that definition. So, we are really
grappling with it. A definition cannot be a two-page or three-page thing. That is why we are
working on the definition very carefully. Once we come up with the definition, it has to be so
foolproof that it is not misused. That is our main concern."
3.5 The representative of TERI stated that they had been working on the definition of 'forests' in the
Forest Policy of our country for the last 10-15 years. It came to the fore with the Godavarman case
in 1996 when the Supreme Court defined it. The definition of forests, as areas notified in any of the
Government records, was workable with certain exceptions. Otherwise, the main definition is sufficient.
The country is so diverse, with diverse ownership and diverse kind of forests that the entire country's
diversity cannot be brought into one definition. So, though there could be some exceptions, they agreed
with the main definition followed by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change.
3.6 The Committee observes that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has
provided the Committee with a working definition as provided by the Supreme Court. The
Committee agrees that any narrow and specific definition of forests may leave out certain types
of forests and open up the possibility of loopholes being exploited by vested interests. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must come out with a comprehensive,
clear-cut and legally sustainable definition of Forest to dispel any kind of doubt in this regard.
Assessment of Forest Cover
4.1 One of the major challenges facing the forest in the country is forest degradation and deforestation.
According to India State of Forest Report, 2017, forest cover of the country is 70.83 million hectare
which is 21.54% of the geographical area. The areas under very dense cover, moderately dense cover
and open forests are 9.82 million hectare (2.99%), 30.83 million hectare (9.38%) and 30.18 million
hectare (9.18%) respectively. Natural forests contribute about 95% to the forest cover of the country.
The tree cover of the country is 9.38 million hectare which is 2.85% of the geographical area of the
country. Total forest and tree cover in the country is 80.20 million hectare which is 24.39% of the

6
geographical area of the country. The growing stock of India's forests is 4218.38 million cubic meter
and growing stock of TOF is 1603.99 million cubic meter (FSI, 2017). There is increase in open forests
but reduction of 0.34 million hectare of moderately dense forests, which indicates forest degradation.
Major driver for forest degradation is unsustainable harvest of fuel wood and minor forest produce.
4.2 During the meeting of the Committee held on the 9th April 2018, while briefing the Committee about
the status of forests in the country, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
informed that the Ministry carried out the survey of the forests every two years, and were helped by
the technology in their task. Through satellites, they were able to capture where and what nature of
forests the country had. He informed that the country had approximately seven lakh plus square kilometres
of forest land and additionally, there was the tree cover, which was also to be added to that. Thus, adding
the two, of the total land available, the forest was about 24.39 per cent. He further stated that ideally,
we should have 33 per cent forests but the country has presently only 24% to 25% and the rate of
growth was not fast enough for forests in the country to reach 33% immediately. He pointed out that
the forest depletion had stabilised now by and large i.e. the rate of depletion of forests was not going
up. However, they had not been successful so far in creating and increasing very dense and the
moderately dense forest.
4.3 The Secretary further informed the Committee that the findings in ISFR, 2017, particularly with
reference to North-Eastern States, were a cause of worry. The Committee observed that ISFR, 2017 has
indicated that the forest cover has decreased in most of the North-Eastern States and Sikkim.
4.4 The Committee, therefore, desired to know from the Ministry the reasons for the decline in forest
cover in the North-Eastern States, except Manipur and what safeguards had been taken by the Ministry
to increase the forest cover in North-Eastern States through policy interventions. In response, the
Ministry in their written reply informed the Committee that the North-Eastern region of the country
comprising eight States namely, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland,
Sikkim and Tripura, is endowed with rich forest resources and is one of the 18 biodiversity hotspots
of the world. The region, with just 7.98 per cent of the geographical area of the country, accounts for
nearly one fourth of its forest cover. One distinct feature of land use is the prevalence of shifting
cultivation in hilly parts of almost all the States of this region. Shifting cultivation has traditionally been
intricately linked to socio-cultural life of tribal people.
4.5 Total forest cover in the region as per "India State of Forest Report 2017", is 1,71,306 sq. km.,
which is 65.34% of its geographical area in comparison to the national forest cover of 21.54%. However,
there has been an actual decrease of forest cover to the extent of 630 sq. km. in the North-Eastern
region. Decline in forest cover in the region have been attributed to shifting cultivation and other
development activities and biotic pressures prevalent in the region. The reasons for the decline in forest
cover in the North Eastern region are as follows:
Sl. No. State Reasons for change in Forest Cover of NER
1 Arunachal Pradesh A decrease of 190 sq km observed in the forest cover of the State can
be attributed to shifting cultivation and developmental activities.
2 Assam An increase of 567 sq km in the forest cover is mainly due to the
plantations mostly outside forest areas. The decrease in forest cover in
some districts is mainly due to rotational felling in tea gardens, shifting
cultivation and developmental activities.

7
Sl. No. State Reasons for change in Forest Cover of NER
3 Manipur A net increase of 263 sq. km. has been observed in the State due to
plantation and conservation, as well as regrowth in shifting cultivation
areas.
4 Meghalaya A net decrease of 116 sq. km. has been observed in the State due to
shifting cultivation, rotational felling and developmental activities. Increase
in forest cover in certain pockets is due to plantation activities.
5 Mizoram The net decrease of 531 sq. km. in forest cover in Mizoram can be
attributed to shifting cultivation and development activities. Increase in
forest cover in certain pockets is due to regeneration of Bamboo and
other plantations.
6 Nagaland A net decrease of 450 sq. km. in forest cover observed in the State can
be attributed to shifting cultivation and development activities.
7 Sikkim A net loss of 9 sq. km. in forest cover observed in the State can be
attributed to developmental activities.
8 Tripura A net decrease of 164 sq. km. in the forest cover of the State can be
attributed to shifting cultivation, harvesting of mature rubber plantations
and other development activities.
4.6 The Committee was also informed that in order to arrest the decline in forest cover, the Ministry
is supporting the States with the Intensification of Forest Management Schemes by which protection and
improvement of forest areas especially from forest fires and strengthening of protection measures are
undertaken. Further, the National Afforestation Programme (NAP) has also been supporting the NE
Region for treatment of degraded forest areas. With these interventions, it is expected that the forest and
tree cover will further improve in the NE States in future. The new policy envisages to maintain and
enhancing the forest cover and provide alternatives to shifting cultivation by giving special emphasis on
the management of forests in NE region.
4.7 During the meeting of the Committee held on the 9th April 2018, while further informing the
Committee about the forest cover of the country, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest &
Climate Change, stated as under:
"We, as a country, come in the first ten countries globally which have large forest cover. We are
the eighth in the globe in terms of the percentage gain in forest cover that we are making. Our per
capita forest is still low. It is pretty low compared to the global average. It is 0.058 hectare per
capita here whereas globally it is 0.59 hectare per capita."
4.8 The Committee also desired to know from the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
about the scientific techniques used by the Ministry for increasing forest cover. In response, the
Committee was informed that the Ministry is focussing on increasing forest and tree cover through
various afforestation programmes such as Green India Mission and National Afforestation Programme.
Various technologies and standardized silvicultural practices including production of Quality Planting
Materials, improved nursery technologies, pest and disease management etc. are used by the State Forest

8
Departments in this regard. Forest Survey of India, Dehradun assesses the inventory of forest resources
periodically and as per its assessment during 2017, there has been an increase of 6778 sq. km. of forest
cover and 1234 sq. km. of tree cover over its assessment in 2015.
4.9 It is evident that the anthropogenic pressure endured by nation's forest is enormous. With
rapidly growing population, this pressure is set to rise in future. This will seriously affect the
quality of forests and their sequestration potential. The Committee is of the view that in a
developing nation, the demand for development imperatives and for creation of infrastructure
will always be there. The need is, therefore, that our policies are geared to judicious use of
forests so that this resource is not depleted and the pace of increase of forest cover in the
country continues in future too. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that Ministry of
Environment, Forest & Climate Change should judiciously manage the forests in the country,
if required through necessary policy interventions, and ensure that whatever forest depletion is
there or diversion of forest land is permitted, we are able to make up more than the area
depleted/permitted for diversion so that the forest cover of the country remains intact. Environment
and Development are supplementary and complementary as the two sustain each other. The
need, therefore, is to strike a fine balance between the two and to pay due attention on both,
within sustainable development framework.
4.10 The Committee is also concerned about the decline in the forest cover in the North-Eastern
States, which is 65.34% of its geographical area in comparison to the national forest cover of
21.54%. The Committee recommends that the concerned State Governments and the Union
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change must look into the factors responsible for
the decline in the forest cover and take all necessary steps to ensure that the trend of decline
in forest cover in these States is arrested at the earliest.
4.11 During its meeting held on the 9th April 2018, the Committee observed that in the ISFR, 2017, the
term 'Green-wash area' has been used. The Committee desired to know as to what is the Green-wash
area and on what basis the Green wash area is determined. The Committee was informed by the Ministry
that the forest cover of the country is assessed irrespective of ownership, legal status and land use. This
information provides qualitative and quantitative attributes for better and effective forest management and
for devising appropriate conservation strategies. The major portion of the forest cover, however, falls
within the recorded forests. The assessment of area of the forest cover within the recorded forests is
subject to availability of digitized boundaries of the RFA from the State Forest Departments. Till date,
digitized forest boundaries of RFA are available from 16 States only and accordingly have been used for
analysis and calculation of Forest Cover in the present ISFR. These States/UTs are Andhra Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Gujarat, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana,
Uttarakhand, Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Goa, West Bengal, Maharashtra and Odisha. The Ministry
further informed that due to non-availability of digitized boundaries of RFA from many States, it is not
possible to give forest cover inside and outside the recorded forest area of such States. Thus, in the
absence of digitized boundaries of the RFA, green wash areas have been taken as proxy to RFA. The
green-wash refer to the portions of Survey of India topographic sheets representing the forest at the time
of survey carried out to prepare such topographic sheets. This green-wash by and large corresponds to
recorded forest area of the country. In the report, FSI has given information on forest cover in and
outside green wash area for those States from where the digitized boundary of RFA is not available.

9
4.12 The Committee notes that only 16 States/Union Territories have been able to provide details
of digitized boundaries of Recorded Forest Area for incorporation in the India State of Forest
Report, 2017 and as such, it has not been possible to give forest cover inside and outside the
recorded forest areas of such States. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change should impress upon the all the concerned remaining States/Union
Territories to complete the task of digitization of forest boundaries of the Recorded Forest Area
in their respective States/Union Territories in a time-bound manner, so that a more accurate
picture of the forest cover area of the country can be made available.
Degradation of Forests in the Country
5.1 Forest degradation remains a key concern for quality of forests in India. In its meeting held on the
10th October 2018, the Committee heard the representatives of some non-official organisations working
in the field of forests and ecology in order to have the benefit of their views on the subject. With regard
to the degradation of forests, The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI) was of the view that India
has successfully addressed the problem of deforestation. Forest Conservation Act, 1980 has played a key
role in keeping a balance between conservation and development. Between 2003 and 2017, continuous
improvement has been reported in India's Forest cover as it has increased by 21,506 square kilometres
or 3.13%, whereas the Growing Stock in Forests (GS) reduced significantly by 563.03 million cubic
meters or 11.78%. The reduction in growing stock despite increasing forest cover is an indicator of
forest degradation. Within the recorded forest, 94.96% of forest is prone to crop injuries, 39.94 percent
has inadequate regeneration, and 5.05 percent has no regeneration. Despite improved forest cover; sharp
reduction in Growing Stock of Forests, inadequate regeneration, soil erosion and significant crop injuries
underline deteriorating forest health in India.
5.2 The Committee desired to know as to what extent programmes such as National Afforestation
Programme, Green India Mission, etc. have helped the country in improving the quality of degraded
forests and whether any comparative study had been conducted by the Ministry to assess the impact
of these programmes. In response, the Committee was informed that the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change is implementing the National Afforestation Programme, Green India Mission,
etc. for afforestation and improving the quality of degraded forests. The details of National Afforestation
Programme (NAP) and Green India Mission (GIM) are as under:
(i) National Afforestation Programme (NAP), a flagship Centrally Sponsored Scheme, implemented
for the eco-restoration of degraded forests in the country through a set up involving the Joint
Forest Management Committees (JFMCs) at the village level, the Forest Development Agencies
(FDAs) at the Forest Division level and the State Forest Development Agency (SFDA) at the
State level, has been the biggest and the most successful afforestation scheme of the Ministry
since its inception in 2000-01.
Plantation undertaken through NAP contributes to about 15-20% of the total afforestation
efforts in the country. Most of the afforestation and eco-restoration work under NAP is taken
up in the forest areas for improvement and restocking of existing forests. The major benefits
accrued are successful afforestation activities in degraded forest land, soil and moisture
conservation works, significant impact in improvement of livelihoods, assets creation in village,
etc.

10
No comparative study has been conducted by the Ministry to assess the impact of NAP.
However, the mid-term evaluation study on NAP by Indian Council of Forestry Research and
Education (ICFRE), Dehradun during 2008 has stated that the scheme has been successful in
protection of about ten million hectare forests, under joint control from threat of illicit grazing,
and forest fires. As a result, these forests are regenerating with vigour.
Further, the India State of Forest Report (ISFR), 2017 reveals that during the last 30 years,
the forest cover of the country has increased by 2 percentage point i.e. 19.49% as per ISFR
1987 to 21.54 % as per ISFR 2017 which partly coincides in later half period with the
implementation period of NAP from 2000-02 to till 2017-18. This by any means is not a small
achievement considering the ever increasing biotic pressure on forests and necessity for
development projects, etc.
The ISFR 2017 also pointed out that the positive change in forest cover can be attributed to
consistent afforestation/tree plantation drive under various schemes especially Centrally Sponsored
Schemes (CSS) like NAP and to partnership in forest conservation and management involving
the forest department and the local communities through Joint Forest Management Committee
(JFMC) mechanism.
(ii) Further, National Mission for a Green India (GIM) is one of the eight Mission outlined under
the National Action Plan on Climate Change. It aims at protecting, restoring and enhancing
India's forest cover and responding to Climate Change. GIM India has a target to increase
forest cover on 5 million hectare and improve quality of forest cover on another 5 million
hectare including enhanced annual CO
2 sequestration by 50-60 million tonnes by 2020. GIM
is being implemented through revamped State Forest Development Agencies, revamped Division/
District Forest Development Agencies and revamped Joint Forest Management Committees/
Gram Sabhas at the village level.
5.3 GIM got operational in FY 2015-16 after due approval of Implementation Guidelines in November
2014. So far, fund amounting to `157.64 Crore have been released under GIM to nine States for carrying
out GIM activities. The State-wise information regarding area approved for afforestation and corresponding
funds released under GIM is at Annexure-III.
5.4 The Committee takes note of the schemes/programmes initiated by the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change for improving the quality of degraded forests in the
country. The mid-term evaluation study on National Afforestation Programme by ICFRE during
2008 had highlighted the successful implementation of the plan as a result of which these forests
were regenerating with vigour. The Ministry has also informed the Committee that the forest
depletion has by and large stabilized now. However, the Committee wishes to point out that
nearly 10 years have passed by since the evaluation had been conducted by ICFRE. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should undertake a study to assess the impact of
National Afforestation Programme and Green India Mission in improving the quality of degraded
forests so that their actual impact on the forest cover is known and further strategies in this
regard could be drawn accordingly.
Management of Forests
6.1 The Committee observed that encroachment, illegal tree felling, invasive weed, grazing, etc. were
some of the issues plaguing the forests in the country. The Committee desired to know from the Ministry

11
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change about the scientific and technological innovations made by
the Ministry to address these issues.
6.2 Responding to the query of the Committee, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
informed that the responsibility of protection, conservation and management of the forests primarily lie
with the respective State and Union Territory Governments. Role of the Ministry is limited to policy and
technological assistance through its technical organizations in the management of forests and wildlife.
The Ministry also issues advisories and policy guidelines from time to time to address the issues related
to encroachment, illegal tree felling etc.
6.3 The Committee was further informed that the Ministry has developed and launched an e-Green
Watch and Decision Support System, a web-GIS based system for effective monitoring and evaluation
of various forestry activities especially for regulating the diversion of forest areas for developmental
purposes, etc. Further, digitization and demarcation of forest boundary is strengthening the mechanism
to deal with the issues related to encroachments. Participation of local communities through existing
mechanism of JFMCs has also helped significantly in dealing with the issues of encroachment, illegal
felling of trees and management of forest fires, etc.
6.4 The Committee sought to know as to how the Ministry was handling the issue of grazing/overgrazing
in the forest areas. In response, the Committee was informed that the State/Union Territory Forest
Departments deal with the issue of grazing in forest areas as per the provisions of the extant Acts, rules
and regulations. On the issue of invasive weed, insects, pests etc., it was informed that institutes of
Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE), Dehradun have worked on different
aspects of invasive species. ICFRE and its regional research institutes assist the State Forest Departments
by providing effective and feasible solutions to the problems of pests and diseases by undertaking region-
specific research programmes. Besides this, the State Forest Departments also take the assistance of the
State Agricultural Universities and other research institutions working in the areas of pests and disease
management.
6.5 The Committee was informed that ICFRE has developed bio-composite using combination of natural
fibre of Lantana and thermo-plastics, Oriented Strand Board (OSB) from Lantana for use as composite
wood material, a cellulose and hand-made paper form Lantana and Parthenium and a product named
'Samridhi' from weeds for silkworm rearing which helps in reducing cocoon spinning time, improves
quality of leaf fed, reduces cost and improves quality of silk thread. The product is patented. Coloring
dye has also been extracted from Lantana, Parthenium, Eupotorium, Ageratum and Water hyacinth.
6.6 Institute of Wood Science & Technology (IWST) Bengaluru, has successfully analysed the calorific
value and fuel properties of Lantana camara and Prosopisjulifora, the invasive weeds and prepared
biomass briquettes. These briquettes can be used by industries to produce fuel. Earlier, ICFRE had made
furniture out of Lantana. The Council has also carried out study on 'Impact of Prosopisjuliflora on
biodiversity, rehabilitation of degraded community land in Rajasthan. Another study on spatial mapping
and modelling of wattle invasion for sustainable management of Shola grassland ecosystem of Tamil
Nadu is under progress. Risk analysis assessment of Lantana camara using spatial distribution modeling
approach in Latehar district of Palamu forest region of Jharkhand has also been carried out.
6.7 An all India coordinated Research Project entitled "Assessment and monitoring of invasive plant
species in India and formulation of strategies for management of key Invasive Alien Plant Species (IAPS)

12
in different regions of the country" has been approved. The project will be focusing on four important
species i.e. (i) Prosopisjuliflora, (ii) Mikaniamircrantha, (iii) Lanatancamara, and (iv) Acacia spp. (Wattles).
6.8 The Committee notes that Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE),
Dehradun and its regional research institutes inter alia work towards providing effective and
feasible solutions to the problems of pests and diseases by undertaking region-specific research
programmes. Their research programmes have positively contributed to containing some of the
ailments faced by our forests. The Committee hopes that ICFRE, in coordination, with the State
Agricultural Universities and other research institutions working in the areas of pests and
disease management, would continue to provide solutions to important forestry research needs
of the country.
6.9 During the meeting of the Committee held on 9th April 2018, the Committee also drew attention
of the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change to the reduction of forest area of 3 sq. Km.
in the ISFR, 2017 compared to ISFR, 2015 in the Shravasti District of Uttar Pradesh, due to illegal
cutting of trees in forest near border area of Nepal. The Committee desired to know the action plan
prepared by the Ministry to control this illegal cutting of construction timber. In response, the Committee
was informed that no specific action plan had been prepared by the Ministry for this particular region
and the Ministry had not received any report in this regard from the Uttar Pradesh Forest Department
so far.
6.10 The Committee is constrained to note that no action plan has been prepared by the Ministry
of Environment, Forest & Climate Change for controlling the illegal cutting of trees in forests.
On the one hand, the Government is spending crores of rupees for environmental protection,
while, on the other hand, illegal cutting of trees and transportation of the wood has been plaguing
our forests in a big way. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Environment, Forest
& Climate Change must take due cognizance of the illegal felling of trees in the different parts
of the country and, in coordination with the concerned State Governments/Union Territory
administrations, prepare an action plan for tackling this menace. The Ministry should impress
upon all the concerned forest management authorities to take necessary action and utilize the
constitutional provisions to restrict this illegal practice. Further, the report on illegal cutting of
construction timber in forest near border area of Nepal in the Shravasti District of Uttar Pradesh,
from the Uttar Pradesh Forest Department, should be shared with the Committee at the earliest.
6.11 The Committee also desired to know from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
whether there was any working/management plan to deal with the issue of deforestation. The Ministry
informed the Committee that National Working Plan Code 2014 was adopted for sustainable management
of forests and biodiversity in India. Working Plan is a tool for scientific management of forests and is
extremely useful in evaluating the status of forest resources, assessing the impact of past management
practices and deciding about suitable management interventions for the future. All forests are to be
sustainably managed under the prescription of Working Plan/Scheme. The National Forest Policy clearly
states "no forest should be permitted to be worked without an approved Working Plan by the competent
authority." The same provision has been retained in the new Forest Policy. It is the duty of the manager/
owner (private forest) of the forest area to ensure the preparation of the Working Plan/Scheme. The
authority as designated by the Ministry, will approve the Working Plan and ensure its implementation.
Even working schemes have all major elements of a working plan and these schemes also need the
sanction of the competent authority of the Ministry.

13
6.12 The Committee observed that under National Afforestation Programme, there had been a decline in
progress in terms of area covered under the programme from 80583 hectare in the year 2013-14 to
35986 hectare in the year 2015-16. The Committee desired to know the reasons behind this decrease
and steps taken by the Ministry to improve the said position. Replying to the observations of the
Committee, the Ministry informed the Committee that in the 10th, 11th and 12th Plan period, `1205
crores, `2000 crores and `2500 Crores respectively had been allocated under the NAP scheme. However
the overall outlays in the annual plans were restricted each year which led to less fund availability for
afforestation. With the increase in wage rate in the States and low allocations, the target area for
afforestation has been steadily decreasing over the years.
6.13 As per approved outlay for the 12th Plan, annual allocation for NAP should have been of the tune
of `500 crore each year. However during 2012-13, the allocation in the annual plan was `318.15 crores,
which itself was less than the proportionate annual outlay and which was further reduced to `218.15
crore at the RE stage. Likewise during 2013-14 though the allocation was `318.15 crore, it was reduced
to `257.62 crore. Similarly, in the year 2014-15 also, the Budget was reduced to `243.78 crore at RE
stage. This had adversely affected not only the plantation and maintenance activity of that year but also
the afforestation works carried out in the previous years, which had led to serious constraints in
successful implementation of the scheme as the approved annual work programme could not be followed
by the States.
6.14 Moreover, the funding pattern also changed from 100% Centrally sponsored to sharing pattern in
2015-16 as 60: 40 :: Central: State. With `100 crore budget allocations for 2015-16, `60 Crore for 2016-
17 and changed funding pattern led to budget constraints for achieving the targeted area of afforestation
annually which has already declined gradually over the last 4 years. Only 35,986 ha. new areas could
be sanctioned during 2015-16 due to change in the funding pattern and budget constraints.
6.15 Further, due to budget insufficiency ancillary activities like strengthening of JFMCs, soil moisture
conservation, fencing, awareness generation, monitoring and evaluation, etc. could not be supported
properly which adversely affected the very purpose of this scheme viz. preservation of forests by
participatory approach. During 2017-18 afforestation over 39,847 ha. has been targeted and `80 crores
has been released. The scheme is demand driven and several proposals from some States could not be
approved due to want of budget allocation in 2017-18.
6.16 Forests in India are treated primarily as a social and environmental resource and sustain
full or partial livelihood for more than 300 million rural population. In this backdrop, the
Committee is concerned to note that insufficient budget allocation to National Afforestation
Programme has been hampering achieving the annual targeted area of afforestation during the
last few years, which has already declined gradually over the last 4 years. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change must ensure
that adequate allocation is made for the National Afforestation Programme and the targets under
the programme are achieved. Further, the concerned State Governments should also provide
their share of the changed funding pattern to make the National Afforestation Programme (NAP)
a success.
6.17 The Committee also brought to the notice of the Ministry that there had been concerns from various
sections of society regarding diversion of forest land for mining and other purposes. The Committee
desired to know in detail about the mechanism being thought out by the Ministry to ensure that forest

14
land does not get diverted for industrial activities. In response, the Ministry informed the Committee that
mining in forest areas is taken up only after getting the Forest Clearances under Forest (Conservation)
Act, 1980; Environmental Clearances under Environment Protection Act, 1986 and consent to operate
under Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
Act, 1981. To compensate the loss of trees and ecosystem services, compensatory afforestation is done
on non-forest and degraded forest land and NPV is collected. The status of compensatory afforestation
and compliance of other stipulation of the approval is monitored regularly through different Regional
Offices and also through third party.
6.18 The Committee also desired to know as to how many approvals had been granted by the Ministry
during the last five years for industrial activities in the forest areas throughout the country. The Committee
was informed that the Ministry has granted approval of 3226 number of cases in all categories during
the last five years from 2013-14 to 2017-18 under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, which involve
70920.61 ha. diversion of forest land for non-forestry purposes.
6.19 The Committee also desired to know as to how much of the forest land has been diverted for
infrastructure projects in the last fifteen years and what was the annual rate of such diversions. The
Committee was informed by the Ministry that in the last 15 years (from 01.01.2013 to 20.06.2018), an
area of 2,39,572.16 hectare forest land has been diverted for infrastructure projects under FCA, 1980.
The annual rate of diversion of forest land for infrastructure projects is 15971.48 hectare per year. The
details are at Annexure-IV .
6.20 The Com mittee then drew attention of the Ministry to the fact that the general perception of the
public was that the new draft forest policy overemphasized to commercialize forests to serve the
interests of industry and to bring the private sector for the actual management of forests through the
so-called Public Private Partnership Model. The Committee desired to know the response received from
the public/stakeholders on this issue and the views of the Ministry thereto. The Ministry responded that
the basic objectives, principles and goals of previous policy have been retained in the New Policy. Stress
on conservation of natural forests is same as that of the previous Policy of 1988. Production forestry
for enhancing the forest cover in the country and meeting national needs was also highlighted in the
previous Policy of 1988 including raising of trees outside forests through public or private sources with
appropriate safeguards. The present policy has only further elaborated the production forestry in detailed
manner as a new thrust for growing more wood, which is a carbon neutral renewable resource.
6.21 The policy promotes for afforestation in PPP mode only in scrub/degraded forest areas which are
not wildlife habitats or of any substantial ecological importance and also in areas outside forests. Further,
promotion of trees plantation in degraded areas will help in reducing the dependency on import of timber
and its products by the country. Afforestation in PPP mode emphasises that the communities, Van
Sanrakshan Samiti (VSS), Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMCs) will be equal partner in the
process and will get their due share from the harvest. It was further brought out that all the forestry
operations in forests take place as per approved working plans. The same has been highlighted in the
present Draft Policy that management of forests will be done only as per the Central Government
approved Working /Management Plans. Therefore, there is no major shift in the management of forests
in the proposed Draft Policy compared to the previous Policy of 1988. The Ministry also stated that it
was examining the comments received from various stakeholders regarding their acceptability and feasibility.

15
6.22 The Committee then desired to know as to what safeguards had been taken in the new draft forest
policy in order to prevent diversion of forest lands for non-forestry purposes without ensuring compensatory
afforestation. The Ministry informed the Committee that para 2.7 of the Draft National Forest Policy,
2018 envisages to safeguard forest land by exercising strict restraint on diversion for non-forestry
purposes, and strict oversight on compliance of the conditions. Further, the Forest (Conservation) Act,
1980 and Forest conservation rules and guidelines framed thereunder have necessary safeguards in order
to prevent unsubstantiated diversion of forest land for non-forestry purposes. The Ministry has detailed
and comprehensive guidelines in place for preventing diversion of forests for non-forestry purposes and
ensuring compensatory afforestation. It was further informed that an assessment of the Net Present
Value (NPV) of the forests being diverted in each case is also made to quantify the eco-system services
that may be lost due to diversion. The NPV amount then collected is provisioned to be utilized so that
eco-system services to that extent may be recovered from the existing forests.
6.23 The Committee is of the view that although compensatory afforestation is ensured and Net
Present Value (NPV) is collected, there is a need for striking the right balance between the
developmental aspirations of the country on one hand and the conservation needs on the other.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that while the developmental aspirations of the nation
are not to be compromised, it should be ensured that forest land may be diverted for non-forestry
purposes, if and only if, it is absolutely unavoidable and essential and, in lieu of the diverted
lands, adequate compensatory afforestation is done as per the prevalent guidelines/provisions and
sufficient amount of Net Present Value is collected.
6.24 During the meeting of the Committee held on the 9th April 2018, the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change informed the Committee that fuel wood and fodder collection were among
the factors which put pressures and threat to the forests. The Committee was further informed that
Ujjwala Scheme of the Government of India was helping in reducing the pressure on the forests. The
Committee desired to know as to how the Ujjwala scheme has reduced the pressure on forests, especially
in forest areas and what was the status of the implementation of the Ujjwala scheme?
6.25 In their written reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate
Change informed the Committee that as per the information provided by Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas, in order to provide clean cooking fuel to Below Poverty Line (BPL) households especially
in rural areas, the Government has launched 'Pradhanmantri Ujjwala Yojana' (PMUY) on 01.05.2016
through which deposit free LPG connections to 8 crore women belonging to the BPL households are
to be provided. Identification of beneficiaries under PMUY is made through Socio-Economic Caste
Census (SECC)-2011 list and additionally, it covers SC/STs households, beneficiaries of Pradhan Mantri
Awas Yojana (PMAY) (Gramin), Antyoday Anna Yojana (AAY), Forest dwellers, Most Backward Classes
(MBC), Tea and Ex-Tea Garden Tribes and people residing in islands/river islands, whose names do not
appear in SECC list and subject to fulfilment of other terms and conditions. It was further informed that
under 'Pradhanmantri Ujjwala Yojana', 2.00 crore and 1.55 crore connections were provided to BPL
households during Financial year 2016-17 and 2017-18 respectively. As on 23.07.2018, more than 4.83
crore connections have been provided under the Yojana. It was further stated that forest dwellers are
mainly dependent on forests for their source of firewood used in cooking. Switching over to LPG by
these households would lead to reduced dependency on the forests.
6.26 The Committee is of the view that the LPG cylinders are still not available to a large
number of forest dwellers and BPL households in many areas of the country. Further, the cost

16
of the cylinders has gone up in absence of the subsidy on the cylinders. The Committee
recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change should impress upon the
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to make efforts to bring more and more households
under the Ujjwala scheme to reduce the pressure on forests.
Forest Fires
7.1 Forest fires have emerged as an important threat in recent times and that there is a need for
understanding the issues involved in the matter. In India, due to anthropogenic pressure on land most
forest fires are directly or indirectly influenced by humans. Like other tropical areas, in India local
communities set most fires, not least because it is a cheap and simple land management tool but often
because it is the only option available to them. The reasons for setting fire include clearing areas for
shifting cultivation, clearing forest floor for NTFP collection, and for hunting/poaching purposes (Source
ISFR 2017). Uncontrolled fires are a cause of concern and are a major source of degradation of forests;
in many cases these fires can cause damage on a scale similar to illegal logging of forests. Unfortunately,
forest fires are often seen as mere incidents of fire and the focus is on firefighting alone, whereas it
is a complex problem that requires a comprehensive and long term policy.
7.2 As per the India State of Forest Report, 2017, there are some aspects of forest fires we cannot
control and that we cannot stop all fires, some are necessary and some are useful also. In addition,
accidents or deliberate fire-setting will always occur to some extent. However, effective land and forest
management could help in managing the ways and extent to which people create conditions that encourage
fire, particularly the build-up of inflammable material.
7.3 The Committee in its meeting held on 9th April, 2018 while hearing the views of the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, had expressed its concern over the death of twenty-one
workers and trekkers in Theni district, Tamil Nadu in the Kurangini hills. Incidents of forest fire had also
been reported in Haridwar, Uttarkashi, Tehri Garhwal, Pauri Garhwal, Rudraprayag, Chamoli, Nainital,
Bageshwar, Champawat and Almora in Uttarakhand in the year 2018. The Committee had observed that
there are incidences of forest fires all over the world but there are mechanisms to tackle the situation.
Trekkers are either forewarned or permits are not given to ascend. In Tamil Nadu, there are no permits
required unlike adjacent States like Kerala or Karnataka. That is one important factor for which there are
Forest Departments and concerned officials need to be sensitized.
7.4 The Committee commented that it is said that there are fund constraints in Ministry, but there are
instances where funds are not utilized by the States in a manner in which they should have been. This
was a failure of the system, particularly on the part of the State Forest Department. These lives could
have been saved but were lost. When major forest fires occur, these are areas which are not easily
accessible especially when it is dense, we don't have roads or any ways to get in there. The forest staffs
have very rudimentary techniques to extinguish forest fires. Non-availability of water too becomes an
issue. In many developed countries, helicopters are pressed in to contain the forest fires. The Committee
enquired whether we have any such mechanisms which the foreign Forest Departments have and
whether there is any coordination of the Forest Department with the NDMA, Air Force, etc. The
Committee further observed that we appear to be working as one country, but we are not working as
an integrated whole. The system is working in silos. Forest Department will do one thing; NDMA will
come in when lives are lost and when things go beyond control. Air Force will be called in by the time

17
much damage is done. The Committee observed that the Secretary of the Ministry may in consultation
with Cabinet Secretary put in place some coordination mechanism in which State Chief Secretaries are
also included. The local Air Force Commander and NDMA should also be involved so that all efforts are
put together to act in time so that incidences such as Kurangini are not repeated.
7.5 Responding to the queries of the Committee, representatives of the Ministry accepted that human
deaths due to fire in Kurangini hills was a failure of the system. It was informed that the Ministry has
a system of three passes of the satellite every day and through SMS, alerts are given. But, unfortunately,
in Tamil Nadu the registered number of mobiles is very less. It is one of the lowest in the country. The
alerts are based on the temperatures. These are done by Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
(MODIS) satellite, an American satellite and the Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS) satellite. The
MODIS has four passes a day and there is a thermal band which actually senses the heat beyond a
particular range. There is an earth station at the National Remote Sensing Centre at Hyderabad. The
Forest Survey of India, Dehradun is linked with NRSC and they get the information immediately, within
a couple of minutes to their fire centre at Forest Survey of India. The Ministry has also encouraged all
the States to register with the FSI data base as much as possible. Many States have more than 2000
registered users right up to the beat guards, but there are some States even after a lot of persuasion the
number of registered users are less such as Tamil Nadu and it is one of the reasons the information could
not be given directly to the persons concerned. The Committee was further informed that Government
of India has been alerting State Forest Departments through Forest Survey of India about forest fire
locations detected by the MODIS sensor and assisting the forestry professional in the country in many
ways to deal with the problems associated with forest fires. Forest fire management related initiatives
of the Ministry covers the following areas:-
• Near real time forest fire alerts;
• Forest fire pre-warning alerts; and
• Burnt-scar studies, etc.
7.6 The Committee notes with concern the loss of lives in forest fires besides the severe
degradation of forests & irreparable losses to valuable flora & fauna, there is a crucial need for
developing an integrated approach for firefighting. The Committee feels that there should be a
proper co-ordination mechanism between the State Governments, Forest Departments, National
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), local Air force authorities and the Central Ministry for
quelling forest fires. The Committee also feels that public awareness programmes should be
conducted periodically in the vulnerable forest fire areas about the safety measures. Further, all
State Governments should make the registration of the mobile numbers of the concerned areas
mandatory and ensure that the data base of the registered mobile numbers of the State Forest
Departments is kept up-to-date so that any information/alert is passed on to the maximum
number of persons.
7.7 The Committee also feels that lack of human resources in the Forest Departments of the
respective States is one of the very crucial reasons in its inability to deal with the forest fires
affecting large stretches of the forests. Therefore, the Committee is of the view that Forest
Departments of the State Governments should look into this aspect very seriously and fill the
vacancies after completing the due procedures & approval of competent authorities. The Central

18
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should monitor this important aspect for
tackling the forests fire effectively.
7.8 The Committee also notes that it had presented a detailed and exhaustive report i.e. Report
No. 293 on 'Forest Fires and its Effect on Environment, Forests, Bio-Diversity and Wildlife and
Remedial / Preventive Measures' to the both Houses of Parliament on 16th December, 2016
which could be a guiding force for the concerned agencies/ local authorities/ State Governments
and their respective Forest Departments and Central Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change for effectively tackling the forest fires.
Compensatory Afforestation and CAMPA Funds
8.1 The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Act 2016 was passed on the 3 rd August, 2016. The Act
provides for the establishment of funds under the public accounts of India and the public accounts of
each State and crediting thereto the monies received from the user agencies. The monies is to be utilized
for undertaking artificial regeneration (plantations), assisted natural regeneration, protection of forests,
forest related infrastructure development, Green India Programme, wildlife protection and other related
activities. During the examination of the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment, Forest &
Climate Change in February 2018, the Committee had been informed by the Ministry that CAMPA has
come into being with effect from 3rd August, 2016 and the Ministry has sought extension upto 03.08.2018
for notification of Compensatory Afforestation Fund Rule. The Committee understands that the
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Rules, 2018 have since been notified vide Notification dated 10th
August 2018.
8.2 The Committee desired to know from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change the
mechanism and criteria to select sites for compensatory afforestation. The Ministry informed the Committee
that as per para 3.2 of handbook of FCA rules and Guidelines, the Compensatory Afforestation shall be
done over equivalent area of non-forest land on the following terms and conditions:
(a) As far as possible, the non-forest land for compensatory afforestation should be identified
contiguous to or in proximity of Reserved Forest or Protected Forest to enable the Forest
Department to effectively manage the newly planted area.
(b) In the event that non-forest land for purpose of Compensatory afforestation is not available
in the same district, non-forest land for compensatory afforestation may be identified anywhere
else in the State/UT as near as possible to the site of diversion, so as to minimize adverse
impact on the micro-ecology of the area.
(c) Where non-forest lands are not available or non-forest land is available in less extent to the
forest area being diverted, compensatory afforestation may be carried out over degraded forest
twice in extent to the area being diverted or to the difference between forest land being
diverted and available non-forest land, as the case may be.
(d) The non-availability of suitable non-forest land for compensatory afforestation in the entire
State/UT would be accepted by the Central Government only on the Certificate from the Chief
Secretary to the State/UT Government to that effect.
8.3 The Committee brought to the notice of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
that some news reports suggested that compensatory plantation or afforestation was done on common

19
lands, cultivable lands, pastures etc. In response, the Ministry merely stated that Compensatory Afforestation
area is site specific and selected by State Government prior to obtaining final approval under FCA, 1980.
8.4 The Committee feels that since the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Rules, 2018 have now
been notified, the Central/State Governments would be able to utilise the amount available in
the fund for the intended purposes. The Committee is also hopeful that the above rules will not
give any scope for mis-utilisation or embezzlement of the funds by any of the stake holders. The
Committee recommends the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to devise a
stringent monitoring mechanism for proper utilization of the funds.
8.5 The Committee also sought to know whether the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate
Change has carried out any field survey to determine the total area/land available in the country for
afforestation. The Ministry informed that they had not carried out any study to determine the total area/
land available in the country for afforestation. As per India State of Forest Report 2017, it is estimated
that 24.39 per cent of the geographical area of the country is under forest and tree cover as against the
target of one-third of geographical area under forest or tree cover, in the National Forest Policy. The
balance of 9% can be achieved through taking up plantation/afforestation outside the forests and restocking/
plantation on scrub forest. The Committee was also informed that as per ISFR 2017, the country is
having about 3,01,797 sq.km of open forest land having density between 0.1 to 0.4, which constitute
9.18% of the geographical area of the country. In addition, 45,979 sq km areas have scrubs i.e. with
density less than 0.1 which are not considered as a part of green cover. Most of these degraded forest
lands are situated in Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Telangana, Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal etc. Such areas may not be considered degraded
always as those might also be providing eco-system services. However, a large chunk of these areas are
in various stages of degradation and need to be attended to for qualitative enrichment. Hence, these States
require innovative policy / legal mechanism to bring such degraded forest land under wise-use. Most of
these degraded forest land can also be taken up for afforestation and production forestry.
8.6 In addition, identifying additional 9% of the land outside forest areas suitable for afforestation is a
very difficult task due to the limited land availability and competing demands of land for other land use.
However, a large chunk of potential culturable waste land and other lands in the shape of linear strips
are available in the country for taking up plantations. As per the Wasteland Atlas of India, 2011, an extent
of 467021.16 sq. km is reported as wasteland (2008-09). About 12.6 million ha. land falls under
culturable agricultural wasteland. Approximately, 1.62 lakh ha land can be brought under green cover
along the National Highways network. The total area of land under Railway network is 4.61 lakh hectare
(Year 2015), out of which 4.14 lakh hectare is under operational and allied use and 46333 hectare land
is vacant. The Ministry also expressed the view that the new Forest Policy will provide sufficient policy
guideline support for taking up plantation/ afforestation on these lands to achieve the multiple objectives
of the policy.
8.7 The Committee observes that the Ministry had not undertaken any field survey to determine/
identify the total area/land available in the country for afforestation. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that necessary action in this regard should be taken at the earliest so that the field
survey could provide the necessary data to the State Governments to chalk out the necessary
strategies for taking up the afforestation activities in their respective States.

20
8.8 During the meeting of the Committee held on the 10th October 2018, the representative of The
Energy and Resources Institute (TERI) also made the following submission/suggestions before the
Committee for strengthening of afforestation process in the country:
• Market support is the major constraint for motivating farmers for large scale plantations. The
Government of India should come up with Minimum Support Price Scheme (MSP) for wood/
timber of minimum 10-15 trees species which are remunerative for agro forestry. The Institutional
Mechanism for implementing MSP scheme is needed.
• Government of India needs to make provision of funds to the tune of Rupees 10,000 crores
per annum for quality planting material, institutional strengthening, capacity building and loss
in the implementation of MSP Scheme for timber and other wood products.
8.9 The Committee recommends that the suggestions made by The Energy and Resources
Institute should be duly considered by the concerned Ministries/Departments of the Central
Government to strengthen the afforestation process of the country.
Wildlife Management and Conservation
9.1 Wildlife protection is one of the most important pillars of conservation of our biodiversity and
therefore it needs to be given utmost priority in any consideration with respect to status of forest in the
country. Wildlife plays an important role in balancing the ecosystem and provides stability to different
natural processes of nature.
9.2 The country's wildlife is preserved in 120+ national parks, 515 wildlife sanctuaries, 26 wetlands,
and 18 bio-reserves, out of which 11 are part of the World Network of Biosphere Reserves (Kanchenjunga
Biosphere reserve being the most recent inclusion). This biodiversity and the consequent threat to it bring
forward the need for wild life management which is concerned with the protection, propagation, and
judicious control of population of rare species of animals and plants in their natural habitats.
Causes of Wildlife Destruction: Man-animal conflict, Poaching, Fragmentation of Habitat
9.3 There are two types of destruction of wildlife by man, direct and indirect. The direct destruction
entails species destruction by human interference through poaching of wildlife and capturing of animals
for sale of animal parts in global markets. Human beings have also indiscriminately killed wild animals
for entertainment, flesh, fur, feathers and trophies etc.
9.4 The indirect destruction of wildlife is due to many reasons, out of which, habitat destruction is the
most important reason for the decline of wildlife. Another important problem confronting us in the
present times is global warming induced climate change, this has enormous effects on availability of food
for animals to alteration in migration patterns to destruction of animal life due to alteration in temperature
and precipitation. Deforestation, destruction and alteration of natural habitat is often caused due to
indiscriminate felling and logging of trees with wild animals bearing the brunt of this devastation.
9.5 Land use transformation along with industrialization, rapid urbanization and mining is causing fast
depletion of plant and animal life even within protected areas. Due to all these factors, we are also
witnessing increasing incidents of man -animal conflicts. In recent times, we have witnessed numerous
incidents of animals straying into human habitations due to fragmentation of their habitats and rapid and
unplanned urbanization. This is now a serious cause of concern because man-animal conflict can have

21
a detrimental effect on conservation efforts, as such conflicts can undermine respect for animal life that
has hitherto defined Indian cultural attitudes to animal life.
9.6 The Committee notes with serious concern that wildlife is increasingly coming under pressure
in all parts of the country. Reports of man- animal conflict threaten to tear apart the respect
for wildlife that has traditionally been the hallmark of conservation in India. The Committee
feels that community led solutions must be explored in order to prevent fragmentation of
habitats of wild lives besides policy interventions of the Ministry.
9.7 The Committee is also of the view that wildlife protection requires concerted efforts and
that growing incidents of poaching, encroachment and habitat destruction should be tackled in
an effective manner and it also requires implementation of various Acts such as Wildlife Protection
Act, 1972 etc. and statutes in letter and spirit.
9.8 The Committee in its meeting held on 9th April, 2018 had observed that forest lands are diverted
due to construction and expansion of new highways, rail tracks, creation of infrastructure and many
times elephants and tigers are killed in accidents. The Committee enquired from representatives of the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change that whether the Ministry or Committee concerned,
before giving the approval, analyses the consequential loss of forests, forest lands and wild lives etc.
Responding to the query, the representative of the Ministry submitted that Wild Life Institute of India,
Dehradun has prepared a manual on how to make roads or any linear infrastructure and what care should
be taken for wild life. National Board of Wildlife has made it mandatory that any linear projects whether
it is a rail tracks, roads or canals or transmission lines, they have to follow the guidelines when the
clearance is given particularly in the eco-fragile and wild life areas.
9.9 It was also submitted that Ministry has taken up this issue with the Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways and persuaded them to invest little extra if required but spare the natural resources and
wherever possible take a detour and completely leave it.
9.10 During the meeting, the Committee observed that some sanctuaries have roads / highways within
its periphery such as Mukundra Hills in Rajasthan and as such lives of the animals remain under threat.
There should be proper planning to construct bye-pass outside the sanctuaries.
9.11 The Committee notes that there exists a manual prepared by Wildlife Institute of India,
Dehradun for making roads or any linear infrastructure and what care should be taken for
wildlife and National Board of Wildlife has also made it mandatory that any linear projects
whether it is a rail tracks, roads or canals or transmission lines, they have to follow the
guidelines when the clearance is given particularly in the eco-fragile and wildlife areas. However,
the Committee feels that this is not being followed in right earnest and even some national
parks/sanctuaries have roads/highways within its periphery. Therefore, the Committee recommends
that prior to approval of any infrastructural/ development projects, this aspect must be looked
into by the competent authorities or the concerned agencies. Further, the Committee hopes that
Ministry shall sensitize the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways while considering the
highway projects, and persuade them to spare the natural resources as well as wildlife sanctuaries/
national parks/animal corridors etc. at the planning stage itself and wherever possible take a
detour and completely leave it.

22
9.12 The Committee observed that lion population in Gir forest, Gujarat is decreasing due to one reason
or the other. There are many unprotected wells; lions sometimes fall down in these wells, leading to their
deaths. Frequent fights amongst the lions and man-animal conflicts can also be attributed for reduction
in number of lions. Besides, poaching of tigers is going on unabated and consequently, Sariska had
become tiger less a few years back. However, a real effort was made to populate it again.
9.13 The Committee also observed that there is scarcity of water in some States like Rajasthan and as
such wild animals of sanctuaries face problem of availability of drinking water. There is no mechanism
or arrangement for providing drinking water to animals. They have to solely dependent on rain water.
This problem leads to deaths of several wild animals.
9.14 The Committee hopes that unprotected wells of all wildlife sanctuaries/ national parks of the
country including the Gir Forest in Gujarat would be covered properly in order to save the wild
animals falling into these wells and losing their lives. Also, the Ministry should take up the issue
of non-availability of drinking water in various sanctuaries/national parks with the State
Governments and their respective Forest Departments in order to make necessary arrangements
for providing drinking water to animals.
9.15 The Committee sought status report from the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
regarding recent deaths of 23 lions in Gir forest, Gujarat within a very short span of time i.e. September-
October, 2018. In response, the Ministry submitted status note to the Committee wherein it was informed
that Ministry had sent a team which had reported that cause of deaths of these lions were infighting,
infanticide and ill health that could be diagnosed by proper investigation by wild life health experts. The
samples collected from the lions were sent to National Institute of Virology, Pune, Indian Veterinary
Research Institute, Bareli, U.P., Veterinary College, Junagarh and Forensic Science Laboratory, Junagarh
which confirmed that 4 lions died due to Canine Distemper Virus (CDV). The Committee was further
informed that intensive administrative efforts were initiated to import the vaccine from US which was
received by Govt. of Gujarat on 5th October, 2018. Thereafter, the situation was under control.
9.16 The Committee expresses its deep concern over the deaths of 23 nos. of lions within a short
span of time i.e. September- October, 2018 in Gir forest, Gujarat. Out of these 23 lion deaths,
4 nos. had Canine Distemper Virus (CDV). The Committee recommends that Ministry should
direct the various State Governments and their respective Forest Departments to take all necessary
preventive measures in all the wild life sanctuaries across the country to avoid the situation like
Gir forest in Gujarat. The Committee is also of the opinion that requisite steps to contain spread
of any type of virus should be taken. The patrolling mechanism and constant vigil inside the
wildlife sanctuaries and national parks also needs to be strengthened.
9.17 The Committee also observes that infighting amongst the lions of Gir forest, Gujarat might
be due to over population of the lions in specific areas. The Committee recommends that wild
life experts may be consulted for exploring re-locating/shifting some of the lions in nearby areas/
other sanctuaries, if feasible.
Status of Tiger Reserves
9.18 India is known to encompass several lush green forests. Many of these have even been turned into
tourists spots. People from far and wide visit these to experience the wilderness and enjoy the serenity
they offer. As a part of the study on the subject, the Committee visited the Tadoba-Andhari Tiger

23
Reserve, Chandrapur, Maharashtra on the 25th April 2018 and Corbett Tiger Reserve, Uttarakhand on the
1st June 2018. The Committee also held discussions with the representatives of some local NGOs,
Governments of Maharashtra/Uttarakhand and Union Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
on the environmental issues specific to the Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve and Corbett Tiger Reserve.
Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve
9.19 The Committee was informed that Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve is situated in the Eastern part of
the Maharashtra State. It consists of core area and the buffer area. The core area of Tadoba-Andhari
Tiger Reserve consists of Tadoba National Park (116.55 sq. km) and Andhari Wildlife Sanctuary (508.85
sq. km). The total area of the Tiger Reserve including Core and Buffer area is 1727.17 sq. km. It
includes 1101.77 sq. Km of forest area and 401.49 sq. Km of revenue area. It has important source
population of tigers. Besides, 80 species of mammals, 280 species of aves, 54 species of reptiles, 11
species of amphibians and 84 species of pisces are found in Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve. 667 species
of flora are also found in Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve. Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve is an important
catchment area of Irai and Andhari river and is a major source of livelihood to the people living in its
surroundings.
9.20 The Committee sought to know about the population of tigers in the park and prey species in the
tiger reserve. The Committee was informed that long term monitoring of tigers, co-predators and prey
species in Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve is being carried out since last 5 years. There had been a healthy
rise in the population of tigers and prey species in the past 5 years. The estimated tiger population in
the park was as under :
Year Estimated Tiger Population
2012 49
2013 61
2014 72
2015 88
2016 86
2017 86
9.21 The Committee desired to know about the tourism activities in the Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve.
The Committee was informed that in the past 5 years, Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve has seen rise in
the number of tourists. Tourism is an important source of livelihood for guides, gypsy owners, drivers
and people working in resorts and other facilities. It was also informed that indirect employment avenues
have also been generated due to eco-tourism in and around Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve. The
representatives of Government of Maharashtra present in the meeting also provided the following details
of the tourists and income generated through tourism :
Y ear No. of Tourists Revenue (in `)
2012-13 86557 1,75,36,384
2013-14 105844 2,33,47,448

24
Y ear No. of Tourists Revenue (in `)
2014-15 11 1608 3,33,97,502
2015-16 131869 4,82,87,668
2016-17 140294 6,00,70,779
2017-18 172904 6,78,18,095
9.22 The Committee notes with satisfaction that the number of tourists has been steadily increasing
in the Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve since 2012-13 and it has positively impacted the revenue
generation through wildlife tourism, thereby creating indirect economy in the area. However, the
Committee would like to caution that the tourism in the tiger reserve must be regulated as per
the guidelines of the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) only. Further, the income
generated from tourism should be ploughed back in the development of the tiger reserve and
for the development of the villages located in the buffer area of the tiger reserve.
9.23 Some of the representatives of the NGOs present during the meeting drew attention to the fact that
the wildlife in Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve is susceptible to threats such as poaching, encroachment,
forest fires, electrocution, drowning in open wells, epidemics, illicit felling, grazing etc. The Committee
desired to know as to what steps had been taken to provide safety to the wild animals from the above
mentioned threats. In response, the Committee was informed of the following measures being taken by
the park administration:
(i) Three squads of STPF (Special Tiger Protection Force) regularly patrol the entire area. There
is a network of 61 protection huts manned by forest staff and locals. Regular patrolling is
being carried out by the staff located at protection huts.
(ii) The cases of encroachment are being dealt with in accordance with the provisions of Forest
Rights Act and Indian Forest Act, 1927.
(iii) All the open wells in buffer (420 nos.) have been covered with parapet walls.
(iv) To reduce the incidences of electrocution, regular patrolling is carried out along the electricity
lines. Solar fencing have been supplied to 1502 farmers.
(v) Regular immunisation of the cattle around the periphery of the park is carried out.
(vi) In order to reduce the illicit felling of bamboo, alternative employment opportunities are being
provided to the locals in tourism, making value added products, etc.
(vii) Grazing passes are being provided to the locals and the grazing is limited for these cattle only.
9.24 During its visit to the Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve, the Committee observed a very good
representation of women in the staff of the reserve and enquired about the same during the meeting. The
Committee was informed that in Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve, 33% of the staff is women. It is due
to the prevalent policy of the Maharashtra Government that the women are represented adequately in the
frontline staff as well as in officer cadre. The presence of women staff has resulted in gender sensitive
administration while dealing with villagers of the Eco-development Committees. Women have also played
better role in protection.

25
9.25 During the meeting, the Committee stressed upon the need to ensure the availability of sufficient
drinking water in the tiger reserve for the wildlife. The Committee was informed that in order to ensure
that sufficient drinking water to the wildlife during the summer, various initiatives have been taken by
the Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve administration. There are 76 natural and 33 artificial water holes in
the core area. While there are 97 natural water holes and 86 artificial water holes in the buffer area. 18
water holes in the core area and 83 water holes in the buffer areas have been desilted in the last three
years. 46 solar pumps in the core and 41 solar pumps in the buffer area have been installed on the water
holes to ensure availability of water during the pinch period.
9.26 The Committee takes note of the steps taken to provide safety to the wild animals from
the various threats in the forests and to ensure the availability of sufficient drinking water in
the tiger reserve for the wildlife. The Committee appreciates the involvement of women in forest
force in tiger reserves and recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate
Change should impress upon other State Governments to follow suit and take requisite steps for
the induction of women in the forest departments, especially in wildlife sanctuaries.
9.27 The Committee then sought to know about the important environmental issues concerning the
Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve. The Committee was informed that an irrigation project is proposed on
the Human River which has the potential to cut-off the tiger corridor between Tadoba-Andhari Tiger
Reserve and Bramhapuri Forest Division that connects Satpuda-Maikal Landscape. Further, the Chandrapur-
Mul-Gadchiroli road and Nagpur-Umred-Nagbhid-Bramhapuri road were proposed to be four-laned which
may result in blocking of movement of animals across the corridors. It was further informed that there
are coal mines of Western Coalfields Limited (WCL) and a thermal power plant of Chandrapura Thermal
Power Station (CTPS) along the southern border of the tiger reserve.
9.28 The Committee observes that Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve has emerged as one the most
important tourist destinations for wildlife lovers and enthusiasts as a result of which the revenue
generation by the tiger reserve has seen a consistent increase during the last few years. The
tiger reserve has also become an important source of livelihood for a large number of people in
the area. In this backdrop, the Committee is constrained to note the environmental issues
pertaining to the Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve brought to the notice of the Committee and is
of the view that these issues deserve a serious consideration. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that while establishing the irrigation project on the Human River, it should be
ensured that the tiger corridor between Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve and Bramhapuri Forest
Division that connects Satpuda-Maikal Landscape is not cut-off. Similarly, it should be ensured
that movement of animals across the corridors is not the least restricted while four-laning the
Chandrapur-Mul-Gadchiroli road and Nagpur-Umred-Nagbhid-Bramhapuri road. The Committee
also recommends that the environmental assessment of the coal mines of Western Coalfields
Limited and the thermal power plant of Chandrapura Thermal Power Station located along the
southern border of the tiger reserve on the activities of the wildlife needs to be carried out at
the earliest and remedial measures in respect of adverse impact of the same be taken on priority.
The Ministry should also consider carrying out environmental assessment of other wildlife
sanctuaries/parks affected by such industries/power plants.
Corbett Tiger Reserve
9.29 The Committee was informed that Corbett is located on the foothills of Himalayas in Uttarakhand,
spread over three districts, viz. Pauri, Nainital and Almora. The rivers Ramganga, Pallaen and Sonanadi

26
flow through the valleys. By and large, the reserve is spread over Bhabar and lower Shivalik region with
a deep water table. The tract is porous with boulders and sand deposits. Total area of the tiger reserve
is 1288.31 sq.km., out of which area of core is 821.99 sq.km. and that of buffer is 466.32 sq.km. The
faunal diversity is tremendous and around 40 threatened species have been documented (4 critical, 10
endangered and 26 vulnerable). Tiger and elephant are the charismatic mammals, besides a large array
of co-predators (leopard, small carnivores), ungulates (sambar, hog deer, spotted deer), birds, reptiles
(gharial, crocodile) and fishes.
9.30 During the meeting of the Committee held on the 1st June 2018 with the representatives of some
local NGOs, Government of Uttarakhand and Union Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change,
the representatives of the Civil Society/NGOs/local representatives present during the meeting brought
out the following points:
(i) There had been massive encroachment in the national park area and the corrido ` Not only the
villagers but some of the Government Departments have also encroached upon the national
park area.
(ii) Increase in tourism was stressing the infrastructure available. Since there were already a large
number of hotels in the area, no further expansion in the number of hotels should be allowed.
(iii) Some hotels and resorts were dumping waste into Kosi river which is considered to be the
lifeline of Corbett Tiger Reserve.
(iv) There were a very small number of toilets in the area and most of the people went to relieve
themselves in the open only.
(v) There was an urgent need of a proper solid waste management system and garbage disposal
should also be suitably attended to.
(vi) Instances of man-animal conflict were cited. Some people complained that wild animals
entered their houses. A solar fencing had been erected earlier which is no longer functioning
and needs to be repaired.
(vii) T here was water scarcity in the area and people had to get water from tankers.
(viii) Norms for noise pollution were not being followed. However, no action was being taken by
the local authorities on the complaints made in this regard.
(ix) T ourism industry has directly and indirectly provided employment to thousands of people.
Policies of the administration should not be biased towards them.
9.31 The Committee feels that the genuine demands of the local people must be looked into
administratively by the local authorities. The requirement of toilets for the people of the area
must be given priority. Further, necessary action also needs to be taken for providing a proper
garbage disposal and solid waste management system.
9.32 The Committee desired to know about the population of tigers in the park. The Committee was
informed that the reserve has the highest tiger density in the country and is an important tiger source
area for the entire landscape. As per the 2014 country level assessment using the refined methodology,
the tiger estimate for the Corbett landscape is 215 (ranging from 169-261) with an increasing trend. The

27
forest divisions surrounding the reserve like West Terai, Lansdowne and Ramnagar divisions also support
resident tigers. Elephant is also one of the prime species here. It was also informed that since the Corbett
landscape has high tiger density, monitoring tiger source populations in Corbett and surrounding divisions
is an important issue. The ongoing M-STrIPES and Phase-IV monitoring in Corbett is being mainstreamed
in the adjoining divisions with creation of camera trap tiger ID data base with periodic tallying.
9.33 The Committee was further informed that there has been a significant reduction in the anthropogenic
grasslands owing to submergence under Kalagarh Dam, besides gregarious growth of woodland species.
This changed ecological setting has dispersed the hog deer population to small pockets. The elephants
also contribute towards manipulation of the habitat by bringing down the woodland species. The core/
critical tiger habitat is free of all human habitations after the Gujjar resettlement, carried out in 2013-14.
9.34 In response to a query regarding the buffer area of the tiger reserve, the Committee was informed
that the buffer area of the reserve has been brought under the administrative control of the tiger reserve
management in the recent past and comprises of forests subjected to past working for timber exploitation,
besides plantations. The forestry operations at present are not intense and only extraction of dead and
fallen timber by the Uttarakhand Forest Development Corporation has been permitted. There are few
villages in the buffer zone, besides a large number (around 46) of abandoned revenue patches. However,
the periphery of the buffer has many villages and human-wildlife interface issues and conflicts are
numerous and frequent. Such areas have heavily used public infrastructure in the form of roads, markets,
electrical transmission lines and related development. The tourism is confined largely to the eastern and
southern boundary of the reserve with a large number of tourism related infrastructure.
9.35 The Committee desired to know about the encroachments in the corridor and tiger reserve area and
the action taken in this regard. The Committee was informed that as many as 44 resorts and hotels in
the vicinity of the Corbett National Park were facing action for encroaching revenue and forest land
around the tiger reserve, including the catchment area of the Kosi river that passes through the Corbett
Tiger Reserve. However, none of the encroachments were inside the tiger reserve. It was also informed
that 20 years ago, the area had only 20 resorts which had grown to 150 resorts now. The Uttarakhand
High Court has put restrictions on establishment of resorts within 2 km. area of the Corbett reserve.
9.36 The Committee is constrained to note that there has been massive encroachment in the
revenue and forest land around the tiger reserve, including the catchment area of the Kosi river.
The reports of some hotels and resorts dumping waste into Kosi river, which is considered to be
the lifeline of Corbett Tiger Reserve, are also equally disturbing. The Committee recommends
that the concerned authorities must take all lawful action in this regard and ensure that there
is no further deterioration of environment in Corbett National Park and the commercial activities
around the national park are regulated.
9.37 During the meeting, attention of the Committee was also brought to fact that there are several old
plantations of the sixties and seventies in the forests, which include species like teak, Eucalyptus,
Ailanthus and sisso. However, such plantations are largely confined to the buffer area of the reserve and
several invasive weeds like Lantana and Cannabis were prevalent in the habitat. Further, the connectivity
of the corridor with the Rajaji National Park was fragmented and required improvement. It was also
informed that the linear development of tourism infrastructure along the highway from Ramnagar to
Almora on the banks of Kosi has impacted the habitat matrix.

28
9.38 The Committee is aware that with majestic and swift tigers, Corbett Tiger Reserve is known
as the most prestigious and oldest national park in the country. The Committee feels that the
issues emerging out of the discussions of the Committee must be accorded due consideration.
The Committee recommends that immediate attention should be paid to the eradication of
invasive weeds like Lantana and Cannabis prevalent in the habitat to ensure conducive environment
for herbivores. The connectivity of the corridor with the Rajaji National Park is crucial and
should be taken up on priority. Further, all efforts should be made to ensure that the linear
development of tourism infrastructure along the highway from Ramnagar to Almora on the
banks of Kosi does not adversely impact the habitat matrix.
Draft National Forest Policy, 2018 and related aspects
10.1 The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change that the
National Forest Policy 1988 was a quite comprehensive document encompassing all the essential policy
directives for forests and wildlife management in the country. The Ministry has not observed any major
flaws and shortcomings in the Policy as it has resulted in stabilizing the forest and tree cover in the
country. The forest cover has increased from 6, 38,804 sq km (19.43%) as per ISFR 1989 to 7, 08,273
(21.54%) as per ISFR 2017. The assessment of tree cover was started since 2001. The total tree cover
outside forests of the country was estimated 81,472 sq km (2.48%) as per ISFR 2001 which has been
increased to 93,815 sq km (2.85%) as per ISFR 2017 assessment.
10.2 Further, National Forest Policy, 1988 (NFP) was enacted with the basic objectives of maintenance
of environmental stability, restoration of the ecological balance. It laid emphasis on people's participation
through Joint Forest Management Programme and together with Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 helped
in stabilization of country's forest area over the last two decades in spite of huge demand on forest land
for development and the ever increasing pressure for forest produces.
10.3 In addition, implementation of Joint Forest Management (JFM), which came into effect in 1990
pursuant to the National Forest Policy,1988 and its growth over the last three decades leading to creation
of over 118, 213 JFM Committees across the country managing 22.94 million ha of forests. The impact
of JFM on forest management and conservation has been commendable. Further, the Policy has succeed
in bringing ecosystem based approach reflected in a number of central programme - like DPAP, NAP,
GIM, IWMP, etc. This shows that the National Forest Policy 1988 has been a success by all means.
Further, the NFP 1988 has been appreciated by the Supreme Court of India in Lafarge Judgment of
04.7.2011 in the W.P. (c) 202/1995. As such, principal aims and fundamental objectives of the NFP 1988
are still valid and the same has been considered in the new Draft National Forest Policy, 2018.
10.4 However, developments affecting forestry sector at national and international levels have necessitated
incorporation of some of modifications in the forest policy, which include issues like (a) Global Warming
triggered due to climate change (b) increasing demand for wood and wood products by the country (c)
emphasis on use of wood as a carbon neutral renewable resource (d) making the rivers clean and
perennial (e) water security and ground water recharge, etc. Accordingly, the efforts for reviewing the
Policy were started in 2012.
10.5 The Committee was also provided with a brief note on Draft National Forest Policy, 2018 by the
Ministry which is as under:
• The Draft National Forest Policy, 2018 has been framed in the same format as of National
Forest Policy, 1988 [i.e. in 4 Major Sections- Preamble, Goal and Objectives, Essentials
Principles of Forest Management and Strategy].

29
• Draft National Forest Policy envisages having one-third of the Geographical Area (GA) under
forest and tree cover and two-third of the GA under forest and tree cover in mountainous
region [Same target as of NFP 1988].
• Draft National Forest Policy, 2018 has 16 major objectives whereas previous Policy had 9
major objectives. New Policy has included additional objectives which would be helpful to
safeguard the ecological and livelihood security of people, of the present and future generations,
and in contributing towards achieving the national goal and ecological security of the country.
The present Policy has seven essential principles of forest management. The new Policy has
15 Major Strategies spelt out in a very systemic, clear and crisp manner to achieve the
objectives of the Policy.
10.6 The Committee in its meeting held on 14th May, 2018 heard the views of the representatives of
the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. Initiating the discussion, the Committee observed
that the Draft National Forest Policy, 2018 emphasizes the role of forests in carbon sequestration and
mitigation of climate change and it actually undermines the importance of natural forests and their other
ecological and social services by equating forests with tree cover using the two terms interchangeably.
10.7 The Committee also observed that the general perception of the public is that the Draft
Policy emphasizes the commercialization of forests, particularly refer to as the degraded forests,
so as to serve the interests of industry and to bring the private sector in for the management
of forests through the means of Public Private Partnership Model. Similarly, apprehensions have
been conveyed by various stakeholders that the Draft Policy envisages curtailing of rights of
tribals, and tribal communities and Traditional Forest-Dwellers in ownership and control of non-
timber forest produce as also in community resources. Concerns are also being expressed that
the Draft Policy aims to take away the rights of Gram Sabhas for management of forests and
instead hands it over to the proposed centrally-controlled Corporations. The Committee feels
that if too much emphasis given to Private Partnership Model in management of forests in the
proposed DNFP, we might end up with losing the forest lands whether it is degraded or otherwise.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that adequate safeguards be taken after due consultations
with the stakeholders in order to protect the forests from over exploitation by private parties
alongwith the legitimate rights of tribals and Gram Sabhas.
10.8 The Committee sought to know from the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change as
to what are the basic differences in the new Draft National Forest Policy 2018 as compared to the Forest
Policy, 1988. The Committee was informed by the Ministry that the basic and essential principles, goals
and objectives which were envisaged in the National Forest Policy (NFP), 1988 have also been retained
in the new Draft National Forest Policy of 2018. The overall aim of the Draft NFP, 2018 is to safeguard
the ecological and livelihood security of people, of the present and future generations and enhanced
supply of ecosystem services that flow from forests. Vision of sustainable management of forests has
also been incorporated in the new policy. Besides retaining the essential features related to management,
conservation and protection of forests for environmental and ecological security, the new Draft Policy
of 2018 has also incorporated few new features, in view of addressing the drastic changes in the
environmental imperatives at national and international level. The new Policy attempts to deal specifically
with the issues which pose challenge to the forest governance in general and sustainable forest management
in particular and for the attainment of the objective of achieving the required forest and tree cover and

30
also for meeting the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) of the country. The basic difference
between the previous Policy and new features of the present Policy, inter-alia, includes the following:-
• Achieving the NDC targets of India as part of the climate change mitigation.
• Laying stress on forest hydrology; moisture conservation through landscape based catchment
treatment plans so as to provide sustainable ecosystem services,
• Promoting agro-forestry and farm forestry in non-forest areas to enhance income of farmers
and incentivizing people to actively participate in forest management and growing trees,
• Integrating Climate Change mitigation and adaption measures in forestry practices,
• Giving special attention on the management of forest in NE region for arresting degradation
of forest land in the region and for maintaining forest cover and biodiversity,
• Promoting urban forestry, peri-urban forestry
• Promoting growth of wood, wood products and other forest produce and enhance their
market value through value addition and certification,
• Economic valuation of ecosystem services provided by the forests,
• Developing National Forest Ecosystem Management Information System,
• Ensuring effective translation of this Policy into actions and putting in place a robust monitoring
and evaluation framework,
• Enhancing cooperation and inter-sectoral convergence, simplification of procedures and conflict
resolution through establishment of a National Board of Forestry and State Board of Forestry,
• Good governance, skill development, implementation framework and periodic reviews;
• Enhancing productivity of forests and utilizing open and scrub forest areas which are not
providing ecosystem services for meeting demands of timber,
• Afforestation in PPP mode with communities as partners in limited areas (in open and scrub
forest areas and areas recorded as forests but not having forest growth only to enhance
productivity and in areas outside forest)
10.9 The Committee enquired from the Ministry whether the steps envisaged in the Draft National Forest
Policy, 2018 by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in the direction of Essential
Principles of Forest Management and Strategy are adequate enough to safeguard the ecological and
livelihood security of our people and in contributing towards achieving the national goal and ecological
security of the country. The Committee also observed that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change on its own, should not have taken this initiative to bring about this policy or propose
a policy without the Ministry of Tribal Affairs being fully in agreement. This is very clear in the Allocation
of Business Rules, 1961. The Committee further observed that actually no stakeholders' consultations had
been held while preparing this Draft Policy. The Committee also observed that clear cut definition of
forest should be included in the Draft Policy and there must be synergy with Forest Rights Act, 2006
and other relevant Acts which affect the tribals and other forest dwellers predominantly dependent for
their livelihood on the forests.

31
10.10 The Director-General (Forest) and Special Secretary, while sharing the views of the Ministry on
the subject, informed the Committee that the existing National Forest Policy of 1988 has completed 30
years and lot of changes have taken place calling for review and to bring a new forest policy as per
the changed scenario and meeting requirement of the present and future needs. He informed the Committee
that the Indian Institute of Forest Management (IIFM), Bhopal was assigned the task for preparation of
a policy document after wider consultation and the report was submitted by IIFM in 2016, which after
internal consultations held in Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and by the Committee
constituted by the Ministry, placed in public domain for comments. The Committee was informed that
the Draft National Forest Policy 2018 was circulated to all the State Governments and to all concerned
Central Ministries/Departments for consultation. It was submitted that comments from Governments of
Odisha, Karnataka, Kerala, Uttarakhand and Tamil Nadu have been received alongwith the comments
from the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and Ministry of Panchayati Raj. It was submitted
that the Draft National Forest Policy 2018 envisages having one-third of the Geographical Area (GA)
under forest and tree cover and two-third of the GA under forest and tree cover in mountainous region.
It was submitted that the Draft Policy aims to safeguard the ecological and livelihood security of the
people, of the present and future generations; checking denudation and soil erosion; preservation of
natural forest; reverse degradation; protection of catchment; improving productivity; increasing tree
cover outside forest; ensuring people's participation in forest management; wildlife conservation and
management; conservation of biodiversity; forest fire prevention; forestry extension; research and education;
etc.
10.11 The Committee its meeting held on 14th May, 2018 and 10th October, 2018 respectively also heard
the views of some of the non-official witnesses/NGOs/ members of civil society working in the field
of environment and ecology which may be summarized as under:
10.12 The representative of Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and Environment (ATREE) submitted
before the Committee that in India at least 25 crore people, mostly adivasis and poor, derive their
livelihood from forest products. The Committee was informed that before the National Forest Policy
1988, forests had been considered as a source of raw material for industry and economic development
and that large forest areas were diverted for infrastructural requirements of the country.
10.13 The Forest Policy of 1988 marked a landmark revision of forest policy. For the first time, it was
acknowledged that forests served multiple goals apart from economic development, such as ecological
balance, local livelihoods and industry. He submitted that Forest Policy of 1988 clearly stated that
ecological balance was primary but local needs were to be given priority over industrial requirements.
Furthermore, it was postulated that industries must tie- up with farmers to produce forest products on
private lands, the Forest Policy 1988 articulated the need for people's involvement.
10.14 He further submitted before the Committee that the idea of ecological balance was implemented
through ban on green felling in many States. Highlighting the major lacunae in the Draft National Forest
Policy 2018, the Committee was informed that the draft Policy proposes to shift away from the goals
laid down in National Forest Policy 1988 and prioritize production forestry. It was conveyed to the
Committee that the New Draft Forest Policy proposes the idea of public private partnership in forest
sector to divert the forest lands to the private players; it is also silent on the issue of usage of CAMPA
funds; etc. To bridge the gaps, it was suggested that the Government should follow the road map laid
down by the Joint Committee of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Ministry of

32
Tribal Affairs and to strike a balance between production, livelihood needs conservation, hydrology and
carbon sequestration and to allow local communities to make decision through democratic processes.
10.15 Representative of the NGO namely Environment Support Group submitted before the Committee
about the lacunae in the Draft National Forest Policy 2018 and suggested that the policy has to be made
jointly by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Ministry of Tribal Affairs as
required under Allocation of Business Rules 1961 and also keeping the synergy between the proposed
policy and the Forest Right Act 2006.
10.16 It was further suggested that the policy should also be based on due consultations with all required
Central Ministries, all State Governments and Union Territories and local Governments as is mandated
under the provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996, Constitutional 73rd
Amendment (Panchayat Raj) Act, 1992 and Constitutional 74th Amendment (Nagar Palika) Act, 1992. It
was also suggested that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Ministry of Tribal
Affairs must develop a working paper detailing features and circulated to all the concerned Government
agencies for wider consultation in the matter.
10.17 The representative of The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI) submitted before the Committee
that ecological security of the nation, sustenance and livelihood needs of the people living in and around
forest have the first right on forest and any economic derivative is subordinate to these objectives.
10.18 The representative of the NGO namely WWF-India stressed the need to strengthen the implementation
of legal and policy instruments. To make it more robust, the environmental impact assessment process
is required to be done. He also emphasized for creation of greater ownership for local communities and
other stakeholders in forest development and management.
10.19 The representative of Bombay Natural History Society referring to tribal aspect, opined that there
should be a thorough review of the rights that are considered and used in relation to the present and
predicted livelihood options that are available to our tribal and we also need to look at the trends in rural
demography vis-a-vis implications of Government policies under implementation and the policies which
are under consideration keeping in view of the increased population and present scenario.
Concerns of Ministry of Tribal Affairs
10.20 As part of its consultative process, the Committee heard the views of the representatives of the
Ministry of Tribal Affairs in its meeting held on 10th October, 2018 and also sought the views of the
Ministry of Tribal Affairs about its concerns regarding the Draft National Forest Policy (DNFP), 2018
in writing. Subsequently, the Ministry sent a detailed Background Note outlining the major concerns of
the Ministry. The Committee was informed that the DNFP disregards the role of tribals in conservation
efforts and that it does not reflect the paradigm shift in forest governance, management and conservation
by the enactment of the Forest Rights Act 2006 (FRA) and the Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas
Act, 1996 (PESA). Furthermore, it was informed that the DNFP goes against the spirit of amendment
made in GoI (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961 on 17th March 2006 whereby all matters relating to
the rights of forest dwelling Scheduled Tribes on forest lands was brought under the purview of the
Ministry of Tribal Affairs.
10.21 The Ministry also pointed out that a general impression that the DNFP gives a thrust to increased
privatization, industrialization, and diversion of forest resources for commercialization. The Ministry

33
conveyed to the Committee that the Public Private Partnership Models for afforestation as detailed under
the Draft National Forest Policy, 2018, would open up areas over which tribals and forest dwellers have
legal rights under FRA, 2006 leading to an effective dilution of the Act.
Clarifications by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
10.22 The Committee in its meeting held on 10th October, 2018 again heard the views of representatives
of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the Ministry clarified its stands on certain
issues of the DNFP, 2018 with regard to the concerns raised by the various stakeholders including the
Ministry of Tribal Affairs. The representatives of the Ministry submitted before the Committee that
concerns of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs regarding DNFP, 2018 were received by them during March-
May, 2018 in different phases. Subsequent to placement of the draft policy in public domain, more than
thousand suggestions/ comments were received by the Ministry and all of them have been considered.
All concerns of the various stakeholders including public consultations have been taken into account
while overhauling the draft policy.
10.23 They further submitted that broadly, the main concern of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs was about
natural forests. The policy mainly talks of the main deliverables from the forests not the forest produce;
it is basically the clean air and water security to the country. Hence, the Ministry has two-pronged
approach- i.e. existing natural forests that is about 22 per cent, tree and forest coverage of 24.39 per
cent, the 22 odd per cent which are natural forests which will be managed exclusively for ecosystem
services and only if any timber be a by-product and where the concern of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs,
that it will be in consultation with the Tribal Affairs Ministry and Gram Sabhas, has been very clearly
spelt out in the policy. Only the production of timber, because timber being the only resource, which
is carbon neutral, will be grown in the areas outside the forests, not in natural forests. Hence, the
proposed policy permits growing trees outside the forests for meeting the timber needs of the country
because the Country used to import timber and timber products to the tune of `42,000/- crores annually.
Therefore, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change encourages the agro-forestry systems,
farm forestry systems that will be done; the natural forests where the tribals mostly settle or they have
their rights, those will be managed for conservation, for meeting the requirement of the local people and
the communities, and in consultation with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs. Regarding concern about the
diversion of forest land for mining and other purposes, we have a very strong mechanism in place, as
there is the Forest Conservation Act which looks into that. That also will be taken into consideration and
only as a last priority; the forests will be diverted for non-forestry purposes.
10.24 The Committee was informed that during the formulation stage of DNFP, the Ministry of
Tribal Affairs wasn't consulted. It was also informed that many provisions of the FRA, 2006 and
PESA, 1996 have been diluted or disregarded. Therefore, the Committee recommends that Ministry
of Tribal Affairs must be taken on board for wider consultation alongwith State Governments/
Local Bodies/ NGOs/ Civil society members before finalizing the Draft Forest Policy and notifying
it. Further, adequate safeguards must be taken for the protection of vulnerable forest communities
such as tribals and other communities who are dependent on the forest for their sustenance and
survival.
Conservation of Biodiversity
11.1 India is one of 17 mega diverse countries of the world having varieties of floral and faunal species
and it contributes to about 8% of the known global biodiversity. There are 16 major forest types, varying

34
from alpine pasture in Himalayas to temperate forests, sub-tropical forests, and mangroves in the coastal
line. There are 18 notified biosphere reserves in India spread over 89530 sq km. India currently has 26
sites designated as Wetlands of International Importance (Ramsar Sites), with a surface area of 689,131
hectares. Today there are 769 Protected areas (Pas) including 103 national parks and 544 wild life
sanctuaries, covering 1,62,072.49 sq km (4.93% of total geographical area). Seven of these Protected
Areas (Great Himalayan National Park Conservation Area, Western Ghats, Nanda Devi and Valley of
Flowers National Parks, Sunderbans National Park, Kaziranga National Park, Keoladeo National Park and
Manas Wildlife sanctuary) are designated as Natural World Heritage sites in India by UNESCO. The
conservation efforts particularly in the field of Tiger Conservation have been successful. As of now India
has 50 tiger reserves. The tiger population has gone up to 2226, which constitute about 70% of world'
wild tiger population.
11.2 On being enquired by the Committee regarding survey carried out and documentation of the data
on biodiversity of the forest areas of the country, the Committee was informed that the Zoological Survey
of India (ZSI), under the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change is mandated to carry out
survey and documentation of faunal diversity of the country including forest areas. The various faunal
surveys conducted by ZSI have resulted in documenting diversity among species and areas with endemism
that allows demarcating areas with biodiversity hotspots. The scientific studies of ZSI generate primary
data on biodiversity which contribute directly to conservation and sustainable use of natural resources.
11.3 ZSI has documented faunal diversity of 22 States, 2 Union Territories, and Checklist/Database on
group-wise number of species for India prepared. ZSI, through its field based surveys and identifications
of animal groups from Protozoa to Mammalia, have inventoried the known animal species of the entire
country comprising 100,693 species (2016) and about 5000 species discovered new to science by
scientists of ZSI. The faunistic surveys in all States and Union Territories, various Protected Areas,
different ecosystems of India for taxonomic studies of faunal groups from Protozoa to Mammalia have
been undertaken by ZSI, which resulted in the publication of over 1500 documents.
11.4 Further, Botanical Survey of India (BSI) is the apex research organization under the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Govt. of India for the carrying out taxonomic and floristic
studies of wild plant resources of the country. Survey and exploration of about 75 per cent of the total
geographical areas of the country has been completed for vascular plants. This has resulted into a
Repository of about four million National Reference Collections plant specimens with over 22000 type
specimens.
11.5 The Committee further enquired about the mechanism available with the Ministry to deal with the
legal as well as administrative measures for protection of biodiversity against bio-piracy. The Committee
was informed that the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 is primarily aimed at regulating access to biological
resources and associated traditional knowledge form the country, so as to secure equitable sharing of
benefits arising out of their use.
11.6 The Committee was also informed that the National Biodiversity Authority (NBA) was established
in 2003 by the Central Government to implement India's Biological Diversity Act, 2002. The NBA is a
statutory body and that performs facilitative, regulatory and advisory function for Government of India
on issue of Conservation, sustainable use of biological resource and fair equitable sharing of benefits of
use. NBA advices the State Government in the selection of areas of biodiversity importance to be notified

35
under Sub-Section (1) of Section 37 as heritage sites and measures for the management of such heritage
sites. The Act inter-alia requires an applicant to seek prior approval of the National Biodiversity Authority
(NBA) before making an application for any intellectual property rights which involves an invention based
on biological resource and associated knowledge from India. The NBA grants approval subject to terms
and conditions, which secure equitable sharing of benefits.
11.7 The Committee hopes that ZSI and BSI would continue their good work in conserving the
rich and varied biodiversity of our country through documentation of our animal and faunal
diversity using modern techniques of conservation and that will also promote preservation of
relic, endangered and threatened species.
International Commitments: Carbon Sequestration/Carbon stock in the country
12.1 Climate change has emerged as the leading environmental issue globally in the recent past. The
resulting variability of climate change poses serious threat to the environment and the quality of human
life all over the world. It is for this reason, the parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change (UNFCC) have undertaken a comprehensive exercise to address the issues of climate
change adaptation and mitigation. Forests play an important role in mitigation and adaptation of climate
change as forests sequester and store more carbon than any other terrestrial ecosystem and are an
important natural 'brake' on climate change.
12.2 The Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change during the meeting of the
Committee held on 9th April, 2018 informed the Committee that one of our global commitments, for
which forest is very important, is our commitment for adding an additional 2.5 to 3 billion tonnes of
CO
2 equivalent by 2030. Presently, the carbon stock in the country is about 7 billion tonnes which is
equivalent to 25 plus billion tonnes of CO 2 equivalent. We are growing at about 35 million tonnes every
year. If this growth continues till 2030, we can add about 1.9 billion tonnes of CO 2. However, the
Country will still be short of our global commitment by about 1.1 billion tonnes of carbon stock which
is a cause of worry. Therefore, the Ministry are designing schemes to achieve this target, which are
being implemented by the State Governments and most of the funding is also done by the State
Governments. Government of India does very little direct funding in increasing forest cover.
12.3 Further, during the meeting of the Committee held on 10th October, 2018 the representatives of the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change submitted before the Committee that land area of
India is 2.4 per cent of the world, whereas, we support 17 per cent of the population and 18 per cent
of the domestic cattle of the world respectively. Not only that, our population is so forest-based that their
economy is very intricately linked to the forests. Despite this fact, India is among the top ten countries
as far as the forest cover and the rate of increase of forest is concerned. That is because of the people's
involvement with the forest and this is the main reason that the Country has been able to protect the
forest although the per capita forest of India is one-tenth of world average. In broad terms, India is
committed to sequestering 2.5 to 3 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent in the forests by the year
2030.
12.4 On being enquired by the Committee as how this will be achieved, the representative of the Ministry
submitted that they have put in the Draft National Forest Policy to have a two-pronged approach for that.
They informed that in the natural forests, the carbon dioxide is more in the soil than the ground flora
and hence, New Forest Policy stresses the need of enhancing the quality of the forest. The first strategy

36
of the Government in the policy is that we will use the natural forest as a sink to improve the quality
and that will be done by a catchment area treatment plan. By treating the catchments, we can provide
water security to the country and also accelerate the carbon sequestration in the natural forests.
12.5 The second strategy is that our total forest and tree cover is 24.39 per cent whereas our National
Policy envisages 33 per cent. Hence, we will be focusing more on agro-forestry systems. We will have
the agricultural crop, what will commensurate with those tree crops so that we grow the trees outside
the forests because the trees are the carbon-neutral resource. If we are able to grow more trees outside
the forest and enhance the tree cover, it will not only sequester carbon dioxide but the nation will also
have more renewable resources as wood for our use. In this regard, the country's slogan is 'Grow more
wood, use more wood' so that we have more wood products and then we can not only save on our
foreign exchange but also enrich own forests.
12.6 Submission of The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI): The Committee was provided with
a background note on the subject in which it was submitted that the country has the scope of converting
around 30 million hectare open forests into moderately dense forests and part of moderately dense forests
into dense forests through conservation approach and assisting natural regeneration. We will be able to
achieve around one third of the target with conservation approach. Rest two third target could be met
through afforestation on non-forest land. Since forest is a concurrent subject the responsibility of Central
Government is restricted for policy formulation and planning while responsibility of State Government
is management, development and conservation of forests and hence, the target has been distributed
among the States on the basis of their Forest cover and total area of productive wastelands.
12.7 It was further submitted that India has potential of achieving additional 3 billion tonnes of CO
2
equivalent sequestration by 2030 with conservation and afforestation approach on forests and non-forest
land. Around INR 60000 crore per annum is needed till 2030 for forest development, livelihood activities,
implementing MSP scheme for agro-forestry and providing LPG to the forest dependent communities.
Innovative financial mechanism to obtain forest based carbon finance through Carbon Neutrality Policy
will boost the efforts towards achieving the target. It is not possible to achieve this target without
involvement of people, private sector and other Government Departments. In the recent past, some
States like Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra and Andhra Pradesh etc. have shown commitment towards having
special drive for afforestation. The same kind of commitment is needed from Central Government and
other State Governments on regular basis.
12.8 The Committee is in agreement with the views expressed by the The Energy and Resources
Institute (TERI) as well as the Ministry that India has potential of achieving additional 3 billion
tonnes of CO
2 equivalent sequestration by 2030 with conservation and afforestation approach on
forests, degraded forests and non-forest land. However, the Committee feels that the Country
needs to have a holistic approach and at the same time concerted efforts are required from one
and all and peoples' involvement, particularly the tribals and traditional forest dwellers, for
achieving this important commitment of United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCC) for addressing the issues of climate change adaptation and mitigation.
General Observation
13.1 The importance of forests cannot be underestimated. Forests are more than simply picturesque
retreats to enjoy. Infact, every one of us is dependent on forests for our survival. Beyond providing the

37
wood we use for paper and furniture and the oxygen we breathe, they provide essential ecosystem
services and regulate our water cycle, prevent soil erosion, protect watersheds, provide a habitat for
wildlife and forest communities, sustain biodiversity and supply food and shelter. Forests also play a vital
role in regulating the earth's climate. Forests contribute substantially to climate change mitigation and
adaptation and to conserving biodiversity. Forests prevent land degradation and desertification, and
reduce the risk of floods, landslides and avalanches, droughts, dust storms and sandstorms and other
natural disasters. In many regions, forests also have important cultural and spiritual value. Forests also
serve as a storehouse of genetic materials for the development of medicines, providing components for
three quarters of the top-ranking global prescription medications. Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change has informed that as per sector-wise contribution of GDP of India Report by Ministry
of Statistics and Programme Implementation, the contribution of forestry and logging sector in Indian
economy is estimated to be 1.23 % of Gross Values Added (GV A) at current price during 2013-14, which
amounts to `1,28,550 crores. In view of the above, the necessity of conserving our forests cannot be
overemphasized. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change, being the Central Nodal Ministry dealing with the subject, should make all out efforts
to protect and conserve our forests, wildlife as well as invaluable biodiversity and seek the
cooperation of all State/Union Territory Governments and other stakeholders to see that the
country does not lag behind in this monumental task.

38
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
DEFINITION OF FOREST
The Committee observes that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has
provided the Committee with a working definition as provided by the Supreme Court. The
Committee agrees that any narrow and specific definition of forests may leave out certain types
of forests and open up the possibility of loopholes being exploited by vested interests. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry must come out with a comprehensive,
clear-cut and legally sustainable definition of Forest to dispel any kind of doubt in this regard.
(Para 3.6)
ASSESSMENT OF FOREST COVER
It is evident that the anthropogenic pressure endured by nation's forest is enormous. With
rapidly growing population, this pressure is set to rise in future. This will seriously affect the
quality of forests and their sequestration potential. The Committee is of the view that in a
developing nation, the demand for development imperatives and for creation of infrastructure
will always be there. The need is, therefore, that our policies are geared to judicious use of
forests so that this resource is not depleted and the pace of increase of forest cover in the
country continues in future too. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change should judiciously manage the forests in the country,
if required through necessary policy interventions, and ensure that whatever forest depletion is
there or diversion of forest land is permitted, we are able to make up more than the area
depleted/permitted for diversion so that the forest cover of the country remains intact. Environment
and Development are supplementary and complementary as the two sustain each other. The
need, therefore, is to strike a fine balance between the two and to pay due attention on both,
within sustainable development framework. (Para 4.9)
The Committee is also concerned about the decline in the forest cover in the North-Eastern
States, which is 65.34% of its geographical area in comparison to the national forest cover of
21.54%. The Committee recommends that the concerned State Governments and the Union
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change must look into the factors responsible for
the decline in the forest cover and take all necessary steps to ensure that the trend of decline
in forest cover in these States is arrested at the earliest. (Para 4.10)
The Committee notes that only 16 States/Union Territories have been able to provide details
of digitized boundaries of Recorded Forest Area for incorporation in the India State of Forest
Report, 2017 and as such, it has not been possible to give forest cover inside and outside the
recorded forest areas of such States. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change should impress upon the all the concerned remaining
States/Union Territories to complete the task of digitization of forest boundaries of the Recorded
Forest Area in their respective States/Union Territories in a time-bound manner, so that a more
accurate picture of the forest cover area of the country can be made available. (Para 4.12)
DEGRADATION OF FORESTS IN THE COUNTRY
The Committee takes note of the schemes/programmes initiated by the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change for improving the quality of degraded forests in the

39
country. The mid-term evaluation study on National Afforestation Programme by ICFRE during
2008 had highlighted the successful implementation of the plan as a result of which these forests
were regenerating with vigour. The Ministry has also informed the Committee that the forest
depletion has by and large stabilized now. However, the Committee wishes to point out that
nearly 10 years have passed by since the evaluation had been conducted by ICFRE. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should undertake a study to assess the impact of
National Afforestation Programme and Green India Mission in improving the quality of degraded
forests so that their actual impact on the forest cover is known and further strategies in this
regard could be drawn accordingly. (Para 5.4)
MANAGEMENT OF FORESTS
The Committee notes that Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE),
Dehradun and its regional research institutes inter alia  work towards providing effective and
feasible solutions to the problems of pests and diseases by undertaking region-specific research
programmes. Their research programmes have positively contributed to containing some of the
ailments faced by our forests. The Committee hopes that ICFRE, in coordination, with the State
Agricultural Universities and other research institutions working in the areas of pests and
disease management, would continue to provide solutions to important forestry research needs
of the country. (Para 6.8)
The Committee is constrained to note that no action plan has been prepared by the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for controlling the illegal cutting of trees in forests.
On the one hand, the Government is spending crores of rupees for environmental protection,
while, on the other hand, illegal cutting of trees and transportation of the wood has been plaguing
our forests in a big way. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change must take due cognizance of the illegal felling of trees in the different parts
of the country and, in coordination with the concerned State Governments/Union Territory
administrations, prepare an action plan for tackling this menace. The Ministry should impress
upon all the concerned forest management authorities to take necessary action and utilize the
constitutional provisions to restrict this illegal practice. Further, the report on illegal cutting of
construction timber in forest near border area of Nepal in the Shravasti District of Uttar Pradesh,
from the Uttar Pradesh Forest Department, should be shared with the Committee at the earliest.
(Para 6.10)
Forests in India are treated primarily as a social and environmental resource and sustain
full or partial livelihood for more than 300 million rural population. In this backdrop, the
Committee is concerned to note that insufficient budget allocation to National Afforestation
Programme has been hampering achieving the annual targeted area of afforestation during the
last few years, which has already declined gradually over the last 4 years. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change must
ensure that adequate allocation is made for the National Afforestation Programme and the
targets under the programme are achieved. Further, the concerned State Governments should
also provide their share of the changed funding pattern to make the National Afforestation
Programme (NAP) a success. (Para 6.16)

40
The Committee is of the view that although compensatory afforestation is ensured and Net
Present Value (NPV) is collected, there is a need for striking the right balance between the
developmental aspirations of the country on one hand and the conservation needs on the other.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that while the developmental aspirations of the nation
are not to be compromised, it should be ensured that forest land may be diverted for non-forestry
purposes, if and only if, it is absolutely unavoidable and essential and, in lieu  of the diverted
lands, adequate compensatory afforestation is done as per the prevalent guidelines/provisions and
sufficient amount of Net Present Value is collected. (Para 6.23)
The Committee is of the view that the LPG cylinders are still not available to a large
number of forest dwellers and BPL households in many areas of the country. Further, the cost
of the cylinders has gone up in absence of the subsidy on the cylinders. The Committee
recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change should impress upon the
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas to make efforts to bring more and more households
under the Ujjwala scheme to reduce the pressure on forests. (Para 6.26)
FOREST FIRES
The Committee notes with concern the loss of lives in forest fires besides the severe
degradation of forests and irreparable losses to valuable flora & fauna, there is a crucial need
for developing an integrated approach for firefighting. The Committee feels that there should be
a proper co-ordination mechanism between the State Governments, Forest Departments, National
Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), local Air force authorities and the Central Ministry for
quelling forest fires. The Committee also feels that public awareness programmes should be
conducted periodically in the vulnerable forest fire areas about the safety measures. Further, all
State Governments should make the registration of the mobile numbers of the concerned areas
mandatory and ensure that the data base of the registered mobile numbers of the State Forest
Departments is kept up-to-date so that any information/alert is passed on to the maximum
number of persons. (Para 7.6)
The Committee also feels that lack of human resources in the Forest Departments of the
respective States is one of the very crucial reasons in its inability to deal with the forest fires
affecting large stretches of the forests. Therefore, the Committee is of the view that Forest
Departments of the State Governments should look into this aspect very seriously and fill the
vacancies after completing the due procedures and approval of competent authorities. The Central
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should monitor this important aspect for
tackling the forests fire effectively. (Para 7.7)
The Committee also notes that it had presented a detailed and exhaustive report i.e. Report
No. 293 on 'Forest Fires and its Effect on Environment, Forests, Bio-Diversity and Wildlife and
Remedial/Preventive Measures' to the both Houses of Parliament on 16th December, 2016 which
could be a guiding force for the concerned agencies/local authorities/State Governments and their
respective Forest Departments and Central Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
for effectively tackling the forest fires. (Para 7.8)
COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION AND CAMPA FUNDS
The Committee feels that since the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Rules, 2018 have now
been notified, the Central/State Governments would be able to utilise the amount available in

41
the fund for the intended purposes. The Committee is also hopeful that the above rules will not
give any scope for mis-utilisation or embezzlement of the funds by any of the stake holders. The
Committee recommends the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change to devise a
stringent monitoring mechanism for f proper utilization of the funds. (Para 8.4)
The Committee observes that the Ministry had not undertaken any field survey to determine/
identify the total area/land available in the country for afforestation. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that necessary action in this regard should be taken at the earliest so that the field
survey could provide the necessary data to the State Governments to chalk out the necessary
strategies for taking up the afforestation activities in their respective States. (Para 8.7)
The Committee recommends that the suggestions made by The Energy and Resources
Institute should be duly considered by the concerned Ministries/Departments of the Central
Government to strengthen the afforestation process of the country. (Para 8.9)
WILDLIFE MANAGEMENT AND CONSERV ATION
The Committee notes with serious concern that wildlife is increasingly coming under pressure
in all parts of the country. Reports of man- animal conflict threaten to tear apart the respect
for wildlife that has traditionally been the hallmark of conservation in India. The Committee
feels that community led solutions must be explored in order to prevent fragmentation of
habitats of wild lives besides policy/interventions of the Ministry. (Para 9.6)
The Committee is also of the view that wildlife protection requires concerted efforts and
that growing incidents of poaching, encroachment and habitat destruction should be tackled in
an effective manner and it also requires implementation of various/Acts such as Wildlife Protection
Act, 1972 etc. and statutes in letter and spirit. (Para 9.7)
The Committee notes that there exists a manual prepared by Wildlife Institute of India,
Dehradun for making roads or any linear infrastructure and what care should be taken for
wildlife and National Board of Wildlife has also made it mandatory that any linear projects
whether it is a rail tracks, roads or canals or transmission lines, they have to follow the
guidelines when the clearance is given particularly in the eco-fragile and wildlife areas. However,
the Committee feels that this is not being followed in right earnest and even some national
parks/sanctuaries have roads/highways within its periphery. Therefore, the Committee recommends
that prior to approval of any infrastructural/ development projects, this aspect must be looked
into by the competent authorities or the concerned agencies. Further, the Committee hopes that
Ministry shall sensitize the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways while considering the
highway projects, and persuade them to spare the natural resources as well as wildlife sanctuaries/
national parks/ animal corridors etc. at the planning stage itself and wherever possible take a
detour and completely leave it. (Para 9.11)
The Committee hopes that unprotected wells of all wildlife sanctuaries/national parks of t.he
country including the Gir Forest in Gujarat would be covered properly in order to save the wild
animals falling into these wells and losing their lives. Also, the Ministry should take up the issue
of non-availability of drinking water in various sanctuaries/national parks with the State
Governments and their respective Forest Departments in order to make necessary arrangements
for providing drinking water to animals. (Para 9.14)

42
The Committee expresses its deep concern over the deaths of 23 nos. of lions within a short
span of time i.e. September-October, 2018 in Gir forest, Gujarat. Out of these 23 lion deaths,
4 nos. had Canine Distemper Virus (CDV). The Committee recommends that Ministry should
direct the various State Governments and their respective Forest Departments to take all necessary
preventive measures in all the wild life sanctuaries across the country to avoid the situation like
Gir forest in Gujarat. The Committee is also of the opinion that requisite steps to contain spread
of any type of virus should be taken. The patrolling mechanism and constant vigil inside the
wildlife sanctuaries and national parks also needs to be strengthened. (Para 9.16)
The Committee also observes that infighting amongst the lions of Gir forest, Gujarat might
be due to over population of the lions in specific areas. The Committee recommends that wild
life experts may be consulted for exploring re-locating/shifting some of the lions in nearby areas/
other sanctuaries, if feasible. (Para 9.17)
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the number of tourists has been steadily increasing
in the Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve since 2012-13 and it has positively impacted the revenue
generation through wildlife tourism, thereby creating indirect economy in the area. However, the
Committee would like to caution that the tourism in the tiger reserve must be regulated as per
the guidelines of the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) only. Further, the income
generated from tourism should be ploughed back in the development of the tiger reserve and
for the development of the villages located in the buffer area of the tiger reserve.
(Para 9.22)
The Committee takes note of the steps taken to provide safety to the wild animals from
the various threats in the forests and to ensure the availability of sufficient drinking water in
the tiger reserve for the wildlife. The Committee appreciates the involvement of women in forest
force in tiger reserves and recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate
Change should impress upon other State Governments to follow suit and take requisite steps for
the induction of women in the forest departments, especially in wildlife sanctuaries. (Para 9.26)
The Committee observes that Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve has emerged W one the most
important tourist destinations for wildlife lovers and enthusiasts as a result of which the revenue
generation by the tiger reserve has seen a consistent increase during the last few years. The
tiger reserve has also become an important source of livelihood for a large number of people in
the area. In this backdrop, the Committee is constrained to note the environmental issues
pertaining to the Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve brought to the notice of the Committee and is
of the view that these issues deserve a serious consideration. The Committee, accordingly,
recommends that while establishing the irrigation project on the Human River, it should be
ensured that the tiger corridor between Tadoba-Andhari Tiger Reserve and Bramhapuri Forest
Division that connects Satpuda-Maikal Landscape is not cut-off. Similarly, it should be ensured
that movement of animals across the corridors is not the least restricted while four-laning the
Chandrapur-Mul-Gadchiroli road and Nagpur-Umred-Nagbhid-Bramhapuri road. The Committee
also recommends that the environmental assessment of the coal mines of Western Coalfields
Limited and the thermal power plant of Chandrapura Thermal Power Station located along the
southern border of the tiger reserve on the activities of the wildlife needs to be carried out at
the earliest and remedial measures in respect of adverse impact of the same be taken on priority.

43
The Ministry should also consider carrying out environmental assessment of other wildlife
sanctuaries/parks affected by such industries/power plants. (Para 9.28)
The Committee feels that the genuine demands of the local people must be looked into
administratively by the local authorities. The requirement of toilets for the people of the area
must be given priority. Further, necessary action also needs to be taken for providing a proper
garbage disposal and solid waste management system. (Para 9.31)
The Committee is constrained to note that there has been massive encroachment in the
revenue and forest land around the tiger reserve, including the catchment area of the Kosi river.
The reports of some hotels and resorts dumping waste into Kosi river, which is considered to be
the lifeline of Corbett Tiger Reserve, are also equally disturbing. The Committee recommends
that the concerned authorities must take all lawful action in this regard and ensure that there
is no further deterioration of environment in Corbett National Park and the commercial activities
around the national park are regulated. (Para 9.36)
The Committee is aware that with majestic and swift tigers, Corbett Tiger Reserve is known
as the most prestigious and oldest national park in the country. The Committee feels that the
issues emerging out of the discussions of the Committee must be accorded due consideration.
The Committee recommends that immediate attention should be paid to the eradication of
invasive weeds like Lantana and Cannabis prevalent in the habitat to ensure conducive environment
for herbivores. The connectivity of the corridor with the Rajaji National Park is crucial and
should be taken up on priority. Further, all efforts should be made to ensure that the linear
development of tourism infrastructure along the highway from Ramnagar to Almora on the
banks of Kosi does not adversely impact the habitat matrix. (Para 9.38)
DRAFT NATIONAL FOREST POLICY, 2018 AND RELATED ASPECTS
The Committee also observed that the general perception of the public is that the Draft
Policy emphasizes the commercialization of forests, particularly refer to as the degraded forests,
so as to serve the interests of industry and to bring the private sector in for the management
of forests through the means of Public Private Partnership Model. Similarly, apprehensions have
been conveyed by various stakeholders that the Draft Policy envisages curtailing of rights of
tribals, and tribal communities and Traditional Forest-Dwellers in ownership and control of non-
timber forest produce as also in community resources. Concerns are also being expressed that
the Draft Policy aims to take away the rights of Gram Sabhas for management of forests and
instead hands it over to the proposed centrally-controlled Corporations. The Committee feels
that if too much emphasis given to Private Partnership Model in management of forests in the
proposed DNFP, we might end up with losing the forest lands whether it is degraded or otherwise.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that adequate safeguards be taken after due consultations
with the stakeholders in order to protect the forests from over exploitation by private parties
alongwith the legitimate rights of tribals and Gram Sabhas. (Para 10.7)
The Committee was informed that during the formulation stage of DNFP, the Ministry of
Tribal Affairs wasn't consulted. It was also informed that many provisions of the FRA, 2006 and
PESA, 1996 have been diluted or disregarded. Therefore, the Committee recommends that Ministry
of Tribal Affairs must be taken on board for wider consultation alongwith State Governments/

44
Local Bodies/NGOs/Civil society members before finalizing the Draft Forest Policy and notifying
it. Further, adequate safeguards must be taken for the protection of vulnerable forest communities
such as tribals and other communities who are dependent on the forest for their sustenance and
survival. (Para 10.24)
CONSERV ATION OF BIODIVERSITY
The Committee hopes that ZSI and BSI would continue their good work in conserving the
rich & varied biodiversity of our country through documentation of our animal and faunal
diversity using modern techniques of conservation and that will also promote preservation of
relic, endangered and threatened species. (Para 11.7)
INTERNATIONAL COMMITMENTS: CARBON SEQUESTRATION/CARBON STOCK IN THE
COUNTRY
The Committee is in agreement with the views expressed by the The Energy and Resources
Institute (TERI) as well as the Ministry that India has potential of achieving additional 3 billion
tonnes of CO2 equivalent sequestration by 2030 with conservation and afforestation approach on
forests, degraded forests and non-forest land. However, the Committee feels that the Country
needs to have a holistic approach and at the same time concerted efforts are required from one
and all and peoples' involvement, particularly the tribals & traditional forest dwellers, for achieving
this important commitment of United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCC)
for addressing the issues of climate change adaptation and mitigation. (Para 12.8)
GENERAL OBSERV ATION
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
being the Central Nodal Ministry dealing with the subject, should make all out efforts to protect
and conserve our forests, wildlife as well as invaluable biodiversity and seek the cooperation of
all State/Union Territory Governments and other stakeholders to see that the country does not
lag behind in this monumental task. (Para 13.1)

45
MINUTES

X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 9th April, 2018 in Room No. G-74, Ground Floor,
Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
LOK SABHA
4. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
5. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
6. Shri P.P . Chauhan
7. Dr. K. Gopal
8. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
9. Shri Daddan Mishra
10. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
11. Shri Vikram Usendi
12. Dr. Raghu Sharma
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change:
1. Shri C.K. Mishra, Secretary
2. Shri Siddhanta Das, Director General of Forest & Special Secretary
3. Shri Saibal Das Gupta, ADG (FC)
4. Shri Deepak Kumar Sinha, IGF
47

48
5. Shri A.K. Mohanty, IGF
6. Shri E. Vikram, Deputy Director, FSI, Dehradun
7. Shri Prakash Lakchura, Deputy Director, FSI, Dehradun
2. * * *
3. The Chairman then welcomed the Members of the Committee and the Secretary and other officers
of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to the meeting of the Committee. He informed
that the meeting had been convened to hear the views of Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change on 'Status of Forest in India' and sought to know the views of the Secretary on various
issues such as compensatory afforestation, proposed new National Forest Policy of the Government,
reserved forests, forest area under Government land and also under private land, area brought under
forest and degraded forest, forest land diverted for development projects, use of CAMPA funds, steps
taken by the Government for arresting the loss of natural resources; destruction of habitat and increasing
the forest cover of the country, the statutory provisions available with the Government for the purpose
and whether these statutory provisions are adequate to take care of the changing requirements, funds
earmarked for the purpose and whether the funds so allocated are adequate to cater to the financial
requirements, etc.
4. Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change informed that total forest and tree
cover of the country is about 8 lakh square kilometres which is about 24 per cent of the total geographical
area. The Committee was informed that there is a total increase of forest and tree cover by 8,021 square
kilometres which includes 6,778 square kilometres increase in forest cover and 1,243 square kilometres
in tree cover. It was submitted that the forest depletion has by and large stabilised now. It was informed
that technically forest is divided into several types of forests such as very dense category, moderately
dense category, open forest category, tree cover and shrubs. He submitted that as per the Forest Survey
of India's report 2017, there is an increase of about 8000 odd sq. kilometres in forest land which is close
to one percent of the total area. He informed that India is one of the top ten countries in the world having
largest forest cover and ranked 8 in the world in term of per cent gain in forest cover. However, the
country's per capita forest is still low as compared to the global per capita forest. He submitted that the
degraded forests continue to be a matter of worry for which the Ministry has created a data base of
all the degraded forests across the country and get them into a moderately dense forest. Apprising the
Committee of the global commitments, he submitted that though the country was growing at about 35
million tonnes carbon stocks every year, the country will still be short of global commitment by about
1.1 billion tonnes of carbon stocks. He also informed the Committee that various schemes are implemented
by the State Governments and Government of India does very little direct funding in increasing the forest
cover. He also submitted that the Ministry is not using the principal amount of the CAMPA fund as per
the Supreme Court order and ten percent is being allocated to the States depending on their plans.
Informing the Committee about the CAMPA rules, he submitted that the draft of CAMPA rules are in
public domain for 60 days to get comments thereon. He submitted that once these rules are finalised,
the principal amount of CAMPA fund belonging to the States, will get transferred to them for their usage.
Sharing the plan of catchment area plantation with the Committee, he informed that it is critical for
***Relate to other matters.

49
perennial flow of rivers and to increase the moisture content for which the funding would be from the
part of Government of India share in CAMPA fund. He also informed the Committee that this plan will
start with the Ganga followed by other rivers. Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate
Change also sought the Committee's support for this very resource-intensive programme. A power point
presentation was also made on the subject apprising the Committee of pressure and threats on forests
in the form of competing land demands viz. fuelwood and fodder collection, forest fire, pest diseases
and invasive species, encroachment and illegal falling of trees, vulnerability of forests and biodiversity
to climate change. Major issues facing the Indian forestry along with solutions were also brought to the
notice of the Committee.
5. The Chairman and Members of the Committee then raised their queries relating to various issues
viz., New Forest Policy, impact of Ujjwala Scheme on forests, decreasing forest area in Uttar Pradesh,
forest fires, mechanism available with the Government to deal with forest fires coordination between
Forest Departments and other related agencies such as NDMA, Air Force, etc., issue of grazing of
livestock, scientific techniques to increase the forest cover, total forest land diverted for infrastructure
projects, re-afforestation, technological interventions for highways in hilly areas, lion population in
country, poaching of tigers, water availability to the wild animals, efforts made to increase the forest
cover, sight selection criteria for compensatory afforestation, etc.
6. The Secretary and other representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change,
while presenting their views, also responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairman and Members
of the Committee. The Chairman also directed the Secretary to furnish the written replies to queries/
points/issues raised by him and the Members of the Committee, which could not be replied during the
meeting, to the Secretariat.
7. The witnesses then withdrew.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 12:29 
P.M.

50
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 14th May, 2018 in Room No. G-074, Ground
Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri Raj kumar Dhoot
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Sharad Pawar
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
7. Shri P.P . Chauhan
8. Kumari Sushmita Dev
9. Shri Ninong Ering
10. Dr. K. Gopal
11. Shri Daddan Mishra
12. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
13. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
14. Shri Nagendra Singh
15. Dr. Raghu Sharma
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
Non-official witnesses
1. Shri Leo Saldanha, Coordinator/Trustee, Environment Support Group, Bengaluru
2. Dr. Sharachchandra Lele, Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment, Bengaluru
50

51
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and Shri Leo Saldanha,
Coordinator/Trustee, Environment Support Group and Dr. Sharachchandra Lele, Ashoka Trust for Research
in Ecology and the Environment and informed them that the meeting had been convened to hear their
views on various provisions of the 'Draft National Forest Policy 2018'. The Chairman desired to know
whether the provisions of Draft National Forest Policy 2018 jeopardise our forests, their ecologies,
environmental stability, ecological security, rights of our tribal communities dependent predominantly on
forests directly or indirectly for livelihood and sustenance and whether the steps envisaged in the Draft
National Forest Policy 2018 in the direction of Essentials Principles of Forest Management and Strategy
are adequate enough to safeguard the ecological and livelihood security of our people and in contributing
towards achieving the national goal and ecological security of the country. Suggestions for enhancing
the productivity of our forests, forestry production, promotion of agro-forestry and farm forestry in non-
forest areas in order to increase the income of farmers, strategic policy interventions required for meeting
international commitments, etc. were also sought by the Chairman.
3. Dr. Lele made a power point presentation before the Committee wherein he informed the Committee
that in India at least 25 crore people, mostly adivasis and poor, deriving livelihood from forest products.
It was submitted that before the Forest Policy 1988, the forests had been considered as a source of
industrial material for national development and the large forest area were given away for infrastructural
requirements of the country. In the Forest Policy of 1988, a landmark revision of forest policy took place
and for the first time it was acknowledged that forests served multiple goals such as ecological balance,
local livelihoods and industry. Dr. Lele also informed the Committee that Forest Policy of 1988 clearly
stated that ecological balance was primary but local needs were to be given priority over industrial
requirements and industries must tie up with farmer to produce forest products on private lands. It was
submitted that Forest Policy 1988 articulated the need for people's involvement. It was brought to the
notice of the Committee that the idea of ecological balance was implemented through ban on green felling
in many States. Highlighting the major lacunae in the Draft National Forest Policy 2018, Dr. Lele
informed the Committee that the draft Policy proposes to shift away from the goals laid down in National
Forest Policy 1988 and prioritise production forestry; draft Policy proposes the idea of public private
partnership in forest sector to divert the forest lands to the private players; the draft policy is silent on
the issue of usage , of CAMPA funds; etc. To bridge the gaps, Dr. Lele suggested that the Government
should follow the road map laid down by the Joint Committee of Ministry of Environment, Forest &
Climate Change and Ministry of Tribal Affairs and to strike a balance between production, livelihood
needs conservation, hydrology and carbon sequestration and to allow local communities to make decision
through democratic processes.
4. Shri Leo F. Saldanha, Co-ordinator, Environment Support Group also briefed the Committee about
the lacunae in the Draft National Forest Policy 2018 and suggested that the policy has to be made jointly
by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Ministry of Tribal Affairs as required
under Allocation of Business Rules 1961 and Forest Right Act 2006 and the policy should also be based
on due consultations with all required Central Ministries, all State Governments and Union Territories and
local Governments as is mandated under the provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled
Areas) Act, 1996, Constitutional 73rd Amendment (Panchayat Raj) Act, 1992 and Constitutional 74th
Amendment (Nagar Palika) Act, 1992. He also suggested that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and

52
Climate Change and Ministry of Tribal Affairs must develop a working paper detailing features and
circulated to all the concerned Government agencies for wider consultation in the matter.
5. Dr. Sharachchandra Lele and Shri Leo F. Saldanha, while presenting their views, also responded to
some of the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee. The Chairman also directed
them to furnish written replies to queries/points/issues raised by him and the Members of the Committee,
which could not be replied during the meeting, to the Secretariat.
6. The witnesses, then, withdrew and the following representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change appeared before the Committee:-
1.  Shri Siddhanta Das, DGF & Special Secretary
2. Shri M.S. Negi, ADGF
3. Sri Noyal Thomas, IGF
4. Shri Pankaj Asthana, IGF
5. Shri A.K. Mohanty, IGF
7. The Chairman welcomed the Director-General of Forest & Special Secretary and other officers of
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and sought to know their views on the subject
"Draft National Forest Policy 2018". The Chairman also observed that before framing the Draft National
Forest Policy and putting it on website of the Ministry for seeking comments, wider consultation with
various stake holders/NGOs/Civil Society/State Governments/Central Ministries was required. Director-
General of Forest, while sharing the views of the Ministry, made a power point presentation on the
subject, and informed that the existing National Forest Policy of 1988 has completed 30 years and lot
of changes have taken place calling for review and to bring a new forest policy as per the changed
scenario and meeting requirement of the present and future needs. He informed the Committee that the
Indian Institute of Forest Management (IIFM), Bhopal was assigned the task for preparation of a policy
document after wider consultation and the report was submitted by IIFM in 2016, which after internal
consultations held in Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and by the Committee constituted
by the Ministry, placed in public domain for comments. The Committee was informed that the Draft
National Forest Policy 2018 was circulated to all the State Governments and to all concerned Central
Ministries/Departments for consultation. It was submitted that comments from Governments of Odisha,
Karnataka, Kerala, Uttarakhand and Tamil Nadu have been received alongwith the comments from the
Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare and Ministry of Panchayati Raj. It was submitted that the
Draft National Forest Policy 2018 envisages to have one-third of the Geographical Area (GA) under
forest and tree cover and two-third of the GA under forest and tree cover in mountainous region. The
Committee was given to understand that the Draft National Forest Policy 2018 has 16 major objectives,
7 essential of forest management and 15 major strategies spelt out in a very systematic, clear and crisp
manner to achieve the objectives of the policy. It was submitted that the Draft Policy aims to safeguard
the ecological and livelihood security of people, of the present and future generations; checking denudation
and soil erosion; preservation of natural forest; reverse degradation; protection of catchment; improving
productivity; increasing tree cover outside forest; ensuring people's participation in forest management;

53
wildlife conservation and management; conservation of biodiversity; forest fire prevention; forestry
extension; research and education; etc. The Committee was also briefed about the concerns raised by
the some stake holders on the Draft National Forest Policy 2018.
8. The Director General of Forests and other representatives of Ministry of , Environment, Forest &
Climate Change, while presenting their views, also responded to some of the queries raised by the
Chairman and Members of the Committee. The Chairman directed the Director General of Forests to
furnish the written replies to queries/points/issues raised by him and the Members of the Committee,
which could not be replied during the meeting, to the Secretariat. The Chairman also observed that clear
cut definition of forest should be included in the Draft Policy and there must be synergy with Forest
Rights Act, 2006 and other relevant Acts which effect the tribals and other forest dwellers predominantly
dependent for their livelihood on the forests.
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. The witnesses then withdrew.
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
13. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 1:40 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

54
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 10th October, 2018 in Room No. 'G-074',
Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Baluni
3. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
4. Shri Sharad Pawar
5. Dr. Raghunath Mohapatra
LOK SABHA
6. Shri P. P. Chauhan
7. Shri Laxman Giluwa
8. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
9. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministry of Tribal Affairs
1. Shri Deepak Khandekar, Secretary
2. Shri Vinod Kumar Tiwari, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Naval Jit Kapoor, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Jaideep Singh Kochher, Economic Advisor
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Shri Siddhanta Das, Director General Forest & Special Secretary
2. Shri D. K. Sinha, IGF
54

55
3. Shri Rohit Tiwari, DIG (SU)
4. Shri S. Elamurugannan, AIGF
Non-Official Witness
1. Dr. Jitendra Vir Sharma, Director, The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI)
2. Shri Ravi Singh, Secretary-General & CEO, WWF-India
3. Dr. Nita Shah, Conservation Ecologist, Bombay Natural History Society (BNHS)
2. * * *
3. Thereafter, the Chairman informed the Members about the agenda of the meeting. He stated that
the Committee would continue with one of the subjects under consideration of the erstwhile Committee
i.e. 'Status of Forest in India' and would hear the representatives of the Ministries of Tribal Affairs;
Environment, Forest and Climate Change and some non-official witnesses.
4. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Ministries of Tribal Affairs; Environment,
Forest and Climate Change and the non-official witnesses. Initiating the discussion, the Chairman stated
that during the Committee's interaction with some non-official witnesses on the subject, the Committee
was informed that the Draft National Forest Policy, 2018 envisages the curtailing of rights of tribals and
tribal communities and traditional Forest Dwellers in ownership and control of Non-Timber Forest
Produce as also in community resources. Further, concerns had also been raised that the draft policy
aims to take away the rights of Gram Sabhas for management of forests and instead hand it over to
Corporates. The Chairman asked the representatives of Ministries of Tribal Affairs and Environment,
Forest and Climate Change to enlighten the Committee of their concerns regarding the dilution of the
provisions of Forest Rights Act 2006. The Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to Scheduled Areas)
Act, 1996 and the National Forest Policy 1988.
5. The Ministry of Tribal Affairs made a Power Point Presentation (PPT) on the subject apprising the
Committee about the likely impact of the Draft National Forest Policy, 2018 on the Tribals and the role
of the Ministry in protecting the interests of tribals guaranteed under Forest Rights Act, 2006. The
representative of the Ministry pointed out that the GoI (Allocation of Business) Rules, (1961) were
amended on 17.3.2006 to bring all matters Including legislation relating to the rights of forest dwelling
Scheduled Tribes on forest lands under the purview of that Ministry while the MoEFCC continued to
be responsible for overall policy in relation to forests. The Committee was also informed about the
various initiatives taken by the Ministry regarding monitoring of schemes, capacity building to States/
UTs, training, technological support etc.
6. The Chairman asked the representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to
respond to the concerns raised by the Ministry of Tribal Affairs and the lack of consultation among
various stakeholders while drafting the National Forest Policy, 2018. The Committee was informed by
the Special Secretary, MoEFCC that the Ministry had received a large number of representations from
across the country on the draft policy and the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change had
considered all of them. They had taken into account all the concerns, including the concerns of the
***Relate to other matters.

56
Ministry of Tribal Affairs, and had revised the draft, which has been circulated to all the Ministries for,
consultations and thereafter, it would be placed in the Parliament.
7. Thereafter, the Committee heard the representative of The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI)
on the subject. Director, TERI apprised the Committee about the need for sustainable forestry and the
need to develop practices that would help sustainable exploitation of forest resources. He also suggested
community ownership of common resources. He also emphasized on the need for a better implementation
framework. Responding to the points raised by Director, TERI, the Committee was informed by the
Special Secretary and DG, MoEFCC that the DNFP has included sustainable forestry within its purview
with an added emphasis on non destructive forestry. He also gave details of provisions for consultation
with Gram Sabha with regard to exploitation of forest resources. Shri Das also tried to distinguish
between 'conservation' and 'protection' saying that in contrast to protection, conservation was a more
holistic approach.
8. The Committee then heard the views of WWF-India on the subject. Secretary General & CEO,
WWF-India informed the Committee that the country cannot afford to lose any more forest cover and
that development should not come at the cost of the environment. He emphasized that increasing forest
cover through afforestation, concerted efforts was required. He also stressed the need to increase forest
cover in order to face challenges of climate change and global warming. He advocated for greater
community rights and promotion of agro-forestry and also emphasized the need for a robust implementation
framework for the purpose.
9. The representative of Bombay Natural History Society appreciated that the Draft National Forest
Policy, 2018 had included Climate Change mitigation and INDC targets within its purview. She stressed
the need for an exhaustive 'definition of forests' and to include within it natural areas such as wetlands,
grasslands etc. as these areas are most vulnerable to environmental destruction as also are key to climate
change.
10. The Chairman emphasized the need for a robust institutional framework in order to save the forests.
He impressed upon the concerned Ministries towards the need for balancing economic growth with
ecological conservation. Director General Forest & Special Secretary stated that India faces an unenviable
situation since the pressure on land and resources is enormous. He further stated that both public and
private sector have to come together alongwith the people for afforestation efforts. He also gave details
of Compensatory Afforestation Fund (CAF) Rules which were being notified.
11. The representatives of Ministries of Tribal Affairs; Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the
non-official witnesses, while presenting their views also responded to some of the queries raised by the
Chairman and Members of the Committee. The Chairman also directed them to furnish written replies
to some other queries/points/issues raised by the Chairman and the Members of the Committee, which
could not be replied during the meeting, as well as the questionnaire to be forwarded by the Secretariat,
at the earliest.
12. The witnesses then withdrew.
13. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
14. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 12.55 
P.M.

57
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Friday, the 8th February, 2019 in Room No. '63', First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri Prasanna Acharya
4. Dr. Raghunath Mohapatra
LOK SABHA
5. Kum. Sushmita Dev
6. Shri Daddan Mishra
7. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
8. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
9. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
10. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He informed
that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 324th report of the Committee on
'Status of Forests in India'. The Committee, then, considered the draft 324th Report and adopted the
same.
3. The Committee also decided to present/lay its 324th report to both the Houses of Parliament on the
12th February, 2019. The Committee authorised the Chairman and, in his absence, Shri Prasanna
Acharya, M.P. and, in his absence, Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan, M.P. to present the reports in the Rajya
Sabha and Kumari Sushmita Dev, M.P . and in her absence, Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh, M.P ., to lay the
reports on the Table of Lok Sabha.
4. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3:30 
P.M.
57

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
Recorded Forest Areas (RFAs) in States and UTs
(Area in sq. km.)
State/ UT Geographical RFA (as revised by SFDs) Total RFA % of GA
Area (GA) (2017)
Reserved Protected Unclassed
forests forests Forests
12 3 4 5 6 7
Andhra Pradesh 162968 31,959 5,069 230 37,258 22.86
Arunachal Pradesh 83743 10,589 9,779 31,039 51,407 61.39
Assam 78438 17,864 0 8,968 26,832 34.21
Bihar 94163 693 6,183 1 6,877 7.30
Chhattisgarh 135192 25,782 24,036 9,954 59,772 44.21
Delhi 1483 78 24 0 102 6.88
Goa 3702 253 0 972 1,225 33.09
Gujarat 196244 14,373 2,886 4,388 21,647 11.03
Haryana 44212 249 1,158 152 1,559 3.53
Himachal Pradesh 55673 1,898 33,130 2,005 37,033 66.52
Jammu and Kashmir # 222236 17,643 2,551 36 20,230 9.10
Jharkhand 79716 4,387 19,185 33 23,605 29.61
Karnataka 191791 28,690 3,931 5,663 38,284 19.96
Kerala 38852 11,309 0 0 11,309 29.11
Madhya Pradesh 308252 61,886 31,098 1,705 94,689 30.72
Maharashtra 307713 49,546 6,733 5,300 61,579 20.01
Manipur 22327 1,467 4,171 1 1,780 17,418 78.01
Meghalaya 22429 1,113 12 8,371 9,496 42.34
Mizoram 21081 4,483 0 1,158 5,641 26.76
Nagaland 16579 234 0 8,389 8,623 52.01
Odisha 155707 36,049 25,133 22 61,204 39.31
Punjab 50362 44 1,137 1,903 3,084 6.12
61

62
12 3 4 5 6 7
Rajasthan 342239 12,475 18,217 2,045 32,737 9.57
Sikkim 7096 5,452 389 0 5,841 82.31
Tamil Nadu 130060 20,293 1,782 802 22,877 17.59
Telangana 112077 20,353 5,939 612 26,904 24.00
Tripura 10486 4,175 2 2,117 6,294 60.02
Uttar Pradesh 240928 12,071 1,157 3,354 16,582 6.88
Uttarakhand 53483 26,547 9,885 1,568 38,000 71.05
West Bengal 88752 7,054 3,772 1,053 11,879 13.38
Andaman and Nicobar 8249 5,613 1,558 0 7,171 86.93
Islands
Chandigarh 114 32 0 3 35 30.70
Dadra and Nagar Haveli 491 199 5 0 204 41.55
Daman and Diu 111 0 0 8 8 7.21
Lakshadweep 30 0 0 0 0 0.00
Puducherry 490 0 2 11 13 2.65
T
OTAL 32,87,469 4,34,705 2,19,432 1,13,881 7,67,419 23.34
Source :  State Forest Departments
# Includes Jammu and Kashmir area outside LoC that is under illegal occupation of Pakistan and China

63
ANNEXURE-II
Forest Cover as per ISFR 2017, State-wise
State Geographical Area 2017 Assessment
as per census VDF MDF OF Total Forest
12 3 4 5 6
Andhra Pradesh 162968 1957 14051 12139 28147
Arunachal Pradesh 83743 20721 30955 15288 66964
Assam 78438 2797 10192 15116 28105
Bihar 94163 332 3260 3707 7299
Chhattisgarh 135192 7064 32215 16268 55547
Delhi 1483 6.72 56.24 129.45 192.41
Goa 3702 538 576 1115 2229
Gujarat 196244 378 5200 9179 14757
Haryana 44212 28 452 1108 1588
Himachal Pradesh 55673 3110 6705 5285 15100
Jammu and Kashmir 222236 4075 8579 10587 23241
Jharkhand 79716 2598 9686 1 1269 23553
Karnataka 191791 4502 20444 12604 37550
Kerala 38852 1663 9407 9251 20321
Madhya Pradesh 308252 6563 34571 36280 77414
Maharashtra 307713 8736 20652 21294 50682
Manipur 22327 908 6510 9928 17346
Meghalaya 22429 453 9386 7307 17146
Mizoram 21081 131 5861 12194 18186
Nagaland 16579 1279 4587 6623 12489
Odisha 155707 6967 21370 23008 51345
Punjab 50362 8 806 1023 1837
Rajasthan 342239 78 4340 12154 16572
Sikkim 7096 1081 1575 688 3344
Tamil Nadu 130060 3672 10979 1 1630 26281
63

64
12 3 4 5 6
Telangana 112077 1596 8738 10085 20419
Tripura 10486 656 5246 1824 7726
Uttar Pradesh 240928 2617 4069 7993 14679
Uttarakhand 53483 4969 12884 6442 24295
West Bengal 88752 2994 4147 9706 16847
Andaman and Nicobar 8249 5678 684 380 6742
Islands
Chandigarh 114 1.36 13.82 6.38 21.56
Dadra and Nagar Haveli 491 0 80 127 207
Daman and Diu 111 1.4 5.82 13.27 20.49
Lakshadweep 30 0 17.04 10.06 27.1
Puducherry 490 0 1 7.6 36.07 53.67
G
RAND T OTAL 3287469 98158 308318 301797 708273

65
65
ANNEXURE-III
State-wise details of area approved for afforestation and corresponding funds
released under Green India Mission (GIM)
Sl .No. States FY 2015-16 FY 2016-17
   Physical (ha) Financial (in ` Physical (ha) Financial (in ` Lakh)
Lakh)
Target Achievement^ Target Achievement^
Advance Advance Fund Fund Advance Creation Advance Creation Fund Fund
Work Work Released Released Work Work Work Work Released Released
l. Andhra Pradesh - - - - 881 - 534 - 105.53 105.53
2. Chhattisgarh 19128 19128 2338.55 2338.55 - 19128 - 19128 2023.017 2023.017
3. Karnataka 760 760 105.53 105.53 - 760 - 760 86.853 86.853
4. Kerala* 4978 - 914.82 - - - 2115 - - 383.118
5. Manipur 8798 8798 834.84 834.84 - 8798 - 8798 782.285 782.285
6. Mizoram - - - - 19643 - 9869 - 988.35 988.35
7. Odisha 2177.72 2177.72 182.92 182.92 - 2094.4 - 2094.4 138.964 138.964
8. Punjab* 3000 - 61 1.53 - - - 1704 1286** - 606.11
9. Uttarakhand* 7483 - 2020.9 - - - - - - -
T
OTAL 46324.7 30863.72 7009.09 3461.84 20524 30780.4 14222 32066.4 4125 5114.227
Note: *Fund were revalidated for utilization in FY 2016-17.
**The State of Punjab has also carried out creation activities apart from advance work due to sandy geo-morphology.
^Achievements as reported by States.

66
Sl. No. States FY 2017-18
Physical Targets (ha.)
Advance/Creation Maintenance Work Fund Released
Work (in ` Lakh)
1. Chhattisgarh - 19128 1095.272
2. Odisha - 2094.4 140.556
3. Manipur - 8798 641.579
4. Mizoram 9774.6 - 2000.000
5. Karnataka - 760 85.734
6. Punjab 1732 1286 621.730
7. Andhra Pradesh* - - 44.60
TOTAL 11506.6 32066.4 4629.471
Note: *Fund released as second installment of FY 2016-17 to carry out balance work in FY 2016-17.

67
ANNEXURE-IV
Details of forest land diverted under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 for infrastructure projects in
the last fifteen years (from 01.01.2003 to 20.06.2018)
Sl. No. State/UT 2003-2018
No. of Proposals Area Diverted (Ha.)
12 3 4
1. Andaman and Nicobar Islands 33 190.58
2. Andhra Pradesh 111 8719.66
3. Arunachal Pradesh 123 10224.34
4. Assam 47 1932.28
5. Bihar 189 5273.68
6. Chandigarh 19 56.30
7. Chhattisgarh 156 7850.15
8. Dadar and Nagar Haveli 67 28.38
9. Daman and Diu 1 3.95
10. Delhi 12 38.25
11. Goa 12 51.82
12. Gujarat 749 12422.08
13. Haryana 3165 4278.06
14. Himachal Pradesh 941 5920.48
15. Jharkhand 150 6142.40
16. Karnataka 297 5989.50
17. Kerala 55 10271.53
18. Madhya Pradesh 373 23726.33
19. Maharashtra 403 14703.29
20. Manipur 24 2537.82
21. Meghalaya 22 231.82
22. Mizoram 9 604.58
23. Orissa 134 7151.06
24. Pondicherry 1 0.96
67

68
12 3 4
25. Punjab 3685 60658.05
26. Rajasthan 335 13342.23
27. Sikkim 276 1617.77
28. Tamil Nadu 132 925.63
29. Telangana 71 9331.90
30. Tripura 189 1347.62
31. Uttar Pradesh 707 7344.07
32. Uttarakhand 2158 15532.12
33. West Bengal 46 1123.47
G
RAND T OTAL 14692 239572.16