Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
267
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 23rd July, 2015)
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 23rd July, 2015)
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT
Unprecedented Floods in Srinagar and Warning and 
Forecasting of Floods and Environmental Issues in Leh,
Jammu and Pathankot

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY SEVENTH REPORT
Unprecedented Floods in Srinagar and Warning and
Forecasting of Floods and Environmental Issues in Leh,
Jammu and Pathankot
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the  23rd July, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the  23rd July, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—23
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS - AT G LANCE .................................................................. 24—27
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 29—30
7. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 32—47

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1 st September, 2014-15)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri Bhupinder Singh
 9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Beig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
22. Shri Nana Patole
23. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
24. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
25. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
27. Shri Nagendra Singh
28. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
*31. Shri Chirag Paswan
*  Nominated w.e.f.  25 th March, 2015.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to
present the report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred and Sixty-seventh Report on
‘Unprecedented floods in Srinagar and warning and forecasting of floods and environmental
issues in Leh, Jammu and Pathankot’.
2.     During its study visit to Srinagar, Leh, Jammu and Pathankot from 24
th to 29 th May,
2015, the Committee heard the views of the officers of the Central Government and State
Governments of Jammu & Kashmir and Punjab and Experts and Civil Society Organisations/
NGOs on ‘Unprecedented floods in Srinagar and warning and forecasting of floods and
environmental issues in Leh, Jammu and Pathankot’.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Central Government and
State Governments of Jammu & Kashmir and Punjab and Experts and Civil Society
Organisations/NGOs for rendering their valuable views/replies to clarifications sought by the
Committee.
4. In its meeting held on 21 st July, 2015, the Committee considered the draft report and
adopted the same. 
ASHWANI KUMAR
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
July 21 , 2015 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Ashadha 30, 1937 Science and Technology, Environment and Forests
Rajya Sabha

(iv)
ACRONYMS
PIL : Public Interest Litigation
DPR : Detailed Project Report
ERA : Economic Reconstruction Agency
STPs : Sewerage Treatment Plants
LAWDA : Lakes and Waterway Development Authority
HCFs : Health Care Facilities
NAMP : National Air Quality Monitoring Programme
PPCB : Punjab Pollution Control Board

REPORT
Concerned with the unprecedented floods in the context of climate change in Srinagar
and failure of warning and forecasting of floods system, the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment & Forests
decided to visit inter-alia  to Srinagar, Leh, Jammu and Pathankot from 24
th to 29 th May, 2015
to interact with the concerned Central and State Government agencies as well as members
of Civil Society/NGOs.
SRINAGAR
2. In Srinagar on 24
th May 2015, the Committee held an interaction with civil society
organizations and NGOs on the reasons for unprecedented floods in Srinagar and failure of
warning and forecasting of floods in the context of climate change.  The Chairman, while
initiating the discussion, stated that the idea behind having a meeting of the Committee with
civil society and non-governmental organizations was to have a firsthand information of the
ground reality.  He further stated that though floods of the magnitude that occurred in
Srinagar were unprecedented but with the technological advancement in India particularly in
weather forecasting, it should not have been impossible to forecast and forewarn the people
so that damage could have been minimized, more so when we had the experience of
torrential rain and its aftermath in Uttarakhand not too long ago.  He asked the members of
Civil Society/NGOs to express their views frankly and without hesitation so that their views
could be factored in for the future. A list of Civil Society Organisations/NGO and individuals
is at Annexure I.
3. Representatives of NGOs/Civil Society raised a number of points pertaining to the
subject under discussion, some of main ones are summarized as under:-
(i) Ms. Maria Hearty, a representative of an environmental group stated that
services of environmental experts should be obtained and their input taken into
consideration on every aspect of planning to avoid recurrence of floods that
caused heavy damages.
(ii) Ms. Shahala Ali Sheikh, a representative of an environmental group stated that
due to bad planning and illegal constructions/ encroachments which have taken
place on wet lands/agricultural lands, the space for water bodies had shrunk to
a great extent. The State Government had prepared a Detailed Project Report
for providing water transport from Pampore to Chattabal but it had not been
made fully operational. She further informed the Committee that dredging/
desilting of waterbodies had not been done to the desired level even though
these wetlands function as water sponges/water storage structures. She also
suggested forming of a committee on wetlands. She also expressed concern
over the degradation of high forests and grass lands through continuous heavy

2
deployment of security forces especially in Dachigam National Park and
demanded its mitigation.
(iii) Ms. Jyoti Singh, social/environmental activist, suggested that youth should be
taken into confidence and involved in the efforts to conserve Dal Lake. She also
stated that people’s involvement in development and management of resources
was extremely important.
(iv) Shri Vijay Dhar, a prominent native of the city, informed the Committee that
eight Cement factories were functioning in Khrew Khonmoh areas of the Valley
which was a matter of concern from environmental point of view. He stated
that 60% to 70% of the solid/liquid waste of the hotels and house boats in Dal
Lake in the city goes into the Dal Lake. He suggested that an improvised
technology for disposal of solid/liquid waste costing Rs.2.00 lacs per unit can
be adopted for proper management of the sewage. He further suggested that
intensive measures should be undertaken for dredging of water bodies and
rivers on priority basis. He emphasized upon the need of Master Plan for
development of Pahalgam, Sonmarg and Gulmarg.
(v) Justice (Retd.) Muzaffar Hussain Jan stated that some Civil Society members
had filed a Public Interest Litigation (PIL) in the Hon’ble High Court of J&K
during his tenure as a Judge of the High Court wherein he passed orders for
preservation of Dal Lake, which was implemented to a large extent. Directions
were passed that no construction should be permitted to come within radial
distance of 200 metres from the periphery of the Dal Lake. He also stated that
he had passed orders for putting a stop to all constructions in flood prone
areas.  Unless there was a effective drainage of water, floods were bound to
occur.
(vi) Shri Javed Makhdoomi, retired Inspector General of Police, was of the view
that despite lapse of eight months after floods of September 2014, only minor/
nominal remedial measures have been taken up by the Government with no
tangible results on the ground. He informed that effective steps need to be taken
by the Government for improvement/construction of infrastructure without any
further delay. Large scale engineering works should be immediately taken up so
that no breach of banks of River Jehlum takes place again. He also suggested
that the Government should take immediate steps for providing weather
forecasting system in the valley as there are apprehensions of recurrence of
floods and that can be worst since no life saving  machinery / equipments have
been put in place till date. He also said that training should be provided to the
concerned staff of Govt. agencies for effective delivery in times of exigency.
(vii) Shri Mohammed Ishaq Qadri, Ex-Advocate General, disagreed that there was no
Master Plan of Srinagar city. He said that the Master Plan for Srinagar city was
under review, because the building permission authorities had miserably failed to

3
check illegal constructions.  He stated that a number of water bodies had been
encroached upon and the administration had not been able to remove them.
Thus floods were inevitable since there was no channel for passage of water.
He also stressed that Government should initiate dredging work of Dal Lake,
River Jehlum and other water bodies, especially Wullar, on war footing basis so
that their existing water capacity is enhanced. These waterbodies have got silted
up and their carrying capacity reduced to 10% to 20% only. Shri Qadri
suggested dredging work should be undertaken upto two to three meters depth
in the aforesaid water bodies.
(viii) Shri Mohammed Shafi Pandit, Ex-Member PSC, suggested that Government of
India should install weather forecasting machinery in the Valley. He also
suggested that dredging work of rivers and flood spill channels should be taken
up on war footing basis. He also impressed on the improvement work on
embankments to prevent any chances of breaches during high water levels.  He
further observed that the Master plan was not being implemented in letter and
spirit.
(ix) Shri Shakeel Qalender was of the view that main reasons behind the floods of
September 2014 were devastation of wetlands, soil erosion, lack of dredging
work of rivers, Dal lake and other water bodies.  He stated that the presence
of security forces had destroyed the eco-fragile areas, which was wreaking
havoc on environment.  He also brought out that J&K does not have a disaster
management  authority and the government machinery evaporated into thin air
during September 2014 floods.
(x) Shri Nazir-be-Nazir stated that all wetlands had gone into oblivion and there was
an urgent need for plantation.   He further suggested that a solid waste
management plant with modern technology should be installed at Achan dumping
site where Srinagar Municipal Corporation was dumping garbage of entire
Srinagar city.
(xi) Dr. R. Kundangar stated that there was  no visible improvement in Dal
conservation as the basic proposals for conservation of Dal are faulty. A
Detailed Project Report (DPR) amounting to Rs. 199.00 Crores for conservation
of Dal Lake was framed and submitted to the Government of India, but the
same was pending for the last three years. He demanded expediting the same.
He further informed that three Sewerage Treatment Plants were defunct, as
chemicals required for functioning of these plants were not available because of
non-availability of funds with the LAWDA. He requested that an amount of Rs.
100 lakh may be sanctioned for maintenance of these defunct plants.
(xii) The representative of Kashmir Chamber of Commerce was of the view that
dredging work of water bodies should be taken up immediately so that water
carrying/holding capacity of these water bodies could be enhanced.  He also

4
requested for expediting the financial package of  Rs. 44000 crore to the State
Government by the Government of India so that compensation/relief could be
provided to the flood victims of  Kashmir Valley without any further loss of
time.  He pointed out that a partly some of Rs.3800/- was paid to those whose
houses had been damaged upto 90%.  It was also brought out that contractors
in Kashmir Valley, who had executed works after floods of September 2014,
have not received payments despite cheques issued by the Government
functionaries which were pending in various treasuries of Kashmir Valley due to
cash crunch.
(xiii) Shri Afaq Qadri stated the Central Government should issue a white paper for
cause of devastating floods in September 2014. He stated that no dredging has
been carried even after 8 months of the floods.  He was surprised when he
received Income Tax notices at a time when his office was in 20 feet deep
water.
4. Sympathizing with the people of Kashmir valley, the Chairman assured to take up the
issues with the concerned authorities.
5. On 25
th July 2015, the Committee visited some of the areas critically affected by floods
such as G.B. Pant Contentment General Hospital, Hotel Management Institute, Amar Singh
College, Craft Museum School of Designs, DAV Institute, Lal Chowk etc. and apprised itself
of the devastation caused due to the floods. The Committee also interacted with the local
populace at these places.  The Committee witnessed that some building and houses had been
thoroughly devastated by the floods and there were watermarks upto 12-15 feet on houses and
buildings.
6. Thereafter, the Committee met with the representatives of Union Ministries of
Environment Forests & Climate Change, Earth Sciences, India Meteorological Department,
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and local administration of Government of
J&K on unprecedented floods in Srinagar and failure of Warning and Forecasting of Floods
systems in the context of Climate Change and strengthening relief and rehabilitation work and
remedial/preventive measures.
7. Initiating the discussion, the Chairman stated that vagaries of weather, erratic and
unpredictable climatic behavior with discernible and debilitating impact on human life and
livelihood, has been manifesting at regular intervals.  He desired to know as to how far
ecological degradation caused by unplanned development and urbanization alongwith reckless
encroachment on the wetlands leading to shrinking of water bodies-wetlands, drainage
channels, etc. were responsible for the calamity in Kashmir. The Chairman also brought out
various issues raised by members of Civil Society/NGOs etc. before the Committee to the
notice of Chief Secretary, J&K and sought his response.
8. The Chief Secretary informed the Committee that State Government had issued warning
well in time to the people in the affected areas of Kashmir, Jammu and in some parts of

5
Ladakh Region through press, electronic media and various NGOs etc. but they had not
anticipated floods of such a gigantic magnitude. He added that almost all the people were
rescued and brought to the safer places.  He gave brief of the measures taken by the State
Government in providing timely relief /compensation to flood victims. The Chief Secretary
informed the Committee that relief has been provided to the flood victims in light of policy
framed by the State Government and according to the available resources and donation
received from various State Governments/NGOs and volunteers.  Replying to the Chairman’s
observation that business community have not been provided with any relief by the State
Government, the Chief Secretary informed the committee that there was no provision in the
existing rules wherein business community can be provided compensation. However, State
Government has framed a relief package of Rs. 44000 crores which had been submitted to
the Government of India for approval wherein provision for relief to the business community
has also been kept but sanction to the aforesaid relief package was pending with Government
of India. The Principal Secretary to Chief Minister, J&K informed the Committee that the
Chief Minister, accompanied a team of State Government Officers, to Delhi where it had
been assured by the Central Government that the package shall be processed for sanction at
the earliest. The Principal Secretary to the Chief Minister, Jammu and Kashmir also informed
the Committee that various Insurance Companies had also settled the insurance claims of
flood victims.
9. The Chairman desired that that State Government must come up with a short term
proposal which would be beneficial for providing immediate relief to the people who have not
got any type of relief / compensation.  In this regard, the Committee was informed that an
amount of Rs.75,000/- and Rs.1,00,000/- had been given to those whose house had been fully
damaged from State Disaster Relief Fund and Prime Minister Relief Fund respectively.  It was
also informed that with the representative of Government of India, World Bank had been roped
in to help in the housing sector.
10. The Chairman brought to the notice of State administration that Members of Civil
Society / NGOs, during interaction with the Committee, complained that garbage is being
dumped at Achan site and there is no provision of its scientific disposal. The Principal
Secretary to the Chief Minister informed the Committee that latest technology is in place at
Achan dumping site which has been designed by a reputed consultant engaged by Economic
Reconstruction Agency (ERA) and the said technology was functioning satisfactorily.  The
Chairman also raised the issue of non-functioning of three Sewerage Treatment Plants (STPs)
around the Dal Lake. The Vice Chairman, Lakes and Waterway Development Authority
(LAWDA) informed the Committee that Sewerage Treatment Plants were functioning
satisfactorily. He gave a brief account of various activities being carried out by the LAWDA
which includes dredging of Dal Lake and other water bodies, shifting of dislocated people from
Dal Lake, their rehabilitation in Rak-I-Arch and eviction of encroachments etc. The Divisional
Commissioner, informed the Committee that State Government has submitted a DPR amounting
to Rs.23000 crores to Central Water Commission, Government of India for conservation of Dal
Lake in the year 2006 approval of which was still awaited although all the observations raised

6
by the CWC have been replied by the State Government from time to time. The Committee
assured that the issue shall be taken up with the concerned Ministry in the Government of
India for its early approval.
11. Thereafter, the Chairman raised the issue of eight Cement factories in the suburbs of
Srinagar city. The Chairman, J&K State Pollution Control Board informed the Committee that
these Cement plants were located 13 Kms away from Srinagar city and have been installed in
Khrew area in distant past. Proper checking of pollution is being conducted by the Board
through its functionaries. It was also stated that some increase in pollution level was noticed
in summer months.
12. The Chairman also asked the Director General, Meteorological Department to intimate
the Committee whether any warning had been issued to the State Government in time. The
Director General, India Meteorological Department informed the Committee that they had issued
flood forecast warning on 6 th  September 2014 in Jammu and Kashmir through State
Government in view of unprecedented rains for the last so many days in Kashmir Valley and
in some Districts of Jammu and Ladakh Region.
13. Taking all the interaction in view, the Committee is of the opinion that action
on following points should be taken at the earliest to check the occurrence of similar
floods in J&K in future.
(i) Dredging/desilting of waterbodies should be undertaken on war-footing so
that carrying/holding capacity of their water bodies could be enhanced.
(ii) Old Drainage system of Srinagar should be replaced with new drainage
system that could cope up with future exigencies.
(iii) Central Govt. should sanction a suitable and adequate relief package to
the State Government and actively engage with the State Administration
to bring relief to the people.
(iv) The State Government should look into the issue of providing relief to
those people who have not got any type of relief/compensation.
(v) Compensation for partially/fully damaged houses should be suitably
revised.
(vi) Central Water Commission, Government of India should process the
Detailed Project Report submitted by the State Govt. for conservation of
Dal Lake expeditiously.
(vii) Effect of cement factories in Khrew area on environment should be
examined and a detailed project with all facts be prepared and submitted
to CPCB as well as the Committee.
(viii) Ministry of Earth Sciences and India Meteorological Department should
coordinate and integrate their effort with the State Govt. and ensure
timely warning and forecasting for such calamities particularly floods.

7
Leh
14. On 27 th May, 2015 at Leh, the Committee interacted with representatives of NGOs/Civil
Society Organisations and Deputy Commissioner of Leh and other officers of Ladakh
Autonomous Hill Development Council, Union Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate
Change regarding pollution control measures and effects of Climate Change.
 15. Initiating the discussion, the Chairman enquired about the environmental status of Leh
and Ladakh and pollution mitigation measures adopted in Leh as it was one of the most pristine
and ecologically sensitive part of the country. The Committee felt that pollution by growing
number of vehicles had been affecting Ladakh and Leh and the ever growing number of
tourists visiting the city are causing heaps of polybag and garbage all over the area. He desired
to know as to whether any time frame has been fixed for achieving the pollution mitigation
goals. Chairman invited representatives of civil society/NGOs to inform the Committee about
the issues of environmental pollution and effects of climate change being felt in Leh. A list of
Civil Society Organisations/NGOs is at Annexure II.
16. Thereafter, representatives of civil society/ NGOs made the following points before
the Committee:-
(i) There was selective and myopic approach to deal with ecological imbalances
in Leh.
(ii) Instead of targeting the tourists, a comprehensive well thought out action plan
should be devised to mitigate environmental pollution caused by tourists.
(iii) There was scarcity of water in the area and climate change had an adverse
impact on water scarcity, life stock and agriculture.
17. The Chairman emphasised that awareness among the general public about environmental
issues needs to be increased. Leh District had a fragile ecology and global warning was having
its effect on Leh too.
18. Thereafter, the Committee desired to know from the officers representing the local
administration, about the status of bio-medical waste, municipal solid waste, plastic waste
management etc. In response, the Committee was informed that Leh District was among top
tourist destination on the tourist map of India and during summers tourist influx is at its
peak. Therefore, the number of Hotels, Guest Houses, and Restaurants was growing. The
Committee was informed that the District Forests Officer, Leh acts as Nodal officer for JK
Pollution Control Board to have a check on the Development activities, growth of hotels etc.
As regards status of Bio-Medical Waste, Leh has 04 Health Care Facilities (HCFs) including
02 clinical laboratories catering to 360 beds and generating 240 Kgs/day of biomedical waste.
All the  04 HCFs have applied and have been granted authorisation under Bio-Medical Waste
(Management & Handling) Rules. No Common Bio-Medical Waste Treatment Facility exists in
Leh. Out of the 240 kgs/day bio-medical waste generated, 50 kg/day is incinerable, 40kg/day
is recyclable and 150kg/day is disposed via secured landfill. Only one on-site incinerator of
capacity 25kg/hr is available for waste treatment. In order to create awareness regarding the

8
need for proper handling of the infectious bio-medical waste, a training was organized in
collaboration with a team from CPCB.
19. Regarding status of Municipal Solid Waste, the Committee was informed that for the
collection of municipal solid waste, door to door collection mechanism is in place but
segregation of waste is not carried out. However, the recyclable segment of the waste was
collected manually by rag-pickers. Both the bio-degradable and non-bio-degradable waste are
stored in a single bin. Transportation of the waste is carried out by tippers and transported
to an open dumping site, as Leh does not have a designated engineered landfill site for the
disposal of the waste. Although, Leh District Master Plan in the year 2009 had earmarked a
land approx. 28 kms from leh for setting up of sanitary landfill site.
20. Regarding status of Plastic Waste Management, it was informed that to control the
menace of polythene carry bags and the other non-biodegradable products in the state, J&K
State Pollution Control Board presented a draft bill to the Government which was finally
enacted as J&K State Non-Biodegradable material (Management, Handling & Disposal) Act,
2007. Later, ban had been imposed on polythene carry bags under the said Act in 2008.
However, the enforcement of the Act became possible only after notification of J&K Non-Bio-
degradable (Management, Handling & Disposal) Rules in May, 2009. The Committee was also
informed that a proposal had been sent to State Pollution Control Board for monitoring of
Water Pollution by six new stations at Leh Nalla, Indus River, Pangong Lake, Tsomoriri Lake,
Niddar Nallah and Hunder Tokpo.
21. It was also informed that out of 23 stone crushers operating in Leh, 08 stone crushers
have been granted permission by the Pollution Control Board while notices were served to 13
operating illegally and closure order had been issued against 02. Further, under national Air
Quality Monitoring Programme (NAMP), 03 stations for Leh viz Leh, Zanskar and Nubra had
been sanctioned which were not operational.
22. Considering all the points, the Committee feels that to mitigate the
environmental pollution of Leh, action on following needs to be undertaken on
priority:-
(i) The State Government should constitute an expert group to study ways
and means to reconcile the growth of tourism in the district with the
imperatives of preserving the ecology.
(ii) Concerned municipal agencies must ensure that solid waste is disposed off
in a environmentally friendly manner.
(iii) Action is required to be taken for the setting up of a sanitary landfill for
disposal of municipal solid waste for which Leh District Master Plan 2009
had earmarked a land approximately 28 km from Leh.
(iv) Three stations under National Air Quality Monitoring Programme (NAMP)
for Leh i.e. Leh, Zanskar and Nubra, should be made  operational at the
earliest.

9
(v) The proposal for monitoring of Water Pollution by six new stations at
Leh Nalla, Indus River, Pangong Lake, Tsomoriri Lake, Niddar Nallah
and Hunder Tokpo should be taken up by the state pollution control
board on priority basis and decision conveyed to the Leh District
Administration.
Jammu
23. On 29
th May, 2015, the Committee held interaction with members of civil society,
NGOs and the concerned central and state govt. authorities on the problems of Tier-II cities
of J&K in general and Jammu in particular.
24. In the beginning, the Chairman highlighted that the pace and process of economic
growth has put environment under great stress. The need of the hour was to make
environment and development supplementary and complementary to each other in a way that
the two sustain each other. He stated that there were formidable environmental challenges such
as rising population, haphazard urbanisation, growing industrialisation, ever increasing number
of vehicles plying on the roads, depleting natural forest cover; inadequate facilities for disposal
of sewerage and solid waste, e-waste, biomedical waste, etc., which were common to all the
towns and cities and Jammu was no exception to it. He asked the representatives of civil
society organisations/NGOs to present their views on environmental problems in Jammu so that
the Committee could get a clear picture of actual state of affairs. A list of Civil Society
Organisations/NGOs is at Annexure- III.
25. The members of civil society organisation/NGOs raised a number of points, some of
which are as under:-
(i) Shri Bhushan Parimoo brought out that in Jammu, the forest cover was only
about 2.78%. He also stated that a large number of wetlands had shrunk and
the position seemed to be irreversible now.
(ii) Shri Om Prakesh Thakur stated that in Doda, areas which were once a jungle,
have transformed into industrial areas. The forestry and wildlife of these areas
has been destroyed.
(iii) Dr. Seth stated that attention should be paid for increasing the number of oak
trees and nurseries in the region.
(iv) The representatives of Tawi Bachao Andolan impressed upon the need for
creation of State Green Tribunal and Tawi Development Tribunal. He also
wanted bringing River Chenab under National River Conservation Plan. He
suggested plantation activities on both sides of the National Highway in a time
bound manner.
(v) Shri Vikram Gaur stated that residential areas had become commercial hubs in
the city and vehicular traffic mismanagement and increasing number of vehicles
were adding to the pollution. Disposal of medical waste was not being done

10
properly. He also stated that some areas near Jammu Railway station had
become dumping grounds.
(vi) Shri Anil Raina stressed upon the need for an action plan for saving River Tawi
which had become a dumping point for solid waste and debris. He stated that
there was a acute shortage of drinking water in Jammu. He wanted rain water
harvesting to be made compulsory for all.
(vii) Shri Rakesh Gupta, representative of Chamber of Commerce and Industry,
Jammu stated that the nallahs in the city had been encroached not only by
people but also by Govt agencies. He also alleged that nallah sites had been sold
by the govt for constructing shops there.
26. The Chairman raised the issue pertaining to encroachment on forest land in
compartment No.1 to 35 Ramban (Narparistan) of Ramban Forest Division falling under the
jurisdiction of Jammu region. The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests informed the
Committee that this forest land is on upper hills. Out of 317 hectares of forest land, 150 kanals
have been evicted. He further stated that eviction process shall be completed within a period
of five years. The Chairman asked the PCCF to come up with a time frame for eviction of
encroached forest land and asked if encroached land can be evicted within a period of three
months. He desired that the reply from the PCCF should reach the Committee through Chief
Secretary, J&K in the shortest possible time.
27. The Department of Forests, Environment and Ecology, Government of Jammu &
Kashmir, vide letter dated 29
th June, 2015, forwarded a Status report on the ‘Forests of Neel,
Pougal and Paristan areas of Ramban Forest Division’, which also contains a revised proposal
on eviction of encroachment and rehabilitation of degraded forests. The proposal shall be taken
up in two phases, in which 1000 Hectares shall be treated in each phase. The first phase has
been proposed from 2015-16 to 2019-20 at the cost of Rs. 509.60 Lakh. A copy of the status
note received from Government of Jammu & Kashmir is at Annexure-IV .
28. The Committee feels that action on following points needs to be taken to
mitigate the environmental pollution of Jammu:-
(i) Afforestation process not only to bridge the gap between the plantation
and trees that are being cut but also to increase the forest areas needs
to be taken up in the entire city on war-footing.
(ii) Nurseries should be set up on large scale to meet the requirement of
saplings.
(iii) Action against encroachment of forest land should be intensified and there
should be strict enforcement of laws in this regard.
(iv) The concerned agencies should mobilise the resources for cleaning of river
Tawi and immediate action should be taken for the removal of waste on
the river bed.

11
(v) Solid waste management plan should be incorporated in the Master Plan
to cater to increasing requirement.
(vi) Master plan should have provision for green spaces and parks.
(vii) Noise pollution should be tackled effectively.
(viii) Ef fective steps be taken for disposal of waste at Mata Vasihno Devi Yatra
and Amarnath Yatra and an effective mechanism should be put in place to
ensure that the ecology of the area was not disturbed.
(ix) Environment should be introduced as a compulsory subject in schools to
create awareness.
(x) Time frame devised for eviction of encroached forest land in Ramban
Forest Division should be strictly adhered to.
Pathankot
29. On 29
th May 2015, the Committee visited Pathankot and discussed problems of Tier-
II cities of Punjab in general and Pathankot in particular with members of Civil Society
Organisations/NGOs and local representatives and representatives of Government bodies and
local authorities. A list of Civil Society Organisations/NGO is at Annexure-V .
30. In the meeting, the Chairman emphasised upon the need for sustainable development
without any adverse impact on environment. He stated that the Committee was visiting
Pathankot to discuss various issues regarding water, air and noise pollution and haphazard
growth, sewage treatment and solid water disposal.  V oicing major concern of the public in
Pathankot regarding pollution caused by disposal of debris, lack of greeneries, walking spaces
and traffic management, he emphasised that there was an urgent need to take necessary and
purposive measures.  He further elaborated that Pathankot had become an open dump for
Municipal Solid Waste, which could be found scattered throughout the city. The railway lines
and open spaces are full of malba and garbage. No open spaces were available for walking for
people living in the city. He also stated that noise pollution through high volume horns in
vehicles and in marriage palaces and other social functions is big source of environmental
pollution.  He emphasised that population in urban areas in the country was likely to double
by 2040 and if the infrastructure was not developed, the whole system would collapse.
31. Thereafter, the representatives of civil society/NGOs presenting their views raised a
number of issues pertaining to the environmental and urban problems of Pathankot.  Some of
the important views expressed are as under:-
(i) The representative of Nari Shakti Sangathan stated that the roads of Pathankot
are covered with dust, no one can walk and people suffer from the problem of
heart and lungs. Roads and streets are full of garbage. Because of smell
emanating from the garbage, people suffer from many diseases. The material
used the in the construction of roads was not upto the mark and only 25-30%

12
of the funds received from the Punjab Govt. and Central Govt. were used.
Another representative of the organisation expressed apprehension that tower
installed by V odafone might be causing cancer in the area. Drawing attention to
the problem of cleanliness in the area, she stated that the sweepers do not
perform their duties.
(ii) The representative  of  Beopar  Mandal stated that vehicles causing pollution
should be challaned as smoke from vehicles was a big problem, especially near
school and colleges.
(iii) The representative of  Paryas Sanstha highlited that 17 people had been injured
and 07 people died due to attack by stray animals. His organisation was fighting
for environment protection and nandishala for providing shelter to stray bulls.
He stated that inspite of meetings with the district administration, no solution
for the problem had come out.
(iv) Shri Gopal Mahajan, Ex-M.C. stated that the major problem of Pathankot was
drainage system. During rainy season, Pathankot gets submerged in rainy water.
He also informed that more than 6000 auto rickshaws were plying on road and
whereas only 300-400 had been registered with District Transport Authority.
(v) Shri Raman Bhalla, Ex-Minister also highlighted the problems of sewerage and
traffic congestions. He stated that the sewerage system was laid down 20-25
years ago.  With the passage of time and with the blockages, the sewerage
system has become a house of mouses who were eroding the soil with the
result that the level of soil was going down. He also brought out that there
were no parks or path for pedestrian morning or evening walk.
(vi) Shri Ashok Sharma, Ex-M.L.A. stated that the concerned Govt. departments and
the Punjab Pollution Control Board (PPCB) were not keen towards the
environment and pollution control in the area. The environment was degrading
because of stone crusher industry and hotel industry and the forest cover had
depleted in the last 40 years. He also stated that a place for dumping carcasses
in residential area within the centre of the city was the major cause for many
diseases. However, no action had been taken inspite of repeated requests to the
district administration to shift the place.
(vii) Shri M. Furkan Imam, a Maulvi stated that during the rainy season, the storm
water flows towards the Hirra Masjid inundating the area along old road,
making it difficult for people to go to Masjid and offer Namaz.
(viii) Smt. Raj Kumari, Sarpanch of a village stated that polythenes were not banned
in Punjab, which were the major cause of pollution and caused many diseases.
She also drew attention to the problem of toilets in her village since only 30
toilets had been constructed and 1000 more were required to be constructed.
She further apprised that there was no sweeper in her village because no grant

13
from the Central/State Govt. was available for paying the salary to the sweepers
as a result of which solid waste was not being lifted. She also stated that the
overloading of trucks carrying crusher was another problem which was causing
asthma to many people.
(ix) The representative of Senior Citizen Association stated that a narrow gauge train
runs from Pathankot which results into traffic jam and a source of loss of
diesel and pollution caused by vehicles as there is no overbridge/underpass for
crossing the road. He also suggested that the halting of trains should be shifted
near the Chakki bridge.
32. The Committee then interacted with the representatives of various government bodies
and local authorities on the points raised by various members of civil society etc.  The
Chairman stated that the purpose of the visit was to find concrete solutions to the problems
of the people and to understand problem and find solution enquired about the forest cover area
of the state.  It was informed that the forest cover of the state was about 1%.  The
Conservator of Forests, Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change stated that trees
which are food bearing should be identified and planted to increase the forest cover.
33. As regards the sewerage system, the Committee was informed by Chief Engineer,
PWSSB that there were three disposal points for discharge of treated domestic effluent of
Pathankot City, of which two disposal points shall be made functional by 31-08-2015 for
discharge of treated domestic effluent of Pathankot City and the third disposal point shall be
made operational only after getting clearance from Railway Authorities, Govt. of India.
Regarding solid waste management project, the Committee was informed by the Mayor,
Pathankot that a solid waste management project was proposed to be set up in and around
Pathankot. Land has been identified at Deriwal village. Final steps for identification were in
progress and within next one month, collection points for garbage would be identified. The
Chairman desired that the garbage should be removed from the city at the earliest and report
be sent to the Committee. As regards the place for dumping carcasses, the Committee was
informed by the concerned authorities that a case had been filed against the culprits and the
Deputy Commissioner will take action against them.
34. Taking into consideration the views expressed and information received, the
Committee feels that to mitigate the environmental pollution of Pathankot, action on
following points should be taken at the earliest:
(i) Deputy Commissioners of Pathankot and Gurdaspur should from a citizens
Committee under their chairmanship to take care of environmental issues
such as cleanliness, menace of stray animals, wastes, garbage, cleaning of
roads and streets and removal of debris etc. and the meetings of the
Committee should be convened frequently.
(ii) Problem of excreta of animals like camel, buffaloes, cows, horses, etc. on
roads needs to be tackled by involving municipal authorities and citizens

14
and strict and better enforcement of provisions regarding stray animals
for disposal of excreta discharged by the animals, concerned municipal
authorities should chalk out a plan.
(iii) The issue of providing shelter to stray bulls in Nandishala should be
resolved.
(iv) Dairies should be shifted outside the city. The Commissioner, Municipal
Corporation, Pathankot should submit a comprehensive report/plan
urgently.
(v) The existing site for dumping carcasses should be shifted elsewhere
outside at the earliest.  Chairman, PPCB should prepare a report
regarding handling of carcasses at the earliest.
(vi) For smooth functioning of public transport, Deputy Commissioner,
Pathankot may devise a mechanism to effectively enforce the law against
unlawful plying of autos.
(vii) Unauthorized vehicles, auto rickshaws, should be banned as they are a big
source of pollution.
(viii) Provision to provide more parks, path for pedestrians/morning or evening
walkers should be explored, planned and executed in a time bound
manner.
(ix) The problems of drainage system and the resultant menace of mice in
Pathankot during rainy season be resolved expeditiously.
(x) Govt. of Punjab, Department of Forest should send a proposal to Govt. of
India for getting funds under Green India Mission to increase forest cover
in Pathankot.
(xi) Deputy Commissioner, Pathankot should find a solution to the problem of
the Hirra Masjid inundating during rainy season.
(xii) Providing more toilets, sweepers in villages by getting grant from the
Central/State Govt. should be explored. Provisions regarding dust emitted
during transportation of crusher material in overloaded trucks of crusher
needs to be enforced.
(xiii) To solve the problem of traffic jam in the city at Chakki crossing, the
District Authorities should take up the matter with Railway authorities to
shift the halting point of trains near the Chakki bridge.
(xiv) Deputy Commissioner, Pathankot in consultation with Sewerage Board
should initiate action for getting funds from the Govt. of Punjab to
enhance the capacity for sewerage system.

15
(xv) The Chief Engineer, PWSSB should ensure other alternatives of two
disposal points of Sewage Treatment Plant functional by 31.08.2015 for
discharge of treated domestic effluent of Pathankot City.
(xvi) Deputy Commissioner, Pathankot should initiate action for clearance from
Railway Authorities to make the third disposal point functional.
(xvii) Chairman, PPCB should make provision regarding removal of garbage in
Pathankot City at the earliest.
(xviii) Govt. of Punjab shall work out a policy to ban polythene bags in Punjab,
which are a major cause of pollution and cause many diseases.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS— AT A GLANCE
1. Taking all the interaction in view, the Committee is of the opinion that action
on following points should be taken at the earliest to check the occurrence of similar
floods in J&K in future.
(i) Dredging/desilting of water bodies should be undertaken on war-footing so
that carrying/holding capacity of their water bodies could be enhanced.
(ii) Old Drainage system of Srinagar should be replaced with new drainage
system that could cope up with future exigencies.
(iii) Central Govt. should sanction a suitable and adequate relief package to
the State Government and actively engage with the State Administration
to bring relief to the people.
(iv) The State Government should look into the issue of providing relief to
those people who have not got any type of relief/compensation.
(v) Compensation for partially/fully damaged houses should be suitably
revised.
(vi) Central Water Commission, Government of India should process the
Detailed Project Report submitted by the State Govt. for conservation of
Dal Lake expeditiously.
(vii) Effect of cement factories in Khrew area on environment should be
examined and a detailed project with all facts be prepared and submitted
to CPCB as well as the Committee.
(viii) Ministry of Earth Sciences and India Meteorological Department
should Coordinate and integrate their effort with the State Govt. and
ensure timely warning and forecasting for such calamities particularly
floods. (Para 13)
2. Considering all the points, the Committee feels that to mitigate the
environmental pollution of Leh, action on following needs to be undertaken on priority:-
(i) The State Government should constitute an expert group to study ways
and means to reconcile the growth of tourism in the district with the
imperatives of preserving the ecology.
(ii) Concerned municipal agencies must ensure that solid waste is disposed off
in a environmentally friendly manner.
(iii) Action is required to be taken for the setting up of a sanitary landfill for
disposal of municipal solid waste for which Leh District Master Plan 2009
had earmarked a land approximately 28 km from Leh.
16

(iv) Three stations under National Air Quality Mounting Programme (NAMP)
for Leh i.e. Leh, Zanskar and Nubra, should be made operational at the
earliest.
(v) The proposal for monitoring of Water Pollution by six new stations at
Leh Nalla, Indus River, Pangong Lake, Tsomoriri Lake, Niddar Nallah
and Hunder Tokpo should be taken up by the state pollution control
board on priority basis and decision conveyed to the Leh District
Administration. (Para 22)
3. The Committee feels that action on following points needs to be taken to
mitigate the environmental pollution of Jammu:-
(i) Afforestation process not only to bridge the gap between the plantation
ana trees that are being cut but also to increase the forest areas needs
to be taken up in the entire city on war-footing.
(ii) Nurseries should be set up on large scale to meet the requirement of
saplings.
(iii) Action against encroachment of forest land should be intensified and there
should be strict enforcement of laws in this regard.
(iv) The concerned agencies should mobilise the resources for cleaning of river
Tawi and immediate action should be taken for the removal of waste on
the river bed.
(v) Solid waste management plan should be incorporated in the Master Plan
to cater to increasing requirement.
(vi) Master plan should have provision for green spaces and parks.
(vii) Noise pollution should be tackled effectively.
(viii) Ef fective steps be taken for disposal of waste at Mata Vasihno Devi Yatra
and Amarnath Yatra and an effective mechanism should be put in place to
ensure that the ecology of the area was not disturbed.
(ix) Environment should be introduced as a compulsory subject in schools to
create awareness.
(x) Time frame devised for eviction of encroached forest land in Ramban
Forest Division should be strictly adhered to. (Para 28)
4. Taking into consideration the views expressed and information received, the
Committee feels that to mitigate the environmental pollution of Pathankot, action on
following points should be taken at the earliest:
(i) Deputy Commissioners of Pathankot and Gurdaspur should from a citizens
Committee under their chairmanship to take care of environmental issues
such as cleanliness, menace of stray animals, wastes, garbage, cleaning of
17

18
roads and streets and removal of debris etc. and the meetings of the
Committee should be convened frequently.
(ii) Problem of excreta of animals like camel, buffaloes, cows, horses, etc. on
roads needs to be tackled by involving municipal authorities and citizens
and strict and better enforcement of provisions regarding stray animals
for disposal of excreta discharged by the animals, concerned municipal
authorities should chalk out a plan.
(iii) The issue of providing shelter to stray bulls in Nandishala should be
resolved.
(iv) Dairies should be shifted outside the city. The Commissioner, Municipal
Corporation, Pathankot should submit a comprehensive report/plan
urgently.
(v) The existing site for dumping carcasses should be shifted elsewhere
outside at the earliest. Chairman, PPCB should prepare a report regarding
handling of carcasses at the earliest.
(vi) For smooth functioning of public transport, Deputy Commissioner,
Pathankot may devise a mechanism to effectively enforce the law against
unlawful plying of autos.
(vii) Unauthorized vehicles, auto rickshaws, should be banned as they are a big
source of pollution.
(viii) Provision to provide more parks, path for pedestrians/morning or evening
walkers should be explored, planned and executed in a time bound manner.
(ix) The problems of drainage system and the resultant menace of mice in
Pathankot during rainy season be resolved expeditiously.
(x) Govt. of Punjab, Department of Forest should send a proposal to Govt. of
India for getting funds under Green India Mission to increase forest cover
in Pathankot.
(xi) Deputy Commissioner, Pathankot should find a solution to the problem of
the Hirra Masjid inundating during rainy season.
(xii) Providing more toilets, sweepers in villages by getting grant from the
Central/State Govt. should be explored. Provisions regarding dust emitted
during transportation of crusher material in overloaded trucks of crusher
needs to be enforced.
(xiii) To solve the problem of traffic jam in the city at Chakki crossing, the
District Authorities should take up the matter with Railway authorities to
shift the halting point of trains near the Chakki bridge.
(xiv) Deputy Commissioner, Pathankot in consultation with Sewerage Board
should initiate action for getting funds from the Govt. of Punjab to
enhance the capacity for sewerage system.

19
(xv) The Chief Engineer, PWSSB should ensure other alternatives of two
disposal points of Sewage Treatment Plant functional by 31.08.2015 for
discharge of treated domestic effluent of Pathankot City.
(xvi) Deputy Commissioner, Pathankot should initiate action for clearance from
Railway Authorities to make the third disposal point functional.
(xvii) Chairman, PPCB should make provision regarding removal of garbage in
Pathankot City at the earliest.
(xviii) Govt. of Punjab shall work out a policy to ban polythene bags in Punjab,
which are a major cause of pollution and cause many diseases. (Para 34)

MINUTES

XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 21 st July, 2015 in Room No. ‘67’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
2. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Shri Bhupinder Singh
LOK SABRA
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapshinh Chauhan
7. Kum. Sushmita Dev
8. Shri Ninong Ering
9. Shri Laxman Giluwa
10. Shri Daddan Mishra
11. Shri Nana Patole
12. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
13. Shri Nagendra Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed
them that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft *** 267 th reports on
*** ‘Unprecedented Floods in Srinagar and Warning and Forecasting of Floods and
Environmental Issues in Leh, Jammu and Pathankot’, respectively.
23
*** Relates to other matters

3. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the 266 th and 26 th reports. The
Committee also decided to present/lay its 265 th, 266 th and 26 th reports to both the Houses of
Parliament on 23 rd July, 2015.
4 . *                                  *                                  *
5. The Committee authorized the Chairman to seek necessary permission from the Hon’ble
Chairman, Rajya Sabha for the said study visit and also for interaction with the State
Government and other concerned authorities.
6. The meeting of the Committee, then, adjourned at 3.45 P.M.
*** Relates to other matters
24

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE -I
Civil Society organisations/NGOs and individuals present at
meeting of the Committee in Srinagar on 24.5.2015
1. Ms. Maria Hearty
2. Ms. Shahala Ali Sheikh
3. Ms. Jyoti Singh
4. Shri Vijay Dhar
5. Justice (Retd.) Muzaffar Hussain Jan
6. Shri Javeed Makhdoomi (Retired PSC member)
7. Shri. Mohammed Ishaq Qadri (Ex-Advocate General)
8. Shri A.R. Wani (Retired Principal Chief Conservator of Forests)
9. Shri Parveez Koul (Principal, Tyandle Bisco School)
10. Shri Mohammed Shafi Pandit (Ex-Member PSC)
11. Shri Shakeel Qalender (KCSDS)
12. Shri Nazir-be-Nazir
13. Dr. Kundangar
14. Shri Mohammed Ashraf Mir
15. Shri Afaq Qadri
27

ANNEXURE -II
NGOs represented at meeting of the Committee in Leh on 27.5.2015
1. Ladakh Ecological Development Group (LEDeG)
2. Leh Nutrition Project (LNP)
3. Leh ecological and Health Organisation (LEHO)
4. Ladakh Women Alliance (LW A)
28

ANNEXURE -III
Civil Society Organisations/NGOs and Individuals present at
meeting of the Committee in Jammu on 29.5.2015
1. Shri Bhushan Parimoo
2. Shri Om Prakesh Thakur
3. Dr. Seth
4. Tawi Bachao Andolan
5. Shri Vikram Gaur
6. Sh. Anil Raina
7. Shri Rakesh Gupta
8. Shri D.P. Khajuria
29

ANNEXURE -IV
Status report on Forests of Neel, Pogul and Paristan Catchments
falling in Ramban Forest Division.
The Neel, Pogul and Paristan catchments form a part of Ramban Forest Range of
Ramban Forest Division. The forest compartments from l/Rbn to 35/Rbn fall in these
catchments. The topography of these catchments includes low lying flat areas as well as
sloppy areas having moderate to steep slopes. The forests are confined to upper reaches and
sloppy areas.
Location: These catchments fall between 75°14’00.56" E and 75°19’53" E (Latitude) and
33°24’47.98" Nand 33°20’04.06" N (Longitude). The elevation of the area
varies from 1117 Mtr (msl) at Magarkote to 4070 Mtr (msl) at the highest point
in compartment No. 22/Rbn.
Neel Catchment
30

Forest Area: The total forest area falling in compartment No. l/Rbn to 35/Rbn is 13616 Ha.
Out of this forest area 3745 Ha is degraded. The compartment wise detail is
as follows.
Comptt. Area ( in Ha) Degraded area (in Ha)
12 3
1 426 277
2a 232 112
2b 128 40
3 351 85
4 335 70
5 480 371
6 470 170
7 198 33
8 254 73
9 305 40
10 201 0
11 65 19
12 133 16
13a 295 55
13b 470 275
14 392 174
15 717 326
16 507 102
17a 176 42
17b 206 10
18 313 70
19a 124 28
31

32
19b 17 2
20 345 11
21 742 162
22 620 227
23a 165 0
23b 550 70
24 656 224
25a 222 31
25b 300 84
26 590 95
27a 185 50
27b 290 17
28 280 7
29 205 20
30 220 10
31 130 12
32 252 0
32a 154 30
32b 110 12
34a 380 80
34b 75 3
35 350 210
TOTAL 13616 3745
12 3

33
Vegetation: The main coniferous species existing in these catchments are deodar, kail, fir
and spruce. At a few locations Taxus baccala is also found existing. The
common broad leaved species found in the area include aesculus indica, Alnus
nitida, Quercus species, Prunus padus & Ulmus wallichiana. Commonly found
bushes are viburnun species, Rosa moschata and Barberis species. The higher
reaches of these catchments have green meadows. The area above tree line
remains snow clad for the maximum period during the year.
Paristan Catchment
Human and Cattle Population:
As per Census report of 2011 human population of Neel, Pogul and Paristan
catclm1ents is 28,300 whereas the cattle population of these areas is 25700. On
an average 0.5 Ha forest area is available per person and 0.53 Ha forest area
is available per cattle. Practically, it is quite less than these figures because the
uncommercial and inaccessible forest areas of these catchments are not
available to human as well as cattle population. This indicates the degree of
biotic pressure on the forest areas. The village/location-wise hun1an and cattle
population is given as follows.

34
Sl.No. V illagelLocality Human Population Cattle Population
1. Harodi 2500 3000
2. Partridar 1500 2000
3 J aradi 1200 3000
4 Suranga/Ladand har 1500 1000
5 Batao 3000 1200
6 Bohardhar 1200 1000
7 Dhanmast/Dhak 700 500
8 Maligam 4000 2000
9 Pogul 3000 3000
10 Senapati/Paristan 3000 3000
11 Bhangara 2000 2500
12 Fagmulla 1500 1500
13 Ukhral 1200 1000
14 Khoda Magerkote 2000 1000
TOTAL 28300 25700
Present Status of the Forests:-
With the increase in human population as well as cattle population the forests
of these catchments have come under tremendous biotic pressure. Not only
this, the forests of these catchments have also borne the brunt of militancy.
During the militancy period the forest areas of these catchments along with
other forest areas of Chenab Valley remained inaccessible which resulted in poor
control of the field staff over the forests. This coupled with increasing biotic
pressure has led to damages to the forests. These damages are visible in the
form of unauthorized removal of trees, especially during the militancy period,
and encroachments on certain portions of the forest land. As per the available
data 6359 Kanals (318 Ha) of forest land have been encroached upon in the
aforementioned forest compartments. At certain locations soil erosion has also
occurred. Incessant rains and snow avalanches have caused landslides in
different areas over the past few years.

35
Issues of concern:
The Forest Department is grappling with the following issues as on today.
i. Prevention of illegal removal of trees:
With the growing demand of timber due to increase in human population there
has been a tremendous pressure on the forests for timber and firewood. At
times people resort to unauthorized felling and removal of trees from the forests
to meet their requirements. This is becoming difficult to deal with because of
unwieldy beats/blocks and inadequate man power.
ii. Removal of encroachments:
Encroachment removal is another uphill task for the department in view of
increasing demand for the land resource.
iii. Rehabilitation of degraded forests:
It is an important aspect of forest management/development. About 27% of
the forest area is degraded in the aforementioned catchments. Rehabilitation of
these degraded forests is also not that easy in view of topography, distance
from road head, refractory edaphic conditions in certain areas and unfavorable
weather at times.
Steps taken by the Department so far:
Though inadequacy of funds and field staff has been an impediment, the
department hastried its best to address the above mentioned issues within
available human/financial resources. Following measures have been taken by the
department so far.
i. Afforestation:
An area of 208 Ha has been brought under plantation under various schemes
like State Plan, District Plan and CAMPA during the last 5 years.
ii. Prevention of damage to the forest crop:
Sincere efforts are being made to prevent illegal removal of trees from the
forests. The field staff do frequent rounds of their respective areas of
responsibility. On detection of a damage case, immediate action is taken as
required under rules. During the last few years 59 damage cases have been
booked and 500 cft of illegal timber has been seized/confiscated.
iii. Eviction of encroachers:
The Forest Department has initiated action to prevent/remove encroachment of
the forest land. During the last 2 years 155 Kanals of forest land has been
retrieved.

36
Measures proposed for future:
To treat the degraded forest areas and prevent! remove the encroachment of forest
land, effective steps are required to be taken. Demarcation work and removal of
encroachments has to be undertaken by the Forest Department with the assistance of Revenue
and Police Department. The development works shall be executed with the involvement of
people of the area as people participation is important for sustainable management and
development of forests. Accordingly, following measures are proposed to be undertaken in the
aforementioned catchment.
i. Demarcation and removal of encroachments:
The old boundary pillars are either damaged or missing’. To make the boundary
line clearly visible on ground, recently approved newly designed boundary pillars
have to be erected in place of the old ones. This is possible only after carrying
out demarcation of the forest land. The main boundary line of the forests of
these catchments consists of 304 boundary pillars. The boundary line around
the Chaks has 1265 boundary pillars. All these boundary pillars are to be erected
afresh in order to have newly designed Boundary Pillars in place. expenditure
of Rs. 70.70 lacs.
After carrying out the demarcation, encroachment on the forest land would
become clearly visible and accordingly the eviction process would’ ‘be initiated.
As on today, record indicates encroachment on 318 Ha of forest land in Neel,
Pogul and Paristan catchments. It is proposed to retrieve this encroached forest
land within a period of 5 years. After removal of encroachments, the retrieved
area would be fenced followed by plantation of coniferous and broad leaved
plants. The fencing of and plantation in the retrieved forest area would involve
an expenditure of Rs. 90.70 lacs.
Monitoring of demarcation works and encroachment removal:
As the demarcation work and subsequent removal of encroachments requires assistance
of Revenue and Police Department, it is proposed to have following monitoring committees for
the above said purpose.
a. District Level Monitoring Committee:
The District Level Monitoring Committee is proposed to be headed by Deputy
Commissioner Ramban with SSP Ramban as its member and Divisional Forest
Officer Ramban Forest Division as member secretary.
b. Provincial Level Monitoring Committee:
The Provincial Level Committee is proposed to be headed by Divisional
Commissioner Jammu with IGP Jammu Zone as its member and Chief
Conservator of Forests Jammu as its member secretary.

37
ii. Rehabilitation of Degraded Forests:
The record shows that 3745 Ha of forest area is degraded in the aforementioned
compartments which includes very steep/difficult area in the upper most.
reaches of the compartments as well besides the snow-clad peaks. Therefore,
practically about 2000 Ha of degraded forest area only is treatable. It is
proposed to rehabilitate the treatable degraded forest area in two phases of 5
years each i.e. phase- I from 2015-16 to 2019-20 and phase-
ii ITom 2020-21 to 2025-26. In Phase-I 1,000 Ha of degraded forest area is
proposed to be treated. Annually about 200 Ha of degraded forest area will be
treated. The above said target shall be achieved by incurring an expenditure of
Rs. 320.00 lacs in 5 years. Rehabilitation of degraded forests would involve
fencing of the area being treated, plantation of conifers/broad leaved species in
the fenced area and minor soil/moisture conservation works. Treatment to the
degraded forest areas will be given in two ways - i) by assisting the natural
regeneration (ANR) of the indigenous species to get established and ii) by
promoting artificial regeneration (AR) of the indigenous species. Apart from
this, silvi- pasture development is also proposed to be a component of
rehabilitation programme in certain areas adjacent to habitation where demand
for forage/fodder is high and people meet their fodder requirement substantially
from forest areas.
iii. Soil Conservation measures:
Soil conservation measures are proposed to be carried out in landslide lerosion
prone areas of the aforementioned compartments. The landslides have taken
place at various locations in the forest areas of aforesaid catchments which
need to be treated! arrested. The soil conservation measures to be undertaken
in such areas would involve mechanical method and vegetative method. In
mechanical method gabionic structures, retaining walls and check dams would
be constructed at appropriate places in the eroded areas, whereas vegetative
method entails plantation of soil binding species in the inter check dams/inter
retaining walls/inter gabionic structures spaces. The soil conservation works
would involve a financial implication of Rs. 28.20 lacs in the 1st phase.
Landslide in Co.30/Rbn.

38
The total project cost is estimated to be Rs.509.60 lacs. Statement showing
year:-wise physical and financial targets from 2015-16 to 2019-20 is enclosed
as annexure-A to this report. The requisite funds shall be arranged by pooling
the resources under different schemes.
Steps to be taken immediately:
The process of demarcation, encroachment removal and rehabilitation of degraded
forests has to be started in a well planned and resulted oriented manner. It is deemed proper
to start this process from Paristan catchment and conclude it in Neel catchment. Therefore,
first compartment to be dealt with would be compartment No. 35/Rbn falling in Paristan
catchment and last compartment to be treated would be compartment No. l/Rbn falling in the
Neel catchment. Accordingly, it is proposed to undertake the following works in compartment
No. 35/Rbn to begin with.
i) Demarcation work and removal of encroachment: d
As per record total forest area of this compartment is 350 Ha, out of which
about 13 Ha is under encroachment. The demarcation work would involve
survey of main boundary line and chak boundary line. 100 main line and chak
line boundary pillars are proposed to be erected in compartment No. 35/Rbn
which would involve an expenditure of Rs. 4.50 lacs.
ii) Treatment of retrieved forest land:
Encroachment on 13 Ha of forest land in Co.35/Rbn shall be removed. The
retrieved forest land shall be treated as given in the following table.
iii) Rehabilitation of degraded forests: It is proposed to treat the entire degraded
area of 210 ha of this compartment. The activity wise details and financial
implication is as follows.
Sl.No. Activity Physical targets Rate per  unit Financial implication
12 3 4 5
1 Area 210 Ha - -
2 Demarcation work 100 BPs Rs. 4500IBp 4.50
Rehabilitation of
degraded forests.
a) Fencing 63000 rft Rs. 51.00/rft 32.13
3 b) Planting of PB plants 50000 plants Rs. 21.29/p1ant 10.64
c) Planting of NR plants 75000 plants Rs. 14.32/plant 10.74
Treatment of retrieved
forest land.

39
 4 a) Area 13 Ha
b) Fencing of PB 3900 rft Rs 51.00/rft 2.00
c) Planting of NR plants 4000 plants Rs 21.29/plant 0.85
d) Planting of NR plants 5000 plants Rs 14.32/plant 0.72
   T OTAL Say 62.00 Lacs.
The proposed outlay for 2015-16 is Rs. 100.24 Lac. To begin with Rs. 62.00 lac for the
above given works programme are earmarked under CAMP A and proposal for the
balance amount ofRs. 38.24 Lac shall be prepared separately.
Sd/-Divisional Forest Officer, Ramban Forest Division
12 3 4 5

ANNEXURE -A
Statement showing Year-wise physical and financial targets
  2015-16    2016-17    2017-18   2018-19   2019-20  Total Fin.
  2015-16
Activity Phy. Fin. Phy. Fin. Phy. Fin. Phy. Fin. Phy. Fin. Phy. Fin.
(Rs.in (Rs.in (Rs.in (Rs.in (Rs.in (Rs.in
lacs) lacs) lacs) lacs) lacs) lacs)
Demarcation work. 300 BPs 13.50 320 BPs 14.40 320 BPs 14.40 320 BPs 14.40 309 BPs 14.00 1569 BPs 70.70
Rehabilitation of 200 Ha. 64.00 200 Ha. 64.00 200 Ha. 64.00 200 Ha. 64.00 200 Ha. 64.00 1000 Ha. 320.001
degraded forest area.
Fencing and plantation 60 Ha. 17.10 60 Ha. 17.10 60 Ha. 17.10 60 Ha. 17.10 78 Ha. 22.30 318 Ha. 90.70
in forest land, to be retrieved.
Soil Conservation 1000 CU.m 5.64 1000 CU.m 5.64 1000 CU.m 5.64 1000 CU.m 5.64 1000 CU.m 5.64 5000 CU.m 28.20
measures.
TOTAL - 100.24 - 101.14 - 101.14 - 101.14 - 105.94 - 509.60
Sd/-
Divisional Forest Officer
 Ramban Forest Division
40

ANNEXURE -V
Civil Society Organisations/NGOs and Individuals present at meeting of the
Committee in Pathankot on 29.5.2015
1. Shri Sham Chadha, Senior Citizen Association
2. Smt. Inderjit Kaur Ahuja, Senior Citizen Association
3. Shri Bawa, Beopar Mandal
4. Shri Raja Julka, Prayas
5. Shri Gopal Mahajan, Ex-M.C.
6. Shri Raman Bhalla, Ex-Minister
7. Shri Ashok Sharma, Ex-MLA
8. Shri M. Furkan Imam, Heera Masjid
9. Smt. Raj Kumari, Sarpanch
10. Shri Swaraj Singh Noorpuri, Senior Citizen Association
11. Shri Ashwani Puri Toni, Hotel Association
41

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.