 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND         
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2023/ Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-2024) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH  
(DEMAND NO. 91) 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 15thMarch, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th March, 2023) 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
375 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2023-2024) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH 
 (DEMAND NO. 91) 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 15th March, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th March, 2023) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2023/ Phalguna, 1944 (Saka) 

 
C O N T E N T S 
  
      
  PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION  (ii) 
 3. ACRONYMS  
 
(iii) 
4. REPORT 1-12 
5 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 13-15 
6. MINUTES 16-19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
 

                                       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2022-23) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh -    Chairman 
 
         RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi  
4. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
6. Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
7. Shri Jose K. Mani 
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
9. Shri Nabam Rebia   
10. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  
         LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
13. Shri Jashwantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
14. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
15. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16. Shri Sunny Deol 
17. Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
18. Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
19. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
20. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
21. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
22. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
23. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
24. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
25. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha  
26. Shri Anurag Sharma 
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
28. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
29. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava  
30. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
31. *Vacant 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 
      Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
      Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
Shri Thangzasiam Paite, Committee Officer 
              Shri Rama Nand, Committee Officer 
 
* Shri S. Jagathrakshakan ceased to be the Member of the Committee w.e.f. 8th December, 2022 
  
 
 
 
 
(i) 

 
 
INTRODUCTION  
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change , having  been 
authorised by the Committee , present this ‘Three Hundred Seventy Fifth Report’ on 
Demands for Grants (2023-2024) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
 
2.   The Committee considered the Demands for Grants (2023 -24) pertaining to the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research in its meeting held on the 22nd February, 
2023. It held detai led discussion with t he Secretary and other officers of the Department 
of Scientific and Industrial Research.   
  
3.   The Committee expresses it’s thanks to the officers of the Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research  for providing the material an d information, to enable it 
to examine the Demands for Grants of the Department for the year 2023-24. 
 
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the   
14th March, 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 (JAIRAM RAMESH) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
14th March, 2023  Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
Phalguna 23, 1944 (Saka)                                   and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate  Change, 
 Rajya Sabha. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
APCTT Asian & Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology 
APIs Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients  
A2K+ Access to Knowledge for Technology Development and Dissemination  
BIRD-CF Building Industrial R&D and Common Research Facilities 
CRTDH Common Research and Technology Development Hubs 
CSIR Council of Scientific & Industrial Research  
DSIR Department of Scientific and Industrial Research  
FIRST Fundamental & Innovative Research in Science of Tomorrow 
HAL Hindustan Aeronautics Limited. 
KSMs Key Starting Materials 
LTA Light Transport Aircraft  
MSME Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
PACE Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research and Technology Development  
PDTC Programme for Development of Technologies for Commercialisation  
PIII Programme for Inspiring Inventors & Innovators 
PRISM Promoting Innovations in Individuals, Start-ups and MSMEs 
SPV Solar Photovoltaics  
SAIL Steel Authority of India Limited 
TASL Tata Advanced Systems Ltd.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
REPORT  
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) is one of the three Departments of 
the Ministry of Science and Technology. It was established on 4 th January, 1985, for the promotion of 
industrial research through indigenous technology promotion, develop ment, utilization and transfer. 
The allocation of business shown under this Department in the Notification is as under: 
(i) All matters concerning the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR). 
(ii) All matters relating to National Research Development Corporation (NRDC). 
(iii) All matters relating to Central Electronics Limited (CEL). 
(iv) Registration and Recognition of R&D Units. 
(v) Matters relating to UNCTAD and WIPO. 
(vi) National Register for Foreign Collaborations. 
(vii) Matters relating to creation of pool for temporary placement of Indian Scientists and 
Technologists. 
1.2. The primary endeavor of DSIR is to foster development of state -of-the-art technologies and 
products through research and development (R&D), encourage industry to increase their share in the 
country‟s R&D expenditure, support industrial units in developing competitive technologies of high 
commercial potential, catalyze faster commercialization of labor atory-scale R&D, and strengthen 
consultancy and technology management capabilities. 
1.3. The DSIR has two autonomous institutions, viz., CSIR and Consultancy Development Centre 
(CDC) and two public sector undertakings, viz., NRDC and CEL, under its administrative control. The 
Department also provides institutional host facilities to Asian & Pacific Centre for Transfer of 
Technology (APCTT). 
1.4. The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests an d Climate Change considered the Demands for Grants (2023 -24) of the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research in its meeting held on 22nd February, 2023. 
2. OVERALL BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022 -23 (BE, RE & 
ACTUAL EXPENDITURE) AND ALLOCATION FOR 2023-24. 
 
2.1 The following table shows the overall budgetary details of DSIR for the year 2022 -23 (BE, RE 
& actual expenditure) and allocation made for the year 2023-24:- 
 (₹ in crore) 
Scheme  
B.E. 2022-23 
  
 
R.E. 2022-23 
Actual  
(upto 31.01.2023)  
 
% of 
Expenditure 
vis-à-vis R.E. 
 
B.E. 2023-24 
Establishment Expenditure 
of the Centre (Secretariat) 
27.70 16.44 13.09 80 % 18.47 
 
Central Sector Schemes/Projects 
Industrial Research & 
Development 
29.00 29.00 12.75 44 % 23.30 
Assistance to PSEs for 
Other Scientific Research 
(CEL and NRDC)  
10.00 14.68 5.00 34 % 21.73 
Total (Central Sector 
Schemes/ Projects) 
39.00 43.68 17.75 40.6 % 45.03 

2 
 
 
Other Central Sector Expenditure (Autonomous Bodies) 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) 
 
National Laboratories 5102.70 5310.03 4470.97 84 % 5175.51 
Capacity Building and 
Human Resource 
Development 
460.06 564.06 461.89 81.9 % 500.00 
Total (CSIR) 5562.76 5874.09 4932.86 84 % 5675.51 
 
Others   
Contribution to Asian & 
Pacific Centre for Transfer 
of Technology (UN Body) 
7.00 7.40 5.04 68 % 7.50 
Grand Total (DSIR 
inclusive CSIR) 
5636.46 5941.61 4968.74 83.6 % 5746.51 
 
2.2 The Committee notes that there was a marginal increase of about 5 per cent in R.E.2022 -23 
allocation of ₹ 5941.61 crore, over B.E. 2022 -23 allocation of ₹ 5636.46 crore. The Committee also 
observes that that overall financial performance of the Department during 2022 -23 is, by and large, 
satisfactory as it has achieved an overall utilization of 83.6 per cent of its R.E alloc ation for this period. 
However, the performance in respect of the Central Sector Schemes/Projects, which comprises of major 
schemes „Industrial Research & Development‟ and „Assistance to PSEs for Other Scientific Research‟, 
is far from satisfactory . The Department has been able to spend an abysmal 40.6 % of its revised 
allocation under this head. 
2.3 The Committee appreciates  the overall satisfactory financial performance of the 
Department. At the same time, the Committee expresses concern over the sub -optimal utilisation 
in respect of the Central Sector Schemes/Projects, as over 50 per cent of the funds allocated 
under this r emain to be utilized within the remaining quarter of the current financial year . The 
Committee, therefore, urges the Department to ensure optimal utilization of funds during th e 
course of the financial year. In future, periodic monitoring preferably on qua rterly basis may be 
undertaken to facilitate the same. 
2.4 The Committee inquired about the budgetary allocation proposed by the Department vis-à-vis 
the amount actually allocated to it for t he year 2023 -24. The Department  informed that against a 
proposal of Rs. 6871.77 crore, an amount of Rs. 5746.51 has been allocated, which is about 16 per cent 
lesser than its budgetary demand. There is an overall shortfall of Rs. 1125.26 crore in actual allocation 
to the Department. 
2.5 In response to a query about the likely impact of this shortfall in actual allocation over the 
proposed budget and the strategy of the Department for dealing with the challenges arising thereof, the 
Department submitted that - 
- Scale up activities and supp ort for greater number of projects/studies/events/hubs etc., would 
get affected and the Department may not be able to raise the outputs/outcomes of its schemes 
such as PACE, CRTDH and A2K+. 
- Reduction in the demanded budgetary figures would s ignificantly impact the implementation 
of activities under the va rious schemes/projects in CSIR, besides potentially affect ing 
financial planning and participative performance of R&D projects in general. 
- It would also affect operation  and target achievements in respect  of ongoing and proposed 
activities under CEL for upgradation of production capacity for defence product and it would 
not be possible to meet the  proposed timelines for some projects and the ir scope may have to 

3 
 
be reduced as per the budget availability. 
- To deal with the challenges which arise on account of the budgetary shortfall , CSIR is 
collaborating with other Departments/Ministries for sponsoring its projects. Internal resources 
of CSIR may also be utilized to supplement CSIR driven R&D projects. At t he same time, 
some of the proposed activities for the year 2023-24 may be postponed to subsequent year.  
 
2.6 Recognizing the implications of the shortfall in allocation on the Department‟s programmes and 
initiatives, the Committee inquired about the absolute bare minimum increase needed to sustain its key 
programmes. The Department submitted that a minimum additional allocation of  ₹ 1048.26 crore over 
and above the B.E. 2023-24, is needed to meet its fund requirements. 
 
Chart 1 
2.7 Chart 1 depicts the difference b etween proposed and actual allocation for 2023 -24, along with 
bare minimum additional allocation required by the Department to sustain its key programmes. The 
Department informed that the additional requirement  of Rs. 1048.26 crore is to augment the budget 
provision for „National Laboratories‟ under CSIR, in order to enable it to contribute towards 
Sustainable Development Goals and Key Security driven STI demands through Indigenous Research, 
including successful execution of the SARAS Mk2 project, bringing out new drugs, vaccines and  
medical equipment, green technologies, Next Gen Energy Management solutions, waste -to-wealth and 
Agrochemical technologies, enabling achievement of  significant success in ongoing and new 
initiatives/missions, renovation of many of its old buildings etc.  
2.8 The Committee finds merit in the Department’s request for an additional budg etary 
allocation to the tune of ₹ 1048.26 crore, over and above the provision made in B.E. 2023-24. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department may seek the requisite additional 
allocation from the Ministry of Finance at the R.E. stage. Further, the Committee recommends 
that, apart from re -appropriation of CSIR i nternal resources to supplement CSIR-driven 
projects, the Department should explore options for more collaborations with other  
Departments/Ministries as well as the pr ivate sector, through enhanced outreach and 
dissemination of information about its activities and achievements. 
Rs. 6871.77 
crore
proposed Rs.5746.51 
crore 
allocated
Rs. 1048.26 
crore 
additional 
required
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000
7000
8000
B.E. Proposed B.E. Allocated 
Rupees (in crores)
B.E. proposed, B.E. allocated and additional bare 
minimum required

4 
 
2.9 The Committee underscores the criticality of timely completion of projects and, therefore, 
recommends the Department to undertake regular review of its financial and physical targets, in 
order to make a practical assessment of any further corrective measures which may be required 
to overcome the challenges in the way of achieving set targets. 
2.10 The following Chart shows the sector -wise distribution  of the B.E. 2023 -24 allocation              
(₹ 5746.51 crore) of the Department:  
 
Chart 2 
 
2.11 As can be observed from Chart  2, out of the total B.E. allocations , over 98 per cent has been 
allocated to CSIR. The Central Sector Schemes/projects of the Department, which comprise of two  
sub-heads „ Industrial Research & Development‟ and „Assistance to PSEs for Other Scientific 
Research‟, together with establishment expenditures, constitute the remain ing portion of the total 
outlay. The Committee i nquired about the major thrust areas of the Department and the strategy  for 
utilizing the  allocation in  B.E. 2023-24. The Department submitted that the allocation made will be 
fully utilized towards the following thrust areas – 
- Carrying out cutting edge research works in the fields of oceanography, earth sciences, 
geophysics, chemicals, drugs,  genomics, biotechnology and nanotechnology, mining, 
aeronautics, instrumentation, environmental engineering and information technology. 
- Executing mission projects like Aroma Mission, Floriculture Mission, Sickle Cell Anaemia  
Mission and other high end research like Next Generation Energy Storage Solutions,  Carbon 
Capture Storage and Utilization, Hydrogen Technology Mission, Medical Instruments and 
research on Cancer and Covid-related areas. 
- Programme on “CSIR -Fundamental & Innovative Research in Science of Tomorrow (CSIR -
FIRST)”, which has been conceived by CSIR which opens the challenge to CSIR laboratories to 
come up with cutting edge proposals for competitive funding, and enables scientists to take their 
research to next higher level. CSIR presently funds 55 projects under this programme. 
- Initiating new missions on Semiconductors and Sensors, Next Gen Energy Management, 
Genome Editing and Microbiome based Therapeutics, Nutritional Security and Millet, 
Agrochemicals and Waste-to-Wealth for circular economy, which are not only in the alignment 
of R&D aspirations of Union Budget of India 2023 -24 but also aims towards achieving Atma  
Nirbhar Bharat. 
1.24%
98.76%
Major budgetary allocations
Others 
Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (CSIR)
Total Gross Budget - Rs. 5,746.51 crore

5 
 
- Additionally, CSIR is working on a project of national importance called SARAS Mk2 which is 
aimed towards Light Transport  Aircraft (LTA) for armed  forces troop movements/commuter 
aircraft for regional connectivity between Tier-2 and Tier-3 cities. 
2.12 The Committee also made a cursory look at the general trends in total B.E allocation towards 
the two major heads, viz., Central Sector Schemes/Projects and CSIR, since 2021 -22. The following 
graphs depict these trends:  
 
Chart 3 
2.13 As can be inferred from Chart above, there has been a general uptrend in the allocations towards 
the two major heads since 2021 -22. For the Central Sector Schemes/Projects , the B.E allocations 
increased from Rs. 35.00 crore in 2021-22 to Rs. 45.03 crore 2023 -24. Similarly, B.E allocation 
towards CSIR rose from Rs. 5144.27 crore in 2021-22, to Rs. 5675.51 crore in 2023-24.  
 
3.  CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES/PROJECTS 
 
3.1 The Department has two umbrella schemes, viz., „Industrial Research and Development‟ and 
„Assistance to PSEs‟. The Committee was informed that, under Industrial R &D, the Department 
implements the following sub-schemes, which will also be pursued during the year 223-24:- 
(i) Promoting Innovations  in Individuals, Start -ups and MSMEs (PRISM),  wherein financial 
assistance is extended to  independent innovators  for converting innovative ideas into 
demonstrable working models/prototypes/processes that may take  the form of new or 
improved products, processes, or services and assist them to become  incubatees/techno-
entrepreneur. 
(ii) Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research and Technology Development (PACE), 
wherein support is provided to industries and institutions for development and demonstration 
of innovative technologies. 
(iii) Building Industrial R&D and Common Research Facilities (BIRD-CF), wherein support is 
provided for creation of Common Research and Technology Development Hubs (CRTDH) for 
use by entrepreneurs and industries. 
(iv) Access to Knowledge for Technology Development and Dissemination (A2K+), wherein 
studies and conferences in up-coming areas of industrial research are taken  up, besides 
undertaking a Technology Development and Utilization Programme for Women. 
 
3.2 In response to a query of the Committee, the Department submit ted that some of the 
achievements of these schemes during the year are – 
- 25 new projects  of independent  innovators supported under PRISM; 12  PRISM projects 
successfully completed; and 10  TePP Outreach cum Cluster Innovation Centres (TOCICs) 
made functional to  assist and  hand-hold innovators  at their  door step and 2  Review 
meeting organized to evaluate the performance. 
35 39
45.03
B.E. 2021-22 B.E. 2022-23 B.E. 2023-24
Trend in Central Sector Scheme Allocation
5144.27
5562.76 5675.51
B.E. 2021-22 B.E. 2022-23 B.E. 2023-24
Trend in allocation to CSIR

6 
 
- 7 new and innovative technologies developed and demonstrated under the PACE scheme. 
- 2 new CRTDH hubs created in 2022 -23 thereby leading to the establishment of to tal 18 
hubs across the country; MSMEs getting access to sophisticated R&D facilities and 
professional and technical expertise at 12 CRTDH hubs created under BIRD-CRF scheme. 
- Technological empowerment of women, leading to employment generation as well as 
starting of business enterprises by them have been achieved under the A2K+(TDUPW) 
scheme. Awareness is created among industry, institutions and academia about latest 
technological trends through studies and events under A2K+ scheme. 
3.3 The Committee wa s also informed that, under the umbrella scheme „Assistance to PSEs‟, the 
Department provides support to NRDC and CEL. NRDC is mandated to commercialise the 
technologies developed by all the  research laboratories and institutes of CSIR and other public fun ded 
research institutes,  universities including autonomous research institutions. It undertakes 
programmes/activities under two promotional schemes , viz., Programme for Inspiring Inventors & 
Innovators (PIII) and Programme  for Development of Technologies for Commercialisation (PDTC), 
which focus  on development and promotion of innovations leading to technology transfer and their  
successful commercialization. The Department submitted that NRDC  is recognized as a repository of 
large number of technologies  and has licensed technologies to over 5000 entrepreneurs  spread over 
almost all areas of industry and has provided assistance for filing of 2000 patents. 
3.4 CEL is another PSE under the administrative control  of the DSIR . CEL‟s operations can be 
broadly g rouped into three areas, viz. Solar Photovoltaics (SPV),  strategic electronics and railway 
electronics. It is  the pioneer and leading manufacturer of SPV cells, modules and systems and 
Railway Safety Signaling Equipment. In the  field of  strategic electronics, CEL is  the only 
indigenous manufacturer of phase control modules, which is a key element of phased array radar 
Further, it is involved in development of critical products for strategic applications for defence  and 
currently working on failsafe  new generation  railway signaling and safety systems. CEL has also 
signed an Agreement with CSIR-NAL for manufacturing of Drishti Transmissometer System for Air 
force stations and airports. 
3.5 The Committees takes note of the important initiatives undertaken through the umbrella 
schemes of the Department , and expresses its appreciation for the significant work being done 
through them. However, given the abysmal actual utilization of funds during 2022-23 under these 
schemes, as has been pointed out a t para 2.3 , the Committee is constrained to observe that a 
better monitoring mechanism needs to be put in place to ensure an effective check on its physical 
and financial performance. Concomitantly, the Department should  also indicate and quantify, to 
the extent possible, physical targets it aspires to achieve across all the schemes/sub-schemes. 
3.6 The Committee also desires to be kept abreast of the st atus of CEL, its disinvestment 
process as well as the vision and future plan of the Department regarding this PSE. 
 
 
4. COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR)  
 
4.1 Created in  1942, the CSIR is an autonomous body under administrative control of 
the Department. The Council is known for its cutting edge R&D  knowledge base  in diverse 
S&T areas. A contemporary R&D organization having pan -India presence, CSIR has a dynamic 
network of 37 national  laboratories, 39 outreach centres, 1 Innovation Complex and 3 units. CSIR's 
R&D expertise and experience is embodied in about 3439 active scientists supporte d by about 
4193 scientific and technical personnel, along with about 2514 administrative staff. 
4.2. CSIR has two non -Central Sector Schemes, viz., (i) National Laboratories Scheme; and (ii)  
Capacity Building and Human Resource Development. While the former covers a wide range of R&D 

7 
 
and S&T aspects, latter deals with human resources and different awards. 
4.3 The Committee desired to know about the major achievement s of CSIR during the ye ar. 
The Department informed , during the meeting, that CSIR national labs are grouped together under 
eight sector-specific theme based clusters, with each cluster under a separate directorate. A few of the 
major achievements under these eight verticals during the year are as follow:-   
 
(i) HANSA-NG, India‟s first all -composite single engine light aircraft for flying, training, 
sport and hobby flying designed and developed by CSIR-NAL, successfully completed in-
flight engine relight test on 17 th May, 2022. The 2 -seater, low noise emissio n aircraft has 
completed initial certification, and is ready for flying. Tata Advanced Systems Ltd (T ASL), 
CSIR‟s production partner, has received order worth Rs. 220 crore  from HAL to make 
composite parts of series of Light Combat Aircraft Mk1A. Besides, CSIR developed multi-
copter drones which were utilized  during Covid times for drug delivery, are now also being 
utilized for fertilizer spray.   
(ii) As a part of its endeavo ur to address water security, CSIR has undertaken High Resolution 
Aquifer Mapping & Management in Arid Regions of North Western India to augment the 
groundwater resources. The Heli -borne geophysical  mapping technology of CSIR  which 
provides high resolution images enables mapping of water-rich areas as also arid regions. In 
phase –I, mapping of priority areas covering an area of 1 lakh sq.kms. has been completed. 
The ultimate a im of the project is to map potential sites for groundwater withdrawal and 
conservation. Further, CSIR is in the process of developing an integrated SMART water 
management system. 
(iii) In the area of energy – including generation, conversion and storage, CSIR has made 
significant strides. A CSIR -Innovation Centre for Next Generation Energy Storage Facility 
is being developed to meet the country's requirement for batteries, which aims to be the 
first in India to demonstrate Lithium battery fabrication up to 100  Mega Watt capacities. 
Once developed, it would help the Indian  industry to come up with Lithium battery 
fabrication facilities with environment -friendly, cost-effective, and energy-efficient 
technology. The proposed  facility would leapfrog next-generation technologies such as 
Sodium-ion, Lithium-sulfur and Solid-state batteries. The lead laboratory is  in the process 
of identifying the industrial partner. 
(iv) In view of the country‟s huge dependence on import of many chemicals, special ity 
chemicals and Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (APIs), CSIR is giving special importance 
to speciality chemicals including leather and petrochemicals. Recently, one manufacturing 
unit of Hydrazine Hydrate in Gujarat was dedicated to the nation by the Prime Minister of 
India. CSIR has also made significant progress with respect production of Azelaic Acid and 
Isobutylene-based derivatives. 
(v) CSIR has developed a tissue culture technology for virus free apple root stock, which 
reduced the chilling time from 1,100 hours to 400 hou rs. These low chilling varieties of 
apple, which were earlier confined only to the Himalayan region, are now being 
popularized in the North -Eastern Region . Further, CSI R‟s „Purple  Revolution‟ under its 
Aroma Mission for introduction and promotion of Lavender  cultivation in  Jammu & 
Kashmir, is now in the process of being expanded to other states like Uttarakhand and 
Himachal Pradesh.  
(vi) After successful development of DNA v accines for the Covid – 19 pandemic, CSIR is 
slowly expanding interest towards mRNA vaccines, which will find application in respect 
of other diseases too, including cancer. CSIR is in the process of completely indigenizing 
the platform by means of which u pcoming pandemics can be easily understood, 

8 
 
predicted/forecast at the shortest possible time. 
(vii) CSIR has developed many waste-to-wealth technologies and products such as spent wash 
from distillery, industrial solid waste, brine sludge, e-waste, coal-based power industry 
waste, biomass/agri waste, fertilizer industry waste, lime sludge, marble waste, etc. These 
technologies have been transferred to more than 50 licencees and are at various stages of 
implementation with MSMEs, industries and other partners.  
4.4 The Committee applauds the contribution of the Department through CSIR and its 
network of laboratories in the pursuit of excellence across all sectors of scientific research and 
development. The Committee also notes that these endeavours of CSIR are  well-aligned to the 
economic, industrial and social priorities of the nation, as exemplified by their convergence with 
the Government's Mission Programmes  such as Atma Nirbhar Bharat, Make in India, Startup 
India, Swachh Bharat, focus on green growth, etc. 
4.5 The Committee is of the view that, although many new initiatives are being undertaken, a 
lot more needs to be done in order to successfully meet the challenges of the future. The 
Committee recommends that the Department should undertake meaningful ini tiatives to 
establish strong foundations to enable the country to become a global leader in scientific research 
and development.  While sufficient allocation of funds is an obvious pre -requisite to effectively 
pursue this goal, the Committee feels that i t is essential to let more private sector/industries on 
board to play a greater role in contributing to R&D in the country. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that more representatives of industries/companies should be motivated to partake 
in this endeavour, especially by way of capital investments. 
 
5. CAPACITY BUILDING AND HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT OF CSIR 
5.1 The Committee was informed that CSIR has  been focusing in a significant manner on human 
resource development and capacity building in the country, and systematically nurturing highly 
qualified manpower by supporting them through various scholarships , fellowships and award schemes. 
CSIR‟s support for creation and nurturing of human resource and capacity building transcends  diverse 
sectors and disciplines of science and technology. 
5.2 The Committee was further informed that CSIR has been supporting more than 9000 doctoral 
and post-doctoral research fellows working in more than 700 universities and R&D institutions across 
the country. Out of these fellows, 53% have been working in universities, 12% in other R&D 
laboratories, 17% in CSIR laboratories, 13% in IITs (Institutes of National Importance) and 5% in 
postgraduate colleges. The Department furnished the following information regarding CSIR‟s 
achievements w.r.t capacity building and human resource development: 
Sl. 
No. 
Scheme/Programme 
 
Number of fellowships/scheme awarded 
2021-22 2022-23 
(till 31.12.2022) 
1. Doctoral and Postdoctoral Fellowship Scheme 1057 933 
2. Extramural Research and Emeritus Scientist 
Scheme 
215 58 
3. 
 
Promotion of Knowledge Sharing Scheme 
through Seminar and Travel Grants 
247 457 
4. Promoting Excellence through Awards Schemes 18 Result not declared 
 
5.3 The Committee notes that the number of extramural support given during 2022 -23 is much 
lower than the corresponding figures for 2021 -22. In respect of fellowships, the Department submitted 

9 
 
that the number declined during 2023 -23 due to huge unpaid backlog of previous financial years and 
the restriction imposed on budget allocation of 5 .5 times of the expenditure incurred in the financial 
year 2019 -20.  For the financial year 2023 -24, a target of about 2000 doctoral and postdoctoral 
fellowships is being envisaged. 
5.4 The Committee inquired about the status of the award schemes, and whet her there is any 
decision by the Government to discontinue them. The Department, in its reply, submitted that CSIR 
will continue all its seven awards schemes under national and internal categories during the current 
financial year 2022 -23, for which an exp enditure of Rs. 7.153 crore has been made. The Committee 
was further informed that the allocation/expenditure in respect of these schemes is expected to be 
similar during 2023-24.  
 
5.5 Recognizing the criticality of human capacity building and development, the Committee 
appreciates the work being done by the CSIR towards this end. However, the Committee notes 
that the scholarships/fellowships are provided to students mostly at higher levels. Options may, 
therefore, be explored for instituting scholarships/fellowships at lower/entry levels too, such as 
graduation or even senior secondary level, in order to encourage the youth of the country to 
pursue science studies. 
5.6 The Committee is of the considered opinion that, apart from awarding some 
fellowships/scholarships, there is a need to nurture and groom young students to become future 
scientists. CSIR, with its vast chain of scientific labs and strong team of scientists, can play a 
major role in this direction. The Comm ittee, therefore, recommends that the Department should 
also work towards introducing various policies and programmes to attract, harness and retain 
the youth in the field of science. 
5.7 Further, the Committee takes note of the status of CSIR award schemes, which are yet to 
be declared even at the last quarter of the current financial year, and recommends that 
appropriate and expeditious action may be taken to complete the process. 
5.8 The Department, submitted details about the number o f patent applications filed, patents 
granted and papers published during the last two years: 
 
 2021-22 2022-23 
(till January, 2023) 
Patent applications filed 164 (abroad) 
230 (India)  
119 (abroad) 
167 (India)  
Patents Granted 165 (abroad) 
202 (India) 
70 (abroad) 
170 (India)  
Papers published and 
impact factor 
5769 papers published in SCI 
journals with an average impact 
factor per paper as 5.401. 
5551 papers published in SCI 
journals, with an average impact 
factor per paper as 5.295. 
 
5.9 The Committee observes that the figures for patent applications f iled and granted and 
papers published during 2022 -23, are lower than those of the preceding year.  As these are key 
indicators of the  scientific and technological advancements of a country, the Committee exhorts 
CSIR to intensify its efforts towards improving these numbers during 2023-24. 
5.10 The Committee also submitted the following information regarding percentage of revenue 
generated by CSIR through various sources like services, products, technologies developed etc., as a 
percentage of its R.E. allocation for the last three years -  
 
 

10 
 
(Rs. in Crore) 
Financial Year  2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 
(Till 31.12.2022) 
Funds Generated  453.93 336.99 231.65 
% of fund generated w.r.t. R.E. of CSIR- 
National Laboratories Scheme 11.92 7.08 4.36 
     
5.11 The Committee applauds the efforts made by CSIR for revenue generation , and 
recommends the Council to set targets in this regard and, accordingly, explore more avenues for 
higher revenue generation during the next financial year.  
6.  CSIR MISSION MODE PROJECT ON ‘WASTE TO WEALTH’  
6.1 The Committee was informed that, in 2023-24, the Department plans to launch a Mission Mode 
project through CSIR, to address a variety  of industrial and other crucial waste management issues 
with their proper disposal, including fossil fuel waste, biotic waste, metallic waste, non -metallic waste, 
and electronic  waste. The Mission is also  in alignment with the United Nation‟s „Sustainable 
Development Goals‟  and the Government‟s commitments towards environment conservation , 
mitigating climate change and adapting approaches of sustainable development. 
6.2 The Department, in the meeting, mentioned about some of the waste -to-wealth technologies 
developed by CSIR for converting various types of wastes into high, value added -end products. The 
Committee evinced keen interest in the success stories of the Department in this area, and sought to 
know more about the technology developed for conversion of steel slag as road making aggregates. In a 
written reply, the Department informed that , under the R&D project sponsored by Ministry of Steel 
along with four major steel industries, CSIR -Central Road Research Institute (CRRI), New Delhi 
developed customized steel slag valorisation technologies for conversion of different types of steel slag 
as processed steel slag aggregates for road making. The design and construction methodology for its 
utilization have been devised after various intrinsic challenges associated with the slag conversion and 
its possible environmental impacts were successfully addressed. 
6.3 Using this technology, India‟s first steel slag road (1.2 km long six lane) has been constructed at 
Hazira Surat. The road has 32% reduced thickness than conventional bituminous road section, with its 
structural strength four times better despite reduced thickness and caters to heavy commercial traffic 
without any sign of distress. Further, the construction cost is around 40 % cheaper than conventional 
bituminous road. So far, the technology has been used for construction of steel slag roads in other areas 
too, including the Sino -India Border Road in Aru nachal Pradesh (1 km. long, two lane); Jharkhand 
(six-lane road on NH -33 connecting Jamshedpur to Ranchi); Maharashtra (1 km. six lane road on 
Mumbai-Goa highway and another six lane Bhadara Bypass Section of NH -53); and Gujarat (NH -53, 
near Abhava village junction and Khajod village junction at Surat). 
6.4 The Committee was informed that there are many key benefits of thi s technology, such as eco -
friendly sustainable utilization of steel slag waste (19 million tons generated annually through various 
steel plants in the country, which will increase to 45 million tons by 2030); saving of natural aggregates 
and reducing unsustainable quarrying and mining; reduction of GHG emissions and carbon footprint of 
road construction, improved durability of road with better service life; higher load resistance capacity, 
etc. As per directives of Niti Aayog and Ministry of Steel, CSIR is preparing a comprehensive design 
guidelines and specifications for utilization of steel slag in road constructions. Apart from road 
projects, there are immense future prospects for using steel slags in construction of civil and defence 
runways and for usin g it as Railway Ballast. CSIR -CRRI is focused towards promotion of sustainable 
utilization side by side with upgradation of the technology for better outcomes, and aiming to extend 
this technological support to various SAIL and other steel plants in the country. 

11 
 
6.5 The Committee highly commends the efforts of the Department in the field of waste 
management and, in particular, is pleased to learn about the technol ogies developed for 
converting various wastes to wealth. Taking cognizance of the need for a we ll coordinated waste 
management strategy in the country for various types of wastes, the Committee recommends that 
the Department should make concerted efforts to ensure that the Mission project on waste to 
wealth is implemented with all sincerity  and in a  holistic manner. Apart from sufficient 
budgetary allocations to wards the project, efforts should be made to involve other stakeholders 
as well . Further, thrust should be given to research and development of more waste -to-wealth 
technologies including for electronic wastes – the management of which is becoming an 
important issue for the country.  
7. MISSION PROJECT ON ACTIVE PHARMACEUTICAL INGREDIENTS (APIs) 
7.1 The Com mittee inquired about the steps taken by the Dep artment, if any, to reduce the 
country‟s heavy dependence on import of raw materials, intermediates, APIs and components for the 
pharmaceutical industry. In its reply, the Department submitted that, while  Indian pharmaceutical 
industry has established itself as a global player, it  is heavily depe ndent on key bulk/fine chemicals, 
solvents, salts and the excipients essential for drug formulations. Hence, there is an urgent necessity to 
invest in R&D not only to achieve greater heights in this field, but to sustain current levels of business. 
7.2 The Department informed that, so far,  CSIR has developed cost -effective processes for various 
APIs and their intermediates through different projects. Processes have been developed successfully for 
17 APIs with transfer of few molecules like α -Lipoic acid, Az elaic Acid and Paracetamol to 
pharmaceutical companies for production and commercialization. CSIR -Indian Institute of Chemical 
Technology (IICT), Hyderabad has established a kilo -lab facility which soon will be made a GMP 
accredited lab. Similarly, CSIR ha s stepped forward in developing indigenous, innovative and novel 
chemical processes to produce intermediates and final APIs and also repurposing drugs for Covid-19 
towards affordable health care. 
7.3 To continue R&D in this crucial domain,  CSIR has propose d to take up a Mission P roject on 
APIs, with an objective to develop viable, non -infringing routes of synthesis for selected APIs using 
advanced instruments such as automation, flow chemistry and follow ing green chemistry principles. 
The Government of Indi a had, during the beginning of Covid -19 pandemic, shortlisted close to 60 
APIs/bulk drugs for which the Indian pharma industry was critically dependent on imports of raw 
materials or Key Starting Materials (KSMs). Under the proposed Mission project on APIs , priority is 
being given to these KSMs depending upon essentiality, availability of raw -materials and supply chain. 
Some of them have been selected keeping the prior experience/expertise and the potential to bring 
down the cost of production through proce ss optimization to enhance productivity and robustness. The 
efforts will be focused on developing alternate synthesis with the use of indigenous and renewable 
sources of raw materials and flow synthesis. Based on their need for the country, around 20 APIs are 
being taken up for process development under the proposed mission project.  The project aims to serve 
the country with its contributions to „Make in India‟ program and towards better health for the society. 
7.4 The Committee is fully aware of current st ate of huge dependence of the Indian 
Pharmaceutical industry on import of majority of raw materials used in the pharmaceutical 
industry. The Committee, therefore, expresses its wholehearted support towards CSIR’s 
proposed Mission Project on APIs, and wishes the Department a speedy progress in this 
direction. 
7.5 The Committee recommends that specific targets, both short term and long term, should 
be set for reducing th e dependence on imported raw materials from around 80 per cent at 
present, to 30 or 4 0 per cent in the next five yea rs.  To achieve this, the Committee recommends 
that the proposed Mission project should be dovetailed with the initiatives being undertaken in 

12 
 
this area by other Ministries/Departments and the private sector, adequate funds s hould be 
earmarked for the purpose so that financial constrains do not hinder the much needed research 
work, and options should be explored for benefiting from latest emerging technologies such as 
Artificial Intelligence (AI), with the overall objective of achieving the desired outcomes within the 
shortest possible timeframe . The Committee would also like to be kept abreast of the progress 
made by the Department in this regard. 
 
*** 
 
 
  

13 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 
OVERALL BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2022 -23 (BE, RE & 
ACTUAL EXPENDITURE) AND ALLOCATION FOR 2023-24. 
 The Committee appreciates the overall satisfactory financial performance of the 
Department. At the same time, the Committee expresses concern over the sub -optimal utilisation 
in respect of the Central Sector Schemes/Projects, as over 50 per cent of the funds allocated 
under this remain to be utilized within the remaining quarter of the current financial year . The 
Committee, therefore, urges the Department to ensure optimal  utilization of funds during the 
course of the financial year. In future, periodic monitoring preferably on quarterly basis may be 
undertaken to facilitate the same.                                                                                            (Para 2.3) 
 The Committee finds merit in the Department’s request for an additional budgetary 
allocation to the tune of Rs. 1048.26 crore, over and above the provision made in B.E. 2023 -24. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department may seek  the requisite additional 
allocation from the Ministry of Finance at the R.E. stage. Further, the Committee recommends 
that, apart from re -appropriation of CSIR i nternal resources to supplement CSIR-driven 
projects, the Department should explore options fo r more collaborations with other  
Departments/Ministries as well as the pr ivate sector, through enhanced outreach and 
dissemination of information about its activities and achievements.                                   (Para 2.8) 
 The Committee underscores the criticality of timely completion of projects and, therefore, 
recommends the Department to undertake regular review of its financial and physical targets, in 
order to make a practical assessment of any further corrective measure s which may be required 
to overcome the challenges in the way of achieving set targets.                                            (Para 2.9) 
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES/PROJECTS 
 The Committees takes note of the important initiatives undertaken through the umb rella 
schemes of the Department , and expresses its appreciation for the significant work being done 
through them. However, given the abysmal actual utilization of funds during 2022-23 under these 
schemes, as has been pointed out at para 2.3 , the Committee is constrained to observe that a 
better monitoring mechanism needs to be put in place to ensure an effective check on its physical 
and financial performance. Concomitantly, the Department should  also indicate and quantify, to 
the extent possible, physical targets it aspires to achieve across all the schemes/sub-schemes. 
(Para 3.5) 
 The Committee also desires to be kept abreast of the status of CEL, its disinvestment 
process as well as the vision and future plan of the Department regarding this PSE.        (Para 3.6) 
 
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR) 
 The Committee applauds the contribution of the Department through CSIR and its 
network of laboratories in the pursuit of excellence across all sectors of scientific research and 
development. The Committee also notes that these endeavours of CSIR are  well-aligned to the 
economic, industrial and social priorities of the nation, as exemplified by their convergence with 
the Government's Mission Programmes  such as Atma Nirbhar Bharat, Make in India, Startup 
India, Swachh Bharat, focus on green growth, etc.                                                                (Para 4.4) 
 The Committee is of the view that, although many new initiatives are being undertaken, a 
lot more needs to be done in order to successfully meet the challenges of the future. The 
Committee recommends that the Department should undertake meaningful initiatives to 
establish strong foundations to enable the country to become a global leader in scientific research 
and development.  While sufficient allocation of funds is an obvious pre -requisite to effectively 

14 
 
pursue this goal, the Committee feels that it is essential to let more private sector/industries on 
board to play a greater role in contributing to R&D in the country. The Committee, accordingly, 
recommends that more representatives of in dustries/companies should be motivated to partake 
in this endeavour, especially by way of capital investments.                                                 (Para 4.5) 
 
CAPACITY BUILDING AND HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT OF CSIR 
 Recognizing the criticality  of human capacity building and development, the Committee 
appreciates the work being done by the CSIR towards this end. However, the Committee notes 
that the scholarships/fellowships are provided to students mostly at higher levels. Options may, 
therefore, be explored for instituting scholarships/fellowships at lower/entry levels too, such as 
graduation or even senior secondary level, in order to encourage the youth of the country to 
pursue science studies.                                                                                                              (Para 5.5) 
 
 The Committee is of the considered opinion that, apart from awarding some 
fellowships/scholarships, there is a need to nurture and groom young students to become future 
scientists. CS IR, with its vast chain of scientific labs and strong team of scientists, can play a 
major role in this direction. The Comm ittee, therefore, recommends that the  Department should 
also work towards introducing various policies and programmes to attract, harness and retain 
the youth in the field of science.                                                                                               (Para 5.6) 
 Further, the Committee takes note of the status of CSIR award schemes, which are yet to 
be declared  even at the last quarter of the current financial year, and recommends that 
appropriate and expeditious action may be taken to complete the process.        (Para 5.7) 
 The Committee observes that the figures for patent applications f iled and granted and 
papers published during 2022 -23, are lower than those of the preceding year.  As these are key 
indicators of the  scientific and technological advancements of a country, the Committee exhorts 
CSIR to intensify its efforts towards improving these numbers during 2023-24.       (Para 5.9) 
 The Committee applauds the efforts made by CSIR for revenue generation , and 
recommends the Council to set targets in this regard and, accordingly, explore more avenues for 
higher revenue generation during the next financial year.          (Para 5.11) 
 
CSIR MISSION MODE PROJECT ON ‘WASTE TO WEALTH’ 
 The Committee highly commends the efforts of the Department in the field of waste 
management and, in particular, is pleased to learn about the technologies developed for 
converting various wastes to wealth. T aking cognizance of the need for a well coordinated waste 
management strategy in the country for various types of wastes, the Committee recommends that 
the Department should make concerted efforts to ensu re that the Mission project on waste to 
wealth is implemented with all sincerity and in a holistic manner. Apart from sufficient 
budgetary allocations towards the project, efforts should be made to involve other stakeholders 
as well. Further, thrust should  be given to research and development of more waste -to-wealth 
technologies including for electronic wastes – the management of which is becoming an 
important issue for the country.                                                                                               (Para 6.5) 
 
MISSION PROJECT ON ACTIVE PHARMACEUTICAL INGREDIENTS (APIs) 
 The Committee is fully aware of current state of huge dependence of the Indian 
Pharmaceutical industry on import of majority of  raw materials used in the pharmaceutical 
industry. The Committee, therefore, expresses its wholehearted support towards CSIR’s 
proposed Mission Project on APIs, and wishes the Department a speedy progress in this 
direction.                                                                                                                                     (Para 7.4) 

15 
 
 The Committee recommends that specific targets, both short term and long term, should 
be set for reducing th e dependence on imported raw materi als from around 80 per cent at 
present, to 30 or 40 per cent in the next five yea rs.  To achieve this, the Committee recommends 
that the proposed Mission project should be dovetailed with the initiatives being undertaken in 
this area by other Ministries/De partments and the private sector, adequate funds should be 
earmarked for the purpose so that financial constrains do not hinder the much needed research 
work, and options should be explored for benefiting from latest emerging technologies such as 
Artificial Intelligence (AI), with the overall objective of achieving the desired outcomes within the 
shortest possible timeframe . The Committee would also like to be kept abreast of the progress 
made by the Department in this regard.                                                                                  (Para7.5) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________ 
MINUTES 
_______________________________________  

17 
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 22nd February, 2023 in Committee Room 
4, Block A, PHAE Building, New Delhi. 
            MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh - Chairman 
            RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
4. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
            LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
6. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
7. Dr.  Swami Sakshi Ji Maharaj 
8. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
9. Shri Anurag Sharma 
10. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi 
11. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
      SECRETARIAT 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
Shri Thangzasiam Paite, Committee Officer 
Shri Rama Nand, Committee Officer 
 
       Witnesses: 
 Representatives of the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research (DSIR): 
(i) Dr. (Mrs.) N. Kalaiselvi, Secretary 
(ii) Shri Surinder Pal Singh, Joint Secretary  
(iii) Shri Mahendra Kumar Gupta, Joint Secretary 
(iv) Shri Chetan Prakash Jain, JS&FA 
(v) Commodore (Retd.) Amit Rastogi, Chairman and Managing Director 
(vi) Dr. S. Sathiyanarayanan, Chief Scientist and Head, CPO 
(vii) Shri Subodh Chawla, Chief (TC), NRDC 
(viii) Dr. Abhishek Kumar, Sr. Scientist, CPD  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised them about 
agenda of the meeting i.e. to hear the views of the representatives of the  Department of Scientific & 
Industrial Research on the Demands for Grants 2023-24 of the respective Department.  
3. *   *   *   * 
4. *   *   *   *  
5. *   *   *   * 
 
                                                           
**** Relate to other matters. 

18 
 
6. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of Department of Scientific & 
Industrial Research.  He asked the Secretary to give a brief presentation on the Demands for Grants 
2023-24 of the Department and inform the Committee about the allocation requested by the 
Department for 2023-24; allocation actually made to the Department for the year; the potential impact 
of the shortfall on the current and proposed projects of the Department. The Chairman also asked the 
Secretary to highlight crucial issues for which the Department would like to draw the attention of the 
Committee.  
7. Secretary, Department of Scientific & Industrial Research  while making a presentation 
submitted that the Department was allocated `5,636.46 crore in B.E. 2022 -23 which was increased to 
`5,941.61 crore in R.E. 2022 -23.  It was submitted that against the R.E. allocation of `5,941.61 crore, 
the Department could utilise `4,968.74 crore, upto January, 2023 which is about 83.6 per cent of the 
budgetary utilisation. The Committee was also informed that against the proposed demand of ` 6871.77 
crore, the Department ha s been allocated ` 5746.51 crore in B.E. 2023 -24 registering a shortfall of 
`1125.26 crore which is about 16 per cent lesser.  It was briefed that the shortfall in budgetary 
allocation of B.E. 2023 -24 would result in obstruction in development of infrastruc ture, affect 
upgradation of production capacity for defence products, postponement of proposed activities for the 
year 2023 -24 to subsequent  year. The Committee was also informed about the Department‟s major 
achievements during the year 2022 -23, significant strides made in Aerospace, Electronics, Healthcare, 
Civil Infrastructure and Engineering along with the development of DNA vaccines for the  Covid – 19 
pandemic. The Committee was also apprised about the roadmap prepared for implementation of major 
schemes and initiatives of the Department during the year 2023-24.   
8. The Chairman and Members then raised various queries/issues/points pertaining to the activities 
of the Department under its various programmes/schemes. The representatives of the Department, 
while presenting their views, responded to some of the queries/issues/points raised by the Chairman 
and Members of the Committee.  T he Chairman directed the Secretary to furnish detailed written 
replies to the queries/points/issues raised by the Committee to the Secretariat at the earliest. 
9. *   *   *   * 
10. *   *   *   *  
11.  A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
12.  The Committee then adjourned at 2:12 p.m. 
 
  

19 
 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 14th March, 2023 in Committee Room No. 
67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
            MEMBERS PRESENT 
      1.   Shri Jairam Ramesh – Chairman  
            RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Anil Baluni 
3. Shri Niranjan Bishi  
4. Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5. Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
6. Shri Jose K. Mani 
7. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
8. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav  
            LOK SABHA 
9. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
10. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
11. Dr. Dhal Singh Bisen 
12. Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
13. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
14. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
15. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
16. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
17. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
            SECRETARIAT 
Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
        Shri Narendra Kumar, Additional Director 
        Shri Sammer Kapoor, Deputy Secretary 
        Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
        Shri Thangzasiam Paite, Committee Officer 
        Shri Rama Nand, Committee Officer          
 2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. The 
Committee then took up for consideration the draft 373 rd, 374 th, 375 th, 376 th, 377 th, 378 th, and 379 th 
Reports of the Committee on the Demands for Grants of the Ministries/Departments of Atomic Ener gy; 
Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial Research; Science & Technology; Space; Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, respectively and adopted the same after some deliberations. 
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned Reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 15 th March, 2023. The Committee also decided to nominate Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
and, in his absence, Shrimati Seema Dwivedi to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. Dhal Singh 
Bisen and, in his absence, Shri Ram Shiromani Verma to lay the reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
4.  *   *   *    * 
 5. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3:45 p.m. 
 
 
                                                           
**** Relate to other matters. 