TWO HUNDRED THIRTY SIXTH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2012)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations Contained in the Two Hundred Twenty
Sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment 
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-2013) of the 
Ministry of Earth Sciences
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
 
REPORT NO. 
236
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY SIXTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations Contained in the Two Hundred Twenty
Sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  20 th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  20 th December, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—11
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 13—16

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2012-2013)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil H. Lad
3. Shrimati Maya Singh
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri Alok Tiwari
6. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi
7. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
8. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
12. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
@13. Vacant
#14. Vacant
15. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
16. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase
17. Dr. Ajay Kumar
18. Shri O.S. Manian
19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
20. Shri Basori Singh Masram
21. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
22. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
23. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
25. Shri Yashvir Singh
#26. Vacant
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
30. Shri Ramakant Yadav
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
@ Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 14th December, 2012 on his resignation
from the Membership of the Committee.
# Shri Ninong Ering and Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon their
induction in the Union Council of Ministers w.e.f. 28
th October, 2012.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra,  Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Thirty Sixth Report on the Action Taken by the
Ministry of Earth Sciences on the recommendations contained in Two Hundred Twenty Sixth
Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-2013) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Earth Sciences
on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Sixth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on
the Demands for Grants (2012-2013) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences which was presented to
the Rajya Sabha on 18
th May, 2012.
3. There were twenty two recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Sixth
Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were
received from the Ministry on 27
th July, 2012.
4. In the meeting held on 17 th December, 2012, the Committee considered the Draft Action
Taken Report and adopted the same.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 17, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests

(iv)
ACRONYMS
EEZ – Exclusive Economic Zone
EFC – Expenditure Finance Committee
ESSO – Earth System Science Organisation
GPR – Ground Penetrating Radar
HPC – High Performance Computer
IITM – Indian Institute of Tropical Management
IMD – Indian Meteorological Department
INCOIS – Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services
LTTD – Low Temperature Thermal Desalination
MLD – Million litres of freshwater per day
NCAOR – National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research
NCS – National Centre for Seismology
NIOT – National Institute of Ocean Technology
RFD – Result Framework Document

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Earth Sciences
on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty-sixth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on
the Demands for Grants (2012-2013) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences, which was presented to
both the Houses of Parliament on 18
th May, 2012. There were twenty-two recommendations in the
Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee were
received from the Department on 27
th July, 2012.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee
on the action taken by the Ministry of Earth Sciences are set out in the succeeding paragraphs:-
Recommendation (Para 5.3)
The Committee feels that without any financial and administrative powers, the Earth
Commission will hardly be effective in performing its role and functions and the very purpose of
setting up of Earth Commission would be defeated. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
immediate steps be taken to provide necessary financial and administrative powers to the Earth
Commission so that it may carry out its assigned role effectively.
Action Taken by Government
Expressing the gratitude to the Committee for supporting the proposal on administrative and
financial support to Earth Commission, the Ministry would like to apprise the Committee that a
draft Cabinet Note of the proposal on administrative and financial powers to the Earth Commission
has already been circulated to all the concerned Ministries/agencies. Currently, their comments on
the same being obtained from the concerned Ministries.
Comments
The Committee hopes that the comments of the concerned Ministries/agencies would have
been received by now and a decision taken. The Committee reiterates its view that administrative
and financial powers be granted without any further delay to the Earth Commission.
Recommendation (Para 6.3)
The Committee notes with satisfaction that Result Framework Document (RFD), has been
adopted by the Ministry to review and monitor physical and financial progress/achievements of
major activities with respect to agreed targets fixed for each programme, in addition to its internal
monitoring mechanisms. The Committee is of the opinion that an effective monitoring mechanism
is imperative for ensuring that the various projects are completed as per the projected schedule and
timely action taken to overcome problems that may arise in the implementation of the projects. The
Committee hopes that with potent monitoring mechanisms, the Ministry would be able to complete
its projects in time.
Action Taken by Government
As pointed out by the Committee, the Ministry has adopted an adequate monitoring
mechanism (3-tier) to monitor the effective performance of various schemes towards timely

2
accomplishing the targets of the projects, including RFDs for all the centres of the Ministry. At
Ministry level, the Earth System Science Organisation (ESSO) Council set up by the Ministry meets
twice in a year to review in detail the performance of various programmes which are generally held
in April and September in the beginning of the financial year and middle of the year. Besides, the
performances of major projects are being monitored by Project Management and Advisory Council.
The progress of autonomous bodies of the Ministry is also monitored periodically by Finance
Committee, Governing Bodies and Research Advisory Committee, besides being monitored by the
Planning Commission on annual basis.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that effective monitoring would lead to
timely completion of projects.
Recommendation (Para 7.3)
In this connection the Committee would like to invite the attention of the Ministry to its
204
th Report (page 3, para 5.1) on the Demands for Grants (2010-11), wherein it has been stated
that as per information furnished by the Ministry, the total initial Budgetary allocation of Rs.7004.00
crores for the Eleventh five year Plan was revised to Rs.6637.00 crores at the mid term appraisal
stage. In comparison to this, the Committee has observed that the projected amount has been
increased by almost three times during Twelfth Plan with outlay proposed by the Ministry at
Rs.18,824.00 crores. The Committee also notes that for focused attention and securing effective
implementation, Ministry has reoriented its 76 projects into 15 major programmes for Twelfth Plan.
The Committee hopes that with increased allocations and more focused attention, the Ministry
would be able to achieve capacity for reliable weather forecasts at par with the highest international
standards and would be able to develop technologies needed for effective exploitation of marine
resources for the socio-economic development of our people during the Twelfth Plan period.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry would like to assure that every effort would be made to achieve the targets
set for Twelfth Five Year Plan, in a more focused way. These included providing reliable weather
forecast at par with international standards, as the numerical weather forecast models, being
employed to develop these weather products by the Ministry, are similar to global models used by
the advanced countries. Besides, more local data collected from the autonomous platforms/sensors
would be assimilated into these models, which will enhance weather forecasting capability. Similarly
the various technology being developed by the Ministry to harness marine resources are the state-
of-the-art technology used elsewhere.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and is of the view that increased demand for budget
allocation, should be matched by proper utilization of funds on the part of the Ministry.
Recommendation (Para 7.4)
The Committee also notes that two projects viz. Multi-channel Seismic System on board
Sagar Kanya and National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) extension centre in West Bengal,
could not be completed during the Eleventh Plan period. The Committee would like Ministry to
make all possible efforts to complete these programmes as soon as possible and well before the
expiry of the first year of the Twelfth Plan.

3
Action Taken by Government
It may kindly be noted that the above mentioned two projects have been dropped in
consultation with the Planning Commission. However, the objectives envisaged under the projects
could be pursued through existing ongoing programmes of the Ministry without jeopardizing the
goal of these projects.
Comments
The Committee expresses its concern that two of its projects pursued during the
Eleventh Five Year Plan have been dropped without assigning any reason. The Committee
hopes that as assured by the Ministry, the objectives envisaged under these projects would
be pursued through existing programmes of the Ministry.
Recommendation (Para 8.2)
The Committee observes that the Ministry has received a plan outlay of Rs.1281.00 crores,
which is Rs.369.00 crores less than the amount of Rs.1650.00 crores, projected by the Ministry.
The Committee, however, notes with surprise and concern that Twelfth Five Year Plan of the
Ministry is yet to be finalized and the Ministry is not certain about some of the new initiatives that
it had proposed during the Plan period. The Committee recommends that all possible efforts may
be made to finalise the Twelfth Five Year Plan of the Ministry at the earliest so that future roadmap
of the Ministry’s action Plan becomes certain and it can vigorously pursue the Plan targets and
achieve them.
Action Taken by Government
As recommended, finalization of Twelfth Five Year Plan proposals of the Ministry has been
completed and waiting for the final approval of the Planning Commission. Meanwhile the Ministry
has been actively engaged to seek the necessary approvals/clearances of the Government on various
Schemes proposed for implementation during Twelfth Plan.
Comments
The Committee hopes that the Ministry after obtaining the approval of the Planning
Commission will make all out efforts to achieve the targets set for the Twelfth Plan.
Recommendation (Para 9.3)
The Committee notes that various ongoing projects/activities and proposed new initiatives
have been integrated into 15 broad major restructured programmes to carry out the research
activities in a more focused way. The Committee hopes that the new initiatives does not lead to
less focused monitoring or neglect of some of the programmes vis-a-vis the position existing so
far when these programmes were assigned individual budgetary allocations. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should carry out a review, after a suitable interval, to see
if the new system has helped/achieve/improved meeting of physical and financial targets and apprise
the Committee of the finding of such a review. The Committee would, however, like Ministry to
ensure that despite amalgamation of a large number of projects/schemes in a programme, individua1
focus and attention continues to be provided to each schemes and project of the Ministry.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry would like to assure that all the ongoing and new schemes proposed for

4
implementation during Twelfth Plan would be implemented under the 15 Major umbrella schemes
without losing the focus of the individual activities. The necessary review mechanism has been in
place to monitor these activities separately.
Comments
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry. The
Committee’s recommendation was meant for proper scrutiny and critical appraisal of new
monitoring mechanism.  The Committee therefore, reiterates that the Ministry should
immediately carry out the review of its activities/programmes to ascertain as to whether the
new system has worked as per expectation.
Recommendation (Para 10.4)
The Committee has always stressed upon the need for greater application of technologies
for socio-economic development of common masses. The Committee, therefore, commends the
initiative of the NIOT in using technology i.e. ‘Low Temperature Thermal Desalination (LTTD)’ to
solve the drinking water problem in two islands of Lakshadweep, by setting up two LTTD plants.
The Committee is also happy to know that NIOT, also proposed to set up six more plants in other
islands of Lakshadweep, through public-private partnership mode. The Committee is of the opinion
that such technologies needs to be popularized and such plants should also established in Andaman
& Nicobar Islands as well and other coastal regions of the country, which face a scarcity of fresh
drinking water. It also feels that the adoption of the public-private partnership model would make
the establishment of such plants more cost effective, and enable the Ministry to commission a
larger number of plants in the coastal regions of the country in a short time.
Action Taken by Government
Expressing gratitude to the Committee for appreciation, it is informed that the Ministry has
been making several efforts for popularizing the LTTD technology in selected coastal location and
island territories. NIOT has already taken steps to commission six more plants based on LTTD
technology in Lakhshadweep islands (Amini, Chetlet, Kadamath, Kalpeni, Kiltan and Andrott).
Efforts are underway to set up a LTTD plant with a capacity of generating two million litres of
freshwater per day (2 MLD) at Tuticorin.
Comments
The Committee hopes that proposed commissioning of six more LTTD plants in
Lakshdweep Islands and Tuticorin (Tamil Nadu), would be carried out as per schedule. The
Committee reiterates that technologies for the benefit of common man such as LTTD needs
to be encouraged and established in other coastal regions of the country like Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, which face a scarcity of fresh drinking water. It reiterates that the Ministry
may explore the public-private partnership model for setting up more such LTTD plants
which would make it more cost effective.
Recommendation (Para 10.8)
The Committee commends the efforts of the Ministry in augmenting the scientific and
technological capabilities of the INCOIS, in respect of predicting cyclones and tsunami, since
accurate and advance warnings about these natural hazards give sufficient time to disaster
management agencies to gear themselves better to minimize the loss of property and lives. The
Committee is also happy to note that the Indian Tsunami Warning System has been entrusted the

5
responsibility to, function as Regional Tsunami Service Provider by UNESCO and have started its
operation for the Indian Ocean Rim countries. The Committee commends the Ministry for making
accurate predictions on recent earthquake that hit certain parts of India and saving the country
from unnecessary anxiety and fear. The Committee appreciates the fact that the technological
capabilities of the INCOIS have been recognized internationally and hopes that, in future the Centre
would forge collaborations with similar scientific organizations of the advanced countries, to
provide ocean information and advisory services to society, industry, Government agencies and
scientific community through sustained ocean observations, information management, and focused
research.
Action Taken by Government
Thanking the Committee for the appreciation on work of augmentation of ocean information
services, it is mentioned that INCOIS would make every effort to forge cooperation with similar
similar scientific organizations of the advance countries, when ever required to provide best
possible ocean advisory services.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 10.14)
The Committee notes the importance of the useful research being done by the IITM and
hopes that the Institute would successfully provide research backup needed for raising the
accuracy levels of our weather and climate forecasts to the highest international standards well
before the end of Twelfth Five Year Plan and the Committee recommends adequate budgetary
support during the period be provided to the Institute to achieve this task.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry highly appreciates the recommendations of the Committee for the adequate
budgetary support to be provided to achieve the task of providing the research backup needed for
raising the accuracy levels of our weather and climate forecasts to the highest international
standards well before the end of Twelfth Five Year Plan. Some of the major actions taken towards
achieving the targets are (i) establishment of capacity to make dynamical prediction of seasonal
mean monsoon using coupled model (ii) An empirical system to predict the active and break spells
3-4 weeks in advance has also been developed. The High Performance Computer (RPC) of 70
Teraflop acquired by the HTM during the Eleventh Five Year Plan has provided great opportunity
for R&D that has gone in to the improvement in modeling work for weather and climate forecasts.
In order to work out a Modeling Framework and put it in use to predict seasonal mean climate
in India the Ministry has launched a Monsoon Mission with a view to design a weather prediction
model for improving the Indian monsoon weather and climate forecasts, ultimately to develop an
Indian Model (based on changes made to the CFS model) which will have the capability to better
simulate and predict the monsoon rainfall. High priority has been accorded to the development of
climate models for more reliable projection of climate change in the 21 st century – with a special
focus on the behaviour (frequency and intensity) of extreme events (heat waves, cold spells, severe
thunder storms, tropical cyclones, storm surges, severe storms, droughts, etc.) in the near future.
The development of a coupled modeling strategy as well as to generate a large ensemble of future
climate change scenarios using a suite of global and high resolution regional climate models
involves a large number crunching capability.

6
Comments
The Committee appreciates the efforts and the progress made by the Ministry for
improving accuracy of weather and climate predictions. It also notes that the Ministry has
launched ‘Monsoon Mission’ a weather prediction model for better simulation and prediction
of the monsoon rainfall. The Committee hopes that efforts would also be made to pass on
the crucial cyclonic predictions/early warnings to the common man so as to avert any loss
of life and property.
Recommendation (Para 10.11)
The Committee is aware of National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research’s (NCAOR)
good performance in conducting scientific expeditions to Polar Regions. The Committee hopes
results of scientific studies being done in .Polar Regions would find useful application in glaciers
of Himalayas, forecasts and control relating to monsoons and in other areas and a better
understanding of climate change would emerge from these studies.
Action Taken by Government
Expressing gratitude to the Committee for the appreciation on scientific performance in
Polar Regions, it may be noted that the results of the scientific studies conducted in the Polar
Regions and the expertise gained out of it is planned to be extended to the Himalayan Glaciers
during the Twelfth Five Year Plan. NCAOR has initiated a long term programme on ‘Cryosphere
studies in Himalayas’ which is intended to conduct Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) traverse,
studies on Snow and Ice Chemistry and Glacier dynan1ics of selected glaciers to begin with. This
would help us in better understanding of the impact of the climate change on the Himalayan Glaciers.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 11.20)
The Committee, is of the opinion that research in the field of cloud physics should be
accorded high priority as it would not only help in right selection of clouds for seeding but would
help master its other aspects as well including development of cost effective techniques for
successful cloud seeding, which may go a long way in helping the country solve the problems of
drought and water scarcity in certain parts of the country. Such research may also provide greater
insights in understanding the dynamics of global warming. The Committee, therefore, strongly
recommends that Ministry should make all our efforts to strengthen the special laboratory which
has been set up at Mahabaleshwar to study all kinds of clouds from precipitation point of view
so that cost effective techniques for artificial precipitation could be  developed and for that, if
needed, adequate funds should be made available.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry expresses gratitude for the recommendations of the Committee for adequate
budgetary support towards strengthening the special laboratory at Mahabaleshwar for addressing
the issues relating to clouds to understand complex interactions between aerosols, clouds and
circulation. It may be noted that the construction of the laboratory will commence after the
monsoon season is over in the month of October, 2012 and expected to be completed by June,
2013. The High Altitude Cloud Physics Laboratory will house the state of art instruments for the
observations.

7
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and at the same time hopes that the construction of
the laboratory would have commenced and would be completed as per schedule.
Recommendation (Para 12.3)
The Committee is happy to note that allocations made for R&D activities of IMD and for
the programmes ‘Research, Training, Education and Outreach’ taken together are sufficient and
hopes that a strong research backup would be available for the Ministry to complete its various
programmes and achieve its objectives during the year 2011-12.
Action Taken by Government
Expressing thanks to the Committee for its appreciation for the activities being carried out
under the programme on “Research, Training, Education and Outreach”, it is informed that during
2011-12, the Ministry had taken several initiatives to support academic programmes, establishment
of national lab facilities, capacity building through opening of training schools, national and
international collaboration etc. These have helped in achieving the objectives of the various
programmes of the Ministry.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Paras 13.5 and 13.6)
The Committee fully understands that though it may not humanly possible to completely
control the forces of nature like earthquake, yet through technological interventions the massive
destruction and financial losses it causes can certainly be minimized. The Committee, therefore,
feels that, intensive efforts towards scientific research are needed to fully understand the various
aspects of earthquakes, it is, therefore, imperative to establish a separate institutional mechanism
to effectively deal with earthquake related issues in the country, so as to minimize the damage in
future due to earthquakes.
The Committee also notes that presently, various aspects of seismology related research are
being carried out in a fragmented way by several research, academic, State and Central
Government institutions in the county. In view of the extreme killer and destructive potential of
earthquake as a natural phenomenon. the Committee fully endorses the proposal of the Ministry to
set up a separate research institute of the nature of ‘National Centre of Seismology’ which is
exclusively devoted to study of the mechanic of earthquakes, geo-tectonic movements and -all
other aspects of earthquake so as to avoid/minimize the losses of life and property, a field which
is yet to be mastered by the human mind.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry is actively considering setting up a National Centre for Seismology (NCS) with
a view to conduct focused research in the area of seismology. It may be mentioned that issues
relating to preparation, circulation of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) document, finalization
of site/land/construction of building and modalities of setting up of NCS is under consideration.
Comments
The Committee hopes that the procedural aspects relating to setting up of the

8
“National Centre for Seismology’ would be expedited and the Centre established at the
earliest, for carrying out concerted research in the field of seismology, so as to minimize
loss of life and property caused due to earthquakes.
Recommendation (Paras 14.7 and 14.8)
The Committee is of the opinion that the agricultural economy of the country is immensely
affected by the vagaries of nature. However, this effect can on]y be minimized with scientific
inputs, through the installation of state-of-the-art weather observation system throughout the
country and utilizing them for providing accurate and advance information to the farmers pertaining
to the weather and climatic conditions. In this connection the Committee appreciates the Ministry
for initiating the ‘Agro-meteorological services’ to provide advance information to the farmers
pertaining to wind, temperature, rainfall, humidity and soil moisture and help them to plan the
cultivation and harvesting of various crops and in issuing district-level bulletins to 560 districts
across the country. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Government intends to increase
the coverage of farmers under the agro-meteorological services from the current level of 10% to
around 40%.
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should develop Atmospheric Observations
Systems Network and Atmospheric Processes & Modeling and Services throughout the country in
a time bound manner so as to improve weather and climate forecasting services. The Committee
further recommends that agro-meteorological advisory services should be extended to cover all
districts of the country. The Committee further recommends that crop and location specific
information to farmers be disseminated in a more friendly manner and its reach extended to cover
all farmers in a time-bound manner, so that even small and marginal farmers could full benefit of
these services.
Action Taken by Government
Expressing the gratitude to the Committee, the Ministry would like to inform that at present
127 Agro-Automatic Weather stations have been installed to issue more accurate advisories to the
farmers. In addition to that, Automatic Weather Station recently installed at various locations are
also used for the same. The observations from these automatic weather stations are extensively
used in the preparation of crop and location specific advisories for the farmers. Implementations
of various programmes, popularization of the Agromet Services are being made to outreach these
services to the maximum number of farmers in the country. Efforts will be made to increase user
network of this service.
Under the modernization programme of IMD, efforts are being made to improve the
forecasting system by installation of more weather observations and introduction of different high
resolution indigenous and other models available in different parts of the world. For improving the
outreach of the advisories, the same are sent through SMS and IVRS mode to the farmers in
different States in PPP mode. The advisories will also be disseminated on line through the Farmers’
Club under the network of National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD). Apart
from these, advisories are also disseminated using already existing channels like internet, print
media, Door Darshan Kendras, AIR and other cable TV networks to communicate the Agromet
Advisories to the huge number of farmer in a user friendly manner. IMD shall provide any support
if required for full implementation of the recommendations.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

9
Recommendation (Para 15.3)
The Committee appreciates the good initiative of the Ministry in providing the fishermen
advance advisories, which have led to reduction of search time and increase in the catch per unit
effort, resulting in an increased net profit from 1.5 to 2.5 times and fuel savings upto 30%. The
Committee also note the proposal to increase the user base of these advisories from the existing
65% to 90% of the fishermen across the country, by the end of the Plan period. The Committee
desires the Ministry to make concerted efforts to achieve this target.
Action Taken by Government
Expressing the gratitude to the Committee for the appreciation on fisherman advisory
services, the Ministry will make every effort to augment user base of the Potential Fishery zone
advisories and to reach out fisherman community.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry would be able to achieve
its objective of increasing the user base from the existing 65% to 90% of the fishermen
who are beneficiaries of these advisories, by the end of the Plan period.
Recommendation (Para 16.2)
The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for making concerted efforts to improve
the accuracy of out weather and climate services. In a country like India, where a large section
of population is dependent on agriculture for its living, correct and reliable weather prediction well
in advance, will prove a boon for the farmers. The Committee, therefore, feels that instead of
putting a distant plan of achieving the United States level of accuracy, in climate and weather
forecasting in the next five years, the Ministry should make all out efforts to improve our weather
and climate prediction services and bring them at par with the highest international standards of
accuracy within the next three years.
Action Taken by Government
Towards this, a five day district level Medium Range Weather Forecast is being issued since
June, 2008. During recent years, there is considerable improvement in quality of the forecast
issued. Continuous efforts are being made for improvement of the quality of these forecasts to
bring them at par with the highest international standards or accuracy. During Twelfth Five Year
Plan, it is also proposed to develop and issue block level Medium Range Weather Forecast for
facilitating the preparation of block level Agromet advisories as per the need of the marginal and
small farmers.
Comments
The Committee hopes that the proposal for the development and issue of block level
Medium Range Weather Forecast, to facilitate the preparation of block level Agromet
advisory services would be pursued and completed as per schedule, keeping in mind the
benefits that would accrue to the marginal and small farmers.
Recommendation (Para 17.5)
The Committee acknowledges the significance of the Indian polar missions as the climatic
conditions in these regions have a direct bearing on the monsoons, which is the lifeline of the

10
agriculture in our country. The Committee commends the setting of the Indian polar stations which
would increase the base of data collection regarding polar processes. The Committee hopes that
Bharati station would be commissioned as per schedule and start its operations during the year
2012-13, which will give significant boost to India’s polar research programme. The Committee
recommends that the continuing long term approved scientific projects which are the proposed
activity under the “Polar Science and Cryosphere” should be pursued diligently and in a well-
planned and strategic manner and the data collected from its scientific expeditions must be analyzed
and a serious endeavor made to use the results to predict the Indian monsoons more accurately.
Action Taken by Government
Thanking the Committee for appreciating the setting up of new Indian Station’ Bharati’ in
Antarctica, it is informed that the station has since been operationalised and first team has already
commenced wintering in the station. The collection of scientific data on weather parameter and
Geomagnetic Observation has already commenced.
Comments
The Committee congratulates the Ministry for the operationalisation of the new
Indian Station ‘Bharati’ and hopes that India’s polar research programme would reach new
heights and would help in the accurate prediction of the Indian monsoons.
Recommendation (Para 18.4)
The Committee, notes with concern that there was a shortfall in utilization of allocated funds
by the Ministry, to the tune of Rs.1.24 crores in the year 2009-10 and Rs.2.54 crores in the year
2010-11; which is evident from the difference in B.E. and Actual allocations for the said years. The
shortfall in utilization, is even more apparent for the year 2012, where the B.E. allocation stood
reduced from Rs.18.00 crores to Rs.2.00 crores only, i.e. a drastic reduction of about 90 per cent
of allocated budget. The Committee takes a serious view of the under utilization of funds in last few
years by the Ministry, which shows that the Ministry is not seriously pursuing this important
programme viz.. Polymetallic Nodules Programme. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends
that the Ministry must actively pursue this programme and the programme must be carried forward
with full vigour, for exploitation of the mineral resources in our vast Exclusive Economic Zone to
enhance availability of sufficient mineral resources required for our industrial growth.
Action Taken by Government
Recognizing the past financial performance of the programme, the Ministry has taken up
advance action to identify for chartering of a research vessel towards conducting topographic
survey of EEZ. Another partner has been identified to accelerate the work. The drastic under
utilizations of funds particularly during the year 2011-12 could be due to non-availability of required
chartered research vessel.
Comments
The Committee feels that the procedural requirements such as requirement of
chartered research vessel, ought to be sorted out without any further delay and the funds
allocated for the purpose must be utilized meticulously.
Recommendation (Para 19.4)
The Committee observes that as regards the detection and quantification of  gas-hydrates,

11
major portions of  the deep-water regions have remained unexplored and available data is inadequate
for the assessment of  gas-hydrates. The Committee therefore recommends that evaluation and
quantification of  gas-hydrates must be intensified in the EEZ region of  the country to fully explore
this resource especially in view of  its potential as clean fuel resource. The Committee is of  the
opinion that to meet the ever increasing demand of  energy in the country, it is imperative to explore
alternate sources of  energy as soon as possible and therefore such programmes should be actively
pursued and adequately funded.
Action Taken by Government
Ministry is already working on developing technologies for exploration. The Autonomous
Coring system has been developed and trials are continuing. Similarly remotely operated submersible
has been developed for exploration of  gas hydrates. Presently there is no technology available for
extraction of  gas hydrates from deep waters.
Comments
The Committee notes the efforts of  the Ministry and reiterates that the exploration
of gas hydrates should be expedited to meet the ever increasing demand for energy.

MINUTES

14

15
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the 17 th December, 2012 in Committee Room.
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri M. Rama Jois
3. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
LOK SABHA
4. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
5. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
6. Shri O.S. Manian
7. Shri Basori Singh Masram
8. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
9. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
10. Shri Pradeep Tamta
11. Shri Joseph Toppo
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and
informed them that the Committee would consider and adopt its draft 232
nd to 238 th Reports on
the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 222 nd to
228th reports on Demands for Grants (2012-13), pertaining to the Ministries/De partments of Atomic
Energy, Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, Space, Earth Sciences, Scientific and
Industrial Research and Biotechnology respectively.
2. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration, one by one, the Draft Action Taken
Reports and adopted the 232
nd to 238 th reports without any amendment.
15

16
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Committee, thereafter, decided to present/lay on the table of both the Houses of the
Parliament its 232 nd to 238 th Reports on 20 th December, 2012. The Committee authorised its
Chairman and in his absence Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra to present the Report in Rajya Sabha and
Shri Pradeep Tamta and in his absence Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde to lay the copy of the report
on the table of Lok Sabha.
The Committee, then, adjourned at 10.35 
A.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.