PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 192
ND  
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON THE 22 SEPTEMBER, 2008)
ND  
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON THE 22 SEPTEMBER, 2008)
ND  
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON THE 22 SEPTEMBER, 2008)
ND  
(FORWARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON THE 22 SEPTEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY , 
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY SECOND REPORT
ON
FUNCTIONING OF CENTRAL POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD
ST  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 21 OCTOBER, 2008)
ST  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 21 OCTOBER, 2008)
ST  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 21 OCTOBER, 2008)
ST  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 21 OCTOBER, 2008)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY SECOND REPORT
ON
FUNCTIONING OF CENTRAL POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD
(PRESENTED TO HON’BLE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON THE 22 ND SEPTEMBER, 2008)
(FORW ARDED TO HON’BLE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON THE 22 ND SEPTEMBER, 2008)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 21 ST OCTOBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 21 ST OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(iv)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (v)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—32
4S UMMARY OF R ECOMMENDATIONS .......................................................................................... 33—42
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 43—48
6. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................ 49—70

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2006-07)
1. Shri P.G . Narayanan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabha Thakur
#3. Vacant
4. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
5. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
6. Shri Kamal Akhtar
7. Shri Saman Pathak
8. Shri Jabir Husain
9. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
10. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Francis Fanthome
16. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
17. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
18. Shri Brahmananda Panda
19. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
20. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
21. Shri Pratik P. Patil
22. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
23. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
25. Shri Rakesh Singh
26. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
29. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
30. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
*31. Shri Rampal Singh
#Shrimati Viplove Thakur ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 30th November, 2006.
*Shri Rampal Singh nominated to the Committee w.e.f. 8th December, 2006.
(i)

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2007-08)
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabha Thakur
3. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
4. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
5. Shri Kamal Akhtar
6. Shri Saman Pathak
7. Shri Jabir Husain
8. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
9. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
*10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Francis Fanthome
16. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
17. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
18. Shri Brahmananda Panda
19. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
20. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
21. Shri Pratik P. Patil
22. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
23. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
25. Shri Rakesh Singh
26. Shri Rampal Singh
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
29. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
30. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
31. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
* Nominated w.e.f. 28th August, 2007.
(ii)

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2008-09)
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Dr. Ejaz Ali
7. Shri Jabir Husain
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Akbar Ahmad Dumpy
16. Shri Francis Fanthome
17. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
18. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
19. Shri Brahmananda Panda
20. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
21. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
22. Shri Pratik P. Patil
23. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
24. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
25. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
26. Shri Rampal Singh
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
29. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
30. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
31. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
(iii)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
(iv)

(v)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Ninety-second Report on the Functioning of Central
Pollution Control Board (CPCB).
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests in its meeting held on 8th September, 2006, decided to take up for
examination on the aspects relating to Functioning of Central Pollution Control Board and report
thereon. The Central Pollution Control Board is the apex technical body of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests to advise the Government on matters related to protection of
Environment. In this regard the Committee heard the views of the Secretary Ministry of
Environment and Forests and the representatives of certain State Pollution Control Boards viz.
Uttarakhand, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Orissa, Delhi, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. In
addition, the Committee also heard the views of some experts. A list showing the details of the
representatives of various Ministries/Departments who appeared before the Committee for oral
evidence is given in Annexure-I.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests, CPCB and different State Governments for replying to the clarifications sought by the
Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinize the same.
4. In the meeting held on 13th June, 2008 the Committee considered the draft report and adopted
the same.
DR. V . MAITREYAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
June 13, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

1
REPORT
CHAPTER-I
I. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Nature has since the hoary past been attached utmost significance in our country so much
so that it has been personified, revered and worshiped. Be it the sun, air, water, rivers, lakes,
ponds, mountains or the earth – all the constituents of environment were regarded in high esteem
and treated as sacrosanct. Whatever the religious or spiritual rationale behind this, one thing was
certain, that all these elements of nature individually as well as collectively were regarded vital for
the existence and survival of mankind, and hence such an august and holy treatment. This theory
still holds good. These elements of nature are still vital for the well being of mankind but with the
gradual change in our socio economic priorities, the reverence and significance accorded to them
has somehow been put on back burner. Basically and primarily an agrarian economy till mid Fiftees
of the last century, it started drifting towards industrialisation which led to urbanisation and now
in the age of globalization, economic development has acquired such a predominance that there can
be no looking back. Economic development and environment came into direct conflict with each
other, the latter often understood as anti-thesis to the former.
1.2 That the overriding economic priority would have its impact on environment was visualised
in the early seventies of the twentieth century. It was around this period that pollution had started
getting manifested or reflected in rivers and other water bodies due to industrial or sewage
discharge. To nip the problem in the bud a Central Board for Prevention and Control of Water
Pollution (CBPCWP) was constituted under the provision of the Water (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Act, 1974. The mandate of the board as spelt out in the above Act was:
“To promote cleanliness of streams and wells in different areas of the States through
prevention, control and abatement of water pollution”.
1.3 A major step in this direction was taken in the year 1976 with the enactment of the
Constitution (forty second Amendment) Act through which a new article i.e., article 48A under
Directive Principles of State Policy and a fundamental duty i.e., 51A (g) were inserted which
read as follows:
48A: Protection and improvement of environment and safeguarding of forests and wild life–
The State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to safeguard the
forests and wild life of the country.
51A: It shall be the duty of every citizen of lndia—
(g) To protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild
life, and to have compassion for living creatures.
1.4 The former provides that the State shall endeavor to apply the principle in making laws
while the latter makes it obligatory on the part of every citizen of the country to protect and
improve the natural environment.
1.5 Thereafter with the manifestation of pollution in air came the Air (Prevention and Control
of Pollution) Act in 1981 and the responsibility to improve the quality of air and to prevent control
or abate air pollution in the country was also entrusted to the CBPCWP. Later on under Water
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Amendment Act 1988, CBPCWP was rechristened as “Central
Pollution Control Board”. Thereafter a number of legislative and administrative measures of far
reaching consequences for Pollution Control were introduced some of which are:

2
(i) The Environment (Protection) Act 1986;
(ii) The Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989;
(iii) The Bio-Medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989;
(iv) The Plastics Manufacture, Sale and Usage Rules, 1999;
(v) Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000;
(vi) The Ozone Depleting Substances (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000;
(vii) The Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000;
(viii) The Batteries (Management and Handling) Rules, 2001;
(ix) The Plastics Manufacture and Usage Amendment Rules, 2003.
1.6 The present national policies for environmental management are contained in the National
Conservation Strategy and Statement on Environment and Development, 1992, the Policy Statement
on Abatement of Pollution, 1992 and National Environment Policy 2006.

3
CHAPTER-II
2. CENTRAL POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD (CPCB)
2.1 The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) is the apex technical body of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests entrusted with the task of abatement and control of pollution in the
country. Department of Science and Technology has recognized CPCB as a scientific and technical
organization. It is a multi-disciplinary organization where engineers and scientists of various
disciplines are in position. It gets 100 per cent grant-in-aid from the Ministry of Environment and
Forests both for plan and non-plan expenditure.
2.2 Sub-clauses (1) and (2) of clause 3 of ‘The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
Act, 1974 provide that to exercise its powers and discharge its functions, there shall be a Central
Board consisting of the following members:
• a full-time Chairman, being a person having special knowledge or practical experience
in respect of matters relating to environmental protection or a person having knowledge and
experience in administering institutions dealing with the matters aforesaid, to be nominated
by the Central Government;
• such number of officials, not exceeding five, to be nominated by the Central
Government to represent Government;
• such number of persons, not exceeding five, to be nominated by the Central
Government, from amongst the members of the State Boards, of whom not exceeding two
shall be from amongst the members of the local authorities;
• such number of non-officials, not exceeding three to be nominated by the Central
Government, to represent the interest of agriculture, fishery or industry or trade or any
other interest which, in the  opinion of the  Central Government, ought to be represented;
• two persons to represent the companies or corporations owned, controlled or managed
by the Central Government, to be nominated by the Government; and
• a full-time Member Secretary, possessing qualifications, knowledge and experience of
scientific, engineering or management aspects of pollution control, to be appointed by the
Central Government.
2.3 The total number of Members of the Board comes to 15 excluding the Chairman and
the Member Secretary. Out of fifteen, twelve Members are such officials who hold additional
charge of the  Membership of CPCB. Out of the twelve, five officials represent the Government and
five persons are nominated from amongst the members of State Boards. All the appointments are
made by Government. Further sub section 3 of section 5 of the Act provides that the  Central
Government may remove any Member of a Board before the expiry of his term of office which
is three years.
2.4 The Act does not prescribe any time limit within which the vacancy of Chairman or other
Members has to be filled up. As a result the post of regular Chairman of CPCB, lying vacant for
almost two years, has not been since filled up and an officer of the rank of Joint Secretary in the
Ministry of Environment and Forests is holding the charge of Chairman, CPCB ever since.
3

4
2.5 The Committee is of the view that with such a composition dominated by
Government representatives and constituted by Central Government, CPCB can not be
expected to act as a watchdog of environmental protection. The Committee also expresses
its displeasure over the fact that no qualifications or criteria have been fixed for Members
of such an important technical and scientific body. The eligibility criteria for Chairman
prescribing a person having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of matters
relating to environmental protection or a person having knowledge and experience in
administering institution dealing with the matters aforesaid are too general and vague as
to accommodate anyone who is even distantly related with environment.
2.6 The Committee has been informed that key posts in CPCB and SPCBs are being
manned by officers of Indian Administrative Service or bureaucrats who neither possess the
necessary capabilities and expertise in properly managing and planning pollution control
activities nor have enough time to pay attention to these activities for obvious reasons. This
trend has led to virtual relegation and replacement of technically capable persons to the
place of exile from the keyposts. The Committee has been informed that this point has
been highlighted by Prof. Menon Committee set up by the Supreme Court with regard to
management of hazardous waste. According to the report of the Supreme Court Monitoring
Committee on Hazardous Waste, 77 per cent of Chairpersons and 55 per cent of Member
Secretaries in different state pollution control boards are not qualified enough to hold the
post. The Committee observes that this is a very disturbing trend and that this practice
needs to be stopped forthwith.
2.7 The Committee feels that Chairman and Members of the Board should be persons
who have rendered remarkable and distinguished service to the cause of Environment. They
should be persons of repute and widely acclaimed. They should be appointed for a fixed
tenure and the sword of removal or termination should not be hanging on their heads.
Members like Chairman should be full time. The Committee also feels that the present
large composition is hampering its effective functioning. The size of the Board may be
reduced, so as to ensure that decisions are taken and translated into action in the right
earnest.
2.8 If the creation of CPCB is seen in the present day context, when pollution has started
posing numerous challenges it appears that the very foundation on which it has been established
is shaky and weak. It has been established under a subject which is primarily the concern of State
Governments. Water supplies, irrigation and canals, drainage and embankments, water storage and
water power is a state subject as per Entry 17 of the State List of the seventh schedule to the
constitution. But prevention and control of water pollution overtly or covertly does not seem to fall
under the ambit of this item as it has nothing to do with drawing or sharing of water that could
affect rights of the states. It involved the larger issue of cleaning up and maintaining the
wholesomeness of water.
2.9 The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 has been enacted under Article
252 of the Constitution and not under Article 248 or 249. Article 248 gives exclusive powers to
Parliament to make law with respect to any matter not enumerated in the concurrent or state list
while as per Article 249 Parliament shall have power to legislate with respect to a matter in the
state list in the national interest. Article 252 provides that it shall be lawful for Parliament to pass
an act if it appears to the Legislatures of two or more states to be desirable that any matter on
which Parliament has no power to make laws for the states except as provided in article 249 and
250 should be regulated in such states by Parliament by law, and if resolutions to that effect are
passed by all the legislatures of those states. Accordingly, resolutions to the effect that prevention
and control of water pollution would be regulated in the states of Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Haryana,

5
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Tripura and
West Bengal, were passed by all the Houses of the legislatures of those States. In pursuance of
the above Act, the Central Government constituted a central Board called the Central Pollution
Control Board (CPCB) and the respective State Governments constituted State Pollution Control
Boards to exercise power conferred on and perform function assigned to them under this Act. Thus
two parallel Boards- one at the centre and the other at State level came into existence with the
latter being entrusted with important and critical functions and the former being given the advisory
and coordination role. This resulted in the Central Pollution Control Board turning into a weak and
lame duck organization.
2.10 The Committee feels that our experiment with the existing framework/model i.e.
simultaneous existence of two parallel boards one at the Central and the other at States level each
one working as independent and autonomous entity in its own capacity with no Central authority
to command and control, has led us to no where over the last 33 years. Environmental degradation
and pollution is growing at an alarming pace and has acquired alarming proportions. Rivers, lakes
and other water bodies are getting polluted unabatedly and recklessly and air is getting dirtier day
by day. To ensure compliance by way of inspection, vigilance and sampling falls under the domain
of SPCBs with CPCB acting merely as a guiding and coordinating body. The end result is that
SPCBs are masters in their own rights and they do whatever they desire.
2.11 Further, section 61 of the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974, empowers
the Central Government to supersede the Central Pollution Control Board if at any time the Central
Government is of the opinion that the Central Pollution Control Board has persistently made default
in performance of the functions imposed on it by or under this Act or that circumstances exist
which render it necessary in the public interest so to do for a period of one year. Such a provision
renders Central Pollution Control Board to act as mere puppet in the hands of Central Government
and does not allow it any space for independent and autonomous functioning.
2.12 For creation and appointment to certain posts, Central Pollution Control Board is also
required to obtain prior sanction of the Government (Rule 8 of Water (Prevention & Control of
Pollution) Rules; 1975).
2.13 Sections 3 and 5 of the Environment (Protection Act) 1986 read as:—
‘‘Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Goverrment, shall have the power to take
all such measures as it deems necessary or expedient for the purpose of protecting and
improving the quality of the environment and preventing controlling and abating
environmental pollution’’;
“Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law but subject to the provisions of this
Act the Central Government may, in the exercise of its powers and performance of its
functions under this Act issue directions in writing to any person, officer or any authority
and such person, officer or authority shall be bound to comply with such directions”.
Explanation—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power to issue
directions under this section includes the power to direct—
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, operation or process; or
(b) stoppage or regulation of the supply of electricity or water or any other service.
2.14 Ministry of Environment and Forests vide its notification dated the 10th July, 2002 delegated
its powers conferred upon it under section 5 of the Act  to the Chairman, CPCB to issue directions
to any industry or any local or other authority for the violation of the standard and rules relating
to hazardous waste, bio-medical waste, hazardous chemicals, industrial solid waste, municipal solid

6
waste including plastic. But delegation of this power is subject to the condition that it may be
revoked if in the opinion of the Central Government such a course of action is necessary in public
interest.
2.15 These are some of the highlights which corroborate the fact that it is the Central
Government/Ministry of Environment and Forests and not the Central Pollution Control Board
which de-facto is the chief custodian of Environment preservation and protection. Central Pollution
Control Board devoid of any effective legal authority is a mere body or board without teeth.
2.16 The Committee’ expresses its anguish over the fact that the Central Board created
for the purpose of control and abatement of pollution is being given such a raw deal so
much so that it has virtually been reduced as a near defunct body. If all the powers and
functions were to be concentrated into the hands of the Central Government/Ministry of
Environment & Forests the very need to have such an apex body is untenable. The
Committee feels that the country can ill afford to let this sorry state of affairs prolong any
further as it has already started bearing the brunt of pollution and climate change and
hence drastic measures are required to be taken. Central Pollution Control Board needs to
be given adequate statutory and legal support to make it effective and functional and for
this purpose its constitution under Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974
needs to be urgently reviewed. The Committee recommends that environment protection
should be included as an item in the seventh schedule to the constitution in the concurrent
list and CPCB be brought under its ambit with all necessary powers and functions to meet
the challenges that pollution and its after-effects pose before us without disturbing the
federal character of our constitution. This new body should be given functional as well as
financial autonomy so that it can discharge its duties without fear or favour.
2.17 ZONAL OFFICES OF CPCB
2.17.1 It was not practically possible for CPCB with its headquarters at Delhi to run its activities
throughout the country. Accordingly, CPCB has established its Offices to co-ordinate nationwide
programmes on control of pollution. Location of Zonal Offices  and their jurisdiction is as under:
Zonal Offices States Covered
1 Bangalore Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Lakshdweep, Goa,
Pondicherry
2. Kolkata W est Bengal, Orissa, Bihar, Jharkhand, Andman and Nicobar
3. Shillong Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur,
Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan
4. Bhopal Madhaya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan
5. Lucknow Uttar Pradesh, Uttaranchal Pradesh, Haryana, Chandigarh, Punjab,
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir
6. Vadodara Gujarat, Maharashtra, Daman Diu
2.17.2 The Committee feels that although pollution in some form or the other has spread
its tentacles throughout the length and breadth of the country, CPCB has failed in making
its presence felt, as an effective controller, even after 33 years of its existence mainly
because of the number of its Zonal offices being grossly inadequate and insufficient. It may
not be feasible for a zonal office to cover three to eight states specially when the number
of industries, vehicular load etc., has multiplied manifold in course of time. The Committee,

7
therefore, recommends that one zonal office should be established in each State so that
CPCB in close coordination with State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) is able to keep a
close watch on the extent of pollution and take strict action against violations of pollution
norms. This will also help state Pollution Control Boards to derive full benefits of the
Central Pollution Control Boards’ expertise.
2.18 When CPCB was created, its role was limited to promoting cleanliness of streams and wells
and improving the quality of air. However, during the last 33 years since its formation, a lot of
other functions have been assigned to the Board. T he Committee is aware that the
responsibility of pollution control board has over the years increased enormously and is
likely to go up further in time to come. Hazardous Waste Management, industrial pollution,
bio medical waste, e-waste, plastic waste, mercury waste, increase in mining activities, solid
waste management, ever growing air pollution, growing number of vehicles etc, requires
stronger regulatory mechanism and further strengthening of Board both in terms of man
power and expertise.  Even though the number of industries in different categories has gone up
and the workload has increased, it has not been accompanied by proportionate increase in man
power in Central Pollution Control Board. As on 31st March, 2008, only 370 staff are in position
as against the total sanctioned staff strength of 551. A statement showing the sanctioned staff
strength in CPCB and number of vacancies in each cadre is given in Annexure-II.
2.19 The Committee was informed that there has been acute shortage of technical staff
in CPCB. Though the Board has sophisticated equipments to monitor various types of
pollution they do not have sufficient technical manpower to handle it. Technical Staff
comprised only 48 per cent of total staff in 2004-05. Moreover, out of its 236 technical staff
only half are in the officer grade. The Committee was informed that the shortage of
technical manpower is far more acute in various State pollution control boards, also as a
study to find out the number of days a scientific and Technical person individually and
working together devote on monitoring, inspection analysis and preparation of reports to an
industry gave some startling revelations. A technical person in Gujarat PCB spares 1.77 days
to monitor an industry in a year, in Karnataka PCB a technical persons gets 1.72 days while
in Maharastra Board the person spends only 1.23 days* a year. This average includes time
taken on traveling to and fro. This only-presents a glimpse of the whole gamut of
arrangements put in place for pollution control and how efficiently and effectively the
machinery is at work. The Committee feels that one of the reasons for such a sorry State
of affairs lies in shortage of technical and scientific man power within the central as well
as State boards. The Committee expresses its deep anguish over such an apathetic approach
of the Government in providing adequate manpower to the boards and recommends that
urgent steps should be taken to recruit requisite number of technical and scientific staff.
The Committee recommends that CPCB be allowed to recruit staff as per its requirements
after conducting a study for the purpose.
2.20 The Committee also recommends that for making technical and scientific manpower
easily and readily available, a long term strategy should be evolved. Environment
management and education should be included in the higher educational programs by
devising a suitable syllabi for the purpose. An institute exclusively for the purpose of
teaching of and training in the subject of environment related matters could also be one of
the options that Government should try  to explore.
2.21 The Committee was informed that the remunerations/ Salaries/Allowances for
officers and staff of CPCB are not lucrative enough to attract talented people and contain
* Source–Centre for Science and Environment.

8
the attrition rates. The experienced people from CPCB are hired by corporate sector by
offering attractive remuneration and in the process valuable experience is lost. The
Committee expresses its grave concern over the situation. The Committee desires that
talent and performance should be rewarded. A suitable career progression scheme should
also be so devised as to act as incentive to the officers and staff of the CPCB.
2.22 The Committee has been further informed that the policy of Finance Ministry to
abolish posts lying vacant for a year has taken a heavy toll. The Committee understands
the fact that it may not be possible to find suitable technically qualified manpower at any
given moment a vacancy arises. But a post lying vacant for a year for want of non-
availability of a suitable candidate does not mean that the need for the post is gone. In this
context the committee opines that different rules be applied for scientific departments as
their requirements are different from that of general administration. The Committee
recommends the Ministry to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance at an
appropriate level.
2.23 The Committee has been informed that adequate training is not provided to the
personnel of Central Pollution Control Board. Considering that controlling pollution forms
one of the most important functions of CPCB requiring scientific and technical expertise,
multi disciplinary training should be imparted to the personnel.” The Committee is also of
the view that creation of trained cadre is required for monitoring and resolving
environmental problem.
2.24 The Committee feels that strict compliance of environmental regulation is required
to maintain the delicate balance in eco system. The Committee further feels that the
country today needs better regulations which are both observable and implementable.
Therefore, it recommends that the CPCB should be restructured as an autonomous
statutory authority with the mandate not only to develop regulations and fix up standards
but also to ensure enforcement and compliance. CPCB should also suggest alternatives for
meeting those standards in coordination with other Scientific and Technical Departments.
The Research and Development team of CPCB should also act in close coordination with
other Research and Development organisations.
2.25 FUNCTIONS OF THE CENTRAL BOARD
The functions of Central Pollution Control Board find mention under section (16) of the
water and Air Act which are as follows:—
* Advise the Central Government on any matter concerning prevention and. control of water
and air pollution and improvement of the quality of air;
* Plan and cause to be executed a nation-wide programme for the prevention, control or
abatement of water and air pollution;
* Co-ordinate the activities of the State Boards and resolve disputes among them;
* Provide technical assistance and guidance to the State Boards, carry out and sponsor
investigations and research relating to problems of water and air pollution, and for their
prevention; control or abatement;
* Plan and organise training of persons engaged in programmes for prevention, control or
abatement of water and air pollution;
* Organise through mass media, a comprehensive mass awareness programme on
prevention, control or abatement of water and air pollution;

9
* Collect compile and publish technical and statistical data relating to water and air pollution
and the measures devised for their effective prevention, control or abatement; Prepare
manuals, codes and guidelines relating to treatment and disposal of sewage and trade
effluents as well as for stack gas cleaning devices, stacks and ducts;
* Disseminate information in respect of matters relating to water and air pollution and their
prevention and control; and
* Lay-down, modify or annul, in consultation with the State Governments concerned, the
standards for stream or well, and lay down standards for the quality of air; and,
* Perform such other functions as and when prescribed by the Government of India.
2.26 After the enactment of Environment Protection Act, 1986 CPCB has been further delegated
functions to implement rules framed under EP A namely; Hazardous wastes, Bio-medial waste,
Municipal solid wastes and Plastics waste.
2.27 FUNCTIONS OF THE CENTRAL BOARD AS STATE BOARD FOR THE UNION
TERRITORIES
2.27.1 The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has been mandated to perform the functions
of State Pollution Boards for different Union Territories. It has the following functions vis-a vis
the Union Territories:
* Advise the Governments of Union Territories with respect to the suitability of any
premises or location for carrying on any industry which is likely to pollute a stream or well
or cause air pollution; Lay down standards for treatment of sewage and trade effluents and
for emissions from automobiles, industrial plants, and any other polluting source;
* Lay down standards for treatment of sewage and trade effluents and for emissions from
automobiles, industrial plants, and any other polluting source;
* Evolve efficient methods for disposal of sewage and trade effluents on land;
* Develop reliable and economically viable methods for treatment of sewage, trade effluents
and air pollution control equipment;
* Identify any area or areas within Union Territories as air pollution control area or areas
to be notified under The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981; and
* Assess the quality of ambient air and water, and inspect wastewater treatment
installations, air pollution control equipment, industrial plants or manufacturing processes to
evaluate their performance and to take steps for the prevention, control and abatement of
air and water pollution.
2.28 DELEGATION OF POWERS BY CPCB
2.28.1 As per policy decision of the Government of India, the Central Pollution Control Board
delegated its powers and functions under Section 4, Sub Section 4 of The Water (Prevention and
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Section 6 of The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,
1981 with respect to Union Territories to respective Pollution Control Committees under the local
Administration.
2.29 THRUST AREAS OF CENTRAL POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD
2.29.1 The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has identified the foIIowing thrust areas to
contain the environmental damage being done at present:

10
* Monitoring of National Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Programme (NAMP);
* Strengthening of National Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Programme (NAMP);
* Strengthening with respect to number of Stations; and
* Strengthening with respect to additional pollutants monitoring
* Continuation of National Water Quality Monitoring Programme (NWMP)
* Study of Ground Water Pollution;
* Assessment of non-point sources of pollution;
* Epidemiological study;
* Preparation of Environmental Status Report;
* Development and demonstration of appropriate liquid and solid waste Management
technologies for semi-urban area;
* Laboratory Management and Research & Development Activities for prevention and
control of pollution;
* Development and Review of Effluent/Emission Standards and Guidelines;
* Environmental Information and Management System;
* Pollution Control Implementation in major polluting industries;
* Implementation of the Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, the
Recycled Plastics Manufacture and Usage Rules, the Biomedical Waste (Management and
Handling) Rules, Vehicular and Noise Pollution Control etc.
* Cleaner Production, Environmental Auditing and Common Effluent Treatment Plants
(CETPs);
* Implementation of the Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling) Rules;
* Spatial Environmental planning and Natural Resource Protection;
* Preparation and updating of Zoning Atlas.
2.30 ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE
2.30.1 As per the mandated functions of CPCB, the organizational structure has been framed.
There are three major groups in the organization which includes;
a. Technical Services
b. Scientific Services
c. Finance and Administration
The important divisions and their major areas of activities are as under:
Sl. No. Divisions Area of Activity
12 3
1. Pollution Assessment Assessment of Water and Air Pollution
2. Infrastructure and (R&D) Laboratories and R&D

11
12 3
3. Plan Co-ordination Plans and Programmes of CPCB and Co-ordination
matters
4. Pollution Control Chemical Industries
Implementation (PCI-I)
5. PCI-II Metallurgical, Thermal Power Plants and other Air
Polluting Industries.
6. PCI-III Agro based industries
7. Urban Pollution Small Scale Industry, vehicular pollution, environmental
Control planning, solid waste and plastic wastes and Training
8. Hazardous Waste Hazardous waste and chemical, bio-medical waste and
Management electronic waste.

12
CHAPTER-III
3.1 CPCB has organized its activities according to the mandated functions. A critical analysis
of the activities of CPCB under its major heads are brought out in the succeeding paragraphs:—
3.2 AIR POLLUTION
3.2.1 Air is life and life is air. But the same air that sustains and supports life can him out to
be harmful and hazardous for human and living beings on the planet if it gets polIuted. Mostly air
pollution originates from man-made sources which include mobile sources ( e.g., cars, trucks,
buses) and stationary sources ( e.g., factories, refineries, power plants), as well as indoor sources
(e.g., some building materials and cleaning solvents).
3.2.2 In order to arrest the deterioration in air quality, it is necessary to assess the present and
anticipated air pollution through continuous air quality survey/monitoring.
3.3 NATIONAL AMBIENT AIR QUALITY STANDARDS (NAAQS)
3.3.1 The ambient air quality standards are pre-requisite for developing programme for effective
management of ambient air quality and to reduce the damaging effects of air pollution:—
• To indicate the levels of air quality necessary with an adequate margin of safety to protect
the public health, vegetation and property;
• To assist in establishing priorities for abatement and control of pollutant level; and
• To provide uniform yardstick for assessing air quality at national level.
3.3.2 The Central Pollution Control Board had adopted first ambient air quality standards on
November 11, 1982 as per section 16 (2) (h) of the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
Act, 1981. The air quality standards were subsequently revised on April 11, 1994.
3.4 NATIONAL AIR MONITORING PROGRAMME (NAMP)
3.4.1 Central Pollution Control Board initiated National Ambient Air Quality Monitoring (NAAQM)
programme in the year 1984 with 7 stations at Agra and Anpara. Subsequently the programme was
renamed as National Air Monitoring Programme (NAMP), The number of monitoring stations under
NAMP at persent is 332 covering various cities/towns in 28 States and 4 Union Territories of the
country.
3.4.2 The objectives of the NAMP are to determine the status and trends of air quality; to
ascertain whether the prescribed ambient air quality standards are violated; to continue ongoing
process of producing periodic evaluation of air pollution situation in urban and industrial areas of
the country; to obtain the knowledge and understanding necessary for developing preventive and
corrective measures and to understand the natural cleansing process undergoing in the environment
through pollution dilution, dispersion, wind based movement, dry deposition, precipitation and
chemical transformation of pollutants generated.
3.4.3 Four pollutants namely, Sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, respirable suspended particulate
matter and suspended particulate matter are being monitored regularly under this programme.
Monitoring of pollutants are carried out for 24 hours (4 hourly sampling for gaseous pollutants and
12

13
8 hourly for particulate matter) with a frequency of twice a week. Monitoring is being done by
CPCB, zonal offices, SPCB/PCC and NEERI Nagpur, with CPCB acting as coordinator to ensure
uniformity and consistency in air quality data. CPCB provides requisite technical and financial
supports to the agencies engaged in this work.
3.5 The Committee was informed that out of 332 monitoring stations, a number of them
are not on line and some of them are not functioning. Data is not being regularly updated
and the data generated is not being properly analyzed. It was also informed to the
Committee that only criteria pollutants i.e, Sulphur Dioxide (S02) , Nitrogen Dioxide (N02),
Suspended Particulate Matter (SPM) and Respirable Suspended Particulate Matter (RSPM)
are being monitored.There are a number of other hazardous pollutants like Volatile Organic
Compound (VOC), Benzene Toluene Xylene (BTX), Poly Aromatic Hydrocarbons (PAHs),
PM2.5, Ozone, etc, present in the ambience which are neither monitored nor any standards
have been set for them.
3.6 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the situation given above. It feels
that mere monitoring without any corrective and preventive follow up action is not going
to be productive. The Committee, is also of the opinion that there is a need to have new
and much more aggressive strategies to deal with the problem of air pollution in our cities.
Currently, even though we have the Air Act and the standards for air quality, there is no
legal obligation on State Governments/Local Municipal Corporations to meet ambient air
quality standards. While we gear up to monitor and control Air Pollution in biggest cities,
smaller cities are fast catching up with the same critical pollution levels. Thus there is a
greater need to decentralize the responsibility down to the municipal/local and State levels.
Further, to achieve these targets all Central programmes need to be re-organised under a
National Air Quality Plan, the city based programmes under Clean Air Action Plan and
programmes for industrial areas as Air Pollution Control and Prevention in Industrial Areas
programmes.
3.7 The Committee also expresses its concern over the fact that there is no central
agency to set standards/norms for emission. The jurisdiction to set norms for vehicular
emission lies with the Ministry of Surface Transport while for indoor air pollution, the nodal
agency is the Ministry of Labour. The Committee also feels that there is a need for
ensuring that the standards once finalized by technical committees are not put on hold for
notification by the Ministry as is the case with the sponge iron standard for air and water
emission. This is leading to huge problems and rising industrial pollution in Orissa,
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Karnataka and other States.
3.8 The Committee in the light of the above observations, feels that CPCB needs to be
so strengthened as to tackle the above issues in right perspective.
3.9 The Committee also desires that the ambient air quality monitoring network should
be strengthened and expanded from the current 332 stations to at least 1000  stations. This
could be expanded to about 15 cities per year so as to cover the 76 non-compliant cities over
a period of five years. The network of city monitoring stations should broadcast a daily alert
on air pollution levels. The air pollution health index should be used to alert people of the
health risks in their cities. The Committee desires that the same should be done within a
time-bound manner keeping in mind the growing environmental concerns.
3.10 The committee has been informed that the share of SPM load caused by thermal
power plants is about 82% of the total industrial pollution. Still many more thermal powers
projects are in the pipeline and would become operational in the next 10 to 15 years. The
Committee is aware of the importance of energy and power as the main driving force in

14
the process of economic development but at the same time it feels that the ‘country can
not afford to ignore and neglect the importance of environment. It, therefore, emphasizes
the need to switch over to green sources of energy like solar, wind and atomic energy as
a long term solution of energy requirements.  Government should initiate some technology
mission programmes to achieve the above objective.
3.11 Due to increasing replacement of solid and liquid fuels by CNG  and LPG, the
probability of Nitrogen Oxides emitted in atmosphere has increased. The Committee desires
that CPCB should keep itself abreast of the emerging scenario and ready to initiate the
mitigation efforts required therefor.

15
15
CHAPTER-IV
4. W ATER POLLUTION
4.1 Water is another element which plays a very crucial role in the Iife of living beings. It
would not be an exaggeration if it is said that there can be no life on the earth without water.
Water constitutes nearly two-third of the surface area of the earth. But impure and polluted water
proves to be very dangerous not only for human lives, but also ecological system. It was primarily
with this consideration that Government enacted Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act,
1974 to restore and maintain wholesomeness of acquatic resources.
4.2 WATER QUALITY MONITORING PROGRAMME
4.2.1 To ensure that the water quality is being maintained or restored at the desired level, it is
important that the pollution control boards regularly monitor the water quality. The water quality
monitoring is performed  with following main objectives in mind.
• For rational planning of pollution control strategies and their prioritisation;
• To assess nature and extent of pollution control needed in different water bodies or their
part;
• To evaluate effectiveness of pollution control measures already is existence;
• To evaluate water quality trend over a period of time;
• To assess assimilative capacity of a water body thereby reducing cost on pollution
control;
• To understand the environmental fate of different pollutants.
• To assess the fitness of water for different uses.
4.3 The Committee was informed that the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has
established a network of monitoring stations on rivers across the country to evaluate the extent of
pollution and the effect of control measures. The present network comprises of 1019 stations in
27 States and 6 Union Territories spread over the country. The monitoring is done on monthly or
quarterly basis in surface waters and on half yearly basis in case of ground water. The monitoring
network covers 200 Rivers, 60 Lakes, 5 Tanks, 3 Ponds, 3 Creeks, 13 Canals, 17 Drains and 321
Wells. Out of the 1019 stations, 592 are on rivers, 65 on lakes, 17 on drains,13 on canals, 5 on
tank, 3 each on and creeks, and ponds and 321 on wells. Presently the inland water quality-
monitoring network is operated under a three-tier programme i.e., Global Environment Monitoring
System (GEMS), Monitoring of Indian National Aquatic Resources System (MINARS) and Yamuna
Action Plan (YAP). Water samples are analysed for 28 parameters consisting of physico-chemical
and bacteriological parameters for ambient water samples apart from the field observations. Besides
this, 9 trace metals and 22 pesticides are also analysed in selected samples. Biomonitoring is also
carried out on specific locations. In view of limited resources, limited number of organic pollution
related parameters are chosen for frequent monitoring i.e. monthly or quarterly and major cations,
anions, other inorganic ions and micro pollutants (Toxic Metals and POP’s) are analysed once in
a year to keep track of water quality over a period of time.

16
4.4 Approach to Water Quality Management
4.4.1 The water quality management in India is performed under the provision of Water
(Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974. The Act does not define the level of
wholesomeness to be maintained or restored in different water bodies of the country. The Central
Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has, therefore, tried to define the wholesomeness in terms of
protection of human uses, and thus, taken human uses of water as base for identification of water
quality objectives for different water bodies in the country.
4.4.2 It would have been too ambitious to maintain or restore all natural water bodies at pristine
level. Further, Planning pollution control activities to attain such a goal is bound to be deterrent to
developmental activities and cost prohibitive too. Since the natural water bodies are used for
various competing as well as conflicting demands, the objective is aimed at restoring and/or
maintaining natural water bodies or their parts to such a quality as needed for their best uses.
Thus, a concept of “designated best use” (DBU) was developed. According to this concept, out
of several uses of a water body, the use which demands highest quality of water, is termed as
“designated best use”, and accordingly the water body is designated.
4.5 The Committee agrees that the water quality monitoring is an important exercise
which helps in evaluating the nature and extent of pollution control required and
effectiveness of pollution control measures already in existence. The role of CPCB in this
programme is critical. It must be the key agency responsible for monitoring the health of
our water bodies. The information collected through monitoring should be made available to
State Governments and in particular to the public so that accountability and awareness
increases.
4.6 Apart form trade effluents, domestic waste water or sewage forms one of the major
sources of pollution of rivers in the country. As per the Annual Report 2004-05 of the
Central Pollution Control Board about 26500 mld of sewage is generated in the country
from the Class-I cities and Class-II towns at present. Largely owing to funding provided by
NRCD, treatment capacity exists for only about 7000 mId of sewage. Thus, there is a large
gap between generation and treatment of sewage and discharge of untreated sewage
becomes the most important source of water pollution in the country. Sewage treatment
plants exist in only 92 out of 423 Class-I cities and 37 out of 498 Class-II cities. Even this
installed sewage treatment capacity is not utilized fully mainly because of neglect of
respective State Governments/Municipal Authorities. A survey of Sewage Treatment Plants
by Central PoIlution Control Board suggested that a large number of them are not
functioning properly. Most of the plants are facing power cut problem. During power cut
operation of the plants get affected. Out of 13 STPs under Ganga Action Plan only 5 were
observed to be complying with stipulated norms of discharge and rest 8 were not complying
with prescribed standard. Out of 9 STPs monitored under Yamuna Action Plan, only one STP
was found complying with the norms.
4.7 As per the Annual Report 2004-2005 of the CPCB, Common Effluent treatment
Plants having combined capacity of 560 MLD have been constructed and commissioned so
far in the country covering more than 10,000 polluting industries. Central Pollution Control
Board studied the performance of CETPs operating throughout the country through CPCB
Zonal Offices in collaboration with S tate Pollution Control Boards.The performance of
CETPs has also been found to be affected of poor operation and maintenance. The
Committee is of the view that in order to overcome this problem, the CETPs should be
constructed and operated by the concerned State Governments/State Pollution Control
Boards (SPCBs). The capital and operational costs should be charged to the industries.

17
4.8 The Committee expresses its serious concern over the manner in which the problem
of water pollution is being handled. Unless and until proper and foolproof arrangements and
adequate facilities for sewage treatment are put in place and it is ensured that they
function to their capacity rivers, and other water bodies would continue to be heavily
polluted. This is why the river Yamuna, over the years has virtually turned into a “Nallah”
despite crores of rupees being spent on its cleaning and upkeep. The health of prominent
rivers like the Ganga and others is not any better.
4.9 It is understood that the Government is considering the launch of a revamped river
conservation programme. The Committee recommends that programme should include a
revised institutional design, which provides the State Governments with the legal mandate
to ensure river cleaning. The State should be given incentives and disincentives for not
meeting targets for river water quality standards. The programme must be geared towards
ensuring that all urban wastewater is treated so that the health of waterbodies can be
restored and consequently human health costs are minimized. The programme for sewage
treatment must ensure that it is cost effective and focused towards reuse and recycling of
water.
4.10 The Committee is of the view that a holistic approach is required to tackle the
problem of water pollution. The present division of responsibilities between MOEF, Ministry
of Agriculture, Ministry of Health and various municipalities, etc., requires better
coordination and more synergies so that pollution in water at whatever stage, source or at
the consumption point, could be checked and responsibility fixed. The. Committee desires
that samples of ground water should be taken more frequently in areas which have
distilleries, paper plants, power plants and other polluting industries so as to check the
adverse impact on local population. The Central Pollution Control Board should also have
detailed action plans in the existing industrial areas for regular monitoring of the quality
of ground water and other water bodies to ascertain the level of contamination, fix a
benchmark for future industrialization and also to consider moratorium on further
industrialization in such regions based on the contamination level. The Committee
recommends that CPCB must also ensure that the polluting industries make adequate
arrangements for providing medical and health facilities to the people affected by pollution
related diseases in that area/region. The Committee is of the view that the discharge of
sewerage is regulated not only in terms of specific loads but also in terms of maximum daily
load i.e., kg perday/kg per hour so that the amount of pollution discharge into a media
always remains lower than the assimilative capacity of the rivers. This will ensure that the
river or media is not unduly stressed and the downstream users are not affected.

18
CHAPTER-V
5. NOISE POLLUTION
5.1 Noise is a major factor of environmental pollution. It is a disturbance to the human
environment that is escalating at such a high rate that it will became a major threat to the quality
of human lives. Noise originates from human activities, especially the urbanization and the
development of transport and industry. Though, the urban population is more affected by such
pollution, however, small town/villages along side roads or industries are also a victim of this
problem, Noise is becoming increasingly omnipresent, yet unnoticed form of pollution even in
developed countries. Road traffic, jet planes, garbage trucks, construction equipment,
manufacturing processes, and lawnmowers are same of the major sources of unwanted sounds that
are routinely released into the air.
5.2 Though noise pollution is a slow and subtle  killer, very little efforts have been made to
address this problem. The effects of excessive noise could lead to permanent loss of memory,
hearing or psychiatric disorder. Even relatively low levels of noise affects human health adversely.
It may cause hypertension, sleep disorder and/or hinder cognitive development in children.
5.3 To monitor and control noise pollution, Government of India has notified The Noise
Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000 an 14th February, 2000. The standards prescribed
in the rules are as follows:
5.4 Ambient air quality standards in respect of noise for different Areas/Zones:—
(i) The ambient air quality standards in respect of noise for different areas/zones shall be
such as specified in the Schedule annexed to these rules.
(ii) The State Government shall categorize the areas into industrial, commercial, residential
or silence areas/zones for the purpose of implementation of noise standards for
different areas.
(iii) The State Government shall take measures for abatement of noise including noise
emanating from vehicular movements and ensure that the existing noise levels do not
exceed the ambient air quality standards specified under these rules.
(iv) All development authorities, local bodies and other concerned authorities while planning
developmental activity or carrying out functions relating to town and country planning
shall take into consideration all aspects of noise pollution as a parameter of quality of
life to avoid noise menace and to achieve the objective of maintaining the ambient air
quality standards in respect of noise.
(v) An area comprising not less than 100 metres around hospitals, educational institutions
and courts may be declared as silence area/zone for the purpose of these rules.
5.5 Restrictions on the use of Loud Speakers/Public Address System
(i) A loud speaker or a public address system shall not be used except after obtaining
written permission from the authority.
18

19
(ii) A loud speaker or a public address system shall not be used at night (between 10:00
p.m. to 6:00 a.m.) except in closed premises for communication within,  e.g.  auditoria,
conference rooms, community halls and banquet halls.
(iii) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-rule (2), the State Government may subject
to such terms and conditions as are necessary to reduce noise pollution, permit use
of loud speakers or public address systems during night hours (between 10.00 p.m.
to 12.00 midnight) on or during any cultural or religious festive occasion of a limited
duration not exceeding fifteen days in all during a calendar year.
5.6 Violation in Silence Zone/Area
Whoever, in any place covered under the silence zone/area commits any of the following
offence, shall be liable for penalty under the provisions of the Act:—
(i) whoever, plays any music or uses any sound amplifiers,
(ii) whoever, beats a drum or tom-tom or blows a horn either musical or pressure, or
trumpet or beats or sounds any instrument, or
(iii) whoever, exhibits any mimetic, musical or other performances of a nature to attract
crowds.
5.7 The Committee feels that owing to rapid industrialization and urbanization in the
country, an enormous increase in noise pollution has taken place which is going to
aggravate further in times to come. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that
different State Governments stipulate different norms to control the noise pollution. In this
light the Committee recommends that a uniform and strict institutional mechanism
throughout the country to check and mitigate the problem be evolved and implemented in
a time bound manner.
5.8 The Committee feels that CPCB as a nodal central agency entrusted with the task
of pollution control has utterly failed in even evolving a pan-Indian, standard parameters
of pollutants, acceptable to all the States/UTs. Some of the States like West Bengal and
Maharashtra, have adopted much more stringent norms particularly with regard to
manufacture of plastic bag and noise level. For plastic it is less than 14 micron in West
Bengal, whereas the national standard is 20 micron. For noise it is 90 dcb in West Bengal
as against 125 dcb at the national level. The Committee is of the opinion that the standards
for various types of pollutions set by CBCB must be updated at regular intervals and
uniform standards should be the adopted throughout the country. More than the need for
setting standards is the necessity for enforcement, which is totally lacking as of now. The
local authority need to be suitably sensitized to be alive and responsive to the problem
within their jurisdiction. CPCB must find ways to address the concerns in this regard.

20
CHAPTER-VI
6. INDUSTRIAL POLLUTION
6.1 Industrial development is an important constituent of our pursuit for economic growth,
employment generation and betterment in the quality of life. On the other hand, industrial activities,
without proper precautionary measures for environmental protection are liable to cause pollution and
associated problems. Hence, it is necessary that regulatory norms are complied with for prevention
and control of pollution. The adoption of clean technologies and improvement in management
practices, commitment and voluntary initiatives of industry for responsible care of the environment
are also important to sustain responsibilities of industrial sector towards environment.
6.2 The Committee during the course of examination of the subject has been given to
understand that environment clearances for mining, setting up of industries, etc. are given by the
Central or State Government concerned and that CPCB or SPCBs do not have any say in these
matters. They are not even consulted or informed. These Boards come in the picture only after
the clearance has been given to set up industry with their role limited to giving a pollution control
standard for effluent discharge, emission, etc. Here also they do not have any decisive say to
prevail upon the industries to make them follow these standards. If the Board says “zero effluents”
and the industry says ‘no’ , in all likelihood the latter will prevail with the support of the
Government. Boards are made to bear the brunt of such clearances as they have to take necessary
pollution control and mitigation measures. The Committee was told that this is a cruel and bitter
reality.
6.3 The Committee takes serious note of the prevailing position of Central and State boards.
It feels that economic development should be given priority but not such an overriding priority as
to endanger the environment human and living beings. It is of the considered opinion that economic
strides devoid of any concern and care for environment is doomed to be retrograde. A lot more
resources than what we expect to generate now would be required to be spent on adaptation and
mitigation measures to counter the fallouts of environmental degradation and climate change. The
Committee therefore feels that the need of the hour is to strike a fine balance between
economic development and environment. Hence, recommends that the industries must be
made to comply with and adhere to the standards set by the board. Industries must adopt
technology efficient measures and green technologies by setting aside a part of their profits
for which a rebate can be planned. The Committee recommends that CPCB/SPCBs should
be actively and effectively involved in the process of issue of license for setting up of
industries and an enabling amendment for the purpose may be made in the Environment
Impact Assessment Act., 1986.
6.4 A cursory glance at the compliance status of the guidelines of CPCB on minimum
inspection frequency suggests that State boards rarely follow them. The Committee was informed
that the CPCB guidelines put the inspection frequency at once in every 3 months for large-medium
sized red category industry.
20

21
Minimum Frequency of Inspections: CPCB Guidance*
Size of Industry Category of Pollution Inspection Frequency
Potential
Large and medium-sized Red Once every 3 months
Orange Once a year
Green Once in two years
Small scale (capital Red Once a year
investment below 10,000 Orange Once in 3 years
rupees) Green Once in 5 years
* Source–Annual Report of CPCB.
6.5 However, Karnataka State Pollution Control Board and Maharashtra State Pollution Control
Board were not able to inspect industries even once in a year. The average inspection per industry,
per year, for Maharashtra is 0.3 while for Karnataka it is 0.63 times. Even for Gujarat State
Pollution Control Board, which is able to inspect all industries twice every year, it is unlikely that
these two inspections are enough to ensure compliance throughout the year.
6.6 For any environmental protection programme to be successful it is inevitable to identify and
quantify pollution sources, pollutants, conduct baseline survey and build up monitoring systems. To
achieve these objectives, a sophisticated environmental laboratory equipped with state-of-the-art
instruments and equipments, capable and competent manpower is essential.
6.7 Provisions to establish and recognize environmental laboratories have been laid down under
Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974; Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
Act, 1981 and Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, according to which different agencies have
been entrusted with the power to accord recognition to such labs. Under Water (Prevention and
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 recognition
to laboratories is given by the respective State Pollution Control Boards or Pollution Control
Committees, whereas under Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 recognition in case of Private
Laboratories is granted by the Ministry of Environment and Forests while power to accord
recognition to Government; semi-Government or public sector laboratories is vested with the
Central Pollution Control Board.
6.8 The Committee fails to understand the rationale behind having separate set of
agency for recognizing private and public sector laboratories. The Committee feels that a
laboratory is a laboratory which should fulfil bare minimum requirements of infrastructural
facilities, expertise and capabilities, be it in the private or in the public sector. There must
be a standard set of guidelines defining categorically infrastructural requirements, sample
handling, laboratory competence, quality assurance, quality control, etc. Uniformly
applicable for establishment, evaluation and recognition of labs.
6.9 The Committee, therefore, recommends that guidelines for establishment and
recognition of laboratories should be framed and notified at the earliest and the authority
to recognize labs under private sector should also be with Central Pollution Control Board
(CPCB) instead of the Ministry of Environment and Forests. The recognition can be made
from among the National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories
(NABL) accredited laboratories.

22
6.10 Central Pollution Control Board has constituted a National Task Force (NTF), for the
implementation of notified environmental standards, and to evolve a time bound programme for the
same. Representatives from steel industry were also nominated as members of the NTF besides
representatives from Ministry of Steel, Ministry of Environment and Forests, CPCB and concerned
State Boards, The Committee desires that the NTF rises to the occasion to ensure implementation
of notified environmental standards.
6.11 The Committee was apprised that the Central Pollution Control Board took action against
180 industries under section 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 during 2004, 2005 and
2006. The year-wise break up of number of industries against which action was initiated is 3, 65
and 112 respectively. Of the 180 industries 10 were issued notices for improvement and 31 for
closure while 74 were issued confirmed directions for improvement and 65 for closure. The
Committee while observing that this is a very good move and CPCB should continue to move ahead
in this direction, feels that this is too little an effort in view of the large number pollution causing
industries in the country. The Committee is also of the opinion that by merely issuing notices/
directions, CPCB should not feel that it has done its devoir and nothing more requires to be done.
CPCB should rather see to it that the notices/direction issued are enforced and complied with. A
centralized data on the overall compliance status by industries must also be maintained. The
Committee recommends that the bottlenecks coming in the way of achieving the above objectives
must be removed forthwith.
6.12 The Committee was informed that presently there is no centralized data base in the country
which could present the real picture of pollution load being created from individual industries, and
what has been its impact on environment. Currently, CPCB depends for most of the environmental
data on SPCBs quarterly and annual reports, However, many of the State Boards do not submit
this information in a consistent format. Many of the smaller Boards do not even have the expertise
or resources to collect and present the data. Under the current system, CPCB has no ability to take
action against SPCBs if it does not provide the requested information.
6.13 It has come to the notice of the Committee that the industries which do not comply
get away rather easily as the compliance system based on Criminal Justice System take
extremely long time to get resolved. Besides, the Boards do not have the legal capacity to
pursue the case. This requires a change in regulatory framework so that such non-
compliances are disposed quickly and the long legal battles don’t serve as incentive to
defaulters. With the increase in pollution from  various industries, the Committee feels that
there is a need for an environmental regulation cases on all industries on an annual basis,
based on their turnover. This money should be collected to pay for regulatory institutions
and their facilities. The Envir onmental Impact Assessment will need funds for scrutiny and
for appraisal.
6.14 The Committee would like the CPCB to check the industrial effluents entering the
river which could not be naturally flushed on account of heavy withdrawal of water for civic
consumption. The Committee is of the view that emphasis should be laid more on
incentivising compliance as catching and penalizing the faltering industries in a cumbersome
judicial process is difficult even more so when our judiciary is already over burdened.
6.15 The Committee desires that the guidelines for environmental processing of used oil/
lead batteries be notified at the earliest so as to check the environmental damage which is
being caused.

23
CHAPTER-VII
7. HAZARDOUS WASTE MANAGEMENT
7.1 As per the Directives of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, dated October 14, 2003 in the
matter of Writ Petition No. (C) of 657 of 1995, Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) is required
to prepare and comply with the following directives:
(i) Preparation and Issuance of Check list and Ensuring its Compliance;
(ii) Preparation of Guidelines on Hazardous Waste Incinerators;
(iii) Preparation of Guidelines for Proper Functioning and Upkeep of Disposal Sites;
(iv) Preparation of Guidelines for T ransportation of Hazardous Waste;
(v) National Policy Document on Management of Hazardous Waste;
(vi) Random Checks on Inventory of Hazardous Waste Generation submitted by the
SPCBs/PCCs;
(vii) Random Checks on Inventory on Hazardous Waste Dump sites submitted by
the SPCBs/PCCs and Evaluation of the Rehabilitation Plans of Dump Sites;
(viii) Preparation of Comprehensive Report on Inventory of HW Generation and HW
Dump Sites and Rehabilitation Plans of Dump Sites;
(ix) To do R&D Work on Phasing out of Dirty Technologies
(x) Co-ordination with Ministry of Environment and Forests with respect to preparation
and finalization of the draft Amendment to  Hazardous Waste (M & H) Amendment
Rules.
7.2 The Committee was informed that the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) in compliance
of aforesaid directives, finalized and published the following guidelines:
(i) Uniform Testing Procedures to be followed by the Labs.
(ii) Guidelines for Common Hazardous Waste Incinerators.
(iii) Guidelines for Transportation of Hazardous Waste.
(iv) Pre-requisites for issuing Authorization by the SPCBs/PCCs.
(v) Guidelines for proper functioning and upkeep of Disposal Sites.
7.3 As per the Order of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, the Ministry of Environment and
Forests (MoEF) either itself or through Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) or any other agency
is required to draft a policy document on hazardous waste management, keeping in view
recommendations of High Power Committee (HPC). CPCB co-ordinated with the Ministry of
Environment and Forests (MoEF), in preparation of ‘National Policy Document on Management of
Hazardous Waste’ and revision of Schedule 3 (list of wastes applicable for import and export for
reprocessing, Schedule 4 (list of wastes, the reprocessing of which need registration from Central
Pollution Control Board) and Schedule 8 (list of wastes prohibited for import and export of hazardous
wastes) of the Hazardous Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989 as amended in 2003. The
23

24
final draft of ‘National Policy Document on Management of Hazardous Waste’ and proposed draft
amendments to Schedule 3, Schedule 4 and Schedule 8 of the Hazardous Waste (Management and
Handling) Rules has been forwarded to Ministry of Environment and Forests for consideration. The
Committee desires that the Policy Document be finalized and notified by the Ministry at the
earliest.

25
CHAPTER-VIII
8. BIO-MEDICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT
8.1 The Bio-medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules notified in July, 1998 under the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 makes it mandatory for all healthcare facilities, irrespective of
their size, to treat bio-medical waste generated by them. In order to comply with the provisions
of the Rules, some of the healthcare facilities have installed their own treatment facilities while
others are availing services of Common Bio-medical Waste Treatment Facilities (CBWTF). CBWTF
are widely accepted by healthcare facilities and are increasing in number continuously because of
various advantages such as reduced capital investment and treatment cost, easy implementation by
the regulatory bodies, etc.
8.2 There are 143 CBWTF, including 13 under installation, in the country as on 31st March, 2005
as compared to 85 the previous year. In order to help CBWTF operators in complying with various
provisions of the Bio-medical Waste (Management and Handling) Rules and other minimum
requirements such as efficient treatment equipment, required infrastructure, proper transportation
system, proper recording system, environmentally sound method of disposal of treated bio-medical
waste etc., Central pollution Control Board has prepared “Guidelines on Bio-medical Waste Treatment
Facilities” which have been circulated to all SPCBs/PCCs and also displayed on website for
dissemination. Further, to assess the compliance and working of existing CBWTF, CPCB has initiated
a study through its Zonal Offices to evaluate their performance. The Committee recommends that the
study should be completed at the earliest.
8.3 The Committee is concerned about the increase in bio-medical waste which is likely
to increase further in near future. It is of the view that more bio-medical facilities need
to be set up to face the challenge. As the capital required for the purpose is enormous,
public-private partnership programmes should be encouraged for the same. The Committee
has been informed that CPCE has no involvement in either identification or setting up of
tariff for bio-medical waste treatment facilities. The Committee believes that CPCB in order
to be effective should have a role to play in setting up the guidelines for such facilities and
be given power to effectively monitor them. The Committee is of the view that more
coordination is required between CPCB and SPCBs for proper functioning of bio-medical
waste facilities. Moreover, CPCB should have teeth to guide and penalize SPCBs which are
found to be lackadaisical. The Committee desires that high temperature plasma technology
for bio-medical waste treatment which has shown good results in other countries be adopted
and efforts in this direction be made.
25

26
CHAPTER-IX
9. MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT
9.1 Solid Waste Management in Metro cities and State Capitals
9.1.1 CPCB sponsored a project on “Assessment of Status of Municipal Solid Wastes
Management in Metro Cities and State Capitals” with a view to establishing database on National
level for selected 59 cities to NEERI. The selected cities include 35 metro cities and 24 State
capitals. Objective of the study was to assess the compliance status of 59 cities with Municipal
Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000 and initiatives taken for improving solid
waste management practices.
9.1.2 It has been observed that initiatives for collection of waste from house-to-house and waste
segregation has been undertaken only in 7 cities, privatization of transportation of waste has been
done in 11 cities and waste processing facilities have been set up in 15 cities. Ten waste processing
facilities are based on composting; one of these composting facilities has provision for energy
recovery also, four are based on vermicomposting, and one facility employs pelletisation and energy
recovery technology. None of the cities is having proper sanitary landfill site and uncontrolled
dumping of MSW has been observed in all but one cities. Leachate collection is practiced in only
two cities and gas collection in only one city.
9.1.3 In many cities, bio-medical waste (BMW) is getting mixed with MSW. Slaughterhouse
waste is not managed properly and is dumped at landfill site alongwith MSW in all except 12 cities,
which have made separate arrangements for collection of such wastes. Studies have revealed that
waste generation rate varies from 0.12 to 0.60 kg per capita per day. Analysis of physical
composition indicates total compostable matter in the waste is in the range of 40-60 per cent while
recyclable fraction was observed between 10 and 25 per cent. The moisture content in the MSW
was observed to vary from 30 to 60 per cent while the C:N ratio was observed to be in the range
of 20-40.
9.1.4 Based on the study, suggestive guidelines for management of MSW are indicated and each
local body will have to prepare detailed project report estimating requirement of tools and
equipment and fund estimates.
9.1.5 The Committee expresses concern that though the problem of Municipal Solid Waste
management has reached alarming proportions, no serious effort has been made to solve
the problem, which has resulted in uncontrolled and unscientific dumping of wastes in
landfill sites. The Committee feels that a concerted effort needs to be undertaken by the
public as well as the concerned municipalities for solving the problem. Public awareness
campaigns should be conducted in all the major cities through mass media and contact
programmes to educate the public about the advantages of segregation of bio-degradable and
non-biodegradable as regards house-to-house collection of waste, for easier processing of
waste at a later stage. The Committee also recommends that the concerned Municipalities
should adopt modern and scientific methods in treatment of municipal wastes which are eco-
friendly and cost-effective. The Committee feels that maximum utilization of such
technologies would solve the problem of Municipal wastes. The Committee also recommends
that action in this regard be taken on priority in a time-bound manner.
26

27
CHAPTER-X
10. STATE POLLUTION CONTROL BOARDS
10.1 The State Pollution Control Boards (SPCB) established in every State of the country, are
responsible for implementing legislations as well as issuing the rules, regulations and notifications
thereof which prescribe the standards for emissions and effluents of air and water pollutants and
noise levels. In the case of Union Territories (UTs), the Pollution Control Committee (PCC) is
responsible for these activities. Therefore, all the industries located or to be located in any
State or UT are required to interact with the respective SPCB or PCC as the case may be. The
Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) at New Delhi, coordinates the activities of the SPCBs
and PCCs.
10.2 Constitution of State Boards
10.2.1 A S tate in which the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 (6 of 1974),
is in force and the State Government has constituted for that State a State Board for the Prevention
and Control of Water Pollution, such State Board shall be deemed to be the State Board for the
Prevention and Control of Air Pollution.
10.2.2 A S tate in which the Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act 1974 (6 of 1974), is
not in force, or that Act is in force but the State Government has not constituted a State Board
for the Prevention and Control of Water Pollution under that Act, the State Government shall with
effect from such date as it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, constitute a State
Board for the Prevention and Control of Air Pollution under such name as may be specified in the
notification, to exercise the powers conferred on, and perform the functions assigned to, that Board
under this Act.
10.2.3 Composition of State Board
A State Board constituted under this Act shall consist of the following members, namely:—
(a) A Chairman, being a person, having a person having special knowledge or practical
experience in respect of matters relating to environmental protection, to be nominated by
the State Government:
Provided that the Chairman may be either whole-time or part-time as the State Government
may think fit;
(b) Such number of officials, not exceeding five, as the State Government may think fit,
to be nominated by the State Government to represent that Government;
(c) such number of persons, not exceeding five, as the State Government may think fit,
to be nominated by the State Government from amongst the members of the local
authorities functioning within the State;
(d) such number of non-officials, not exceeding three, as the State Government may think
fit, to be nominated by the State Government to represent the interest of agriculture, fishery
or industry or trade or labour or any other interest, which in the opinion of that
Government, ought to be represented;
27

28
(e) Two persons to represent the companies or corporations owned, controlled or managed
by the State Government, to be nominated by that Government;
(f) A full-time member-secretary having such qualifications knowledge and experience of
scientific, engineering or management aspects of pollution control as may be prescribed, to
be appointed by the State Governments.
Provided that the State Government shall ensure that not less than two of the members are
persons having special knowledge or practical experience in, respect of matters relating to
the improvement of the quality of air or the prevention, control or abatement of air
pollution.
10.2.4 Every State Board constituted under this Act shall be a body corporate with the name
specified by the State Government in the notification issued under sub-section (1), having perpetual
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire and
dispose of property and to contract, and may by the said name sue or be sued.
10.3 Functions of the State Pollution Control Boards
• To plan a comprehensive programme for prevention, control and abatement of air
pollution and to secure the execution thereof.
• To advise the State Government on any matter concerning prevention, control and
abatement of air pollution.
• To collect and disseminate information related to air pollution.
• To collaborate with Central Pollution Control Board in programme related to prevention,
control and abatement of air pollution; and
• To inspect air pollution control areas, assess quality of air and to take steps for
prevention, control and abatement of air pollution in such areas.
10.4 The Committee finds that State Pollution Control Boards are suffering from the
same maladies as the Central Pollution Control Board as far  as their constitution and
composition is concerned. The provision that the Chairman of a State Pollution Control
Board may at the discretion of State Governments be either whole–time or part time is not
conducive for a healthy and effective functioning of State Boards. The Committee feels that
only a full time Chairman with adequate knowledge, background and experience in
environment management would be able to do justice with the responsibilities assigned to
the post. Similarly other Members of the board should also be full timers with adequate
technical know-how and expertise in environment related issues.

29
CHAPTER-XI
11. FUNCTIONING OF THE CENTRAL POLLUTION CONTROL BOARD VIS-A-VIS THE
STATE BOARDS
11.1 The role of the Central Pollution Control Board vis-a-vis the State Boards under both the
Acts has been envisaged as following:
(a) Co-ordinate the activities of the State Boards and resolve disputes among them;
(b) Provide technical assistance and guidance to the State Board’s, carry out, and sponsor
investigations and research relating to problems of water pollution and prevention,
control or abatement of water pollution;
(c) Plan and organize the training of persons engaged or to be engaged in programmes
for the prevention, control or abatement of water pollution on such terms and
conditions as the Central Board may specify.
11.2 Co-ordination of the activities of the State Boards
11.2.1 CPCB organises an annual meeting of the Member Secretaries and Chairmen of the State
Pollution Control Boards, wherein a number of issues of common interest like pollution prevention
in highly polluting industries, critically polluted areas, hazardous waste management, air and water
quality monitoring, biomedical and urban solid waste management, monitoring protocols etc., are
discussed and resolved.
11.3 The Committee was informed that the monitoring and enforcement is done by SPCBs.
CPCB is only authorised to enforce against violators in Union Territories and where the SPCB has
been declared by MoEF to have defaulted on its responsibilities. The few direct enforcement
actions taken by the CPCB are generally done by the zonal offices. Under the Water Act, the Air
Act and the Environment Protection Act (EPA), the Pollution Control Board have the authority to
issue and revoke consents to operate, require self-monitoring and reporting, conduct sampling,
inspect facilities, require corrective action and prescribe compliance schedules. The enforcement
powers include emergency measures of disconnecting water or power supply and facility closure,
which are widely used in some States. However, according to the Hazardous Wastes (Management
and Handling) Rules of 1989, SPCB can, with CPCB’s approval, impose administrative fines for any
violation of those rules. Other sanctions (fines and imprisonment) must be pursued under the
criminal authority of the courts. The EPA stipulates steeper penalties than the Water Act and the
Air Act but at the same time differs to them (Section 24 of the EPA) in cases where the same
type of violations is covered under the EPA and the other law. In addition, criminal cases brought
by SPCBs are difficult to prosecute, have a low conviction rate, and consume precious Government
resources and time. Moreover, it takes extremely long period to resolve cases brought by the
Government. This also discourages the boards from taking legal actions against the companies.
That is why out of 1335 cases of non-compliance for air, water and Hazardous Waste Management,
the Gujarat State Pollution Control Board filed cases against only 314 industries during 2001-02,
to 2005-06. Similarly in Maharashtra, as against 8109 cases of non-compliance, cases could be
filed by the Maharashtra Pollution Control Board against 42 units only in between 2001-02 and
2005-06. Non-imposition of severe or harsh penalties is yet another area of concern of the total
2319 cases ruled in the favour of Government only 293 included penalty and 248 imprisonments.
29

30
This works out to 13 and 11 per cent respectively. The lack of civil administrative authority
(particularly, to impose administrative fines) limits the effectiveness of PCBs’ enforcement efforts
and leads to over-reliance on the judiciary for enforcement. Filing criminal cases against violators
in trial courts or reacting to PILs is a time-consuming, unpredictable and ineffective enforcement
mechanism. The Committee observes that it could be very difficult to rein in violations to
follow standards and guidelines with the existing judicial and legal set up. Courts are
already overburdened with civil and criminal cases. They can not be expected to spend time
to expeditiously take up and dispose of environment related cases. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Government should set up environmental courts in each
and every State and UT to deal exlusively with environment r elated matters. It also
recommends that environmental laws be made stringent so as to act as a deterrent for
violators who act with impunity. The principle of polluters pay should also be enforced. The
Committee also feels that the best mechanism to empower CPCB would be allow it to
impose financial fines. An industry is hit badly when it is affected financially. Therefore, the
best way to make industry follow consent guideline strictly, it is to allow pollution control
to put administrative fines.
11.4 The Committee is of the view that the Board should coordinate data collection from
various State Boards and maintain a data bank for ready reference so that the data could
be used both by the experts and public at large. The Board should develop uniform system
for collection enforcement data at National and State level. It should formulate guidance to
define national minimum data requirements, the nature of information required, time-
frame for submitting the information and standardizing the formats. So far the CPCB is
only monitoring the environmental quality. Its role should be expanded to include
compliance and enforcement. It is also extremely important that the information collected
by CPCB should be made public and the operations of the board completely transparent.
Along with the scientific data, legal data regarding laws suits, cases of non compliance
should also be made available in public domain so as to keep track of environmental
problems in the country.

31
CHAPTER-XII
12. GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS
12.1 The Committee was informed that there are no uniform standards regarding banning
and recycling of plastic products. Though all plastic products can be recycled, collection of
thin plastic products like carry bags is a big problem. Such products find their way in
drains, soil etc. resulting in clogging of the former and degradation of the latter. In cities,
on account of non-separation of biodegradable and non-biodegradable kitchen waste, such
products find their way into the digestive system of stray cattle creating health and
environmental hazards both for the cattle and human populations. On account of the above
factors the Committee feels that all products which are difficult to collect and safely
recycled should be banned and a uniform standard in terms of microns below which such
products fall should be arrived at so as to make their identification easy.
12.2 The Committee is of the view that e-waste is going to be a big problem in the future
as the modern life style seeps and the living standards increase with economic growth. The
Committee feels that CPCB should conduct studies to make future projections and devise
steps to check the menace.
12.3 The concept of citizens’ warden should be introduced for keeping environmental
surveillance on air and noise pollution in particular. Prominent persons, retired army
officials, retired Government servants in cities and towns should be nominated to keep a
watch on burning of leaves, plastic and other materials in the open air and at public places,
violation of NO HORN ZONE, playing loudspeakers, running noise and pollution making
gensets, etc. They should be empowered to report the offence to the local police for
necessary penal action.
12.4 Rapid increase in aviation sector is also understood to be contributing to
environmental pollution. CPCB should conduct a study to find out its impact and take such
measures as required in the matter.
12.5 Energy efficient building codes should be introduced and popularized so as to save
energy and reduce burden of pollution on environment.
12.6 There is a need to exercise caution over large polluting MNCs entering into the
country. Trampling environmental health and safety regulations these MNCs ignore real
development needs all in the quest for ever higher profits with the least risk and
responsibility. These MNCs implement high environmental standards in their mother
countries but have another set of environmental standards in our country. Such a disturbing
trend calls for stringent rules and regulations and their strict enforcement in the larger
interest of the country.
12.7 The Committee has been informed that a zoning atlas for 141 districts has been
prepared. The Committee would like it to be extended to rest of the districts so that spatial
planning for environmental management can be done.
12.8 The Committee would like CPCB to notify environmental standards for new
townships so as to ensure that the environmental externalities are not caused. In case of
SEZs the guidelines of environmental clearances notified in 2004 should be strictly followed.
31

32
12.9 The Committee would like CPCB to take proactive/preemptive steps for
environmental protection so as to change the public perception that it comes into action
only after the damage has been done and many a times after judicial intervention. The
motto of CPCB “IN PURSUIT OF CLEAN ENVIRONMENT “needs to be suitably changed
because the path of pursuit, the principle of looking for or trying to; following the concept
of clean environment etc. have proved to be elusive over the years thus far and hence has
outlived its utility and become obsolete. It is high time for CPCB to emerge as a dynamic
and strong national organization totally committed and solely dedicated to the cause of
environment capable enough to preclude and preempt percolation of pollution.

33
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Committee is of the view that with such a composition dominated by
Government representatives and constituted by central Government, CPCB can not be
expected to act as a watchdog of environmental protection. The Committee also expresses
its displeasure over the fact that no qualifications or criteria have been fixed for Members
of such an important technical and scientific body. The eligibility criteria for Chairman
prescribing a person having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of matters
relating to environmental protection or a person having knowledge and experience in
administering institution dealing with the matters aforesaid are too general and vague as
to accommodate anyone who is even distantly related with environment. (Para 2.5)
2. The Committee has been informed that key posts in CPCB and SPCBs are being
manned by officers of Indian Administrative Service or bureaucrats who neither possess the
necessary capabilities and expertise in properly managing and planning pollution control
activities nor have enough time to pay attention to these activities for obvious reasons. This
trend has led to virtual relegation and replacement of technically capable persons to the
place of exile from the keyposts. The Committee has been informed that this point has
been highlighted by Prof. Menon Committee set up by the supreme Court with regard to
management of Hazardous waste. According to the report of the Supreme Court Monitoring
Committee on Hazardous waste, 77 per cent of Chairpersons and 55 per cent of Member
Secretaries in different state pollution control boards are not qualified enough to hold the
post. The Committee observes that this is a very disturbing trend and that this practice
needs to be stopped forthwith. (Para 2.6)
3. The Committee feels that Chairman and Members of the Board should be persons
who have rendered remarkable and distinguished service to the cause of Environment. They
should be persons of repute and widely acclaimed. They should be appointed for a fixed
tenure and the sword of removal or termination should not be hanging on their heads.
Members like Chairman should be full time. The Committee also feels that the present
large composition is hampering its effective functioning. The size of the Board may be
reduced, so as to ensure that decisions are taken and translated into action in the right
earnest. (Para 2.7)
4. The Committee expresses its anguish over the fact that the Central Board created
for the purpose of control and abatement of pollution is being given such a raw deal so
much so that it has virtually been reduced as a near defunct body. If all the powers and
functions were to be concentrated into the hands of the Central Government/Ministry of
Environment and Forests the very need to have such an apex body is untenable. The
Committee feels that the country can ill afford to let this sorry state of affairs prolong any
further as it has already started bearing the brunt of pollution and climate change and
hence drastic measures are required to be taken. Central Pollution Control Board needs to
be given adequate statutory and legal support to make it effective and functional and for
this purpose its constitution under Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974
needs to be urgently reviewed. The Committee recommends that environment protection
33

34
should be included as an item in the seventh schedule to the constitution in the concurrent
list and CPCB be brought under its ambit with all necessary powers and functions to meet
the challenges that pollution and its after-effects pose before us without disturbing the
federal character of our constitution. This new body should be given functional as well as
financial autonomy so that it can discharge its duties without fear or favour. (Para 2.16)
5. The Committee feels that although pollution in some form or the other has spread
its tentacles throughout the length and breadth of the country, CPCB has failed in making
its presence felt, as an effective controller, even after 33 years of its existence mainly
because of the number of its Zonal offices being grossly inadequate and insufficient. It may
not be feasible for a zonal office to cover three to eight states specially when the number
of industries, vehicular load etc., has multiplied manifold in course of time. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that one zonal office should be established in each state so that
CPCB in close coordination with State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) is able to keep a
close watch on the extent of pollution and take strict action against violations of pollution
norms. This will also help State Pollution Control Boards to derive full benefits of the
Central Pollution Control Boards’ expertise. (Para 2.17.2)
6. The Committee is aware that the responsibility of pollution control board has over
the years increased enormously and is likely to go up further in time to come. Hazardous
Waste Management, industrial pollution, bio medical waste, e–waste, plastic waste, mercury
waste, increase in mining activities, solid, waste management, ever growing air pollution,
growing number of vehicles etc., requires stronger regulatory mechanism and further
strengthening of Board both in terms of man power and expertise. (Para 2.18)
7. The Committee was informed that there has been acute shortage of technical staff
in CPCB. Though the Board has sophisticated equipments to monitor various types of
pollution they do not have sufficient technical manpower to handle it. Technical Staff
comprised only 48 per cent of total staff in 2004-05. Moreover, out of its 236 technical staff
only half are in the officer grade. The Committee was informed that the shortage of
technical manpower is far more acute in various State Pollution Control Boards, also as a
study to find out the number of days a scientific and Technical person individually and
working together devote on monitoring, inspection analysis and preparation of reports to an
industry gave some startling revelations. A technical person in Gujarat PCB spares 1.77 days
to monitor an industry in a year, in Karnataka PCB a technical persons gets 1.72 days while
in Maharashtra Board the person spends only 1.23 days* a year. This average includes time
taken on travelling to and fro. This only presents a glimpse of the whole gamut of
arrangements put in place for pollution control and how efficiently and effectively the
machinery is at work. The Committee feels that one of the reasons for such a sorry state
of affairs lies in shortage of technical and scientific man power within the Central as well
as State boards. The Committee expresses its deep anguish over such an apathetic approach
of the Government in providing adequate manpower to the boards and recommends that
urgent steps should be taken to recruit requisite number of technical and scientific staff.
The Committee recommends that CPCB be allowed to recruit staff as per its requirements
after conducting a study for the purpose. (Para 2.19)
8. The Committee also recommends that for making technical and scientific manpower
easily and readily available, a long term strategy should be evolved. Environment
* Source–Centre for Science and Environment.

35
management and education should be included in the higher educational programs by
devising a suitable syllabi for the purpose. An institute exclusively for the purpose of
teaching of and training in the subject of environment related matters could also be one of
the options that Government should try to explore. (Para 2.20)
9. The Committee was informed that the remunerations/salaries/allowances for officers
and staff of CPCB are not lucrative enough to attract talented people and contain the
attrition rates. The experienced people from CPCB are hired by corporate sector by offering
attractive remuneration and in the process valuable experience is lost. The Committee
expresses its grave concern over the situation. The Committee desires that talent and
performance should be rewarded. A suitable career progression scheme should also be so
devised as to act as incentive to the officers and staff of the CPCB. (Para 2.21 )
10. The Committee has been further informed that the policy of Finance Ministry to
abolish posts lying vacant for a year has taken a heavy toll. The Committee understands
the fact that it may not be possible to find suitable technically qualified manpower at any
given moment a vacancy arises. But a post lying vacant for a year for want of non-
availability of a suitable candidate does not mean that the need for the post is gone. In this
context the committee opines that different rules be applied for scientific departments as
their requirements are different from that of general administration. The Committee
recommends the Ministry to take up the matter with the Ministry of Finance at an
appropriate level. (Para 2.22)
11. The Committee has been informed that adequate training is not provided to the
personnel of Central Pollution Control Board. Considering that controlling pollution forms
one of the most important functions of CPCB requiring scientific and technical expertise,
multi disciplinary training should be imparted to the personnel. The Committee is also of
the view that creation of trained cadre is required for monitoring and resolving
environmental problem. (Para 2.23)
12. The Committee feels that strict compliance of environmental regulation is required
to maintain the delicate balance in eco system. The Committee further feels that the
country today needs better regulations which are both observable and implementable.
Therefore, it recommends that the CPCB should be restructured as an autonomous
statutory authority with the mandate not only to develop regulations and fix up standards
but also to ensure enforcement and compliance. CPCB should also suggest alternatives for
meeting those standards in coordination with other Scientific and Technical Departments.
The Research and Development team of CPCB should also act in close coordination with
other Research and Development organisations. (Para 2.24)
13. The Committee was informed that out of 332 monitoring stations, a number of them
are not on line and some of them are not functioning. Data is not being regularly updated
and the data generated is not being properly analyzed. It was also informed to the
Committee that only criteria pollutants i.e., Sulphur Dioxide (S02) , Nitrogen Dioxide (No2),
Suspended Particulate Matter (SPM) and Respirable Suspended Particulate Matter (RSPM)
are being monitored. There are a number of other hazardous pollutants like Volatile
Organic Compound (VOC), Benzene Toluene xylene (BTX), Poly Aromatic Hydrocarbons
(PAHs), PM2.5, Ozone, etc., present in the ambience which are neither monitored nor any
standards have been set for them. (Para 3.5)

36
14. The Committee expresses its serious concern over the situation given above. It feels
that mere monitoring without any corrective and preventive follow up action is not going
to be productive. The Committee, is also of the opinion that there is a need to have new
and much more aggressive strategies to deal with the problem of air pollution in our cities.
Currently, even though we have the Air Act and the standards for air quality, there is no
legal obligation on State Governments/Local Municipal Corporations to meet ambient air
quality standards. While we gear up to monitor and control Air Pollution in biggest cities,
smaller cities are fast catching up with the same critical pollution levels. Thus there is a
greater need to decentralize the responsibility down to the municipal/local and state levels.
Further, to achieve these targets all central programmes need to be re-organised under a
National Air Quality Plan, the city based programmes under Clean Air Action Plan and
programmes for industrial areas as Air Pollution Control and Prevention in Industrial Areas
programmes. (Para 3.6)
15. The Committee also expresses its concern over the fact that there is no central
agency to set standards/norms for emission. The jurisdiction to set norms for vehicular
emission lies with the Ministry of Surface Transport while for indoor air pollution, the nodal
agency is the Ministry of Labour. The Committee also feels that there is a need for
ensuring that the standards once finalized by technical committees are not put on hold for
notification by the Ministry as is the case with the sponge iron standard for air and water
emission. This is leading to huge problems and rising industrial pollution in Orissa,
Jharkhand, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Karnataka and other States. (Para 3.7)
16. The Committee in the light of the above observations, feels that CPCB needs to be
so strengthened as to tackle the above issues in right perspective. (Para 3.8)
17. The Committee also desires that the ambient air quality monitoring network should
be strengthened and expanded from the current 332 stations to at least 1000 stations. This
could be expanded to about 15 cities per year so as to cover the 76 non-compliant cities over
a period of five years. The network of city monitoring stations should broadcast a daily alert
on air pollution levels. The air pollution health index should be used to alert people of the
health risks in their cities. The Committee desires that the same should be done within a
time-bound manner keeping in mind the growing environmental concerns. (Para 3.9)
18. The committee has been informed that the share of SPM load caused by thermal
power plants is about 82% of the total industrial pollution. Still many more thermal powers
projects are in the pipeline and would become operational in the next 10 to 15 years. The
Committee is aware of the importance of energy and power as the main driving force in
the process of economic development but at the same time it feels that the country can not
afford to ignore and neglect the importance of environment. It, therefore, emphasizes the
need to switch over to green sources of energy like solar, wind and atomic energy as a long
term solution of energy requirements. Government should initiate some technology mission
programmes to achieve the above objective. (Para 3.10)
19. Due to increasing replacement of solid and liquid fuels by CNG and LPG, the
probability of Nitrogen Oxides emitted in atmosphere has increased. The Committee desires
that CPCB should keep itself abreast of the emerging scenario and ready to initiate the
mitigation efforts required therefor. (Para 3.11)
20. The Committee agrees that the water quality monitoring is an important exercise
which helps in evaluating the nature and extent of pollution control required and

37
effectiveness of pollution control measures already in existence. The role of CPCB in this
programme is critical. It must be the key agency responsible for monitoring the health of
our water bodies. The information collected through monitoring should be made available to
state governments and in particular to the public so that accountability and awareness
increases. (Para 4.5)
21. Apart form trade effluents, domestic waste water or sewage forms one of the major
sources of pollution of rivers in the country. As per the Annual Report 2004-05 of the
Central Pollution Control Board about 26500 mld of sewage is generated in the country
from the Class I cities and Class-II towns at present. Largely owing to funding provided by
NRCD, treatment capacity exists for only about 7000 mld of sewage. Thus, there is a large
gap between generation and treatment of sewage and discharge of untreated sewage
becomes the most important source of water pollution in the country. Sewage treatment
plants exist in only 92 out of 423 Class I cities and 37 out of 498 class II cities. Even this
installed sewage treatment capacity is not utilized fully mainly because of neglect of
respective State Governments/Municipal Authorities. A survey of Sewage Treatment Plants
by Central Pollution Control Board suggested that a large number of them are not
functioning properly. Most of the plants are facing power cut problem. During power cut
operation of the plants get affected. Out of 13 STPs under Ganga Action Plan only 5 were
observed to be complying with stipulated norms of discharge and rest 8 were not complying
with prescribed standard. Out of 9 STPs monitored under Yamuna Action Plan, only one STP
was found complying with the norms. (Para 4.6)
22. As per the Annual Report 2004-2005 of the CPCB, Common Effluent treatment
Plants having combined capacity of 560 MLD have been constructed and commissioned so
far in the country covering more than 10,000 polluting industries. Central Pollution Control
Board studied the performance of CETPs operating throughout the country through CPCB
Zonal Offices in collaboration with State Pollution Control Boards. The performance of
CETPs has also been found to be affected of poor operation and maintenance. The
Committee is of the view that in order to overcome this problem, the CETPs should be
constructed and operated by the concerned State Governments/State Pollution Control
Boards (SPCBs). The capital and operational costs should be charged to the industries.
(Para 4.7)
23. The Committee expresses its serious concern over the manner in which the problem
of water pollution is being handled. Unless and until proper and foolproof arrangements and
adequate facilities for sewage treatment are put in place and it is ensured that they
function to their capacity rivers, and other water bodies would continue to be heavily
polluted. This is why the river Yamuna, over the years has virtually turned into a ‘‘Nallah’’
despite crores of rupees being spent on its cleaning and upkeep. The health of prominent
rivers like the Ganga and others is not any better. (Para 4.8)
24. It is understood that the Government is considering the launch of a revamped river
conservation programme. The Committee recommends that programme should include a
revised institutional design, which provides the state governments with the legal mandate
to ensure river cleaning. The state should be given incentives and disincentives for not
meeting targets for river water quality standards. The programme must be geared towards
ensuring that all urban wastewater is treated so that the health of waterbodies can be
restored and consequently human health costs are minimized. The programme for sewage

38
treatment must ensure that it is cost effective and focused towards reuse and recycling of
water. (Para 4.9)
25. The Committee is of the view that a holistic approach is required to tackle the
problem of water pollution. The present division of responsibilities between MOEF, Ministry
of Agriculture, Ministry of Health and various municipalities, etc., requires better
coordination and more synergies so that pollution in water at whatever stage, source or at
the consumption point, could be checked and responsibility fixed. The Committee desires
that samples of ground water should be taken more frequently in areas which have
distilleries, paper plants, power plants and other polluting industries so as to check the
adverse impact on local population. The Central Pollution Control Board should also have
detailed action plans in the existing industrial areas for regular monitoring of the quality
of ground water and other water bodies to ascertain the level of contamination, fix a
benchmark for future industrialisation and also to consider moratorium on further
industrialisation in such regions based on the contamination level. The Committee
recommends that CPCB must also ensure that the polluting industries make adequate
arrangements for providing medical and health facilities to the people affected by pollution
related diseases in that area/region. The Committee is of the view that the discharge of
sewerage is regulated not only in terms of specific loads but also in terms of maximum daily
load i.e., kg per day/kg per hour so that the amount of pollution discharge into a media
always remains lower than the assimilative capacity of the rivers. This will ensure that the
river or media is not unduly stressed and the downstream users are not affected.
(Para 4.10)
26. The Committee feels that owing to rapid industrialization and urbanization in the
country, an enormous increase in noise pollution has taken place which is going to
aggravate further in times to come. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that
different State Governments stipulate different norms to control the noise pollution. In this
light the Committee recommends that a uniform and strict institutional mechanism
throughout the country to check and mitigate the problem be evolved and implemented in
a time bound manner. (Para 5.7)
27. The Committee feels that CPCB as a nodal central agency entrusted with the task
of pollution control has utterly failed in even evolving a pan-Indian, standard parameters
of pollutants, acceptable to all the States/UTs. Some of the States like West Bengal and
Maharashtra, have adopted much more stringent norms particularly with regard to
manufacture of plastic bag and noise level. For plastic it is less than 14 micron in West
Bengal, whereas the national standard is 20 micron. For noise it is 90 dcb in West Bengal
as against 125 dcb at the national level. The Committee is of the opinion that the standards
for various types of pollutions set by CBCB must be updated at regular intervals and
uniform standards should be the adopted throughout the country. More than the need for
setting standards is the necessity for enforcement, which is totally lacking as of now. The
local authority need to be suitably sensitized to be alive and responsive to the problem
within their jurisdiction. CPCB must find ways to address the concerns in this regard.
(Para 5.8)
28. The Committee therefore feels that the need of the hour is to strike a fine balance
between economic development and environment. Hence, recommends that the industries
must be made to comply with and adhere to the standards set by the board. Industries must

39
adopt technology efficient measures and green technologies by setting aside a part of their
profits for which a rebate can be planned. The Committee recommends that CPCB/SPCBs
should be actively and effectively involved in the process of issue of license for setting up
of industries and an enabling amendment for the purpose may be made in the Environment
Impact Assessment Act, 1986. (Para 6.3)
29. The Committee fails to understand the rationale behind having separate set of
agency for recognizing private and public sector laboratories. The Committee feels that a
laboratory is a laboratory which should fulfill bare minimum requirements of infrastructural
facilities, expertise and capabilities, be it in the private or in the public sector. There must
be a standard set of guidelines defining categorically infrastructural requirements, sample
handling, laboratory competence, quality assurance, quality control, etc. Uniformly
applicable for establishment, evaluation and recognition of labs. (Para 6.8)
30. The Committee, therefore, recommends that guidelines for establishment and
recognition of laboratories should be framed and notified at the earliest and the authority
to recognize labs under private sector should also be with Central Pollution Control Board
(CPCB) instead of the Ministry of Environment and Forests. The recognition can be made
from among the National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories
(NABL) accredited laboratories. (Para 6.9)
31. It has come to the notice of the Committee that the industries which do not comply
get away rather easily as the compliance system based on Criminal Justice System take
extremely long time to get resolved. Besides, the Boards do not have the legal capacity to
pursue the case. This requires a change in regulatory framework so that such non-
compliances are disposed quickly and the long legal battles don’t serve as incentive to
defaulters. With the increase in pollution from various industries, the Committee feels that
there is a need for an environmental regulation cases on all industries on an annual basis,
based on their turnover. This money should be collected to pay for regulatory institutions
and their facilities. The Envir onmental Impact Assessment will need funds for scrutiny and
for appraisal. (Para 6.13)
32. The Committee would like the CPCB to check the industrial effluents entering the
river which could not be naturally flushed on account of heavy withdrawal of water for civic
consumption. The committee is of the view that emphasis should be laid more on
incentivising compliance as catching and penalizing the faltering industries in a cumbersome
judicial process is difficult even more so when our judiciary is already over burdened.
(Para 6.14)
33. The Committee desires that the guidelines for environmental processing of used oil/
lead batteries be notified at the earliest so as to check the environmental damage which is
being caused. (Para 6.15)
34. The Committee desires that the Policy Document be finalized and notified by the
Ministry at the earliest. (Para 7.3)
35. The Committee is concerned about the increase in bio-medical waste which is likely
to increase further in near future. It is of the view that more bio-medical facilities need
to be set up to face the challenge. As the capital required for the purpose is enormous,
public-private partnership programmes should be encouraged for the same. The Committee
has been informed that CPCB has no involvement in either identification or setting up of

40
tariff for bio-medical waste treatment facilities. The Committee believes that CPCB in order
to be effective should have a role to play in setting up the guidelines for such facilities and
be given power to effectively monitor them. The Committee is of the view that more
coordination is required between CPCB and SPCBs for proper functioning of bio-medical
waste facilities. Moreover, CPCB should have teeth to guide and penalize SPCBs which are
found to be lackadaisical. The Committee desires that high temperature plasma technology
for bio-medical waste treatment which has shown good results in other countries be adopted
and efforts in this direction be made. (Para 8.3)
36. The Committee expresses concern that though the problem of Municipal Solid Waste
management has reached alarming proportions, no serious effort has been made to solve
the problem, which has resulted in uncontrolled and unscientific dumping of wastes in
landfill sites. The Committee feels that a concerted effort needs to be undertaken by the
public as well as the concerned municipalities for solving the problem. Public awareness
campaigns should be conducted in all the major cities through mass media and contact
programmes to educate the public about the advantages of segregation of bio-degradable and
non-biodegradable as regards house-to-house collection of waste, for easier processing of
waste at a later stage. The Committee also recommends that the concerned Municipalities
should adopt modern and scientific methods in treatment of municipal wastes which are
eco-friendly and cost-effective. The Committee feels that maximum utilization of such
technologies would solve the problem of Municipal wastes. The Committee also recommends
that action in this regard be taken on priority in a time-bound manner. (Para 9.1.5)
37. The Committee finds that State Pollution Control Boards are suffering from the
same maladies as the Central Pollution Control Board as far as their constitution and
composition is concerned. The provision that the Chairman of a State Pollution Control
Board may at the discretion of State Governments be either whole time or part time is not
conducive for a healthy and effective functioning of State Boards. The Committee feels that
only a full time Chairman with adequate knowledge, background and experience in
environment management would be able to do justice with the responsibilities assigned to
the post. Similarly other Members of the board should also be full timers with adequate
technical know-how and expertise in environment related issues. (Para 10.4)
38. The Committee observes that it could be very difficult to rein in violations to follow
standards and guidelines with the existing judicial and legal set up. Courts are already
overburdened with civil and criminal cases. They can not be expected to spend time to
expeditiously take up and dispose of environment related cases. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Government should set up environmental courts in each and every
State and UT to deal exlusively with environment related matters. It also recommends that
environmental laws be made stringent so as to act as a deterrent for violators who act with
impunity. The principle of polluters pay should also be enforced. The Committee also feels
that the best mechanism to empower CPCB would be allow it to impose financial fines. An
industry is hit badly when it is affected financially. Therefore, the best way to make
industry follow consent guideline strictly, it is to allow pollution control to put
administrative fines. (Para 11.3)
39. The Committee is of the view that the Board should coordinate data collection from
various State Boards and maintain a data bank for ready reference so that the data could
be used both by the experts and public at large. The Board should develop uniform system

41
for collection enforcement data at national and state level. It should formulate guidance to
define national minimum data requirements, the nature of information required, time
frame for submitting the information and standardizing the formats. So far the CPCB is
only monitoring the environmental quality. Its role should be expanded to include
compliance and enforcement. It is also extremely important that the information collected
by CPCB should be made public and the operations of the board completely transparent.
Along with the scientific data, legal data regarding laws suits, cases of non compliance
should also be made available in public domain so as to keep track of environmental
problems in the country. (Para 11.4)
40. The Committee was informed that there are no uniform standards regarding banning
and recycling of plastic products. Though all plastic products can be recycled, collection of
thin plastic products like carry bags is a big problem. Such products find their way in
drains, soil etc. resulting in clogging of the former and degradation of the latter. In cities,
on account of non-separation of biodegradable and non-biodegradable kitchen waste, such
products find their way into the digestive system of stray cattle creating health and
environmental hazards both for the cattle and human populations. On account of the above
factors the Committee feels that all products which are difficult to collect and safely
recycled should be banned and a uniform standard in terms of microns below which such
products fall should be arrived at so as to make their identification easy. (Para 12.1)
41. The Committee is of the view that e-waste is going to be a big problem in the future
as the modern life style seeps and the living standards increase with economic growth. The
Committee feels that CPCB should conduct studies to make future projections and devise
steps to check the menace. (Para 12.2)
42. The concept of citizens warden should be introduced for keeping environmental
surveillance on air and noise pollution in particular. Prominent persons, retired army
officials, retired government servants in cities and towns should be nominated to keep a
watch on burning of leaves, plastic and other materials in the open air and at public places,
violation of NO HORN ZONE, playing loudspeakers, running noise and pollution making
gensets, etc. They should be empowered to report the offence to the local police for
necessary penal action. (Para 12.3)
43. Rapid increase in aviation sector is also understood to be contributing to
environmental pollution. CPCB should conduct a study to find out its impact and take such
measures as required in the matter. (Para 12.4)
44. Energy efficient building codes should be introduced and popularized so as to save
energy and reduce burden of pollution on environment. (Para 12.5)
45. There is a need to exercise caution over large polluting MNCs entering into the
country. Trampling environmental health and safety regulations these MNCs ignore real
development needs all in the quest for ever higher profits with the least risk and
responsibility. These MNCs implement high environmental standards in their mother
countries but have another set of environmental standards in our country. Such a disturbing
trend calls for stringent rules and regulations and their strict enforcement in the larger
interest of the country. (Para 12.6)
46. The Committee has been informed that a zoning atlas for 141 districts has been
prepared. The Committee would like it to be extended to rest of the districts so that spatial
planning for environmental management can be done. (Para 12.7)

42
47. The Committee would like CPCB to notify environmental standards for new
townships so as to ensure that the environmental externalities are not caused. In case of
SEZs the guidelines of environmental clearances notified in 2004 should be strictly followed.
(Para 12.8)
48. The Committee would like CPCB to take proactive/pre-emptive steps for
environmental protection so as to change the public perception that it comes into action
only after the damage has been done and many a times after judicial intervention. The
motto of CPCB ‘‘IN PURSUIT OF CLEAN ENVIRONMENT’’ needs to be suitably changed
because the path of pursuit the principle of looking for or trying to; following the concept
of clean environment etc. have proved to be elusive over the years thus far and hence has
outlived its utility and become obsolete. It is high time for CPCB to emerge as a dynamic
and strong national organization totally committed and solely dedicated to the cause of
environment capable enough to preclude and preempt percolation of pollution. (Para 12.9)

43
ANNEXURE

45
ANNEXURE-I
LIST OF REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE V ARIOUS MINISTRIES/DEPARTMENT AND
EXPERTS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE COMMITTEE FOR ORAL EVIDENCE
Sl. No. Date of Meeting W itness
12 3
1. 7.02.2007 Shri Siddhartha Behura, Special Secretary, Ministry of
Environment and Forests
2. 15.02.2008 Dr. Prodipto Ghosh, Secretary, Ministry of Environment and
Forests
3. 5.07.2007 (i) Prof. J. M. Dave, former Deputy Director, National
Environment Engineering Research Institute (NEERI) and
Dean JNU, New Delhi
(ii) Shri P.C. Tyagi, Former Chairman, Central Pollution
Control Board
(iii) Prof. H.B. Mathur (Retd.), Indian Institute of Technology
(IIT), Delhi
(iv) Dr. Ashok Pant, Scientific Advisor, Pahal, Pithoragarh,
Uttarakhand
4. 13.07.2007 (i) Shri N. Ravishankar, Principal Secretary, Forest and
Environment, Government of Uttarakhand
(ii) Shri Vijay Kumar, Member Secretary, Pollution Control
Board, Government of Uttarakhand
(iii) Dr. N. Sundaradevan, Chairman, Tamil Nadu Pollution
Control Board
(iv) Dr. T. Sekar, Member Secretary, Tamil Nadu Pollution
Control Board
5. 23.07.2007 (i) Shri D. Roy, Member Secretary, West Bengal Pollution
Control Board
(ii) Shri S.K. Adhikari, West Bengal Pollution Control Board
(iii) Dr. Hrusikesh Panda, Principal Secretary, Forest and
Environment Department, Government of Orissa
(iv) Dr. L.N. Patnaik, Chairman, State Pollution Control
Board, Orissa
6. 25.09.2007 (i) Shri J.K. Dadoo, Chairman, Delhi PolIution Control
Committee

46
12 3
(ii) Shri S.S. Ghonkrokta, Member Secretary, Delhi PolIution
Control Committee
7. 05.10.2007 (i) Shri Johny Joseph, Chief Secretary, Government of
Maharashtra
(ii) Shri Sanjay Khandare, Member Secretary, Maharashtra
Pollution Control Board
8. 12.10.2007 (i) Shri P.K. Mishra, Chief Secretary, Government of Uttar
Pradesh
(ii) Shri Govindan Nair, Principal Secretary, Urban Development
(iii)  Shri C.S. Bhatt, Member Secretary, Uttar Pradesh
Pollution Control Board
(iv) Shri J. S. Yadav, Chief Engineer, Uttar Pradesh Pollution
Control Board
(v) Shri Shishir Sinha, Secretary Environment, Govt. of Bihar
and Chairman Bihar State Pollution Control Board
(vi) Shri S.N. Rao, Member Secretary, Bihar State Control
Board
9. 26.11.2007 Ms. Sunita Narain, Director, Centre for Science and
Environment, Delhi

47
ANNEXURE-II
SANCTIONED STAFF STRENGTH IN  CPCB AND NUMBER OF V ACANCIES IN
EACH CADRE AS ON 03.03.2008
Sl. Name of the Post Sanctioned Filled V acant Deemed
No. abolished/
Regular/Adhoc approval for
Deputation revival
awaited
1 2 3 4567
1. Director 02 02 – – –
2. Additional Director 08 06 – 02 –
3. Finance and Accounts Officer 01 – – 01 –
4. Senior Scientist 05 04 01 – –
5. Sr. Environmental Engineer 07 07 – – –
6. Additional Director (Law) 01 01 – – –
7. Administrative Officer 03 03 – – –
8. Environmental Engineer 28 28 – – –
9. Law Officer 01 01 – – –
10. Scientist ‘C’ 17 17 – – –
11. Assistant Environmental 45 25 03 17 –
Engineer
12. Documentation Officer 01 01 – – –
13. Scientist ‘B’ 30 29 01 – –
14. Accounts Officer 02 02 – – –
15. Assistant Accounts Officer 02 02 – – –
16. Assistant Law Officer 02 02 – – –
17. Hindi Officer 01 01 – – –
18. Private Secretary 01 01 – – –
19. Senior Technical Supervisor 09 – 08 01 –
20. Section Officer 10 10 – – –
21. Draughting Supervisor 01 01 – – –
22. Deputy Librarian 01 – – – 01
47

48
12 3 4 5 6 7
23. Senior Scientific Assistant 35 23 – 11 01
24. Sr. Hindi Translator 01 01 – – –
25. Technical Supervisor 10 10 – – –
26. Assistant 16 16 – – –
27. Data Processing Assistant 04 – 01 03 –
28. Senior Draughtsman 02 02 – – –
29. Junior Engineer (E&M) 01 01 – – –
30. Junior Engineer (Civil) 01 01 – – –
31. Personal Assistant 01 01 – – –
32. Accounts Assistant 06 06 – – –
33. Jr. Hindi Translator 01 01 – – –
34. Junior Scientific Assistant 35 04 03 22 06
35. Publication Assistant 01 01 – – –
36. Senior Technician 12 11 01 – –
37. Driver Special Gd. 01 – – 01 –
38. Data Entry Operator-Gd.I 02 02 – – –
39. Driver Gd-I 07 06 – 01 –
40. Junior Technician 07 03 – 04 –
41. Senior Laboratory Assistant 32 27 – 02 03
42. Cashier 06 – – – 06
43. Driver Gd-II 06 06 – – –
44. Jr. Draftsman 01 – – 01 –
45. Stenographer 20 02 01 15 02
46. Upper Division Clerk 24 23 01 – –
47. Data Entry Operator Gd.II 08 – 01 05 02
48. Driver (Ordinary) 06 06 – – –
49. Junior Laboratory Asstt. 38 15 01 15 07
50. Lower Division Clerk 35 21 – – 14
51. Plumber 01 01 – – –
52. Pump and V alve Operator 02 – 02 – –
53. Senior Attendant 05 05 – – –
54. Field Attendant 07 07 – – –
55. Attendant 39 25 – – 14
551 370 24 101 56

49
MINUTES

I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 8th September, 2006 in Room No. 63,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri P.G. Narayanan  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabha Thakur
3. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
4. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
8. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
9. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
10. Shri Francis Fanthome
11. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
12. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
13. Shri Brahmananda Panda
14. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
15. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
16. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
17. Shri Rakesh Singh
18. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
19. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secretary
2. * * *
3. The Committee then discussed its future programme and decided to take-up for its
consideration the following subjects in order of priority (i) Review of the functioning of Central
Pollution Control Board; and (ii) Science and Technology Applications for Rural Development and
51
*** Relates to other matter.

52
Upliftment of weaker sections. The Committee also directed the Secretariat to obtain relevant
information/papers relating to the first subject, in the first instance, from the concerned Ministry.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The Committee then adjourned at 11.45 
A.M. to meet again on Wednesday, the
27th September, 2006.
*** Relate to other matters.

53
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 7th February, 2007 in Committee
Room ‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri P. G. Narayanan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kamal Akhtar
3. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
4. Shri Barun Mukherjee
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
6. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
7. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
8. Shri Francis Fanthome
9. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
10. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
11. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
12. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
13. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
14. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
15. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Shri Siddhartha Behura, Special Secretary
2. Shri R.K. V aish, Joint Secretary
3. Shri J.M. Mauskar, Joint Secretary and Chairman (CPCB)
4. Dr. B. Sengupta, Member-Secretary (CPCB)
5. Shri V .K Minocha, Director
6. Dr. (Mrs.) Nalini Bhatt, Director
7. Dr. L. Raghupati, Additional Director
8. Dr. M. Subarao, Additional Director
53

54
9. Shri K.V . Mathew, Deputy Secretary
10. Dr. A.K Vidyarthi, Environment Engineer (CPCB)
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members and informed that due to preoccupation with the
official work abroad, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests had asked for exemption
from his personal appearance before the Committee, which he granted. In the absence of Secretary,
the Special Secretary in the Ministry was asked to make the presentation on the subject. Thereafter,
the Chairman welcomed the Special Secretary and other representatives of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests and Special Secretary made a presentation on the aspects relating to the
functioning of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and other connected issues. The Special
Secretary made a visual presentation on the functioning of CPCB and explained the different
activities of CPCB. The Members then sought clarifications on points arising out of the
presentation. The Special Secretary replied to them. The officials then withdrew.
3. The Committee decided to further hear the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests
on the aforesaid subject. The Committee also directed the Secretariat to obtain replies to the
questionnaire prepared on the functioning of CPCB based on the detailed literature sent by CPCB
and routed through Ministry of Environment and Forests.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.20 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the
15th February, 2007.

55
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 15th February, 2007 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri P.G. Narayanan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Barun Mukherjee
LOK SABHA
3. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
4. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
5. Shri Francis Fanthome
6. Shri Rakesh Singh
7. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. Prodipto Ghosh, Secretary
2. Shri Siddhartha Behura, Special Secretary
3. Shri J.M Mauskar, Joint Secretary and Chairman (CPCB)
4. Shri R.K. V aish, Joint Secretary
5. Shri M. Sengupta, Adviser
6. Dr. B. Sengupta, Member-Secretary (CPCB)
7. Dr. (Mrs.) Nalini Bhatt, Director
8. Shri V .K. Minocha, Director
9. Shri Sanjeev Swarup, Director
10. Dr. S.D. Makhijani, Director
11. Shri K.V . Mathew, Deputy Secretary
2. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests and Secretary made an oral presentation on the aspects relating to the
functioning of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and other connected issues and provided
information/clarifications on the replies furnished by the Ministry to the questionnaire prepared on
55

56
the functioning of CPCB. The Members then sought clarifications on points arising out of the
presentation. The Secretary replied to them.
The officials then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the discussion was kept.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.20 
P.M.

57
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 5th July, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri P.G. Narayanan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Jabir Husain
6. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
9. Shri Francis Fanthome.
10. Shri Brahmananda Panda
11. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
12. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
13. Shri Rakesh Singh
14. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
15. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri C.B. Rai, Deputy Secretary
Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
1. Prof. J.M. Dave, Former Deputy Director, National Environment Engineering Research
Institute (NEERI) and Dean, JNU, New Delhi
2. Shri P.C. Tyagi, Former Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board
3. Prof. H.B. Mathur, (Retd.), Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Delhi
4. Dr. Ashok Pant, Scientific Advisor, Pahal, Pithoragarh, Uttarakhand
2. The Chairman welcomed Prof. J.M. Dave, Former Deputy Director, National Environment
Engineering Research Institute (NEERI) and Dean, JNU, New Delhi and requested him to present
his views on the aspects relating to the functioning of Central Pollution Control Board. Prof. Dave
made a presentation on the subject. The Members then sought clarifications on the points arising
out of the presentation. Prof. Dave replied to them.
The witness then withdrew.
57

58
3. The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 11.50 A.M. for tea and re-assembled at 12.05 P.M.
4. The Committee then heard the views of Shri P.C. Tyagi, Former Chairman, Central Pollution
Control Board, Prof. H. B. Mathur, (Retd.), Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Delhi and
Dr. Ashok Pant, Scientific Advisor, Pahal, Pithoragarh, Uttarakhand on the aspects relating to the
functioning of Central Pollution Control Board one by one. The Members sought clarifications on
the points arising out of their presentations to which the witnesses replied.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee thereafter considered its future programme of evidences on the subject and
decided to meet on 23rd July, 2007 at 11.30 
A.M. to hear the representatives of the State
Governments of West Bengal and Orissa. The Committee further decided to restrict its business
to evidence of only two State Governments viz. Uttarakhand and Tamil Nadu in its next meeting
on 13th July, 2007.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 1.55 
P.M. to meet again at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, the
13th July, 2007.

59
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Friday, the 13th July, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri P.G. Narayanan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Jabir Husain
6. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Francis Fanthome
9. Shri Brahmananda Panda
l0. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
11. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
12. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
13. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
14. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty
Shri C.B. Rai, Joint Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of State Pollution Control Board of Uttarakhand
(i) Shri N. Ravishankar, Principal Secretary, Forest and Environment, Government of
Uttarakhand
(ii) Shri Vijay Kumar, Member Secretary, Pollution Control Board, Government of Uttarakhand
II. Representatives of State Pollution Control Board of Tamil Nadu
(i) Dr. N. Sundaradevan, Chairman, Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board.
(ii) Dr. T. Sekar, Member Secretary, Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board.
2. The Chairman welcomed Shri N. Ravishankar, Principal Secretary, Forest and Environment,
Government of Uttarakhand and Shri Vijay Kumar, Member-Secretary, Pollution Control Board,
59

60
Government of Uttarakhand and requested them to present their views on the aspects relating to
the functioning of Central Pollution Control Board. The State representatives made a presentation
on the subject. The Members then sought clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation
to which the witnesses replied.
The witnesses then withdrew at 12.30 
P.M.
3. The Committee then heard the views of Dr. N. Sundaradevan, Chairman and Dr. T. Sekar
Member-Secretary, T amil Nadu Pollution Control Board on the aspects relating to the functioning
of Central Pollution Control Board. The Members sought clarifications on the points arising out of
their presentation to which the witnesses replied.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.35 
P.M. to meet again at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the
23rd July, 2007.

61
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the 23rd July, 2007 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri P. G. Narayanan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabha Thakur
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Jabir Husain
6. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
9. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
10. Shri Francis Fanthome
11. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
12. Shri Brahmananda Panda
13. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
14. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
15. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
16. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty
Shri C.B. Rai, Joint Director
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
I. Representatives of West Bengal Pollution Control Board
(i) Shri D. Roy, Member Secretary
(ii) Shri S. K. Adkhikari, Senior Engineer
II. Representatives of Government of Orissa
(i) Dr. Hrusikesh Panda, Principal Secretary, Forest and Environment Department,
Government of Orissa
(ii) Dr. L.N. Patnaik, Chairman, State Pollution Control Board, Orissa
61

62
2. The Chairman welcomed Shri D. Roy, Member Secretary and Shri S. K. Adkhikari, Senior
Engineer, West Bengal Pollution Control Board and requested them to present their views on the
aspects relating to the functioning of Central Pollution Control Board. The State representatives
made a presentation on the subject. The Members then sought clarifications on the points arising
out of the presentation to which the witnesses replied.
The witnesses then withdrew at 12.35 
P.M.
3. The Committee then heard the views of Dr. Hrusikesh Panda, Principal Secretary, Forest
and Environment Department, Government of Orissa and Dr. L. N. Patnaik, Chairman, State
Pollution Control Board, Orissa on the aspects relating to the functioning of Central Pollution
Control Board. The Members sought clarifications on the points arising out of their presentation to
which the witnesses replied.
The witnesses then withdrew at 1.35 
P.M.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. * * *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 1.45 P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

63
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 25th September, 2007 in Committee
Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Shri Jabir Husain
7. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
8. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
9. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
10. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
11. Shri Brahmananda Panda
12. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
13. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
14. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
15. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
16. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
17. Shri Rampal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vanjula G. Rajan, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC)
(i) Shri J.K. Dadoo, Chairman, DPCC
(ii) Shri S.S. Ghonkrokta, Member Secretary, DPCC
(iii) Shri B. Kumar, Senior Environmental Engineer, DPCC
(iv) Dr. Chandra Prakash, Senior Environmental Engineer, DPCC
(v) Shri M Dwarakanath, Senior Scientific Officer, DPCC
63

64
(vi) Dr. Anil Kumar, Senior Scientific Officer (Environment)
(vii) Dr. M.P. George, Sr. Scientist, DPCC
(viii) Dr. Nandita Moitra, Sr. Scientist, DPCC
(ix) Shri A.N. Singh, Sr. Scientist, DPCC
(x) Shri Dinesh Jindal, ALO.
2. * * *
3. The Chairman then welcomed Shri J.K. Dadoo, Chairman, and other representatives of Delhi
Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) and requested them to present their views on the aspects
relating to the functioning of Central Pollution Control Board. The Chairman, Delhi Pollution Control
Committee made a presentation on the subject. The Members then sought clarifications on the
points arising out of the presentation to which the witness replied.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. The Committee then decided about its future programme and accordingly decided to meet
on the 5th, 12th and 25th October, 2007 to hear the views of the representatives from the States
of Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. The Committee directed the Secretariat to take necessary
action in this regard.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 1.45 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

65
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 5th October, 2007 in Committee Room ‘E’,
Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Jabir Husain
6. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
7. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
9. Shri Francis Fanthome
10. Shri Brahmananda Panda
11. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
12. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
13. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
14. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vanjula G. Rajan, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Maharashtra Pollution Control Board (MPCB)
1. Shri Johny Joseph, Chief Secretary, Government of Maharashtra
2. Shri Sanjay Khandare, Member Secretary (MPCB)
3. Shri Apurva Chandra, Resident Commissioner
4. Dr. Ajay Deshpande, Regional Officer (MPCB)
2. The Chairman welcomed the Chief Secretary Government of Maharashtra and other
representatives of Maharashtra Pollution Control Board (MPCB) and requested them to present their
65

66
views on the aspects relating to the functioning of Central Pollution Control Board. The Chairman,
Maharashtra Pollution Control Board made a presentation on the subject. The Members then sought
clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation to which the witnesses replied.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. * * *
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.50 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

67
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 12th October, 2007 in Committee Room
‘E’, Basement Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Shri Jabir Husain
5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
9. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
10. Shri Francis Fanthome
11. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
12. Shri Brahmananda Panda
13. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
14. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
15. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat
16. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
17. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
18. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Vanjula G. Rajan, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of Government of Uttar Pradesh
1. Shri P.K. Mishra, Chief Secretary, Government of Uttar Pradesh
2. Shri Govindan Nair, Principal Secretary, Government of Uttar Pradesh
3. Shri C.S. Bhatt, Member Secretary, Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board (UPPCB)
4. Shri J.S. Yadav, Chief Engineer, Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board (UPPCB)
67

68
Representatives of Government of Bihar.
1. Shri Shishir Sinha, Secretary (Environment), Government of Bihar
2. Shri S.N. Rao, Member Secretary, Bihar State Pollution Control Board (BSPCB)
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Chief Secretary, Government of Uttar Pradesh and
other representatives of Uttar Pradesh Pollution Control Board (UPPCB) and requested them to
present their views on the activities of the UPPCB, its role vis-a-vis Central Pollution Control
Board, etc. The Chief Secretary, Government of Uttar Pradesh then made an oral presentation on
the subject. The Members then sought clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation
to which the witnesses replied.
The witnesses then withdrew.
3. * * *
4. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary (Environment), Government of Bihar and the
representative of Bihar State Pollution Control Board (BSPCB). He then requested them to present
their views on the activities of BSPCB its role vis-a-vis Central Pollution Control Board, etc. The
Secretary (Environment), Government of Bihar and Member Secretary, BSPCB made an oral
presentation on the subject. The Members then sought clarifications on the points arising out of
the presentation to which the witnesses replied.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee, thereafter, decided to meet on the 6th and 14th November, 2007.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.15 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

69
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 26th November, 2007 in Room No. ‘63’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Jabir Husain
6. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
7. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
9. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
10. Shri Francis Fanthome
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
SECRETARIAT
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESS
Ms. Sunita Narain, Director, Centre for Science and Environment Delhi.
2. At the outset the Chairman welcomed Ms. Sunita Narain, Director, Centre for Science and
Environment Delhi and requested her to highlight the effectiveness of the CPCB and State Pollution
Control Boards in controlling various types of pollution in the country and the extent to which they
have been successful. The Chairman also invited her suggestions for improving the functioning of
CPCB so as to tackle the problem of pollution in the country. The Director, Centre for Science
and Environment then made an oral presentation on the subject. Members then sought clarifications
on the points arising out of the presentation to which the witness replied.
The witness then withdrew.
3. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. The Committee then adjourned at 4.05 
P.M.
69

70
XXV
TWENTY FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 13th June, 2008 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kamal Akhtar
3. Shri Jabir Husain
4. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
6. Shri Francis Fanthome
7. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
8. Shri Brahmananda Panda
9. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
10. Shri Jayasingrao Gaikwad Patil
11. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
12. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
2. The Committee took-up for consideration its draft One Hundred Ninety-second Report on
the Functioning of Central Pollution Control Board. After some discussion on the said report, it was
decided to incorporate some of the suggestions for addition/modification given by some Members.
The Committee, thereafter, adopted the report.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 12.15 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 3rd July, 2008.
70

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.