. .. " .-. 
IllATA .·. 
'tO 
THIRTY POORTB REPORT 
·The Staudir...g 
. . . 
.CoDUol t tee on. s~~ience & Tec·hnology, · Environment and 
·Forests on · Demands for . GrarAl;S of the Department of 
Bio-Technology for the · year 1996·-97 . 
. 51 . Nf;:,. · 
, 
Slj.r:i Sri Wadiyar for Sbri Sri.~~ t. . Read 
Dut.ta Wadivar -in the _ .~o~positj . on -,£ -'the Committee. 
2. At page 4, para 4, .::.ine f r:-ead biot~chn<-1ogy for 
Biotch.~o logy. 
3 At page 4 .. para ? , · line 8 l·~aci o_rganis~tions. for 
organistion.s. ... 
. 
4 . At. page _6. para 6, : .line 1 re!.d as'so.::iated for 
&Cf;OC iated . 
~ •• • t • 
. ; 
. 5 At page· 1r, para one, . line 4 read cont.rt:•l for cent!" . . 
l 
6. At pag~ 15,- . para 2·. li.ne 2, r.ead tobacc? 'for 
... · . . 
· -to ~coo ; : · 
l. · • ... ... . . 
·At pas;e 15,para fi·. line 7 r.ead beneficiaries f-or 
·· :,enefi~aries. 
· 8. At P,.ttRe . ··21 read Z~ri M.ohd. AJ i Aslu·<!af. Fat.mi !o1; 
. 
Moh.d. Ali Aahr~.~:f !!at.tni. 
. ;. 
.· 

CONTENTS 
1. CoMPOSITION OF THE CoMMITTEE ............................................................ . 
2. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ................................................................... . 
3. SCHEDULE & ANNEXURE ...................................................................... .. 
4. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE ..•.•..............................••..••.. 
PAGES 
(i) 
1-7 
9-17 
19-23 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPA RTMENT -RELATED PARL IAMENTARY 
STAND ING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1996-97) 
1. Shri V. Narayanasamy-C/wirmun 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Slui Brahmukumar Bhatt 
4. Slui N. Gir i Prasad 
5. Shri K.R. Jayadevappa 
6. Shri K. Karunakaran 
7. Slui Pranab Mukherjee 
8. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty 
9. Shri Narendra Pradhan 
10. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar 
11. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
12. Slui G. Swaminathan 
13. Slui Prakanta Warisa 
LOK SAHIIA 
14. Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakurma 
15. Shri Ranjib Biswal 
16. Slui A.B.A. Gani Khan Choudhury 
17. Prof. Jitendra Nath Das 
18. Shri Mohd. Ali Ashraaf Fatmi 
19. Smt. Mancka Gandhi 
20. Shri K.C. Kondaiah 
21. Dr. Ramkrishan Kusmaria 
22. Slui Guman Mal Lodha 
23. Slui Shivaji Mane 
24. Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta 
25. Shri Punnu Lal Mohlc 
26. Snn. Atka Nath 
27. Shri Sharad Pawar 
28. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
29. Slui N.K. Premchandran 
30. Slui Kalpnath Rai 
31. Shri A. Raja 
32. Smt. Yasundhara Raje 
33. Shri P.Y. Rajendran 
34. Slui K.B. Raut 
35. Shri S. Ramachandra Reddy 
36. Slui Harivansh Sahai 
37. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
38. Smt. Yijayaraje Scindia 
39. Kumari Selja 
40. Capt. Satish Sharma 
41. Shri Soumya Ranjan Patnaik 
42. Sushri Uma Bharati 
43. Slui Srikanta Dutta Wadivar 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish KumaJ, Joint Secretary 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer 

REPORT 
1, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and 
Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on its behalf, present 
this 34th Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the Demands for Grants 
pertaining to Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of Science & Technology) for the year 
1996-97 (Demand No. 76). 
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on the 13th August, 1996, the representatives 
of the Department of Biotechnology gave an overview of the various activities of the 
Department and the Committee sought clarifications on the various aspects of the 
functioning of the Department of Biotechnology. 
3. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of the Department of 
Biotechnology for their cooperation and answering the queries raised by Hon'ble Members 
on various aspects on programmes initiated by the Department. 
4~ The Committee considered and adopted the draft report at its meeting held on the 
23rd August, 1996. 
5. The world has witnessed spectacular advances in the field of biotechnology in the last 
43 years after the Nobel Prize discovery of the structure and D~A by Watson and Crick, in 
1993. The field was regarded as the greatest individual enterprise of the humankind in this 
century. It has revolutionised the industrial scenario, specially, the pharmaceutical industry 
all over the world, in particular, in advanced countries. Biotechnology is a science which 
uses the living organisms to make or modify a product-to improve plants or animals and 
microorganisms for specific uses. It aims at harnessing the genetic diversity in the living 
organisms for manufacture of useful products and production of strains of microbes, plants 
and animals with improved qualities. 
6. The need to accelerate the pace of research in biotechnology was felt in India. 
Accordingly, the DBT was established in'1986 and since then, a systematic impetus has been 
provided to broad based categor ies of support for: research and development, demonstration 
and technology transfer, human resource development, industrial biotechnology, support for 
infrastructure facilities, vaccine research and production, international collaboration, 
biosafety guidelines and support to autonomous institutions. The Department has supported 
major programmes in the area of agriculture, health care, environment and industry. These 
efforts have resulted in a strong base of biotechnology in the country and the impact has also 
been on weaker sections and in rural areas especially the farming community. 
7. The Secretary, DBT and the other officers of the Department informed the 
Committee that the Department of Biotechnology had funded the programme for 
development of HIV kits employing three technologiesfuode. In the ELISA mode a 
synthetic peptide based diagnostic kit for the detection of HIV I. + II was developed at the 
National Institute of Immunology. A rapid agglutination test was developed using 
recombinant antigens at South Campus, Delhi University and the test could be performed 
using a drop of blood where the results are revealed within a minute. Both the kits have 
been validated on limited samples. A Western Blot Kit has been developed at Cancer 
Research Institute, Mumbai. All the three tests are in the process of being transferred to the 
industry which is expected to reduce the unit cost of HIV testing substantially. 
8. The Committee was informed that the productivity enhancement has been 
demonstrated in semi-intens ive tiger shrimp farming and intensive carp farming. The 
Department has identified aqua-feed development as a priority. R&D programmes are 

oriented towards feed development using low cost ingredients and feeds with better feed 
conversion ratio (FCR). A feed developed at CFTRI, Mysore when field tested in semi­
intensive shrimp farming provided results comparable to imported feeds. Increasing seed 
production is essential for the growth of aquaculture. This is presently a limiting factor. The 
Department's initiatives in developing spawning agents for carp bre.eQing is remarkable. A 
protocol being developed for cryopreservation of prawn seed is likely to make seed available 
for longer periods. The establishment of hatcheries for producing seed of pearl oysters, 
clams and mussels would help the availability of seeds. The emphasis on marioe and fresh 
water prawns for seed production would in the long run l enhance seed availability of these 
non-traditional species and help in diversification of aquaculture. · 
9. The infections have devastated the acquaculture and prawn culture activities in 
coastal regions of the country. The Department of Biotechnology has supported programmes 
to identify the pathogens and to develop appropriate diagnostic technology for the same. 
These programmes have been initiated at Madras University, Madras, Fisheries College, 
Tuticorin, Fisheries College, Mangalore and at Nagpur University. 
10. The department has launched a BIOCONTROL NETWORK PROGRAMME 
(BNP) in 1989. The programme is being implemented through 60 R&D projects. The main 
aim of BNP is to develop better formulations and also to develop cost effective, 
commercially viable production technologies for each of the biocontrol agents. Achievements 
of Biocontrol Network Programme (1989-96) are shown in Annexure 'A'. 
11. The Secretary, DBT informed the Committee that there have been major 
achievements in the field of Agriculture and allied areas such as production of transgenic 
tobacco plants, rice and mustard, isolation of gene for enhancing nutritional qualities under 
Tissue Culture of cereals, regeneration of protocols developed for important trees and 
plantation crops such as Coffee, Pepper , Cocoa , Populus and soapnut. Under biodiversity 
conservation 3 National Gene Banks were established for conserving the medicinal and 
aromatic plants and Molecular Technologies-RFLP, PCR were standardized for biodiversit y 
conservation. 
12. Under animal biotechnology, Embryo Transfer Technology was standardized and 
PCR techniques for sex predi.ction was developed for cattle and buffalo. 
13. Other fields in which the aehievements were made during the year 1995-96 include 
medical biotechnJlogy where Leprosy Vaccine under Phase-III clinical trials gave 
encouraging results. 
14. Microplate ELISA and dot-ELISA technique were developed at CDRI , Lucknow 
for detection of Leishmaniasis and drug targetting system for delivering large variety of 
drugs to macr ophage s developed at Nli, New Delhi. 
15. Biotechnology special based programmes were implemented population and weaker 
sections of the society. A meat meal plant has been installed at Bakshi-ka-Talab, Lucknow 
for utilisation of fallen caracass and a vermi-compositing project has been set up in Tamil 
Nadu. Six different projects in the area of mushroom cultivation, poultry, biofertilizer, 
sericulture, aquaculture and extraction of medicinal and aromatic plants were funded in 
different parts of the country. A new high yielding poultry breeds were developed and 
supplied to weaker sections irY Bihar. The Programme benefitted about 15000 persons in 
terms of training, employment, improved nutrition and health status. 
16. A Special Programme for the benefit of earthquake victims in Latur was taken up. 

Under this programme 8 special projects were initiated in different villages with the help of 
universities, research institutions and NGOs. Biotechnology based programmes were 
demonstrated for the benefit of the local population in terms of income and employment- ·. 
generation, improved health, nutrition and livestock. 
17. The Committee was apprised that Biotechnology based programmes have also been 
initiated for upliftment of rural women and for providing opportunities to women scientists 
and steps have been taken for development of appropriate technologies and their transfer and 
demonstrations for providing income and employment generation in rural areas. The 
technologies developed by DBT which are ready for transfer for the benefit of women include 
Biofertilizer, Biopesticide, Sericulture, Plant tissue culture, Vemicomposting, Spiruline 
production, Mushroom cultivation, Medicinal and aromatic plants and Aquaculture, poultry 
and livestock. 
18. The Secretary DDT informed the Committee that the DBT is expected to achieve 
the following in coming years:-
(i) Genetically improved transgenic cotton, rice, brassica, moongbean, ptgeonpea. 
'(ii) improved varieties of wheat. 
(iii) Tissue culture regeneration protocols available for i1pportant species. 
(iv) Plant tissue culture to be a commercial activity in different regions, will meet local 
demand, indig enous technologies would be transferred to entrepreneurs , 
Micropropagation Technology Parks would be set up. 
(v) Diocontrol and Diofertilizer packages available to a large number of farmers. 
(vi) Indigenous technology development for semi-intensive aquaculture to be 
completed; used for shrimp production. 
(vii) E~.:onomical Diagnostic kits for common communicable diseases available. 
(viii) Gcnctic probes to be used for genetic disorder detection; 15-20 genetic 
counselling units functional. 
(ix) DNA fingerprinting for crime investigation and for identification and 
characterisation of important animal and plant species. 
(x) Vaccine Unit at 13ulandshahr was made fully operational. 
(xi) Chain of Referral Centres to test, validate and evaluation diagnostic kits, probes 
and other biotech prouucts and to provide scientific inputs for clearances, 
patenting etc. of such products. 
19. A Mission mode project was launched to develop production technology packages 
for different types of biofertilizers to ensure quality control and provide training to the 
farmers i111, production technologies. The project has focussed on blue green algae (BGA) for 
wetland rice. rhizobium for oilseeds and leguminous crops and mycorrhiza for forest tree 
species. Technologies for polyhouse, flexi-bioreactor, coir based production of BGA and 
modified soil based conventional production of BGA have been developed. There are 
seventeen Centres located in different parts of the country implementing the programmes. 
The Biotech Consortium lnuia Ltd. (BCIL) is helping DBT in transferring the technology. 
So far, under the programme, 110 tonnes of soil based DGA, 14,000 packets containing 
200 ml. each of BGA a!_1d 50 tonncs of Azolla have been produced. 7300 experimental 
demonstrations conuuctcd; 127 training courses and 32 farmers ' mela organised and 6300 

farmers have been trained. The programmes in different locations are organised in local 
languages and the training m'!nual is also prepared in the local language. The programme has 
picked up very well in Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and Mahara shtra where between 5 to 21% 
grain yield has been reported. 
20. The process parameters for fermentation based production of rhizobia! fertilizers has 
been opt imised for moongbean , soybean, rajamash, chickpea , pigeonpea. So far 1126 
demonstrations have been conducted in the field; 35 training courses and 14 farmers ' mela 
organised and 3000 farmers trained. 40 tonnes of rhizobium fertilizer was produced. 
21. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made to open at least one Centre 
during the year 1996-97 in each state-Union territory. The DDT should make out a case for 
allocation of more funds under major head 3425 and sub-head 119.13 and efforts be made for 
transfer of technology for both BGA and Rhizobium. 
2.2. A Biotchnology Information System (BITS) has been established . The object . is to 
provide a link amongst sci'entists working in the inter-disciplinary areas of biotechnology for 
sharing of resources and expertise. The Department in close coordination with major 
departments of Universities under UGC, R&D institutions under CSIR, ICAR and 
Go.vernment Departments such as the NIC, DOE and DOT, has achieved all its milestones . 
As part of infrastructural development, emergence of a very sophisticated scientific 
infrastructure for bio-informatics involving state of the art computational and communication 
facilities, networked over the National Wide Area Network of NIC viz., NICNET has been a 
major break ·through . 
23. BITS resources are now being used by more than 8000 scientists from all parts of the 
country. The services include analysis of biological data, bibliographic references to published 
literature in biotechnology (including patents data), software development for computationally 
intensive problems in biology such as molecular modelling, genome analysis, protein 
engineering for rational drug design, etc. The centres have started their own Newsletters and 
other SDI services, which have become popular. 
24. In view of its impact on the high tech area research area the Committee feels it 
necessary to strengthen the Bioinformatics in a ~ig way. The facilities available for the 
purpose be augmented to provide Silicon Graphic based high performance computing 
environment for molecular visuali$ation to researchers in modern biolog)Vbiotechnology. 
Efforts may also be initiated to form a Biotechnology!lnformation Forecasting Commission for 
better access to the scientists in the country. 
25. The Committee satisfied with the efforts made by the DBT for initiatives taken to 
promote research and development programmes, demonstration activities, technology 
transfer, patenting of inventions and conservation of natural resources, especially genetic 
diversity using biotechnology tools. The Committee notes that with the involyement of the state 
level organisations initiatives have been taken to promote this field in the States of Haryana, 
Kerala, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa. A beginning should therefore be made to involve all 
States and Union Territories and direct linkage be established with the socio-economic 
ministries and departments and with other organistions involved in scientific work and joint 
proposal be mooted. The Committee recommends that DDT should identify the rural areas in 
each stat&'Union territory for the purpose. The Panchayats should be involved to make the 
projects result oriented. 
26. The Committee observes that topics of interest need to be identified for production of 
video-films. This would provide publicity to subjects being dealt with by DDT, especially for the 
upliftment or rural population, SOST, women and other weaker sections or the society. These 
, . 

video films should be distributed to the States for dissemination of information for benefit of 
rural areas. 
27. A provision of Rupees 3.00 <.: rorcs has been made for research in the area of DNA 
Finger Printing and Diagnostics. A cent re for DNA finger printing and diagnostics (CDFD) 
is being set up at H yde rabad as an autono mou s institution to facilit~te crime inves tigation, 
sett lemen t of paternity disputes and other famil y disputes besides diagnosing genet ic 
diseases. It will facil itate the authenticat ion of cell line and gerin oplasm. 
28. The Committee expresses its concern over the delay in the establishment of the CDFD 
centre at Hyderabad and steps s hould be taken to make the establi shment operative during 
the current yea r itself. 
29. It has been stated that progra mm es aimed at resea rch and demonstration in 
biotechnology with pro mising possibil ities in the area of human health, agriculture and 
industry would continue to be supported. During the year 1996-97 a provis ion of Rs. 3. 90 
crores · has been made for the creation of infrastructure in basic research in emerging areas 
like J-Iuman Genetics, Food Biotechnology, ~ledicinal and A romatic Plants and other 
Train ing Progrummes. Plan schemes of National Institute of Imm unology would receive 
enhanced support. 
30. The National Institute of Immunology (N ll ), New Delhi. an autonomo us Institution 
of DBT , in its decade of existence has mainly adtlressed itself to practical problems germane 
to a developing country such as issues related to fertil ity control, A IDS and related 
opportunistic infections with immunomodulation aspects and Leprosy Vacc ine Trials. The 
Institute is engaged in various other product oriented research and in the upstream areas of 
research. 
31. The Committee notes with satisfact ion the work done by the Institut e in the 
development of detectio n kits developed by the Institutes and its Leprosy Vaccine Trials. 
The Committee is of the view that the Institute should focus more on product oriented 
research taking leads from the basic research results s uported by the Department, rath er than 
duplicating its efforts on the basic research. Nil should direct its research towards more 
products in a realistic manner so that results are used for industrial exploitation of indigenous 
technology. The results of research .should also enjoy the benefit of National and International 
patent protection. The Committee hopes that the allocation of Rs. 9.00 crores for the purpose 
would be fully utilis ed. 
32. Another autonomous institution of DBT , National Facility for Animal Tissue and 
cell culture, Pun e has been renamed as National Centre for Cell Sdence (NCCS). The 
Centre has strengthened furth er its repository with the import of more cell lines. The 
Centre, in addition to supply of cell cultures to various instituti ons in the country has 
maintained its act ivities in the cell and tissue culture research. 
33. The Budget Estimates for 1996-97 provide a sum of Rs. 5.00 crores for NCCS. The 
Committee app reciates the results of successfu l cultiva tion of skin cultures- and thei r 
transplantation in burn and vitiligo cases. Furth er effo rts in standardisation of such 
techniques will help Medical Institutions and practiti oners. At the same time it should be 
ensured that the Centre maintains its service facilities as per its mandate and takes up R & D 
projects according to the nee~s of the society. The Committee recommends that New 
Laboratory-cum-Resid ential Complex of NCCS should be completed at the earliest and made 
functional during the year. 
34. Department of Biotechnology continued to suppo rt 680 ongoing projects in the areas 

of agr i~.:uhural ~.:ov~nng crop hiotedlllology. plan t tissue culture. medic inal plants. 
seril:ultun:. hio- k niliz~r:- <rnd biological pest control. medical biotechnology. animal 
biotechnology and aq uacultun:. resean: h in h uman geneti<.:s, ind ustria l biote<.:hnology. 
environment and con:-ervation and oth er biotechnology basco prog ramme for weaker 
sect ions. 
35. The OUT eontinu~d to work for an integrated manpowe r includ ing develop ment 
programmes in univer-,ities and building a strong R & 1.) based in Genetic Eng ineering 
Units at ll SC. 13~mcalor~. ~ t KU. Madurai. JNU. New Delh i and 13HU. Varanasi tocether 
~ -
with 13ioinformatil:s Network set up. 
36. During 1995-Wl against total Budgetary Support of Rs. 88.14 crores. DDT rendered 
assistan<.:e to scient ific bodies to the tunc o f Rs. 61.14 cron:s. This works out to about 
69%. Likew ise Jur ing ltJtJ6-97 against the total budgetary supo r t of Rs. 96.67 crorcs OUT 
provided assistance to s<.:icntifi<.: bodi...:s for an amout of Rs. 52.70 crores. This wo rks about 
64lX). While the assistance rendered to scientific bodies by Dl3T has marginally declined, 
nevertheless the Committee feels that instead of prov iding financia l suppo rt to the projects 
in other institutions. th<: Dl3T should involve its own institutions in result orien ted projects. 
37. T he Comm ittee rel·omm etuls that new fadliti es namely X-ray c r ~·s tall og r ap hy and 
601t 1\tllz FT Nl\lR bci n ~ created to take up str uctural biology studi es speci ally fro m the view 
point to dru g design ing and tar getin g should he expedited . 
38. Acco rding to th e " Backg round Note" th e sa nctioned st<.~ ff s t re n ~ th of DBT as on 
01.113. 1996 is 251. The note is however silent o n the vaca ncies as on d:1te. T he Commi ttee 
reitcratt-s its ea rlier recomm endat ions made in its 21st report rega rd ing the a ppointmen ts 
and ade qu ate promotion ave nues for the s cientists. The Com mittee furt her r ecommends th at 
a total cadre review incl udin g the s cientists' feeder cad re be take n up at t he earli est and a n 
ind epend ent Cadre Controlling Cell be set up. The Committ ee ohse r n~s th at DBT should 
have its own R ecruitment Rul es, for Scientists and Suppor t Staff . 
39. Budget Estimates for 1995-96 provided a some of Rs. ()6.51 crores to DBT 
including Rs . 90.00 crores as Plan Expenditure. OUT could utilise Rs. 81.7-l crore only 
under Plan Expenditure during the yea r and surrendered a some of Rs. 8.26 crorcs under 
plan and Rs. 0.12 crore under · Non-plan during the year. The Committee was informed 
that the amount was su rr...:ndered under instru<.:tions from the Ministry of finance and was 
as an economy measure. The Committee feels that this situation would not have arisen if 
the scientists were also accoc iated with the finam:ial requirements of the projects well 111 
advance. 
40. T he Committ ee observes that th e DBT should d raw up a comprehensive plan of 
action fo•· projects in hilly areas especiall y in Uttr anchal and olhl•r h:~l· k wa rd and trihal 
areas of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar and North Eastern region. T herefore, it sho uld app roach 
Plannin g Commi ssion with its re<Juirements for addit ional f unds. 
41. 13harat Immunological and biological Corporation Ltd. (13113COL) l3ulandshahr 
was incorporated in March. 1989 as a publ ic sector company to manufacture 100 million 
doses of Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV) and other immunobiologil:uls. The Company has 
already implem<:ntcd Phasc- 1 activity and bottled a few batches of OPV from imported 
bulk after qlwlity of the vaccine tested at Nationul Quality Control L.tbowtory at C. R.I.. 
Kasauli. 1t has the approval of Drug Controller of India. Twenty two lakh doses were 
suppl ied to the National Immun ization Programme. 1n phase-ll activit i...:s, indigenous 

prodw.:tion of OPV frum primary cell cultur~ have b~.:~n initiateu . Bl13COL would b~.: 
capabk of prov iding. ~)() lakh ~uses of OPV during thc ycar. lt also initiated the production 
of prototype plasma (k rivcu I kpatitis 1.3. Vaccine in <:ollaboration with Centre for Diseases 
Conrl. Atlanta. USA. 
42. The Committee in its twent y first report expressed its satisfaction over the fact that 
lllllCOL had started trial runs for the production of vaccine from hulk. An investment of 
Rup ees ~.52 crore s and Hs. 1.10 crores was made in the year 1993-9_. and 199 ... ·95 in 
lllll COL and an amount of Rupe es 3 crores has been earmarked for inves tment purpo ses for 
the )'ear 1996-97. Attention of the Committee has been drawn to an annexure to the report of 
auditor for the yea r ended 31.3. 199_. which indicate s that the fixed assets of BlllCOL have 
neith er been physica lly verified by the manugem ent at reasonable intervals nor any 
reconciliation of assets was produced before the auditors. BIBCOL also failed to produce and 
satisfy the auditors on the as ped of reconciliation of assets on such verifi cation as compared 
to book records. 
43. The Committee obse rves that Dl3T shoul d attend to the audit observations in right 
earnest unkss the :-ame have been attentkd in the mean time. The Comm ittee should be 
upri;cd of the action taken by OUT . 
~-L The Commillec has been given to undcrstanJ that the joint vantu re namely the 
Indian Vaccines Coqwration LtJ. is under the process of winding up. In these circumstaces 
the need for advancing a Juan of Rs. 1.5 crores to the corporation is difficult to comprehend. 
Tlw Co mmitte~ is of the view that the corporat ion shouiJ have funued its requi rements fro m 
the cash llow gencrated from the process of winding up itself, say. from the sale of assets 
etc. 
45. After making a ddailcd scrutiny of the D~mands for Grants of the Department of 
l3iotcdmolog.y and assessing the progress of various important programmes and projc.:c.:ts 
administered by it , the Comm ittee recommends that the Dcma nus for Grants of Rs. 96.67 
crorcs. as sought by the Departmcnt of Uiotechnolo gy for the year 199(1·97. under Demand 
No. 76 may be upproved. 
Nt.:w Dt:u u ; 
All!iii.H 23. 1996 
V. NARA Y ANASAMY 
Chairman 
Committee on Science and Technology. 
£111·irvwnent and Fore.ws. 

SCHEDULE 

SCHEDULE-I 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1996-97 
The budgetary allocation in respect of DBT during the 8th Plan (1992-97) is Rs. 427 
crores and the department has projected for the year 1996-97 a total budget of Rs. 96.67 
crores including plan budget of Rs. 90.00 crores (Revenue Rs. 85.50 crores and capital Rs. 
04.50 crores) under the following heads:-
Plan Non-Plan Total . 
1. Secretariat 00.30 1.95 02.25 
2. Scientific Research 17.00 1.72 18.72 
3. Assistance to Scientific bodies 62.70 0.00 62.70 
4. International Cooperation 00.50 0.00 00.50 
5. International Centre for Genetic 
Engineering & Biotechnology 05.00 3.00 08.00 
6. Investment in Public Enterprises/Joint Ventures 04.50 0.00 04.50 
90.00 6.67 96.67 

SCHEDULE-II 
BUDGETARY OUTLAYS FOR mE YEAR 1996-97 (PLAN & NON-PLAN) 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Plan Non-Plan Total 
s. Name' of the ~heme Demands Approved Demands Approved Demands Approved 
No. Made Made Made 
D.B.T 
1. Manpower Development. 10.00 7.00 0.00 0.00 10.00 7.00 
2. Infrastructure facilities 15.00 7.00 0.00 0.00 15.00 7.00 
3. Basic and product based R & D projects 48.00 35.00 0.00 0.00 48.00 35.00 
4. Demonstrationlfransfer of t.echnology , and manufacturing activities 18.50 13.70 0.00 0.00 18.50 13.70 
5. International cooperation 2.00 . 0.50 0.00 0.00 2.00 0.50 
6. International centre for genetic engineering 
and biotechnology 3.00 5.00 5.00 3.00 8.00 8.00 
7. Secretariat Manpower 0.35 0.30 2.27 1.95 2.62 2.25 
Autonomous Bodies 
8. National Institute of Immunology 14.00 9.00 1.32 1.22 15.32 10.22 
9. National facility for animal tissue and cell 
culture (National Centre for Cell Science) 6.15· 5.00 0.55 0.50 6.70 5.50 
10. Centre for DNA finger printing 
and diagnostics 4.00 3.00 0.00 0.00 4.00 3.00 
Companies 
11. Bharat Immunologicals and Bio}ogicals 
Corp. Ltd . 5.25 3.00 0.00 0.00 5.25 3.00 
12. Indian Vaccines Corp. Ltd. 3.50 1.50 0.00 0.00 3.50 1.50 
TOTAL: \ 
129.75 90.00 9.14 6.67 138.89 96.67 

ANNEXURE 

ANNEXURE 
ACIIIEVEI\IENTS OF BiOCONTROL NETWOUK PROGRAMME (1989-96) 
!\lass Prod ucl ion 
Technologies Developed 
Coverage 
J»opularisal ion 
Training 
Comml•n-ial Production 
1. NPV of lleliothis armigera 
2. NPV of Spodvptera liture 
3. Granulosis virus of Chilo infuscatellus 
4. Tricltogramma 
5. Chrysopa 
6. Tricllodema viride 
7. Glioclndium viren. .. r and 
8. Pseudomonas fluorescens 
A total target of 11,700 hectares covered (cotton, chick­
pea, tobacoo, sugarcane, groundnut, sunflower, black­
gram, grcengram, Pigeon Pea, Pulses, Sesamum & veg­
etables) all over the country. 
Several Travel workshops cum farmers Melas/Field days 
were conducted in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, U.P., A.P., 
Maharashtra, Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh and was 
attended by Subject Matter Specialist, students, Farmers 
field functionaries, scientists from Govt. and private orgn. 
and rep. of industries. These were in local languages. 
Training was imparted to farmers, NGOs scientists from 
Govt. and private organisations and private entrepreneurs. 
3500 farmers trained on production and management 
strategy of Diocontrol agents. 
2 Model units were set up at TNAU, Coimbatore and 
MKU, Madurai in 1992. 
Sufficient quantities of Biocontrol agents have been pro­
duced and sold to cover an area of 22,500 hectares in the 
fields of regional crops. 
Sale · proceeds-18 lakhs during the last 4 years. 
Dencficaries through the sale of Biocontrol agents were 
3812. 
With the help of DBT, Biotechnology Construction India 
Ltd. (BCIL) has signed the technology transfer agreement 
with five entrepreneurs including one multinational. 
Uasl'd nn the SU\:l:ess and acceptability of R&D projects a mission mode programme was 
started. 
l. Aims & Ohjeclives To demonstrate the usc of biopesticide produced through 
technology pacbgcs generated from various R&D pro­
jects. 
to revalidate and fine tunc! the tedtnology through large 
scale demonstrution in different agroclimative zones and 
to improve whereever necessary. 
to create general awareness among the users. 
to provide training about the biopesticide technology. 
to set up Production Units in a phased manner in different 
states. 

2. Major Achievements 
3. States Covered 
4. Area Covered 
5. Popularisation 
6. Training 
7. Advantages Realised in · 
IPM trials Besides 
Environmental Protection 
& Conservation of 
Ecosystem 
20 production units and 1 Repository Centre set up in a 
phased manner. 
In the states of Haryana (HAU), Punjab (PAU ), U.P. 
(PDVR, GBPAU, UPR), Maharashtra (MPKV; PKV) , 
Gujarat (GAU), Tamilnadu (TNAU , AU), Karnataka 
(UAS), Assam (TES-2), Orissa (QUAT ), Andhra Pradesh 
(APAU, CfRI), Rajasthan (RAU) , Kerala (NRCS) , J&K 
(SKUASI, Jammu). 
So far 5000 hectares through 10 Units. 
Several Field days, Krishi Melas , Exhibitions were 
organised for farmers & other extension functionaries. 
Several trammg programmes organised at these centres , 
for the benefit of the users. 
About 2000 fanners attended the training programme at 
various places 
1000 handouts in different re~ional languages were 
prepared and distributed to Extension Personnel for 
onward transmission to farmers and other users . 
*Cost benefit ratio was worked out m several crops. 
(1) The benefit realised in terms of monetary gain is 
within a range of Rs. 12,000 to 35,000/hac. in 
various crops. 
(ii) The benefit realised in terms of yield is within the 
range pf 20 kgs. to 500 kgs. per hectare. 
(iii) Reduction in the pesticide consumption is about 50. 

APPENDIX TO ANNEXURE 
Biotech Consortium India Limited 
1. 
2. 
Company Main Business 
Crop Health Products Chemical 
Limited, Ghaziabad Pesticides 
Maharashtra 
Oil, seeds 
Jalgaon 
Cooperative Oil seeds 
federation, processing, 
marketing 
3. Hoechst AgrEvo, Bombay Chemical 
Pesticides 
4. Godavari Sugar Mills, Sugar Mills 
Bombay (Somaiya Group) 
5. Pralshar Bio products Ltd., Manufacturers 
Goa of Growth 
Promoters 
Other companies interested 
1. Krishi Rasayan Exports Chemical 
Pvt. Ltd.. Bihar Pesticides 
2. Bharat Technologies Ltd. Sugar mills 
Tiruchirapalli, Tamil Nadu 
17 
Biopesticides 
Trichogramma, 
Trichoderma , 
Heliothis NPV 
Trichoderma 
Trichoderma 
Trichogramma 
Heliothis NPV 
Status of the 
Project 
Trial production 
started 
Implementation is 
yet to begin 
Project under 
implementation 
Project under 
implementation 
Project under 
implementation 
Trichogramma, Field trails 
Trichoderma , initiated 
Heliothis NPV 
Spodoptura NPV 
Trichogramma Proposal under 
consideration 

MINUTES 

MINUTES OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met from 11.10 a.m. to 12.55 p.m. and again from 3.00 p.m. to 4.45· 
p.m. and from 5.10 p.m. to 5.50 p.m. on Tuesday, the 13th August, 1996 in Committee 
Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri V. Narayanasamy __ Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri N. Giri Prasad 
4 .. Shri Narendra Pradhan 
5. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar 
6. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma 
8. Mohd. Ali Ashraaf Fatmi 
9. Dr. Ramkrishan Kusmaria 
10. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
11. Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta 
12. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
13. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
14. Shri Kalpnnth Rai 
15. Shri K.B. Raut 
16. Shri S. Ramachandra Reddy 
17. Shri Harivansh Sahai 
18. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
19. Kumari Selja 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri· O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer 
•• • • • • • • • 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
Dr. (Mrs) Manju Sharma, Secretary 
Dr. J.R. Arora, Adviser 
Dr. (Mrs) Amita Biswas, Adviser 
Dr. P.K. Ghosh, Adviser 
Dr. V.K. Vinayak, Adviser 
Dr. M. Balasubramanian, Adviser 
Shri Sujit Banerjee , Joint Secretary (Admn .) 
Shri S.B. Krishnan, Joinr Secretary & F.A. 
•••Relates to other mailers. 
• • 

Dr. S. Natesh, Director 
Dr. K.K. Tripathi , Director 
Dr. Sandeep K. Basu , Director , Nil 
Miss Renu Swarup , PSO 
• • • 
2. • • • 
• * • • • • 
• • • • • • 
3. In the afternoon session, the Committee took up consideration of the Demands for 
Grants (1996-97) of the Department of Biotechnology . The Secretary in the Department 
gave an overview on the budgetary allocations as proposed for its various schemes m the 
Demands for Grants and the Members sought clarifications on some points. 
4. • • • • • • • • • 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
6. the Committee then adjourned at 5.50 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on 22nd 
August, 1996. 

VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met from 11.()() a.m. on Friday, the 23rd August , 1996 in Committee 
Room 'Main', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi . 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Y. Narayanasamy __ Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ram Das Agarwal 
3. Shri N. Giri Prasad 
4. Shri K.R. Jayadevappa 
5. Shri K. Karunakaran 
6. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
7.- Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Mahabir La! Bishvakarma 
9. Shri Guman Mal Loda 
10. Prof Ajit Kumar Mehta 
11. Shri Kalpnath Rai 
12. Shri K.B. Raut 
13. Shri S. Ramachandra Reddy 
14. Shri Harivansh Sahai 
15. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri O.D . Sharma, Under Secretary 
Shri D.P. Ahuja , Committee Officer 
2. The Committee, took up consideration of the Draft Reports on Demands for Grants 
(1996-97) of (i) the Department of Science and Technology; (ii) the Department of 
Electronics; (iii) the Department of Space and (iv) the Department of Biotechnology. After 
some discussion, the Committee adopted the same with minor amendments. 
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to fjnalise the date on which these reports 
may be presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha. The Committee 
authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Shri G. Swaminathan or Dr. Mahesh -Chandra 
Sharma to present these Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Prof. , Ajit Kumar Mehta and in 
his absence Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj or Shri K.B. Raut to lay these Reports on the 
Table of the Lok Sabha. 
4. The Committee placed orr record its appreciation for the excellent work done by the 
Secretariat in preparing the Draft Reports and circulating the same to the Members in a 
record time. 
5. The Committee adjourned at 12.20 p.m. 