 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
May, 2013/ Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014) 
OF THE MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES 
(DEMAND NO. 30) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th May, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th May, 2013) 
REPORT 
NO. 
243

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS  
 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY THIRD REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014) 
      OF THE MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES 
 (DEMAND NO. 30) 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 8TH MAY, 2013) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 8TH MAY, 2013) 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MAY, 2013/VAISAKHA, 1935 (SAKA) 
C O N T E N T S 
         PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       (i) – (ii)   
2.     PREFACE                                                                                                                   (iii) 
3. ACRONYMS 
4. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                                             
●5. SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS  
●6. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE         
    
                                                 
● To be appended at printing stage 
 
 


 MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY,  
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS (2012-13) 
---------- 
          
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy  –– Chairman  
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Anil H. Lad 
3. Smt. Maya Singh 
4. Shri M. Rama Jois 
5. Shri Alok Tiwari 
    6. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
7. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra 
   8. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian 
 9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
10. Vacant 
 LOK SABHA 
11. Shri K.C. Singh "Baba"    
   12. Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
13. Shri Vincent H. Pala 
14. Vacant 
15. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde 
16. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
17. Dr. Ajay Kumar 
18. Shri O.S. Manian 
      19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
20. Shri Basori Singh Masram 
21. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
22. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
23. Shri Ramashanakar Rajbhar 
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
25. Shri Yshvir Singh 
26. Smt. Supriya Sule 
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
28. Shri Joseph Toppo 
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava 
30. Shri Ramaknt Yadav 
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
                                                
 
 Prof. M.S. Swaminathan ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 9th April, 2013. 
 Nominated w.e.f 9th January, 2013. 
 Nominated w.e.f. 1st May, 2013 

   SECRETARIAT 
 
 Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary 
 Shri  Alok Chatterjee, Director 
 Shri  V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri  Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director 
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer 
Preface 
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee on Science & 
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been  authorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred  Forty-Third Report of the Committee.  This 
Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2013-2014) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences 
(Demand No.30). 
 
2.   In the meeting of the Committee held on 2
nd April, 2013, the Secretary and other Officers of 
the Ministry of Earth Sciences gave an overview of the various activities of the Ministry and the 
Members sought clarifications on various aspects of  the performance of the Ministry to enable it 
to scrutinise the Demands for Grants. 
 
3.   The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministry  for replying to the 
clarifications sought by the Members and placing  before it the required material to enable the 
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Earth Sciences. 
 
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 7
th May, 2013. 
 
NEW DELHI; 
May, 2013    
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
Chairman,
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 
ACRONYMS 
  AMFU  :  Agro Met Field Units  
ARGs  :  Automatic Rain Gauges  
AWS  :  Automatic Weather Stations  
CAIPEEX : Cloud Aerosols Interact ion and Precipitation Enhancement 
CIR  :  Central Indian Ridge  
CIOB:  :  Central Indian Ocean Basin 
CMLRE :  Centre for Marine Living Resources   
COMAPS :  Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System  
CoS  :  Committee of Secretaries  
CPCB  :  Central Pollution Control Board  
CSIR  :  Department of Scientific & Industrial Research 
CVI  :  Coastal Vulnerability Index  
DPR  :  Detailed Project Report 
  DRDO  :  Defence Research & Development Organisation 
DWR  :  Doppler Weather Radar  
EEZ  :  Exclusive Economic Zone 
EFC   :  Expenditure Finance Committee 

ESSO  :  Earth System Science Organisation  
FORV  :  Fishery Oceanographic Research Vessel  
GSI  :  Geological Survey of India  
HAB  :  Harmful Algal Blooms 
HCS  :  Himalayan Cryosphere Studies  
HPCS  :  High Performance Computing Systems  
ICAR  :  Indian Council of Agricultural Research 
ICMAM :  Integrated Coastal a nd Marine Area Management’  
IMD  :  India Meteorological Department  
IITM  :  Indian Institut e of Tropical Meteorology  
INCOIS :  Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services  
IVR   :  Interactive Voice Response  
LPA  :  Long Period Average 
MoU  :  Memorandum of Understanding  
NCS  :  National Centre for Seismology  
NGRI  :  National Geophysical Research Institute 
  NGOs    :  Non Governmental Organisations 
NCAER :  National Council of Applied Economic Research  
NCMRWF :  National Centre for Medi um Range Weather Forecasting   
NCAOR :  National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research  
NIOT  :  National Institute of Ocean Technology  
ORV  :  Ocean Research Vessel 
RFD  :  Result Framework Document  
SAU  :  State Agriculture Universities  
SPCB  :  State Pollution Control Boards  
SMS  :  Short Message Service 
 
REPORT 
 
The Earth behaves as a si ngle, interlinked and self-regulati ng system, its components,                     
viz. atmosphere, oceans, cryosphere, geosphere and biosphere, function as a single system with 
complex interactions.  The scientific understa nding of the earth system helps to improve 
prediction of climate, weather and natural hazards as well as afford sustainable use of 
resources. Recognising the importance of st rong inter-relation of processes among various 
components of the earth, in 2006 the Ministry of Earth Sciences was established to develop and 
improve capability to forecast, weather, climat e and hazard related phenomena for societal, 
economic and environmental benefits. The Ea rth System Science Organisation (ESSO) was 
also established in the year October, 2007, to monitor and give  a overall policy direction to the 
Ministry.  The agenda for the earth system science in the country includes providing new 
perspectives on earth systems, better unders tanding of earth processes and applying this 
knowledge for sustainability of the Earth and developing services for the societal benefits.  
2. In view of the importance of  the fact that India has a va st coastline, stretching some 
7,500 kms and its Exclusive Economic Zone(EEZ) of about 2.02 million sq. km., the Ministry 
of Earth Sciences brought all the agencies of the meteorological and ocean development 
activities under one umbrella. The Ministry of Earth Sciences is mandated to provide the nation 
with the best possible services in forecas ting monsoons and other weather and climate 
parameters, ocean states, earthquakes, tsun amis, and other earth phenomena through well 
integrated programmes. The Ministry also de als with science and t echnology for exploration 

and exploitation of ocean resources (living and  non-living) and plays a nodal role for 
Antarctic/Arctic and Seismological research in an integrated manner. 
3. OBJECTIVES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE MINISTRY 
The Ministry of Earth Sciences has the following objectives and functions: 
 To improve weather forecast and provide advisory for agriculture, aviation, shipping, 
sports including the Extended Long Range Seasonal Monsoon forecast, 
 To  provide a wide range of ocean information advisories including fishery information, 
  To improve the understanding of Polar Science and its implications for climate change, 
 To develop technology for harnessing marine resources, 
 To conduct surveys for assessing non-living resources, 
 To assess coastal marine productivity and Marine Ecosystems, 
 To improve understanding of Climate Change Science, 
 To provide early warning of natural hazards viz. cyclone, tsunami, sea level rise, and 
 To promote basic research including Capacity building in the Earth System Science. 
4.  ORGANISATIONAL STRU CTURE OF THE MINISTRY 
4.1 The Earth Commission
, Ministry of Earth Sciences works in Mission Mode 
basis and is responsible for formulating pol icies, overseeing implementation of policies 
and programmes in mission mode and ensuring th e necessary interdisciplinary integration. 
The ‘Earth System Science Organisation(ES SO)’, under the Ministry has four major 
branches of earth sciences viz.(i) Ocean Sc ience & Technology Services, (ii) Atmospheric 
and Climate Science Services,  (iii) Geoscience  and  Technology  and  (iv)  Polar Science 
and Cyrosphere. The ESSO implements its policies through th e following eight 
institutions: 
 India Meteorological Department (IMD),  
 National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF),  
 Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM),  
 National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR),  
 National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT),  
 Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS),  
 Centre for Marine Living Resources (CMLRE), and  
 Integrated Coastal & Marine Area Management (ICMAM).   
      Each centre of MoES  has a we ll defined mandate  to conduct cutting-edge 
research in  a specific area of Earth System Science. 
5. FINANCIAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE POWE RS FOR THE EARTH        
     COMMISSION   
5.1 The Ministry, during the examination of  the Demands for Grants(2012-13) had 
apprised the Committee that the Earth Commission presently lacks financial and 
administrative powers and a draft Cabinet Note on conferring of said powers to the Earth 
Commission had been circulat ed to all the concerned Ministries/agencies and their 
comments were being obtained. The Committee in its 226 th and 236 th Reports had 
reiterated that the comments from the con cerned Ministries/agencies should be expedited 
and recommended that the administrative and financial powers be granted without any 
further delay to the Earth Commission.  
5.2 The Ministry informed the Committee th at the comments on the said issue has 
already been received from the Planni ng Commission, Departments of Expenditure, 
Economic Affairs, Personnel & Training, Space and Atomic Energy and have been 
suitably incorporated in the draft note.  However, the Cabinet Secretariat while giving its 

comments has insisted that inter-ministerial co nsultations cannot be dispensed with in the 
instant case and therefore the draft note has now  being circulated to the Departments of 
Ministry of Science & Technol ogy viz. Departments of Scie ntific & Industrial Research 
(CSIR), Biotechnology, and also to the Defence Research & Development Organisation 
(DRDO) for their comments. 
5.3 The Committee feels that undue del ay in devolution of appropriate 
financial and administrative powers to th e Earth Commission, which is responsible 
for formulating, overseeing and implementing the policies and programmes of the 
Ministry, hampers the overall functioning of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterates its recommendation made in its 226
th Report that immediate steps be taken 
to provide financial and administrative pow ers to the Earth Commission to enable it 
to effectively carry out its assigned role.  
6.  The detailed budget allocation of the Mini stry of Earth Sciences, for the year 
2013-14 was considered by the Department-re lated Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests in its meeting held on the 2nd April, 2013. 
7.  MECHANISM TO MONITOR AND REVIEW ONGOING SCHEMES 
7.1  At the Ministry level, the ESSO Council setup by the Ministry, reviews the 
implementation of its programmes on a half year ly basis. At institute levels, particularly 
for the autonomous bodies of the Ministry, th e programmes are monito red periodically by 
the Research Advisory Committee of the centres. The Governing Council, Financial 
Committee of the respective centres provide di rection from both technical and financial 
angles. At the programme level, the schemes are monitored by Steering Committee 
constituted by the Ministry with experts dr awn from relevant fields.  Besides, the 
programmes of the Ministry are being monitored by Planning Commission, and the 
Cabinet Secretariat through its Result Framework Document (RFD) on an annual basis.  
7.2 The Committee was also informed that the performance of various schemes is 
being assessed periodica lly since 2009–2010, by th e Ad Hoc Task Group under the 
direction of High Powered Committee, constituted by the Cabinet Secretariat, as a part of 
RFD. The Ministry also informed that it has obtained RFD scor es of 95.07% and 97.15% 
for the years 2010–11 and 2011–12, respectively. The RFD score for the year 2012-13 is 
awaited.                    
7.3 The Committee notes with happiness th at the Ministry has been able to 
obtain high RFD scores, in the years 2010- 11 and 2011-12, which is indicative of the 
fact that the monitoring and review mech anism adopted by the Ministry has been 
successful in timely implementation of programmes. The Committee hopes that the 
Ministry would maintain the same level of  performance of its various schemes and 
even aim to secure a better RFD score, in the current fiscal.  
8. THE XIITH FIVE YEAR PLAN  
8.1 The Committee was informed that while an amount of Rs.7004.00crores was 
provided to it in the XIth  Plan, the plan outlay has been increas ed to Rs. 9506.00 crores 
during the XIIth Plan period. Further, the Minist ry also informed that  after reorienting its 
76 projects into 14 major programmes during the first year of the XIIth Plan, the Ministry 
has been able to effectively monitor and flawlessly implement the programmes in a more 
coordinated way towards achieving its targets.  
The major thrust areas of the XIIth Plan and its progress/achievements are as follows: 
 Monsoon Mission : The monsoon mission, was initiate d with the ultimate aim to 
improve the monsoon prediction over the country on all time scales. The necessary models 
for improving monsoon forecast had been inst alled and the first experimental seasonal 

monsoon prediction was carried out during 2012 and necessary improvements in the 
models had been carried out. 
 Exploration of Deep Sea Minerals: Seven cruises were conducted in Indian Ocean to 
identify potential areas and analysis of the collected samples, was under progress. 
 Augmentation of High Computing System : Technical and financial evaluation for a 
High Computing system were underway. 
 Cloud Physics Lab :  Necessary permission had been obtained for construction of a 
cloud physics laboratory at Mahabaleshwar(Maharashtra). 
 Seismological Research : Deep bore holes investigati ons in Koyna–Warna region of 
Maharastra has been launched to address majo r issues pertaining to the occurrence of 
earthquakes and their mechanism by drilling  deep boreholes of 6-7 km depth, in a 
continental earthquake zone, to  study physical and chemical  changes before, during and 
after an earthquake.  A dedicated Seismological Research Laboratory with the state-of-the-
art facilities was also being established.  
 Numerical Modeling : A paradigm shift in numerical modeling activity for 
operational weather forecast has been achieved. The atmospheric Model of Global 
Forecasting System (GFS) with a special resolution of 18 km had been created.  
 Regional Cooperation in  Multi-hazard Warnings :  The Indian Tsunami Early 
Warning system was recognized as Regional Tsunami Service Provider for the Indian 
Ocean region. Presently, 21 countries in th e Indian Ocean region are receiving tsunami 
advisories and as a part of  this programme, a Coastal Vulnerability Index (CVI) atlas 
comprising 157 maps on 1:100000 scales was prepared for nine coastal states and Islands.   
 3rd Indian Permanent Station in Antarctica  - India successfully commenced 
operations at Bharati, third new permanent station at Antarctica from March, 2012 and 
scientific studies in the field of geosci ences, glaciology, atmosphere, paleoclimate and 
polar biology were being carried out.  
8.2 The Committee notes that the Mini stry has been provided an increased 
Budgetary support of Rs.9506.00crores durin g the XIIth Plan, which is Rs 2502.00 
crores more than the amount of Rs.7004.00cro res provided during XIth Plan Period. 
It also notes that during the XIIth Plan, the Ministry has been successful in 
monitoring and implementing its program mes in a more coordinated way towards 
achieving its targets, after the reorienta tion of its 76 proj ects into 14 major 
programmes. The Committee also hopes that with judicious planning and execution, 
the Ministry would be able to utilize the in creased allocation for the XIIth Plan in a 
more efficient manner and achieve its targeted objectives.  
9. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR THE YEAR 2013-14 
9.1 As regards the Budgetary allocation, the Committee was informed that the 
Ministry has been given a Plan allocation of  Rs. 1281.00 crores, against the Ministry’s 
demand for a Plan allocation of Rs. 2424.63 crores for the B.E. 2013-14.  The Committee 
also noted that in the year 2012-2013, the total B.E. outlay was Rs.1668.00 crores, which 
was substantially reduced to Rs 1195.00 cror es at R.E. stage and enquired about the 
reasons for the reduction of funds  allocated.  In repl y, the Ministry info rmed that it had 
achieved only an utilization of 40% of th e Budgetary outlay by September, 2012, and the 
Planning Commission had resorted to a drastic reduction in the outlay at RE stage of 2012-
13 citing funds crunch as the reason for the redu ction.  The Ministry further informed that, 
due to the drastic reduction at RE stage, seve ral new activities planned for implementation 
during the XIIth Five year Plan have been deferred for the time being. The Committee also 

noted that there has been no increase in  the Plan allocation during BE 2013-14 as 
compared to BE 2012-13, with the Plan allo cation stagnating at Rs. 1281.00 crores. In 
reply to a query, the Committee was info rmed that in the years 2009-10, 2010-11 and 
2011-12, the percentage utilization at B.E. stag e as compared to the Actual Expenditure 
had been 89.05%, 84.13% and 74.86% respectively. 
9.2 The Committee notes with co ncern the gross underutilization of funds by 
the Ministry over the years 2009-10 to 2011-12, which is evident from the decreasing 
trend of percentage utilization of allocated funds at B.E. stage, i.e. from 89.05% in 
2009-10 to 74.85% in 2011-12. It also notes that in the year 2012-2013, the B.E. outlay 
of Rs.1668.00 crores was cut down to Rs 1195.00 crores at R.E. stage, due to resource 
crunch and the fact that the percentage ut ilization of B.E. 2012-13 was only 40% till 
September, 2012, which again points towards the underutilization of funds. The 
Committee takes a strong view of the gross und erutilization of funds and feels lack of 
proper monitoring of projects on the part of  the Ministry is the principal reason for 
underutilization of funds. The Committee, th erefore, recommends that the Ministry 
should only seek funds to th e extent it can utilise and sh ould meticulously monitor its 
spending from B.E. stage itself, so that  huge underutilisation of funds could be 
avoided.  The Committee further recommends that plan outlay for the year 2013-14 
should be adequately enhanced to offset reduction of plan allocation made at RE 
stage in the year 2012-13 so that the total pl an outlay of the Department for the XIIth  
Five Year Plan does not get reduced and the Department is able to achieve all of its 
plan objectives for the XIIth  Five Year Plan.  
MAJOR PROGRAMMES OF THE MINISTRY 
10. ATMOSPHERIC OBSERVATION SYSTEMS NETWORK 
10.1 The Ministry informed that this pr ogramme is mainly designed to augment 
accuracy of the atmospheric observation system s to meet the needs of a wide range of 
weather services. The ‘Atmospheric Observat ion Systems Network’ is a modernization 
plan, that aims at commissioning of state- of-the-art weather observing systems throughout 
the country.  An Atmospheric Technology In stitute is also planned to coordinate 
development of instruments, calibration of  instruments (including satellite-based 
instruments) and provide ove rall technology support to atmo spheric sciences, besides 
validation of satellite data.  Besides, a de dicated forecasting system for the entire 
Himalayan region with a much focused objectiv e of integrating and improving the weather 
related services, had also been proposed.  
10.2 As regards the Budgetary allocation, the Committee observed that the 
‘Atmospheric Observation Systems Network’ had been allocated  Rs. 206.00 crores in B.E. 
and Rs.142.00 crores in R.E. in the year 2012-13, while Rs. 200.00 crores had been 
allocated in the B.E. 2013-14. When the Committee enquired into the reasons for the 
fluctuation, the Ministry stated that the drastic reduction in the budget at RE 2012-13 stage 
was due to the cuts effected by the Planning Commission in the second half of the 2012-13 
fiscal. Due to this reduction, several new ac tivities planned/envisaged for implementation 
during 12
th Five Year Plan have been deferred fo r the time being. The Ministry further  
justified the allocation of Rs. 200.00 crores in B.E 2013-14, which was made to clear the 
backlog of activities for 2012-13 and to m eet new commitments for 2013-14. The budget 
is primarily required to maintain the existi ng observation network installed during the 12 th 
Five Year Plan and to comple te the planned activities.  Th e ‘Modernisation of the Indian 
Meteorological Department (IMD) Phase-II’ was also envisaged un der this budgetary 
head. 

MODERNISATION OF INDIAN METEOROLOGICAL DEPARTMENT 
10.3    The Ministry informed the Committee,  that through ‘Modernization of IMD Phase-
II’ programme, it proposes to further augment the meteorological observational systems 
and forecasting tools to improve the weather forecasting services. It also envisages to 
develop weather & climate monitoring and fo recast services over the Himalayan region 
through ‘Integrated Himalayan Meteorology programme’.  
10.4 In reply to a query, the Ministry stated  that significant increase in the success 
rate of meteorological obser vations had been exibited af ter the reorientation of the 
programmes in the XIIth Pla n. Sustenance & augmentation of operational meteorological 
network and services, satellite related meteorological products , block level agro-
meteorological services, meteor ological services at airports were being implemented 
holistically to develop Atmospheric Obse rvations System Network. The weather 
forecasting capabilities had also been upda ted and IMD now had a network of 675 
Automatic Weather Stations (AWSs), 1000 Au tomatic Rain Gauges (ARGs), 12 Doppler 
Weather Radars (DWRs), state- of-the-art upper air systems et c. These observations were 
now being assimilated to run global and regi onal numerical prediction models on High 
Performance Computing Systems (HPCS) an d of late, had improved the accuracy of 
forecasting capabilities significantly.  
10.5 The Committee is of the opinion that  weather forecasting and its accuracy 
is of prime importance, specially in view  of the climatic changes which had taken 
place over the recent past a nd the fact that agriculture in the country primarily 
depends on the monsoon and is happy to  know the accuracy of forecasting 
capabilities of the Department have incr eased significantly. The Committee while 
complementing the Department on this achievement and taking note that the 
Department has initiated modernization of IMD Phase-II programme with a view to 
further improve the weather forecasting services, would like the Department to 
further improve its weather forecasting servi ces and make them at par with the best 
in the world, particularly in terms of accuracy in prediction.  
10.6 The Committee, keeping in view the large extent to which the Himalayas 
affect the weather and monsoon pattern in the country and the need for developing 
deeper understanding of Himalayan meteor ology to obtain better accuracy in 
weather forecasting, welcomes the programme ‘Integrated Himalayan Meteorology 
Programme’ undertaken by the Department.    
AGRO-METEROLOGICAL SERVICES 
10.7  The Ministry informed the Committee that through the ‘Agro-meterological 
services’, advance information were provided to the farmers to assist them in cultivation of 
various crops. A quantitative district level weather forecast bulletin covering 585 districts, 
were issued 5 days in advance. These forecasts after proper value addition are 
communicated to 130 AgroMet Field Units (AMFUs) located at State Agriculture 
Universities (SAUs), ICAR institutes etc. whic h prepare district level crop specific agro-
met advisories twice a week for field/horticultural crops & livestock and issue the 
advisories to different government and  non- government Stakeholders. A typical Agromet 
Advisory Bulletin tailored to meet the farmers’  need contains information about district 
specific weather forecast for the next five days for rainfall, cloud, temperature, wind 
speed/direction and relative humidity, includin g forewarning of hazardous weather event 
etc.  
10.8  The Ministry further informed that in addition to different multi-channel 
dissemination system, agromet advisories were being disseminated to the farming 

community through SMS (Short Message Servic e) and IVR (Interac tive Voice Response). 
Agro-met Brochures highlighting the activities of Agromet Services were being issued in 
14 regional languages for general awareness am ong various stakeholders such as state 
agriculture department officials, State Agri cultural Universities, Krishi Vigyan Kendras, 
NGOs, farmers club etc. 
 10.9 In reply to a query, the Ministry info rmed that the agrome t advisory services 
have resulted in significant increase in farm productivity, resulting in increased availability 
of food and higher income generation for farmer s. At present only 10 to 15 % of the total 
farmers in the country are benefiting from the SMS services and about 24% farmers are 
aware about Agromet services. Further, Ag romet services were covering around 3.5 
million farmers in the country through SMS/IVR and under 12
th Five Year Plan, a major 
initiative has been taken to increase the avai lability of its services to 10 million farmers 
and also for increasing outreach of the services  to block level in villages instead of the 
District level, through discussions with the Ministry of Agriculture.  
10.10 The economic benefit of the Agromet se rvices which had been estimated by an 
independent organization i.e. National Council  of Applied Economic Research (NCAER), 
at Rs.50,000 crores per year and is expected to rise to Rs.2,11,000 crores if the entire 
farming community in the country were to ap ply Agromet information to their agricultural 
activities. 
10.11       The Committee notes with happiness that agromet advisory services have 
resulted in increase in farm productivity resulting in increased availability of food 
and higher income generation for farmers.   The Committee further notes that agro-
meteorological services have brought a substantial economic benefit of Rs 50,000 
crores per year, when only 10 to 15% of  the total farmers in the country were 
availing of its services and the same was ex pected to rise to Rs.2,11,000 crores if all 
the farmers avail the benefit of the Agro met advisories for their agricultural 
operations. The Committee is, th erefore, of the view that  Agromet services launched 
by the Ministry is a commendable initiative  in the right direction and hopes that 
during the 12
th Five Year Plan, concerted effort s would be made to achieve the 
targeted plan of covering 10 million farm ers. The Committee also recommends that 
the proposal for increasing the outreach of  the Agromet services from the present 
district level to block level,  through discussions with the Ministry of Agriculture may 
also be taken up in the right earnest and implemented at the earliest. 
11. ATMOSPHERIC PROCESSESS & MODELLING AND SERVICES 
11.1 This endeavor mainly focuses on development of atmospheric models for 
providing weather and climate forecasting servic es to various sectors by integrating all the 
process studies and models, es sential for working out a m odeling framework and using it 
to predict monsoon weather and climate in I ndia on different time scales ranging from 
short and medium range to seasonal mean.  Attempt would also be made by the Ministry to 
make specific severe weather forecasts such as  cyclones, heavy rains, storms, floods, heat 
and cold waves, etc. which cause huge damages.  
11.2    As regards the budgetary allocation, the Committee noted that the allocation for 
the ‘Atmospheric Processes and Modelling a nd Services’ was Rs. 79.00 crores in B.E., 
which was drastically reduced to Rs. 25.00 crores in R.E. in the year 2012-13. However, 
the B.E. for 2013-14 has been raised to Rs. 70.00 crores. The Ministry explained that 
during the 12th Plan period, under ‘Atmospheri c Processes and Modelling and Services’, 
initially programme components of aviation a nd agro-meteorological services of IMD, 
comprising mostly of observing systems,  were included. These components were 

subsequently merged with other services  of IMD and became part of 'Atmospheric 
Observation Systems Network' and therefore th e BE was reduced at the RE stage of the 
year 2012-13. At present the ‘Atmospheric Pr ocesses and Modelling and Services’, has 
been allocated Rs.70.00crores in B.E. 2013-14 as it  consists of additional allocations for 
'Monsoon Mission’, 'Metropolitan Air Quality Forecasting' and 'Numerical Modeling of 
Weather and Climate', which were not included under this head earlier. All these programs 
have been approved during 2012-13 and the funds  have been allocated accordingly in this 
fiscal. 
MOONSOON MISSION 
11.3 The Ministry informed the Commit tee that the monsoon mission was a multi-
institutional and inter-agency research programme, for impr oving monsoon forecasts over 
India on all time scales i.e. from Short ra nge to seasonal. The M onsoon Mission with a 
budget of Rs.400.00 crores is to be implemented during the 12 th five year plan (2012-17).  
Under the monsoon mission, a dynamical pred iction system for predicting the monsoon 
weather and climate on all time scales was being implemented and was expected to 
improve prediction skills. A major highlight of the mission was the participation of 
research and academic institutions from India and abroad in collaborative research work to 
improve the monsoon forecasts. Under the monsoon mission, a coupled climate model, 
was implemented at the Indian Institute of  Tropical Meteorology (IITM) for extended 
range (up to one month) for seasonal monsoon forecasts. Another coupled model of United 
Kingdom Meteorological office was implemented at the National Centre for Medium 
Range Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF) for shor t range forecasting up to two-weeks. In 
this mission 16 projects (8 from India a nd 8 from abroad) are approved for funding under 
this mission.  
11.4 The Committee notes that the Mini stry had engaged the services and  
participation of research and academic in stitutions from India and abroad in 
collaborative research to improve the monsoo n forecasts. Further, 16 projects, eight 
from within the country and eight from ab road are being funded under this Mission 
for improving prediction skills.  The Co mmittee recommends that the Department 
take all necessary measures so that the pr ogramme achieves its objective of improved 
capabilities for more accurate monsoon predictions.  
11.5 Regarding the percentage of accuracy of the Monsoon predictions, the Ministry 
provided the following details of the forecast and actual rainfall of All-India monsoon 
during the period, 2008-2012, in terms of the ‘Long Period Average’(LPA), which is a 
measure of the average rainfall, over a period of time:  
Year Forecast (%of LPA) Actual (% of LPA)
2008 100 98 
2009 93 78 
2010 102 102 
2011 95 101 
2012 96 92 
            As may be seen from the seasonal forecasts, the monsoon rainfall during the last 5 
years were found to be reasonably accurate, except for the year 2009, when the actual 
percentage was 78 against  a forecast percentage of 93. 

11.6 In reply to another query regarding the efforts made by the Ministry to improve 
the weather and climate prediction services and bring them at par with the highest 
international standards of accuracy, the Ministry  informed that at present, the operational 
seasonal monsoon forecasts, in the country we re prepared using advanced statistical 
models, which have some limitations. The alternative method to prepare seasonal forecasts 
was the use of dynamical models, based on co upled ocean-atmosphere models, in which 
the dynamics and physics of both the oceans a nd atmosphere were explicitly forecast, 
using high performance super computers. Howeve r, at present, the skill of the dynamical 
models in the country was not meeting the re quirements of true inte rnational standards. 
The monsoon mission launched by the Ministry therefore aims to improve the skill of these 
dynamical models further and more accurate monsoon forecasts were expected. Ministry 
further stated that to improve weather pred iction, it was necessary to improve atmospheric 
and oceanic observations. Therefore, the Mi nistry was making efforts to improve and 
expand the existing observational networks and generate increased satellite derived data 
for assimilating into weather prediction models.  
 11.7    The Ministry also informed that  Weather and climate predictions depend on 
observations/data  regarding initial weather conditions and to account for uncertainty in 
initial conditions (due to inadequate observa tions) ensemble forecasts were required in 
which different forecasts are generated by changing the initial conditions. At present due to 
limitations of computing resources, no ensemb le forecasts were being generated. The 
Ministry, therefore, proposes to prepare en semble forecasts once th e computing facility 
improved. The Ministry also informed that  for generation of operational weather and 
climate forecasts and for carrying out res earch on improved models, there was a high 
demand for high performance computers. At pr esent, the weather forecasting institutions 
working under the Ministry had computers of a computi ng capacity of around 100 Tera 
(10
12) Flop. However, for working on improved weather models, for the planned modeling 
activity, high performance computing (HPC) facility with 2.5 Peta (10 15) Flop was 
required. The Ministry was therefore planning to acquire the HPC with capacity around 2.5 
Peta Flop during the next couple of years. 
11.8     The Committee notes with satisfac tion that the ‘Long Period Average’(LPA) 
percentage of accuracy attained in rainfall forecasting was almost equal to the actual 
rainfall occurred in the country, every year from 2008 to 2012, barring the year 2009, 
when the actual rainfall was 78% against the forecast percentage of 93.  The 
Committee, however, observes that for generation of accurate operational weather 
and climate forecasts, more research on improved models was required, for which 
application of high performance computers with a computing facility of 2.5 Peta 
Flops was required.  The Committee, therefore,  feels that there is a genuine need for 
the Ministry to acquire the High Performa nce Computers with around 2.5 Peta Flop 
and high performance computing facility was essential for improving its forecasts 
capabilities and therefore recommends that ad equate funds for it should be made 
available to the Ministry at the earliest.   
12. CLOUD MICROPHYSICS  AND AIRBORNE PLATFORMS 
12.1 The Committee has been given to understa nd by the Ministry that the efficiency 
with which clouds produce rain at the surface varies greatly from one place to another. The 
Committee, accordingly, would like to apprecia te the statement of the Ministry that the 
understanding of these processe s regarding interaction  of  cloud with aeros ols was very 
essential for rain enhancement purpose.  In this  context,  Ministry's  effort to develop a 
programme  "Cloud Aerosols Interaction a nd Precipitation enhancem ent" (CAIPEEX) is 

welcomed by the Committee as there is a need  for simultaneous measurements of aerosols 
and cloud micro physics for studying aerosols  interactions which can be done only by 
airborne platforms by procurin g aircraft for atmospheric re search.  The Committee was 
informed by the Ministry last year that act ion had been initiated to develop cloud physics 
lab at Mahabaleshwar to investigate precipitation process, classify clouds and estimate rain 
rate.  The Committee is also happy to note th at a mobile X-band, D oppler Weather Radar 
has been installed and commissioned near the Mahabaleshwar lab.  In this connection, it 
may be mentioned that in reply to an ear lier recommendation of the Committee, in its 236 th 
Action Taken Report,it has been mentioned by the Ministry that construction of the 
Mahabaleshwar lab will commence after the e xpiry of the monsoon season in October, 
2012 and the same is expected to be completed by June, 2013.  The Committee feels that 
as June, 2013 is approaching, the Ministry sh ould make all out effort to complete the 
construction of the said lab as per schedul e so that better understanding of processes 
regarding interaction of clouds with a erosols is achieved and used for rain 
enhancement purposes.   
12.2 The Committee also observed that the ‘Air borne Platform’ was allocated at B.E. 
stage of  2012-13, an amount of Rs. 50.00 crores  , which was later reduced to a nominal 
level of Rs. 0.50 crores at the R.E stage. Ho wever, in the current fiscal of 2013-14, it has 
been increased substantially to Rs. 30.00 crores  at B.E. stage. When the Committee asked 
for the reason behind the drastic reduction at R. E. stage in the year  2012-13, the Ministry 
informed that in order to achieve the objectiv es of the Airborne Platforms, the Indian 
Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM), co nsulted various departments and submitted a 
Detailed Project Report(DPR) in November, 2013. The EFC document was prepared on the 
basis of DPR, which lead to delay in completion of formalities for the approval of DPR and 
accordingly, the fund of Rs. 50.00 crores under th is head could not be utilized during the 
year 2012-13. The Ministry further stated that the EFC of the Ministry, has now 
recommended Rs 240.00 crores for acquisition of Airborne Platforms. Keeping this in view 
a token  sum of Rs 30.00 crores had been kept in the budget of the current fiscal for the 
said purpose.   
12.3 The Committee notes that in view of th e crucial role of airborne platforms 
in  cloud micro physics and aerosols int eractions studies, the Committee in its 226
th 
report        (Para 11.20)  has strongly recommended for a adequate budgetary support 
for such studies.  The Committee notes that due to the procedural bottlenecks, 
Ministry could not utilise funds allocated for it during 2012-13 and even in the budget 
of 2013-14 only a token provision has been made.  The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should seriously pursue acquisi tion of Airborne Pl atforms so that its 
studies aimed at better unders tanding of processes regardi ng interaction of clouds 
with aerosols and using it for rain e nhancement purposes are completed as per 
schedule. 
13. POLAR SCIENCES AND CYROSPHERE  
13.1 The Committee was informed that ‘Pol ar Science and Cryosphere programme’ 
includes the study of the Antarctic, Arctic cl imate and also Glaciers of Himalayas and 
linking these two climates we re important to understand the climate change and its 
variability over the Indian re gion. The Ministry also inform ed that the third Antarctic 
station Bharati has commenced operations w.e.f. March 2012. 
13.2 As regards the Budgetary allocation, the Ministry informed that ‘Polar Sciences 
and Cyrospere’ has been allocated Rs. 200.00 crores in B.E. 2013-14, while it was earlier 
allocated Rs. 290.00 crores at B.E. stage and Rs. 190.00 crores at R.E. stage in the year 

2012-13. Explaining the reasons for the reduction in allocation at R.E stage of 2012-13 and 
again increase at  B.E. stage of 2013-14, the Ministry mentioned that the major reason for 
reduction in allocation for th e year 2013-14 compared to 2 012-13 was largely due to the 
fact that the final installment of payment towards establishment of 3rd ‘Bharati’ station, at 
Antarctica, was delayed and finally complete d and the station was commissioned in  
March 2012. The Ministry also stated that it had proposed an allocation of Rs.493.00crores 
for 2013-14 for this programme. However onl y Rs. 200.00crores was finally allocated 
which had resulted in deferment of new activ ities like replacement of  Maitri station in 
Antarctica and delay in acquisition of new Polar Research Vessels. 
13.3 The Committee notes with concern that  the Ministry was allocated only 
Rs.200.00 crores for the year 2013-14, which is le ss than half of the amount proposed 
for the programme and this had led to deferment of some important planned 
activities. The Committee is of the view that reduced allocations may hamper the 
Polar Research Programmes of the Ministry  and may have implications on India’s 
stature amongst countries engaged in Pola r Research, and feels that reduction in 
allocation of this programme may be avoide d to the extent possible. The Committee 
also hopes that the ‘Bharti’ station wh ich had recently started functioning in the 
South Pole would be adequately funded to equi p it with the state-of the art scientific 
instruments for carrying out cryogenic research, so that data regarding climate 
change in the polar region can be properly gathered and subsequently used for better 
understanding of Indian climate and other societal benefits. 
13.4 POLAR  RESEARCH  STATIONS 
 The Committee appreciates that a new re search station i.e. Himadri had been 
established in the arctic region of the globe which had paved the way for Indian 
researchers  to conduct a gamut of scientific  obser vations  in the Arctic or  in North Pole.   
On the other hand, 3 stations were already worki ng in the Antarctic or in  South Pole i.e. 
Dakshin Gangotri from 1983 and second research  establishment  viz. Maitri since 1988 
and the latest Antarctic  station which was commissioned in 2012 i.e. Bharati. The 
Committee, however, would like to recommend that researches currently being 
conducted in all these stations should be  properly coordinated so that unnecessary 
duplication of research is avoided. Ideally, research being carried out under 
Antarctic and Arctic  programmes should be linked in such a way that the data 
generated from these stations either in the  South Pole or in the North Pole could be 
co-related to have beneficial  results. 
14. OCEAN RESEARCH VESSELS 
 14.1         The Committee was informed that with the increasing demand for scientific 
studies of vast areas of seas/ocean around the country and in polar regions, it had become 
necessary to plan for acquisition of new vessels as the time taken for acquiring a new 
vessel is around four to five y ears. The vessels that are pro posed to be acquired would be 
of  ice class variety, with speed  of 20 knots and fitted with winc hes and scientific facilities 
for exploration of deep marine bioresou rces. Presently, ORV Sagar Sampada has a 
limitation of undertaking these studies only upto 1000 to 1500 metres depth. 
14.2          The Ministry also informed that the allocation for ‘Ocean Research Vessels’ had 
been almost doubled. From an initial alloca tion of Rs. 68.00 crores in B.E. 2012-13, it was 
raised to Rs.135.00 crores in B.E. 2013-14, as  the Ministry proposes to replace two 
research vessels i.e. Sagar Kanya and Sagar Sampada at a cost of Rs. 600.00 crores and Rs. 
500.00 crores respectively. Ministry further stated  that after the initial allocation made, the 
preparatory work for the acqui sition of these vessels would commence from next year, 

which includes preparation of Detailed Pr oject Report and finalizing the technical 
specifications.  
14.3 In reply to a query, the Ministry informed that th ere are currently, 3 major 
Ocean Research Vessels which were operational viz., Sagar Kanya, Sagar Samapada, 
Sagar Nidhi, for conducting ocean surveys and research. Besides, 3 more small vessels 
viz., Sagar Manjusha, Sagar Paschmi and Sa gar Purvi had also been made operational 
primarily for assessing health of the coastal waters around the country.   
   The salient features of the achie vements of these vessels are as under: 
(i) Fishery Oceanographic Research Vessel (FORV) Sagar Sampada :    FORV 
Sagar Sampada was Commissioned in 1984, main ly for India’s exploratory survey’s 
on Marine Living Resources.  
(ii) Oceanographic Research Vessel (ORV) Sagar Kanya: ORV Sagar Kanya 
was commissioned in 1983, for maintenance of  moorings/buoys of Tsunami System, 
conducting Hydrothermal Su lphides programme; seaf loor morphology mapping & 
rock sampling etc. 
(iii) ORV Sagar Nidhi:   Sagar Nidhi is a state-of-t he-art Ice-Class Research vessel 
for conducting oceanographic research and its achievements include successful 
demonstration of Remotely Operable Vehi cle in Central Indian  Ocean at a water 
depth of 5829m. 
(iv) ORV Sagar Manjusha :   Sagar Manjusha had su ccessfully completed the 
deployment, monitoring, retrieval of Tsunami, collection of meteorological data and 
application of OMNI Buoys at various locations. 
(v) Coastal Research Vessels: Apart from the above, there are two CRVs namely 
Sagar Purvi and Sagar Paschmi, which we re used for the implementation of  
‘Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Ma nagement’ (ICMAM) and ‘Coastal Ocean 
Monitoring and Prediction System’ (COM APS) programmes, besides conducting 
surveys and data collectio n activities for various na tional organizations and 
universities.  
14.4        The Committee recalled that President of India in his address to the Parliament on 
the 21.02.2013, had mentioned that for developing deep sea mineral exploration capability, 
an Ocean Going Research Vessel was lik ely to be commissioned by 2013. When the 
Committee desired for the details in this rega rd, the Ministry replie d that the aforesaid 
reference pertained to commissi oning of a vessel by Geological  Survey of India(GSI) and 
the Ministry was in the process of signing an Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with 
GSI for undertaking topographic survey of the E EZ. The Ministry further informed that it 
had proposed acquisition of two ocean resear ch vessels as a replacement of existing 
research vessels Sagar Kanya and Sagar Sampada which were about 30 years old. It further 
replied that although the preliminary estimates had been worked out, the Ministry was not 
in a position to pursue these proposals owing to budgetary cuts. The Ministry further 
admitted that if adequate budgetary support is provided, Ministry can acquire the vessels in 
five years time, which would reduce the depe ndence on the chartered vessel for pursuing 
national programmes.  
14.5 The Committee notes the importance of  the Ocean Research Vessels, for 
fishery research, survey of marine livin g & non-living resources, maintenance of 
moorings for tsunami systems, demonstrat ion of remotely operable vehicle in the 
Indian Ocean, deployment of meteorologic al data and implementation of COMAPS 
and ICMAM programmes etc. The Committ ee recommends that Government may 

provide adequate funds for replacing th e two aging ORVs viz. Sagar Kanya and 
Sagar Sampada.  
15. SEISMOLOGICAL RESEARCH PROGRAMME 
15.1 The Ministry intimated that the prim ary objective of Seis mological Research 
Programme was to have comprehensive mult i- parametric geophysical observations in 
seismically active areas of the country which include the following: 
 Deep crustal studies across the Indian continental margin and the interior,  
 Andaman subduction zone, and  
 Active faults of India.   
      The Budgetary allocation for th e said programme at B.E. 2013-14 was Rs.80.00 
crores  as compared to Rs 55.00 crores in B.E. 2012-13. 
15.2 In this context, the Committee in its 226
th Report had recommended as 
follows: 
 “The Committee also notes that pres ently, various aspects of seismology 
related research are being carried out in a fragmented way by several 
research, academic and State and Central Government institutions in the 
country. In view of the extreme killer and destructive potential of earthquake 
as a natural phenomenon, the Committee fully endorses the proposal of the 
Ministry to set up a sepa rate research institute of the nature of ‘National 
Centre of Seismology’ which is ex clusively devoted to study of the 
mechanics of earthquakes, geo-tectonic  movements and all other aspects of 
earthquake so as to avoid/minimise the loses of life and property, a field 
which is yet to by mastered by the human mind.” 
15.3 In reply to action taken on said reco mmendation of the Committee, the Ministry 
stated that issues relating to  the preparation, circulation of  EFC documents, finalization of 
site/land/construction of building and the moda lities for the construction of  the National 
Centre for Seismology (NCS) to conduct focuse d research in the area of seismology, was 
under consideration. The Ministry further informed in the meeting of the Committee  held 
on  2
nd April, 2013, that the required land for esta blishment of NCS had been earmarked at 
Ayanagar Complex  (Gurgaon, Haryana) and is expected to be completed in a period of 
about three years after the approval of the EFC. 
15.4 Committee expresses displeasure at the slow pace with which procedural 
formalities are being completed and even after lapse of more than one year, EFC 
approval for the project has not yet been taken.  The Committee recommends that all 
procedural formalities including approval of EFC should be completed without any 
further loss of time and NCS set up within three years from now.  
15.5 The President in his address to th e Parliament on the 21.02.2013, has announced 
that the Government would set up a dedicat ed Seismological Research Laboratory and 
launch a first-of-its-kind research programme in earthquake prone Koyna-Warna region of 
Maharashtra to study ‘precursor changes’.  
 15.6       During the meeti ng of the Committee held on 2 nd April, 2014, the Ministry in 
reply to a query stated that the entire process of earthquake was not yet well understood, as 
the earthquake occurs 10 to 15 kms deep insi de the earth and neither was there any  
process to measure it nor was any process to observe it.  Since earthquake is a regular 
occurrence in the Koyna-Warna region (Mah arashtra), the Ministry intimated the 
Committee that it is going to put a bore-hole th ere and collect seismological data during 
the earthquakes. A location specific Bore-H ole Geophysics lab would also be setup at 

Karad (Maharastra) to measure through bore-hole s, the properties of rocks before, during 
and after an earthquake. All these activities would be coordinated under the NCS.  
15.7      The Committee welcomes the initiative of  the Ministry to establish a location 
specific Bore-Hole Geophysics lab at Karad(Maharastra) in the Koyna-Warna region 
to measure through bore-holes, the propert ies of rocks before, during and after an 
earthquake. The Committee feels that such a la boratory would help in providing 
knowledge and much needed data about the  earthquake processes, for aiding 
scientific investigations leading to better understanding about the mechanisms of 
faulting, physics of earthquakes and also developing models for better earthquake 
forecast in future and recommends that Mini stry should ensure that the laboratory 
start functioning within three years i.e. simu ltaneously or before the National Centre 
of Seismology is set up.   
16. OCEAN SURVEY AND MINE RAL RESOURCES PROGRAMME 
16.1 The Ministry informed that this prog ramme was primarily aimed at conducting 
surveys for harnessing the marine non-living re sources in a sustaina ble way available in 
the Indian EEZ and deep sea region of the Indian Ocean which includes gas hydrates, poly 
metallic nodules, hydrothermal sulphide minerals etc. All ongoing projects of the Ministry 
and the new initiatives of the XIIth Plan ha ve been integrated into this programme. 
Besides, continuing the ongoing projects, the major emphasis would be on the research 
activities relating to the Hydrothermal Su lphides containing valuable noble metals 
available along the mid oceanic regions of the Indian Ocean. 
16.2         The Committee noted that ‘Ocean Survey and Mineral Resources’ was allocated         
Rs.70.00 crores at B.E. 2013-14, in comparison to the R.E. 2012-13 allocation of                     
Rs. 50.00crores. The Ministry explained that the increase of Rs. 20.00 crores in allocation 
of funds during 2013-14 over the R.E. 2012-13, was primarily to meet the expenditure 
relating to the programme on Hydrothermal Sulphides which was launched in 2012-13. 
The project had been recommended for im plementation in-principle by the Inter-
Ministerial Group, as a follow-up action of th e decision by the Committee of Secretaries 
(CoS). The Ministry further explained that it  was a major national initiative which focuses 
on the study of seafloor hydrothermal system s at mid-ocean ridges with emphasis on the 
survey and exploration for hydrothermal sul phide deposits on the Central Indian Ridge 
(CIR) in the Indian Ocean. The discovery of su ch systems in the deep oceanic realm along 
the mid-ocean ridges had kindled a lot of interest primarily on account of the high 
concentration of base metals viz. Copper & Zinc and also many noble metals viz. Gold, 
Silver, Platinum & Palladium in them. Apar t from their economic potential, sea-floor 
hydrothermal vents were among the most pr oductive ecosystems on Earth and also contain 
dense biologic communities, as Sulfide from hydrothermal fluids pr ovides the energy to 
drive these productive systems. National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research 
(NCAOR), Goa, an autonomous body under the Ministry had been entrusted with the 
responsibility for implementa tion of the programme in its entirety on behalf of the 
Ministry.   
16.3            Similarly, the Polymetalli c Nodules, are nodules cont aining Manganese, Iron, 
Nickel, Copper, Cobalt, Lead, etc. occurring at  a depth of 4 to 5 Km in the deep oceans 
lying on the sea bed. India presently has 75,000 sq  km area in the Central Indian Ocean 
Basin(CIOB) for developmental activities targeted at harnessing of these metals. As 
regards the Gas Hydrates the Ministry inform ed that they are naturally occurring solid 
compounds containing natural gas, mainly Meth ane and water and are important as they 
are considered to be source of clean fuel. A detailed seismic survey has been undertaken in 

the Andamans, Kerala-Konkan basin & the Kris hna-Godaveri Basin an d the results were 
being analysed. 
16.4     The Committee notes that the Ministry proposes to undertake survey and 
exploration in the deep oceanic realm along the mid-ocean ridges in the Indian ocean 
for hydro thermal sulphide  deposits havi ng high concentration of base and noble 
metals apart from continuing  its Po lymetallic Nodules and Gas Hydrates 
Programmes from the funds allocated und er Ocean Survey and Mineral Resources 
Programme.  The Committee understands that so far as its Polymetallic Nodules 
Programme is concerned, it is still at exploration stage, while for Gas Hydrates 
Programme, technology is yet being augmente d for exploration purposes.  Therefore, 
the dream of commercial exploitation of these minerals or gas hydrates is still a 
distant dream.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry pursue with greater 
vigour its Mineral Resources Programme and make an endeavor to produce concrete  
results  from this programme in next few years.   
17.         ENVIRONMENT MONITORING AND RESEARCH 
17.1 In reply to a query as to whether any Environment Monitoring and Research 
Programme was being designed by the Ministry to check the pollution in seas/oceans and 
whether any mitigation measures have been carri ed out, the Ministry informed that it had 
been implementing a programme to carry out Environment Monitoring  of water quality 
from pollution point of view and was checkin g pollution in seas at  20 locations along 
coastal states and Union Territories. The Minist ry further stated that  the pollution data so 
collected was provided to the Central Pollu tion Control Board(CPCB) and State Pollution 
Control Boards (SPCBs) for their use for designing pollution mitigation measures, etc.   
The Committee was also informed that anothe r area of concern regarding coastal pollution 
was the Harmful Algal Blooms (HAB), a type of toxic algal species, within India’s EEZ.  
17.2 HARMFUL  ALGAL BLOOMS 
           The oceans are the homes of 2000  micro-scopic algal species which constitute 
the base  of the marine food web and the bene ficial algae intrinsically facilitate food web 
processes as they channel car bon or energy into marine food web.   There were, however, 
a few dozen of algal species whose blooms are associated with serious  adverse impacts on 
environment.  The Ministry mentioned in response  to a query of the Committee  that 
recent studies indicate harmful Algal Blooms were increasing both in terms of frequency 
and extent for which pollution, particularly  marine pollution  was the major contributing 
factor. They have further mentioned that  HABs secrete toxic substances which was 
released  through food chain which causes death among humans and apart from this, 
HABs also cause adverse changes in bio-geoc hemical cycles altering eco-systems having 
cascading effects on marine biota. The Ministry  have mentioned  that for the past ten 
years, the Ministry was monitoring the adve rse effects of HABs in the Indian EEZ with 
particular reference to blooms dynamics and de veloping predictive  capabilities  of the 
occurrence of  such bloom.    
17.3 The Committee is aware of the fact th at rising HABs along the Indian coast  had 
led to serious eutrophication thereby killin g a big section of fish population.  The 
Committee had also observed that HABs blooming was more  prevalent along the west 
coast of the country  than on the east coast.   The Committee is, therefore of the opinion 
that  entire scenario  requires a deep study   particularly regard ing the  regular bloom 
occurrences and  shell fish poisoning  from algal toxin causing human fatalities along the 
Indian coast.  The Committee, therefor e, recommends that Ministry may take up a 

programme, in collaboration with other Mi nistries and national and international 
institutes or bodies, as may be necessary to address this issue.  
18. The Committee notes that the Ministry through its various 
schemes/programmes provides a vast rang e of societal benefits such as 
meteorological, agromet services etc., be sides being responsible for exploring & 
exploiting the marine resources and co nducting polar research. The Committee after 
examining the various aspects of the Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of 
Earth Sciences, is of the view that Mini stry should prudently utilize funds made 
available to it, having due regard to reco mmendations contained in the report and 
efficiently implement its various schemes and programmes in the year 2013-14. 
 
 
 
 