 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY FOUR REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three  Hundred Forty Fourth Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment,  
Forests and Climate Change on the Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the 
Department of Science and Technology 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1stDecember, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1stDecember, 2021) 
 
REPORT NO. 
354 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka)
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY FOUR REPORT 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations 
contained in the Three  Hundred Forty Fourth Report of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment,  
Forests and Climate Change on the Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the 
Department of Science and Technology 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on1st December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
 

 
C O N T E N T S 
 
   
      
          
  PAGES 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ………………………………… (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION ………………………………………………………… (ii) 
  3. ACRONYMS ……………………………………………………………… (iii)-(iv) 
4. REPORT …………………………………………………………………... 1-17 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been  
                       accepted by the Government………………………………... 
 
2-13 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee     
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s  
replies……………………………………………………….. 
 
14-15 
 Chapter III.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies 
 of the Government have not been accepted  by the     
Committee…………………………………………………… 
 
16 
 Chapter IV.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final 
                      Replies of the Government are still awaited………………… 
 
17 
 5. MINUTES …………………………………………………………………. 18-19 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               
                              
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2021)  
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh – Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2.    Shri Anil Baluni 
3.    Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
4.    Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5.   Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
6.    Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
7.    Shri Parimal Nathwani 
8.    Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
9.    Shri Nabam Rebia   
10. # Vacant 
 
   LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
12.    Shri Pradan Baruah 
13.    Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
14.    Shri Jashvantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
15.    Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16.    Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
17.    Shri S. Jagathrakshakan 
18.    Shri Mohammed Azam Khan 
19.    Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
20.    Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
21.    Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
22.    Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
23. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
24. Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
25. Shri Francisco Sardinha  
26. Shri Anurag Sharma 
27. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
28. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
29. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
30. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
31. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
 
        SECRETARIAT 
 
        Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
        Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
        Shri Rakesh Anand, Additional Director 
        Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director 
        Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
        Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
        Shri Ankit Chansoria, Assistant Committee Officer 
    _________________________________________________________________________                      
#Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha ceased to be the member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation 
from the Committee w.e.f. 11th October, 2021  
(i) 

             INTRODUCTION  
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Three 
Hundred Fifty Fourth  Report on Action Taken by the Government on the  
recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Forty Fourth  Report  of 
the Committee on  Demands for Grants (20 21-2022) of the Department of Science and 
Technology, which was presented/laid in both the Houses of Parliament on                      
8th  March, 2021.  
2.   There were 16 recommendations/observations in the Three Forty Fourth Report 
of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of the 
Committee were received from the Department on 10th June, 2021.   
3.   In the meeting held on 30th November, 2021, the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same 
   
 
 
 
 (JAIRAM RAMESH) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
30th November , 2021   Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Agrahayana 09, 1943 (Saka)                                   Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

ACRONYMS 
 
ATN Action Taken Note 
ATR Action Taken Report 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility  
CURIE Consolidation of University Research For Innovation And Excellence in 
Women 
DBT Department of Biotechnology 
DST Department of Science & Technology  
EFC Expenditure Finance Committee   
EV Electric Vehicle  
FY Financial Year  
GATI Gender Advancement for Transforming Institutions 
IMPRINT Impacting Research, Innovation and Technology  
INSPIRE Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research 
JRF Junior Research Fellowship  
KIRAN Knowledge Involvement in Research Advancement through Nurturing 
LiB Lithium Ion Battery 
MSME Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
NM-ICPS National Mission on Inter-disciplinary Cyber Physical Cyber System  
NPDF National Post -Doctoral Fellowship  
NRF National Research Foundation 
NSM National Supercomputing Mission  
PSC Parliamentary Standing Committee  
R&D Research and Development  
RA Research Assistant  
RE Revised Estimate 
SEED Science for Equity Empowerment and Development   
SERB Science & Engineering Research Board  
 
(iii) 

SHE Scholarship for Higher Education  
SME Small and Medium Enterprises 
SoI Survey of India 
SRF Senior Research Fellowship 
STI Science, Technology and Innovation  
TDB Technology Development Board 
TRC Technical Research Center  
WISE Women in Science & Engineering  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
REPORT 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Forty Fourth 
Report of the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (202 1-22) of the Department o f Science and 
Technology’. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 
8th March, 2021.  
2.  Action Taken Note s (ATN) have  been received from Department of Science and 
Technology in respect of the recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Forty 
Fourth Report. This has been categorized as follows:-  
Chapter I:       Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
   Government:  Para Nos. 2.3, 2.6, 2.13, 3.3, 4.3, 4.4, 5.4, 6.3, 7.3, 7.4, 7.6 and 8.2 
(of the Three Hundred Forty Fourth Report) 
             Total recommendations – 12 accepted  
The Committee is pleased to note that the Department has accepted its  
recommendations/observations as mentioned in Chapter-I of the Report.                            
Chapter II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to  
pursue in view of the Government’s replies: Para Nos. 2.9 and 9.2  
          Total recommendations – 02 Not to be pursued  
  The Committee is convinced with th e explanations furnished by the Ministry and, 
therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendations further.  
Chapter III:   Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not   been accepted by the Committee: Nil 
Chapter IV: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the  
Government are still awaited:     
Para Nos.10.2  
           Total recommendations – 01 to be pursued further 
The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and det ailed 
Action Taken Notes in respect of  the further recommendations/observations made 
by the Committee  in Chapter III of the Report.  The Department should also 
furnish the updated information regarding the paragraph mentioned in Chapter IV 
of the Report.  
3. The details of the ATR have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters.  
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020 -21 AND ALLOCATION 
FOR 2021-22 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.1 The Committee acknowledges that despite the restrictions imposed by Department of 
Economic Affairs and closure of some of its institutions, the Department has been able to utilise 
over 80 percent  of the funds allotted during RE  2020-21 upto 31. 01.2021. The Committee is 
satisfied with the utilisation of funds and recommends the Department to ensure its full utilisation 
by the end of the financial year.                                                           (Para 2.3of the 344th Report) 
Action Taken 
1.2 The Department of Science and Technology has been able to spend Rs. 4912.04 crore 
against the RE of Rs. 5012.10 crore, which amounts to 98% expenditure vis-à-vis Revised 
Estimates for the year 2020-2021.  
Recommendation/Observation  
1.3 The Committee is concerned about the impact of the reduction in budgetary allocation on 
the outcomes and physical targets of the Central Sector Schemes. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Department should prioritise the available resources and ensure fu ll 
utilisation of funds, especially, under research and development initiatives and projects, 
disbursement of fellowships and technology development programmes. Further, the Committee 
stresses on the Department to take all steps possible to ensure timely d isbursement of fellowships 
and to continuously monitor the status.                                                                     (Para 2.6 ibid) 
                                                                                          
Action Taken 
1.4 The recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee have been noted for 
compliance and to ensure full utilisation of the funds allocated.  
1.5 Survey of India (SoI)/ National Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organisation (NATMO) have 
been directed to prioritize the available resources and utilization of funds in the year 2021 -2022 to 
achieve the target. 
1.6 The International Co -operation Programme of Department of Science and Technology 
(DST) is implemented in alignment with international partners in te rms of fiscal year, funding 
availability, planning of Joint Committee/Commission meetings for requisite approval, etc. Due to 
spread of COVID -19 pandemic, some of the planned meetings could not take place. Some of the 
International partners even expressed         non-availability of funds which led to reduction in the 
budgetary allocation at RE stage. However, all efforts were made to support ongoing projects with 
manpower component on priority basis. 
1.7 Innovation in Science Pursuit for  Inspired Research (INSPIRE) Scholarship for Higher 
Education (SHE) Scholarship: INSPIRE Fellowship and INSPIRE Faculty Fellowships have been 
disbursed within 60 days of the receipt of necessary documents. Considering the COVID -19 
pandemic, timely release of scholarship/fellowship was ensured and INSPIRE Fellowship was also 
released to about 502 Scholars who were not able to submit the necessary documents in time. 
1.8 The budget allocation for Financial Year  2020-21 under Technology Development 
Programme, Drugs & Pharmaceutic al Research Programme,  National Council for Science & 

3 
 
Technology Communication,  National Geospatial Programme  were fully utilized by the end of 
Financial Year.  
1.9 So far as Technology Fusion Application and Research Programme is concerned, though 
budget was reduced for the programme, prioriti sation of the projects with available limited 
resources was done to ensure full utilization of funds made available. The Quantum Research has 
taken the highest precedence, followed by Epidemiology, Imagining Spectrosc opy and Digital 
Heritage Projects. Thus, the impact of reduction in budget allocation and outcome of physical 
targets was minimized to the possible extent. All fellowships approved under these projects have 
been disbursed timely and there is continuous monitoring of the projects. 
1.10 Under Women in Science & Engineering (WISE) and Knowledge Investment and 
Knowledge Involvement in Research Advancement through Nurturing (KIRAN),  outcome and 
physical targets can be achieved by prioritizing the available resou rces. Top-most priority will be 
given to disbursement of fellowships. 
1.11 So far as Nano Mission, National Supercomputing Mission  (NSM) & Swarna Jayanti 
Fellowships Scheme is concerned, the expenditure under each was as follows: 
 (i)       Nano Mission: RE Rs. 58.5 crore with Rs. 10 crore under ‘Capital’ and Rs. 48 crore under 
‘General’ has been fully spent. The allocation of Rs. 50 lakh for salary of two Scientist s ‘B’ was 
probably reduced to Rs. 30 lakh which was for Administration to use for payment of Salary to two 
Scientists ‘B’. (RE spent Fully); 
(ii)       Under NSM, the RE of ₹ 69.5 crore under Capital and ₹ 0.50 crore under ‘General’ has 
been fully spent. (Spent fully); &    
(iii)      Under Swarna Jayanti Fellowships Scheme, the allocation of ₹ 7 crore was fully spent. 
(Spent fully) 
 1.12 The 3rd Party Evaluation Committee ha s strongly recommended converting Nano Mission 
as a regular programme of DST since applications of Nano S&T and Nano Medicine are going to 
be there for more than 20 years from now. In - principle approval of D/o Expenditure , to merge 
the National Programme  on Nano Science and Technology  under the Research & Development 
Umbrella programme of DST from 2017 onwards , has been obtained.  This has been included as a 
part of Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) on Research and Development submitted by DST to 
D/o Expenditure for approval.  
 1.13 The Fellowships of Research Fellows (JRF/SRF/RA etc.) working in academic and 
research institutions through extramural research projects of Science & Engineering Research 
Board (SERB) are disbursed by the implementing institutions. SERB normally makes financial 
releases to implementing institutions once in a year, in lump sum, which includes cost of 
consumables, manpower, equipment, contingencies , etc. In order to facilitate subsequent financial 
releases during the prevailing pandemic period caused by COVID -19, SERB has extended special 
dispensation to researchers. Releases were made to Institutions on the basis of provisional 
Statement of Expenditure and Utilization Certificates. In case of National Post Doctoral 
Fellowship (NPDF), all the selected NPDF are allowed to join the host institute only after issue of 
Sanction Order by SERB. Thereby , SERB confirms the availability of funds to the institutes for a 
period of one year and ensures NPDF  executing the research work without any difficulties. These 
measures ensure timely disbursement of fellowships. 
1.14 Under the ‘Innovation, Technology Development and Deployment’ scheme entire budget 
has been utilised. To prioritise the utilisation under reduced budgets, releases were ration alised 
under new projects, releases were limited to most relevant expenses for initiating the project. 
Support to Startups operating on C OVID-19 related solutions was extended through flagship 

4 
 
program of the department - Science for Equity Empowerment and D evelopment  (SEED) support 
and by launching a new program CAWACH (Centre for Augmenting WAR with COVID -19 
Health Crisis). Through proper due diligence, 51 startups could be supported under CAWACH 
programme. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.15 The Committee re commends the Department to prioritise its activities and optimise its 
resources in order to support critical projects under different schemes and sub -schemes, and if 
required, seek additional funds at the supplementary stage so that there is no adverse imp act on 
the ongoing schemes/project.                                                                                  (Para 2.13 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.16  All Programme Divisions of the Department have taken note of the recommendation for 
compliance. Activities are being prioritised and resources optimised. 
1.17  Under International Cooperation programme, Utilization Certificates & Statement of 
Expenditures for all ongoing projects will be sought in first quarter itself so that additional funds 
can be sought at supplementary stage. 
1.18   INSPIRE scheme was given priority, in terms of budget availability and to perform 
INSPIRE scheme implementation activities. 
1.19    Utmost care was taken to prioritise  activities and optimize resources to support critical 
projects under the Technology Fusion Application and Research (TFAR), a sub -scheme under 
Research and Development umbrella scheme . Additional funds were sought at Supplementary 
Stage.  However, no additional allocations either at RE stage or supplementary sta ge have been 
provided. 
1.20 Priority is given to all the ongoing projects under Women Scientists Scheme (WOS -A 
and WOS -B) where fellowship of Principal Investigator (PI)  is involved. Further, due to travel 
restriction in pandemic condition s, the new call o f Indo-US Fellowship for Women in STEMM 
(WISTEMM) has been kept on hold. Similarly, budget will be prioriti sed in other programmes as 
well. The proposed travel plan of Identified Higher Education Institutes to UK under GATI would 
also be revisited.  
1.21   Some key programmes mentioned below will get affected, as there is a substantial 
difference between th e budget demanded and allocated.  Following are the points for 
consideration: 
(i)          Scientific Utilization through Research Augmentation - Prime Pr oducts from Indigenous 
Cows (SUTRA-PIC). 
(ii)        State Science & Technology Programme (SSTP):      Under the State Science & 
Technology Programme (SSTP), allocated budget in 2021 -22 is Rs 24 crore against the demanded 
budget of Rs. 65.5 crore as per EFC. This substantial difference between the budgetary allocation 
demanded and funds actually allocated will severely impact the SSTP.   
(iii)       Scheduled Caste (SC) and Scheduled Tribe (ST):       There will be  decrease in the 
proposed new initiatives rel ated to Establishment of Science Technology and Innovation (STI) 
Hubs and Creation of Scheduled Caste (SC) and Scheduled Tribe (ST) Cells for the holistic 
development of SC and ST population in the country. Some of the proposed initiatives like 
Establishment of Fab Labs in Ekalavya Schools, Collaborative initiatives with line function 
Ministries and Departments will be affected. With decrease in funding, the priority of the 
Department will be for ongoing schemes and projects. Focus will be on consolidation of already 
ongoing projects with efforts in reaching maximum number of beneficiaries for Training, S&T 

5 
 
Capacity Building and Skill Development. Efforts will be made for converging the ongoing 
programmes and schemes with other schemes and programmes of the Department.  
(iv)     Science and Society Programme (SSP): With the reduced budgets, prioritization of expenses 
and utilization of 100 % of the budget allocated   under ‘Innovation, Technology Development and 
Deployment’ scheme of DST was done. Startups wo rking on COVID – 19 related solutions were 
supported through seed fund available with Technology Business Incubators.   
 REVENUE AND CAPITAL ALLOCATIONS IN B.E. 2021-22 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.22 The Committee is constrained to note that details of t he activities planned to be undertaken 
by the Department with the increased allocation for creation of Capital Assets was not available in 
the documents furnished by the Department and break -up of budgetary allocations for Revenue 
and Capital Expenditure a s well as funds allotted for Establishment Expenditure under various 
Budgetary Heads has not been made available.  The Committee recommends that the Department 
should invariably furnish the above information to the Committee to facilitate a more detailed 
analysis of Demands for Grants.                                                                               (Para 3.3ibid)                                                                                                                     
Action Taken 
(i)         The Department has allocated Rs.1635.00 crore under ‘Grants for creation of Capital 
Assets’ for the year 2021-2022.  Detailed allocation may be seen as under: 
(Rs.in crore) 
S. No. Particulars BE 2021-22 
1  Science and Technology Institutional and Human Capacity Building 272.00  
2  Research and Development  296.50  
3  Innovation Technology Development and Deployment 332.50  
4  National Mission on Interdisciplinary Cyber System  55.00  
5  Science and Engineering Research Board 299.00  
6  Autonomous Institutions and Professional Bodies 380.00  
Total- Grants for creation of Capital Assets 1635.00  
 (ii)        Section-wise allocation of Department of Science and Technology for the year 2021 -
2022:- 
(Rs. in crore) 
S. No. Particulars Budget 
Estimates 
1. Revenue 5949.59 
2. Capital 122.00 
Total- (Revenue + Capital) 6071.59 
  
 

6 
 
(iii)       Fund to the tune of Rs.715.90 crore has been allocated towards ‘Establishment 
expenditure’, details are given as follows: 
(Rs.in crore) 
S. No. Particulars Budget Estimates 2021-2022 
Revenue Capital Total 
1. Secretariat 93.40 30.00 123.40 
2. Survey of India 460.10 73.50 533.60 
3. NATMO 28.40 18.50 46.90 
4. Science Counsellors Abroad 12.00 0 0 
Total- Establishment Expenditure 593.90 122.00 715.90 
 
1.23    Recommendation to furnish activities planned to be undertaken by the Department with the 
increased allocation for creation of Capital assets to the Committee to facilitate a more detailed 
analysis of Demands for Grants has been noted for compliance. 
KEY INITIATIVES TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT: 
GUIDELINES ON GEO - SPATIAL DATA: LIBERALISATION AND 
DEMOCRATISATION  
Recommendation/Observation  
1.24 The Committee notes the economic, social, technological and developmental potential that 
lies in liberalisation and democ ratisation of the guidelines on acquisition and use of Geo -spatial 
data, and recommends that the Department should ensure better coordination between various 
agencies involved in the process to avoid duplicity of efforts, inordinate delays and waste of 
resources. The Committee is also concerned about the security related to sharing of geospatial 
information of sensitive and prohibited areas, and recommends the Department to develop fool 
proof mechanisms to ensure that the security of data is not compromised.                (Para 4.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.25  Survey of India (SoI) is developing a platform on which its data assets will be visible to all 
and will be available for sharing among all Government departments and public also. This will 
take care of al l duplicity, delay and waste of resources. Datasets will be shared or made available 
through above platform free of cost to all Government agencies, where as private users will be 
provided data at fair and transparent cost. Government of India data platform  security guidelines 
will be complied with stipulated security auditing of platform and web application.  
1.26   Data available with So I will only be shared or made available in accordance with new 
geo-spatial guidelines and negative attributes list cited in the guidelines. All sensitive and 
prohibited attributes will be filtered from the final output data before supply to users. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.27 The Committee recommends that the Department should promote start -ups and SMEs in 
the geo -spatial mapping sector by providing handholding, expertise, technology resource, early 

7 
 
stage funding and incubation through its various entrepreneurship development programmes. The 
Committee also recommends the Department to actively promote the repository of geo-spatial data 
amongst possible buyers as a prospective revenue grosser.                                      (Para 4.4 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.28 Survey of India (SoI) has been outsourcing various geo-spatial data generation works to the 
geo-spatial sector f irms including Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises ( MSME), Small and 
Medium Enterprises ( SME) and Start -Ups in its endeavor to promote MSME and start -ups for 
building the expert capacity, technology resources , etc., with due relaxation in past experience, 
financial qualification, turn -over criteria, etc. SoI is building a data reposi tory and dissemination 
platform.  This repository and platform will be handled by two Directorates with responsibility of 
data storage, archival, publishing as web services and life cycle management i.e. National Geo -
spatial Data Centre (NGDC), Dehradun and GIS & Remote Sensing (GIS&RS) Geo -spatial Data 
Centre, Hyderabad. In order to promote and make available these datasets, So I is cataloguing these 
data layers in National Data Registry (NDR) of the National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI). 
SoI is taking these steps to leverage its data assets for potential buyers at fair price to tap the 
potential of data-sets as prospective revenue grosser. 
1.29 In order to promote the repos itory of geo-spatial data amongst possible buyers, a proof -of-
concept National Data Registry on a cloud -based Geo -platform has been developed and 
demonstrated with the provision of registration and catalogue services to facilitate search, 
discovery and access to geo-spatial data.  
NATIONAL MISSION ON INTER -DISCIPLINARY CYBER PHYSICAL SYSTEM  (NM- 
ICPS) 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.30 The Committee notes with appreciation the achievements of the Department under the 
Mission. The Committee recommends that the  Department should ensure there are adequate 
mechanisms to avoid duplicity of efforts in these Hubs and that each Hub follows a life -cycle 
approach resulting in translation, commercialisation of knowledge and technologies developed. 
                      (Para 5.4 ibid) 
Action Taken  
1.31   National Mission on Inter-disciplinary Cyber Physical Cyber System (NM -ICPS) Mission 
has established 25 Innovation Hubs and independent technology verticals. As such, there is no 
duplicity amongst these Hubs. However, being an emerging technology, an element of overlapping 
and duplicity is unavoidable. The Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) and Mission Governing 
Board (MGB) of NM -ICPS are evaluating these Hubs and will ensure no duplicity among these 
Hubs wherein each Hub acts as a platform for Academia, Industry and Government collaborations. 
These Hubs follow a technology life cycle approach, addressing all stages viz. Knowledge -
Development-Translation-Commercialization. 
 
DRAFT 5th SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND INNOVATION POLICY (STIP) 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.32 The Committee recognises the need for a new Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) 
Policy to strengthen the STI ecosystem and make it more competitive. The Committee advises the 
Department to share and interac t with this Committee this important policy of national relevance, 
to further broaden the scope of consultation and inclusion of diverse ideas.             (Para 6.3 ibid) 

8 
 
Action Taken 
1.33 The English and Hindi versions of the draft Science, Techno logy an d Innovation (STI) 
Policy have already been shared with the Committee for further guidance. 
 AUTONOMOUS BODIES OF THE DEPARTMENT 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.34 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should impress upon all the 
Autonomous Institutions to enlist 10 goals/objectives that each of these Autonomous Institutions 
propose to pursue in the medium to long term plan. The Autonomous Institutions should further 
indicate the goals/objectives that will be pursued during the year 2021-22 along with the steps that 
the Department plans to undertake to achieve these goals during the year. On its part, Department 
of Science and Technology should also develop a mechanism to periodically monitor the progress 
of the goals/objectives of each of t hese Institutions. The Department should also devise a 
framework of inter-Departmental consultation and coordination, with the aim of sharing research 
outcomes, optimising resource utilisation, avoiding overlaps and reducing redundancy.  
           (Para 7.3 ibid) 
Action Taken 
1.35 In pursuance of above observations, it is submitted that each of the Autonomous 
Institutions  (AIs) has already been suitably counselled to enlist relevant goals /objectives being 
taken up during the year 2021 -22. In order to mon itor and appraise the progress made in the AIs, 
this Department has already embarked upon a system to evaluate the outcomes of the progress of 
AIs periodically in three modes i.e. Monthly, Quarterly and Annually.     Further, in order to 
establish compliance to the requirements of General Financial Rules (GFRs)-2017 stipulated as per 
para (ix) Rule 229 regarding Peer Review of Autonomous Institutions, DST had set up a two tier 
evaluation process, comprising of five area -wise Sectoral Committees (SCs) at the first level and 
an Apex Peer Review Committee (ARC) at the second level. The Sectoral Committees made a 
detailed evaluation of AIs with the help of domain experts followed by evaluation by the Apex 
Peer Review Committee which made final recommendations tak ing into account the optimal 
utilization of resources recently. Similar mechanism will be followed by this Department to 
monitor the scientific activities of all Autonomous Institutions . This Department is also 
endeavoring to devise a framework of inter -Departmental consultation and coordination, with the 
aim of sharing research outcomes, optimizing resource utilization, avoiding overlaps and reducing 
redundancy. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.36 The Committee also recommends that these Autonomous Institutio ns should be advised to 
explore avenues to augment revenue generation through technology transfer, consultancy services, 
patents, etc. On its part the Department should also set targets for the same and actively monitor 
the progress.                                                                                                            (Para 7.4 ibid) 
 
Action Taken 
1.37 In pursuance of above observations, it is submitted that in five of the Autonomous 
Institutions, Technical Research Centers (TRC) have b een established to convert research findings 
into commercial products. The TRC programme is translating scientific discoveries and 
technological inventions into products and services of societal and industrial relevance. TRCs have 
been instrumental in buil ding R&D translation ecosystem by supporting advancements in 
technology readiness levels of background R&D capabilities and intellectual properties, 

9 
 
streamlining multi -stakeholder involvement (including industry -academia partnerships), 
technology out -licensing, setting -up platforms for start -ups, and strengthening state -of-the-art 
R&D infrastructure. Around a dozen of technologies have been transferred to the industries and 
many of them are at different stages of developments for transfer to the industries.  These TRCs 
have already started generating revenues. Few more TRCs are under consideration. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.38  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should provide the necessary 
funds to the Birbal Sahni Institute to impr ove and upgrade its infrastructure. Further, the 
Department should undertake a thorough assessment of the physical infrastructure of its 
Institutions/Autonomous Bodies and provide all help to strengthen their infrastructure.                                                                                          
          (Para 7.6 ibid)    
Action Taken 
1.39 In pursuance of above observations, it is submitted that the Department is providing 
necessary funds to Autonomous Institutions and administrative assistance to improve and upgrade 
its research and infrastructure. The Department has been providing grants in aid to improve the 
physical infrastructure of its Autonomous Institutions  within the allocated budget. During the 
recent years, new Infrastructure ha ve been created for the Autonomous Institutions  located at 
different parts of the country and many of the infrastructure proposals are under pipeline. 
GROSS EXPENDITURE ON R&D (GERD) 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.40 The Committee recognises the efforts of the Department in promoting R&D activities and 
highlights the importance of a higher allocation of resources in Research and Development 
activities. However, the Committee is concerned with the stagnation and decline of Gross 
Expenditure on R&D as a percentage of GDP.  The Committee cannot stress enough on the urgent 
need to enhance the GERD as a percentage of GDP and, therefore, urges the Department to 
undertake aggressive steps towards promoting private sector investment in Research and 
Development, espec ially since October 2019, companies have been allowed to use Corporate 
Social Responsibility(CSR) funds for contributions towards research.                      (Para 8.2 ibid) 
                                                                                              
Action Taken 
1.41 In various schemes implemented by the Department for augmenting and strengthening of 
research infrastructure in academic institutions, the existing guideline provides for contribution of 
50% share of funds in the recommended budget in project for Private Academic Institutions.  
1.42 National Mission on Interdisciplinary Cyber Physical Cyber System (NM -ICPS) is 
implemented through 25 Technology Innovation Hubs in the form of Section -8, not for profit 
companies, across the cou ntry. The Companies are to co -partner with Industry, both financially 
and technically, for various activities ranging from R&D to commercialization. All these Hubs are 
encouraged to utilize the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds. Thus, the Mission  is 
working aggressively for promoting private sector contribution to R&D. 
1.43 Under KIRAN programme steps for involvement of companies and using their Corporate 
Social Responsibility (CSR) funds have been taken. IBM, India is involved in Vigyan Jyoti 
Programme and providing its CSR funds to support various activities of the programme.  
1.44 The Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), a Statutory body of the Department 
has taken significant initiatives towards promoting private sector investment in Research and 

10 
 
Development (R&D). The Scheme, Industry Relevant Research & Development (IRRD) had been 
instituted to target solution driven research to address industry specific problems. The Scheme 
utilizes the expertise available in academic institutions a nd national laboratories to solve industry 
specific problems for the larger benefit of society. 
1.45   In order to further catalyze industry relevant research in academic settings, the Board has 
recently initiated a new programme titled ‘Fund for Industria l Research Engagement (FIRE)’. The 
projects identified under SERB -FIRE shall be jointly designed and implemented by the academic 
partner (which includes a partner from national laboratories/recognized R&D institutions as the 
case may be) and industry. SERB  and Industry share the cost on 1:1 basis.  The SERB has already 
signed Letter of Intent / MoU with some key industry players. 
1.46 The Department, in partnership with Ministry of Education (MoE) , has been implementing 
an initiative called I mpacting Resear ch, I nnovation and Technology (IMPRINT) to address all 
major engineering challenges relevant to India through an inclusive and sustainable mode of 
translational research steered by the top engineering institutions in the country.  The SERB has 
been entrust ed to implement IMPRINT – 2 R&D projects and function as a single window 
clearance system of all the financial requirements of the selected projects. The programme ensures 
mandatory engagement and investment of private industries. 
1.47 SERB has recently ma de call for R&D proposals on SERB Centre for Energy 
Transformation and Storage in three specific areas, namely, Electrochemical energy storage 
systems for micro -grid installations, Technologies for utility -scale high -capacity batteries and 
Transparent photovoltaics for devices and surface integration. In order to boost private investment 
and sustainability, it is mandated that the Centres should ensure (added) funding from non -SERB 
sources such as industry, institution, etc. 
1.48 Under Electric Vehicle (EV) R&D Mission, it is proposed to set up three Technology 
Hubs: Energy Storage, Drivetrain and  EV Electronics.   Further, at each EV R&D Hub, the 
following Four Programs will be conducted: 
(i)         To create development facilities for EV Components  
(ii)        To develop & demonstrate technologies  
(iii)       To develop EV Sub-systems & validate in Field Trials 
(iv)       To develop Materials & Manufacturing Equipment for EV Components 
  The total budget for the year 2021 -22 envisaged at Rs. 433.1 crores,  the details of which 
are given as under. 
 
(Rs. in crore) 
 Year-I 
2021-22 
Scheme-wise   
  Energy 
Storage  
Drivetrain  EV              
Electronics  
Sub-Total  Total  
  
  
  
Sub-
Schemes 
Program-1: 
Facilities  
Non-
recurring  
63.75 66.25 2.50 132.50   
186.74 
Recurring  24.2 28.4 1.6 54.2 
Program-2: 
R&D 
Non 
Recurring  
43.5 13.0 15.3 71.8 124.5 
Recurring  26.2 8.5 18.0 52.7 

11 
 
Program-3: 
Sub-Systems  
Non-
Recurring  
18 7.6 11.3 36.9 54.6 
Recurring  10.2 2.8 4.7 17.7   
 
Program-4: 
Incubation  
Non-
recurring 
21.1 23.0 - 44.1 67.3 
Recurring  12.7  10.4   23.1 
   219.7 160.0 53.4 433.1   
  
The draft EFC Memorandum has been prepared. But it could not be taken up for approvals 
due to the COVID-19 situation. 
 
Deliverables 2020-21 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 Sub-totals 
 
1 Facilities for EV R&D Hubs ─ 4 2 ─ ─ 6 
2 Lighthouse | Technology Development 
Program 
─ 2 3 3 ─ 8 
3 Lighthouse | Systems Development 
Program 
─ 2 2 4 3 11 
4 Incubation Program | Materials for EV 
Components 
─ 2 2 ─ ─ 4 
5 Incubation Program | Machinery & 
Equipment 
─ ─ ─ 3 ─ 3 
6 Directed Research | Lithium-free 
Energy Storage Systems 
─ ─ ─ 3 1 4 
7 Directed Research | Lithium ion Battery 
Systems 
─ ─ ─ 3 ─ 3 
8 Directed Research | All Solid-State-
Lithium Metal Batteries 
─ ─ ─ ─ 2 2 
9 Directed Research | Drivetrain & 
Charging Systems 
─ ─ 1 3 ─ 4 
Sub-totals 0 10 10 19 6 45 
 
 

12 
 
 (i)  Facilities for EV R&D Hubs 
(a) Limited-scale Manufacturing Unit for Rare Earth Magnets 
(b) Limited-scale Manufacturing Unit for Battery 
(c) Limited-scale Manufacturing Unit for Supercapacitors 
(d) Prototyping Centre for Energy Storage Systems 
(e) R&D Test Centre for Energy Storage 
(f) R&D Test Centre for Motors & Drives 
 (ii)  Lighthouse | Technology Development Program 
(a)  Lithium Titanate Oxide (LTO) Cell/ Module 
(b)  Supercapacitor Cell/ Module 
(c)  Aluminium-Air Cell/ Module 
(d)  Integration of Fuel Cells Pack into EV 
(e)  Open Source | Battery Management Systems 
(f)  Open Source | Control System for Supercapacitors 
(g)  Open Source | Lean Electronics Architecture in Light EV 
(h)  Power Electronics & Controls Simulation Tools 
 (iii)  Lighthouse | Systems Development Program 
(a)  Light EV Battery Pack cooling using solid state devices 
(b) Thermal runaway protection for Lithium ion Battery 
(c) Improved Energy Storage for Light EV 
(d) Improved Energy Storage for Cars & Vans 
(e) Improved Energy Storage for Buses & Trucks 
(f) Permanent Magnet Motors for Light EV 
(g) Permanent Magnet Motors for Cars & Vans 
(h) Permanent Magnet Motors for Buses & Trucks 
(i) Traction Drives with Regeneration 
(j) DC-DC converters for EV Ancilliary Systems 
(k) WBG Converters for Onboard Charger 
(l) Thermal management of PE converters 
 (iv)  Incubation Program | Materials for EV Components 
(a) Production of Electrode Materials for Battery 
(b) Improvement of Lithium Ion Battery  (LiB) Electrolyte 
(c) Production of electrode materials for Supercapacitors 
(d) REE Alloy Synthesis & Powder Production 
 (v)  Incubation Program | Machinery & Equipment 

13 
 
(a) Manufacturing Equipment for Supercapacitor 
(b) Manufacturing Equipment for Rare Earth Magnets 
(c) Production of Amorphous magnet foil/laminates 
 (vi)  Directed Research | Lithium-free Energy Storage Systems 
(a) Secondary Aluminium ion batteries 
(b) Sodium ion Battery Cell 
(c) Development of Novel materials for Supercapacitors 
(d) Stationary batteries 
 (vii) Directed Research | Lithium ion Battery Systems 
(a) LiB: Reduced Cobalt content 
(b) LiB: High Voltage Cathodes 
(c) LiB: High Capacity Anodes 
 (viii) Directed Research | All Solid-State-Lithium Metal Batteries 
(a) Li Metal Battery: Lithium Garnet/ Oxide Electrolyte 
(b) Li Metal Battery: Sulfide Solid Electrolyte 
 (ix)  Directed Research | Drivetrain and Charging Systems 
(a) Press-less Magnet Manufacturing 
(b) Smart Magnet-less & Reduced Magnet Machines 
(c) 3D Laser Additive Motor 
(d)Inductive Charging 

14 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
BUDGETARY DETAILS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2020 -21 AND ALLOCATION 
FOR 2021-22 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.1 The Committee recommends that the Department should take necessary measures to ensure 
proper utilisation of these funds by the end of  the financial year so that the targeted outcomes 
linked to the initiatives of the Department under these heads are not adversely impacted.                                                                    
                                                                                                         (Para 2.9 of the 344th Report) 
Action Taken 
2.2 The observation has been noted for comp liance. During FY 2020 -21, the Department was 
able to spend 71.02%, 98.03%, 98.40% & 95.92% of their Revised Estimates under the heads 
NATMO; Science and Technology Institutional and Human Capacity Building; Research and 
Development; and Innovation, Techno logy Development and Deployment , respectively. Details 
are given in the table given below:  
 S.No. Particulars  (Rs.in crore) 
FY 2020-2021 
Revised 
Estimates  
Actual 
Expenditure  
% expenditure 
vis-à-vis RE  
1 NATMO 39.68 28.18 71.02% 
2 Science and Technology 
Institutional and Human Capacity 
Building 918.35 900.25 98.03% 
3 Research and Development 402.50 396.05 98.40% 
4 Innovation, Technology 
Development and Deployment 656.30 629.50 95.92% 
  
2.3 So far as International Cooperation is concerned, surrender of budget in Capital asset at RE 
stage was due to less expenditure in European Union (EU)  R&D Projects. Support for equipment 
provided in these projects was  not utilized due to COVID -19 pandemic so next release could not 
be made. Surrender in Foreig n travel and office expenses was also due to prevailing international 
travel restrictions and physical meetings. Division has ensured the utilization in other budget 
heads. 
 2.4 So far as INSPIRE programme is concerned,  measures taken to ensure proper utilization of 
funds and meet the targeted outcomes of the INSPIRE scheme were (i) extended  timelines - for 

15 
 
call of Applications for scholarship/ fellowship; for submission of necessary documents for release 
of scholarship/ fellowship;  (ii) Expert Committee  meetings were organized on virtual mode; (iii) 
E-helpline was started for grievance redressal, (iv) INSPIRE aspirants beneficiaries/ Institutions 
were requested,  through      e -mail, to submit the necessary documents for release of fellowship 
grants. 
2.5 Funds in the current financial year shall be utilized for new and ongoing projects 
sanctioned under Fund for Improvement of S&T Infrastructure (FIST) , Promotion of University 
Research and Scientific Excellence (PURSE)  and Sophisticated Analytical & Techni cal Help 
Institutes (SATHI)  along with providing the ongoing support to Sophisticated Analytical 
Instrument Facilities (SAIF) centres.  
2.6 Under Knowledge Involvement in Research Advancement through Nurturing ( KIRAN) 
programme, activities and processing h ave already commenced in ongoing projects of different 
programmes of KIRAN Division. The targeted outcomes from the ongoing projects of programmes 
like Women Scientists Scheme, Consolidation of University Research for Innovation and 
Excellence in Women ( CURIE), Gender Advancement for Transforming Institutions ( GATI) and 
Vigyan Jyoti will be achieved by the end of financial year. 
 TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT BOARD (TDB) 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.7   The Committee notes the steps taken by the Department toward s the restructuring of 
Technology Development Board and recommends that the Department should explore and 
implement all measures required to enable TDB function as a world -class entity. The Committee 
asks the Department to furnish updated status of the pro gress made with regard to the 
restructuring of TDB as a Section 8 Company under the Companies Act, 2013.         (Para 9.2 ibid)              
Action Taken 
2.8         The Technology Development Board (TDB) has constituted a Committee to review   
Technology Development / Promotion of ecosystem across various stakeholders / Ministries to 
suggest measures to enhance the efficacy of TDB. The mandate of the  Committee is to review and 
hold discussion with various stakeholders of public and private sectors, Minist ries and 
Department of Government of India, industry associations and R&D institutions to compare 
similar model of funding and to suggest changes required in TDB Act , 1995. The Committee has 
deliberated twice during the course of the year and the Report is  likely to be  submitted 
by December 2021. 
2.9        Restructuring of TDB -   A Review was undertaken by the Department of Expenditure for 
Rationalisation of Autonomous Bodies of Department of Science and Technology. In the said 
Review, submitted vide lett er dated 09.10.2020 , under Para No 29 w.r.t TDB , it has been 
recommended that “in order to become self -reliant (Atmanirbhar) it is important to promote 
development and commercialisation of indigenous technology and adaptation of imported 
technology at a ve ry fast pace and this Autonomous Body i.e. TDB may be continued as stand -
alone Autonomous Body”. 
 
  
 
 
 

16 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
 
 
 
 
-Nil- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
National Research Foundation (NRF) 
Recommendation/Observation  
4.1       The Committee welcomes the creation of a National Research Foundation  to increase the 
resources for Research and Development and strengthening its outreach, although the logic of its 
being managed by the Ministry of Education is not very clear. Such a NRF must focus sharply on 
the natural sciences. Bringing social sciences also under its ambit is not advisable. Since, as stated 
by the Department of Science and Technology, the objectives, structure and processes of the 
proposed NRF  are duplicate or parallel  to some of the existing initiatives in the Ministry of 
Science and Technology, especially DST and DBT, the Committee is of the view that the National 
Research Foundation should work closely with the Ministry of Science and Technology to avoid 
duplication of efforts. The Committee endorses the view of the Department that DST  and DBT be 
included in the NRF Council, to avoid duplication and to bring synergy in all major extra -mural 
support. Further, the Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government should strongly consider 
focusing NRF efforts in under -served regions and under -funded areas of research, building 
research capacity of states and the ability of state governments to spend on R&D, and amplifying 
important strategic initiatives of the Ministry of Science and Technology. 
                                                                                                         (Para 10.2 of the 344th Report) 
Action Taken 
4.2 The above comments /observations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee ( PSC) has 
been communicated to the Office of the Principal Scientific Adviser for its consideration. 
 Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.3 The Committee notes that the Department  of Science and Technology has 
communicated the observation of the Committee to the Office of Principle Scientific Advisor 
for its consideration.  The Co mmittee would like the Department to apprise the Committee of 
the further developments  that have taken place  with respect to recommendation/observation 
of the Committee in the above para.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

18 
 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________________________ 

19 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 30 th November, 2021 in Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
              MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.   Shri Jairam Ramesh -- Chairman 
              RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3.  Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
4.  Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
5.  Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
6.  Shri Nabam Rebia 
             LOK SABHA 
7.  Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
8.  Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
9.  Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
10.  Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
11.  Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
12.  Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
13. Shri Anurag Sharma 
14.  Shri Ram Shiromani 
             SECRETARIAT 
             Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
             Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
             Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
             Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
             Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee.  The 
Committee decided to take up the consideration and  adoption of the draft 348 th, 349 th, 350 th, 
351st, 352nd, 353rd, 354th, 355th, 356th and 357th  reports of the Committee on the Action Taken 
by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 316 th Report on 'Air 
Pollution in Delhi and National Capital Region'; the 324 th  Report on ‘Status of Forests in 
India; the 325th  Report on ‘An Expanded Role for the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) in 
Cancer Treatment in India through An Enlarged Network of the Tata Memorial Centre 
(TMC)’; and 351 st to 357 th Reports on the Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the 
Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial Research; 
Science & Technology; Space; Environment, Forest and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, 
respectively. The Committee, then, considered the draft 348 th to 357th reports and adopted the 
same. 
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 1st December, 2021.  The Committee also authorised the Chairman to decide 
the names of the Members for presentation/laying of the reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament.  
4. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10.25 a.m. 