Rajya Sabh a Secretariat, Ne w  De lhi
PARLIAME NT  O F INDIA
DEP AR T MENT -RELA TED P ARLIAME NT A R Y  ST ANDING C OMMITT EE
RAJ Y A  S ABHA  
ON SCIEN CE & TECHNO LOGY , ENVIRO NMENT  & FORE STS
REPOR T NO.  
293
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 16th December, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16th December, 2016)
TWO H UNDRED  NINETY  THIRD R EPOR T
December , 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
Forest Fires and its Effect on Environment, 
Forests, Bio-Diversity and W ildlife and 
Remedial/Preventive Measures


58
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED NINETY THIRD REPORT
Forest Fires and its Effect on Environment,
Forests, Bio-Diversity and Wildlife and
Remedial/Preventive Measures
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 16th December, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 16th December, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-38
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE .............................................................. 39-44
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 45-50
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................................... 51-5 7

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 ( Constituted on 1st September , 2016)
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury     —   Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
5. Shri C.P. Narayanan
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
8. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
31. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on its
behalf, present this Two Hundred Ninety-third Report on “Forest Fires and its Effect on Environment,
Forests, Bio-diversity and Wildlife and remedial/preventive measures”.
2. In its meeting held on the 31st May, 2016 the Committee heard the views of the Ministry of
Environment, Forest & Climate Change and National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) on the subject. The
Committee also undertook a study visit to Mussoorie, Katra and Shimla from 6th to 11th June, 2016 and
discussed the subject with the representatives of Union Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
NDRF and State Governments of Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh and some NGOs/
members of civil society at these places.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate
Change; NDRF, State Governments of Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh and members
of Civil Society/NGOs for placing before the Committee the required material and replying to the clarifications
sought by the Members on the subject.
4. In its meeting held on 15th December, 2016 the Committee considered the draft report and adopted
the same.
RENUKA CHOWDHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
16 December , 2016 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Agrahayana 25, 1938 (Saka)  Science & Technology, Environment & Forests,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

ACRONYMS
FSI : Forest Survey of India
NTFP : None-Timber Forest Products
MCR : Master Control Room
ITGC : Information Technology & Geo-informatics Centre
UKFD : Uttarakhand Forest Department
NRSC : National Remote Sensing Centre
SNPP : Suomi National Pollar-Orbiting Partnership
VIIRS : V isible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite
F AMS : Fire Alert Messaging System
ICFRE : Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education
NDRF : National Disaster Response Force
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
ZSI : Zoological Survey of India
BSI : Botanical Survey of India
N B A : National Biodiversity Authority
GGF : Gandhi Global Family
(iv)

1
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
Uncontrollable and devastating forest fires during February-April 2016 caught the attention of the
entire country. In Uttarakhand, forest fire smashed nearly 4,000 hectare of forest cover across 13 districts
and killed 9 and injured 17 people besides damaging the biodiversity and forest ecosystems beyond repair.
The frequency of forest fire in Uttarakhand during April 2016 was much higher and widespread as compared
to April 2015. As forest fires took a heavy toll in Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh and Jammu and Kashmir
weren’t far behind as large tracts of forests in both States were engulfed by flames. As many as 378 forest
fires had broken out in different parts of Himachal Pradesh this summer. Similarly, Jammu & Kashmir also
suffered the same problem in a big way. Fire broke out in the forest area of Reasi district of Jammu and
Kashmir while other incidents of forest fires were also reported from the Bathuni and Gambhir areas of
Rajouri district in Jammu and Kashmir.
2. Forest fires had seldom been as rampant as they were in the Himalayan States this year, affecting the
fragile ecosystem of these States and destroying invaluable forest resources and causing extensive damage
to biodiversity including wildlife sanctuaries. In view of the enormity of the forest fires this year in the
Himalayan States of the country, resulting in loss of lives and extensive damage to the flora and fauna, the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
decided to take up the subject titled ‘Forest Fires and its effect on environment, forests, bio-diversity and
wildlife and remedial/preventive measures’ for examination and report.
3. At the outset, the Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change on the subject in its meeting held on the 31st May 2016. The Committee also undertook a study visit
to Mussorie, Katra and Shimla from 6th to 11th June 2016 to have an on-the-spot study of some of the areas
affected by forest fires at these places this year and to have discussion with the representatives of the
concerned Central and State Government organisations on the subject. The Committee visited some of the
forest fire affected areas near Mussoorie and Dhanaulti (Uttarakhand) on 6th June 2016, Trikuta Hills and
Nomain forests in Katra (Jammu and Kashmir) on 8th and 9th June 2016 and areas near Shimla (Himachal
Pradesh) on 10th and 11th June 2016. The Committee also held discussion with the representatives of Civil
Society/NGOs and the concerned Central and State Government organizations at Mussoorie, Katra and
Shimla on the 7th, 9th, and 11th June 2016 respectively* to have benefit of their views on the subject.
4. In a background note submitted to the Committee, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change informed the Committee that ‘Forest’ is a concurrent subject in the Seventh Schedule of the
Constitution of India. Therefore, while policy, planning and financing are the key responsibilities of the
Central Government, management of forests, including forest fire control and management, primarily lies
with the State Governments. Further, the Ministry had been designated as the nodal ministry to deal with
forest fires in the country.
5. The Committee was further informed by the Ministry that the Ministry also sends alerts to States/
Union Territories before onset of fire season every year for adequate preparedness. Further, Forest Survey
of India (FSI), Dehradun, an organization under the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change, has
developed an indigenous methodology to detect forest fires from the given fire spots (including within and
* (Lists attached as Annexures I, II & III)

2
outside forest regions) from Web Fire Mapper under a project named “Forest Fire Monitoring in India”. In
this exercise, the coordinates of active fire locations are daily downloaded from Web Fire Mapper. The
active Fire spots are the location of fire affected areas irrespective of forest or non-forest land. The downloaded
positional coordinates for the total fire locations, are projected on the forest cover map of India prepared by
FSI to select active fire locations within forest cover. The active forest fire location is further validated using
other reference information available with FSI. The objective is to disseminate only those signals where
higher level of threat is observed. The information is then disseminated through SMS and emailed to the
State Forest Department’s registered users. The same is also available on the website of FSI.
6. In addition, Government of India provides financial and technical assistance to the State Governments
as per their specific needs and availability of resources. Approximately, one third of the allocation under the
Centrally Sponsored Scheme i.e. Intensification of Forest Management, has been earmarked for forest fire
prevention and control. The various activities funded under this component include:
(i) Creation of Fire Lines
(ii) Maintenance of fire lines
(iii) Construction of watch towers
(iv) Engagement of fire watchers
(v) Assistance to Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMCs)
(vi) Construction of water storage structures
(vii) Se tting up of fire fighting cells
(viii) Procurement of firefighting equipments
(ix) Fire mapping and preparation of fire management plans
(x) Training & awareness
7. The details of funds released to the States and UTs under Centrally Sponsored Scheme namely,
Intensification of Forest Management, during the last five years is as below:
Financial Year Actual release
(Rupees in Crore)
2011-12 63.36
2012-13 51.05
2013-14 51.06
2014-15 53.57
2015-16 43.84
8. The Committee observes that the funds released by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change to the States and UTs under Centrally Sponsored Scheme namely, Intensification

3
of Forest Management, have shown a declining trend during the last few years, as is evident from
the figures provided by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. The Committee is at
a loss to understand as to why, when most of the concerned States have been asking for additional
funds under this scheme, the Ministry has not given priority to this sector. In view of the devastations
caused due to the forest fires, particularly this year, the Committee recommends that the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should enhance its budgetary allocation under the
Scheme and provide increased allocations under the Scheme to the affected States to enable them
to take the requisite measures for prevention and mitigation of forest fires.
UNDERSTANDING FOREST FIRES, CAUSES, PREVENTION & MITIGATION STRATEGIES
9. Fire is an integral part of the functioning of numerous forest ecosystems. Humans have used fire for
thousands of years as a land management tool. Fire is one of the natural forces that have influenced plant
communities over the time and as a natural process, it serves an important function in maintaining the health
of certain ecosystems. However, in the latter part of the twentieth century, changes in the human fire
dynamics and an increase in EI Nino frequency have led to a situation where fires are now a major threat to
many forests and the biodiversity therein. Tropical rain forests and cloud forests, which typically do not
burn on a large scale, were devastated by wildfires during the 1980s & 1990s in India.
10. A forest fire is simply an uncontrolled fire that wipes out large fields and areas of land. These fires
sometimes go on for days and weeks. They pose a threat not only to the forestwealth but also to the entire
regime of fauna and flora seriously disturbing the bio-diversity and the ecology and environment of a region.
During summer, when there is no rain for months, the forests become littered with dry senescent leaves and
twigs, which burst into flames ignited by the slightest spark. Forest fires have become more intense and
more frequent in the last few decades in India. These fires have been springing up in many other countries
of the world too.
11. India has variety of dense forests in tropical south, Himalayan Mountains and the wet north-east
regions. Forest vegetation ranges from tropical evergreen forests (Western Ghats / Eastern Himalayas) to
alpine forests (Himalayas in north) to semi-evergreen, deciduous, sub-tropical broad-leaved hill forests,
sub-tropical pine forests and sub-tropical montane temperate forests.
12. With a variety of forests, the forest fires also are common in India but usually they don’t get much
coverage in media. Forest fires are a recurrent phenomenon during fire season which is from January to
mid-June, with peak season of 3rd week of February to 1st week of June, and every year, close to 20,000
forest fire incidents are reported in the country. As per a Forest Survey of India report, on an average, 54%
of country’s forests are prone to fires, about 1.2% of the total forest areas is prone to heavy, 6.28% to
moderate and 45.27% to mild fires. In 1995, around 3.75 lakh hectares of area was affected in Uttarakhand
(a region of the then Uttar Pradesh State); in 1999, around 80,000 hectares of forest was destroyed in
Ganga-Yamuna doab region; in 2008, the forest fires in Melghat in Maharashtra affected some 10,000
hectares of forests. In 2010, about 19,000 hectare forests were affected by Fire in Himachal Pradesh.
Sikkim, Uttarakhand and Himachal Pradesh are among the most forest fire affected States of India. As per
the India State of Forest Report, 2015, in the year 2015, a total of 15,937 forest fires were reported across
the country. The highest number of fires were reported in Mizoram (2,468), followed by Assam (1,656) and

4
Odisha (1,467). As compared to fires reported in 2014, a decline of 3,117 in the number of fires incidents
was reported in 2015. However, in the year 2016, the scale and extent of forest fires in India escalated and
became really alarming, as is evident from the following comparative figures of forest fire spots detected in
the years 2015 and 2016, provided by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change:
Forest Fire spots detected in the year 2015 & 2016
State/UT 2015 2016
Andaman & Nicobar Islands 1 24
Andhra Pradesh 1075 1699
Arunachal Pradesh 358 293
Assam 1656 1766
Bihar 45 321
Chandigarh 0 0
Chhattisgarh 1272 2808
Dadra & Nagar Haveli 0 0
Daman & Diu 0 0
Delhi 0 2
Goa 0 10
Gujarat 117 262
Haryana 6 43
Himachal Pradesh 22 199
Jammu & Kashmir 13 217
Jharkhand 457 740
Karnataka 295 830
Kerala 91 165
Lakshadweep 0 0
Madhya Pradesh 294 2675
Maharashtra 721 1874
Manipur 1286 1105
Meghalaya 1373 966
Mizoram 2468 1318

5
Nagaland 722 678
Odisha 1467 2763
Puducherry 0 0
Punjab 7 45
Rajasthan 90 66
Sikkim 3 0
Tamil Nadu 95 113
Telengana 1110 1154
Tripura 476 346
Uttar Pradesh 130 691
Uttarakhand 207 1501
West Bengal 138 142
TOTAL 15937 24817
Types of forest fire:
13. As per the background note furnished by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
there are following three types of forest fire:-
(i) Ground Fires: Fires that burn organic material in the soil are called ground fires. This is a
slower burning fire, usually under litter or under vegetation. They burn by glowing combustion.
(ii) Surface Fire: A forest fire may primarily burn dry leaves, broken twigs and branches and
other materials on the ground and engulfed by the spreading flames. These fires spread quickly.
This type of fire is very common in Uttarakhand forests.
(iii) Crown Fire: Crown Fires burn with huge flames and has intense heat and power. They burn
from tree top to tree top and spread very quickly with the wind and heat. It is even worse, if
they are exposed to steep slopes. Crown fires are very rare in India.
Causes of Forest Fire:-
14. The Ministry in their background note informed the Committee that the causes of Forest fires can
broadly be divided as under:
(i) Natural causes: Many forest fires start from natural causes such as lightning which set trees
on fire. However, rain extinguishes such fires without causing much damage. High atmospheric
temperatures and dryness (low humidity) offer favorable circumstance for a fire to start.
State/UT 2015 2016

6
(ii) Man made causes:  Fire is caused when a source of fire like naked flame, cigarette or bidi,
electric spark or any source of ignition comes into contact with inflammable material. The
ignition sources may be intentional or due to negligence.
15. During the study visit of the Committee, the State Governments of Uttarakhand, J&K and Himachal
Pradesh also informed the Committee about the state-specific causes of forest fires in those States. The
Govt. of Utrtarkhand inter-alia informed the Committee that Uttarakhand is a forest and biodiversity rich
Himalayan State with 45.32% of its geographical area under forest cover. It is the only north Indian State to
have more than 33% of area under forest cover. On including the alpine pastures and permanently snowbound
areas most of which are recorded as forests, the total area recorded as forests is as high as 71.05%. The
State witnessed widespread forest fires that year and till 31st May, 2016, a total of 2060 forest fire incident
had been reported across the State, affecting an area of 4412.45 ha. In terms of percentage, the fire affected
area amounted to about 0.1% of the Uttarakhand forests. Of the 13 districts, the most affected districts
were Pauri-Garhwal, Nainital, Almora, Chamoli, Tehri and Dehradun. Besides, there was a loss of 7 human
lives and 7 domestic animals and 31 human injuries due to forest fires in the State.
16. It was also informed that the main reasons behind recent Forest Fires in Uttarakhand State were as
under:
(i) Lack of Moisture in the Forests: While most parts of the State receive nearly 1500 mm of
annual precipitation, it is mostly concentrated over the three monsoon months leaving a very
long period of nearly nine months of scanty precipitation. It is this long dry spell and the
deciduous nature of the forests, which make them vulnerable to forest fires. The rains/snow in
winter months is thus crucial in maintaining moisture levels on the forest floor which helps in
preventing forest fires from becoming large conflagrations. The winter and spring of 2015-16
was practically devoid of precipitation which made the forest floor biomass too dry and extremely
vulnerable to fires. Even the monsoon during the year 2015 was below normal further leading
to low moisture in forest floor.
(ii) The hills of Uttarakhand are dotted with villages more so in the Middle Himalayan zone between
1000 and 2000m with high dependence on forests for their basic needs. This happens to be the
sub-tropical region which is the driest and often has large expanses of Chir Pine forests
(constitutes around 26% of total forests of Uttarakhand). As a traditional annual practice,
people living in these villages have been burning the forest floor near their villages and pasture
lands to get rid of the dry leaf litter particularly the slippery Chir Pine needles, and to ensure
fresh grass growth for their livestock. In a normal year, sufficient ground moisture and
intermittent showers through the winter and spring ensure that such fires usually do not go out
of control but in the current year, many of these fires went out of control.
Fires also sometimes escape from agricultural fields where burning of agricultural biomass
residue is a common practice not only in Uttarakhand but the entire country. Near urban and
semi-urban centres, burning of garbage which is often dumped close to forest areas is a
regular practice and sometimes fires spread into forests from such dumps which keep
smouldering for hours, often days.

7
(iii) The hilly mountainous terrain of Uttarakhand makes it very difficult to control fires. Reaching
the site of forest fires which are often away from road-head is difficult. Many a times, there
are no foot tracks/bridle paths to reach such sites.
(iv) While with the help of satellite based technology, detection of fires is now reasonably fast but
response time to reach the site is still not as quick as it should be. Most of the forest ranges
have usually one vehicle to move the fire fighting crew to the site of fires but in peak fire
season, there are often simultaneous multiple fires in each range making it necessary to have
multiple vehicles for movement of fire-fighting crews. There are usually 5-10 crew stations in
a forest range.
17. The Jammu and Kashmir Forest Department informed the Committee that the recorded forest area of
the State is 20,230 km. About 59% of the geographical area of the State is under permanent snow cover,
glaciers & cold desert and unable to support tree growth. The State has 3 distinct geographical regions
(i) Jammu, (ii) Kashmir and (iii) Ladakh. Forests of J&K exhibit remarkable diversity ranging from sub-
tropical to temperate to alpine because of the distinctive geo-climatic conditions prevalent in the State. The
entire Kashmir Valley experiences temperate climate and has mostly Himalayan temperate Forests. In Jammu
region, about 43.00 sq km (approximately 35% of total forest area) falls under the types: sub-tropical
deciduous, Chir pine Forests, and whereas remaining about 50% forests area experiences temperate and
alpine climatic conditions supporting Himalayan dry temperate, Himalayan Moist temperate and Alpine Forests.
Ladakh region experiences cold desert conditions.
18. It was also informed that in the State, and Jammu region in particular, the main causes of Forest-
Fires can be broadly classified under following 3 categories:
(a) Through Human Interference:
About 90% of fires are caused by local people intentionally with following objectives:-
1. To clean the forest floor to get good growth of grasses for Fodder/grazing in the following
season
2. Burning of the undergrowth and grass to collect MFP.
3. To clear undergrowth with the ultimate aim of cultivating/encroaching the forest area.
4. Charring the stumps to destroy evidence of illicit felling.
5. Scaring away wild animals from near villages.
(b) Un-Intentional:
These fires are caused due to carelessness for example:
1. Un-extinguished camp fires of trekkers, nomadic graziers and labourers/tourists.
2. Sparks from transmission lines and powers transformers.
3. Careless throwing of torchwood, un-extinguished cigarettes, matchsticks.
4. Burning of agricultural fields adjacent to forests.
5. Accidental spread of fire in the forest during control burning due to negligence of staff.

8
(c) Natural:
Natural fires are extremely rare. They may occur due to:-
1. Lightning.
2. Rolling stones.
3. Rubbing of branches.
19. As regards area affected and number of incidents of forest fires in Jammu region, the Committee was
informed that about 5,000 sq km of sub-tropical Forest area of Jammu region experiences severe summer
conditions starting from the month of April and lasts upto June end. The average temperature during summer
months ranges between 39° C to 45° C. The average annual rainfall is 120-140 cm received mostly during
monsoon season. The sub-tropical forests of Jammu region are highly vulnerable to forest fires and fire
season starts from the month of March and lasts upto June end. The temperate forests of Jammu region and
forests in valley face the problem of forest fires during autumn season in the month of October and November
every year. During current summer season, so far 242 incidents of forest fires have occurred in different
parts affecting 502 ha. area in the sub-tropical forests of Jammu region. Only few stray incidents have been
reported from the temperate forests of Kashmir valley.
20. Apart from this, about 180 ha. of forests, in the Trikuta Hills of Shri Mata Vaishno Devi Shrine falling
in Reasi District have been affected by recent fire-incidents. These forests are under the control of Shri
Mata Vaishno Devi Shrine Board. The manpower deployed by the Shrine Board and assisted by the Forest
staff of Reasi Forest Division, Police, and IAF battled for couple of days to control the Wild Fires in Trikuta
Hill-Forests. Mostly these were ground fires and no major damage was caused to forest crop.
21. At Shimla, the Himachal Pradesh Forest Department informed the Committee that the Geographical
area of Himachal Pradesh is 55,673 sq km2 out of which an area of 37,033 sq km2 is classified as forest
which is about 66% of the geographical area of the State. The forests of Himachal Pradesh comprise of
Chir, Deodar, Kail, Fir, Spruce, Oak, Khair, Saal, Bamboo and broad leaved species. Out of above species,
forest area having Chir is highly prone to forest fires especially during summer season in view of shedding
of highly inflammable chir needles. The area of chir forests in Himachal Pradesh is 1258.85 sq km, which
is about 3.4% of the total forest area of the State.
22. The Committee was informed that forest fires are caused by natural as well as man-made factors/
reasons, as under:-
(a) Natural causes- Many forest fires start from natural sources such as lightning. High atmospheric
temperature and dryness (low humidity) offer favorable circumstances for a fire to start in the
forest. Friction between quartize stones also sometimes cause forest fires.
(b) Accidental causes -  Forest fire is also cau sed when a source of fire like cigarette or beedi,
electric spark or any source of ignition comes into contact with inflammable material in the
forest. The other accidental causes due to activities of human beings are graziers and gatherers
of various forest products leaving burning wood in the forest, the use of fire by villagers to
ward off wild animals, fires lit intentionally by people living around forests for recreation or

9
as cultural activity etc. Pine needle is a major cause of forest fires in Himachal Pradesh
(H.P .).
(c) Incendiarism causes- Forests are sometimes are also burnt to conceal illicit felling and illicit
resin tapping. Encroachers and poachers also cause forest fires.
Effects of Forest Fires
23. As regards effects of forest fires, the Committee was informed by the Forest Department of Jammu
& Kashmir that long term assessment of the vulnerable forest areas which get affected by Forest-fires, year
after year, reveals that forest-fires have been causing following adverse affects on the health of Forest-
ecosystem:
(i) Damage to vegetation cover and loss of Natural Regeneration:
Shivalik Forests are characterized by good natural regeneration capacity, provided due to adequate
root-stock the biotic interference is regulated. Chir-pine and broadleaved forests in Jammu
region have very good natural regeneration status. However, forest fires lead to the burning of
young seedlings both in closed planted up areas as well as in open (non-closed) chir forests
causing to a serious problem of absence of young recruits on forest floor.
(ii) Damage to Mature Chir-Pine Trees:
The repeated fires, weaken the boles of trees which get fallen during winds. Many chir-pine
forests in Jammu region suffer from heavy wind fall of mature trees.
Due to the incidences of recurring Forest fires coupled with unregulated grazing about half of
Chir-pine forests have either very poor or no regeneration. Absence of young recruits and
damage to mature crop pose real challenger towards the health of chir-pine forests. About
50% of the chir pine forests have slipped into degraded category.
(iii) Loss of Wildlife Habitat:
Burning of Forest floors and vegetation in the understory degrade the habitat of Wild animals.
Many herbivore and birds species lose their homes. Change in behavior of wild animals lead to
enhanced incidence of “Man-animal” conflict in such forests. Jammu Shivalik region of late is
facing serious problems due to Man-Animal conflict and damage to crops by Wild animals.
(iv) Change in Micro-climate:
The affected areas face problems of enhanced temperature, loss of water-resources and bad
ambience around habitations. The overall living conditions in and around such affected areas
deteriorate in quality and smoky conditions enhance the respiratory diseases amongst locals
and contribute to high atmospheric pollution.
(v) Loss of Biodiversity and Invasion of Weeds:
It is a major after-affect seen in the sub tropical forests of Jammu region. Due to burning of
flora, there is severe loss of biodiversity in such areas. The burnt forest areas, in the ensuing

10
months get profusely invaded by weeds like Lantana (panchphoolie), Parthenium, Agereatum
and Cassiatora etc. The invasion by weeds badly impairs the natural regeneration. The thick
growth of weeds like lantana has been one of the main causes of Forest fires in these Forests.
(vi) Adverse Effect on the Livelihood of Local People:
Fires damage some important None-Timber Forest Products (NTFPs) species on which local
people depend traditionally for their livelihood. Some Examples are as under:
Babian (Euloliopsis) grass: Collected by local people for making ropes and which are sold by
them for earning livelihoods;
Malungad (Bauhinia): leaves collected for making plates and cups to be used in wedding and
other functions in rural areas.
Wild-Khajur (Palm): leaves collected by local communities to make brooms and other
households items are source of their livelihoods.
Damage to these plants due to Forest-fires directly affects the livelihood of local people.
(vii) Loss of Carbon Sink and Addition of GHGs:
Thick smoke generated by Forest-fires, add high concentration of GHGs into atmosphere,
adding to the problem of Global Warming and Climate Change. Burning of vegetation seriously
reduces the carbon sink resource. It is pertinent to mention here that India has international
commitment of enhancing the carbon sink 2.5-3 billion tons of CO
2 equivalent by 2030.
Forest fires pose a serious challenge towards this commitment.
24. It was also informed that in Jammu & Kashmir, in most of the cases, the incidences have been of
ground fire type, caused due to the burning of dry leaves/twigs, fallen wooden logs, grasses and brushwood
in the understory of Chir-pine and broadleaved mixed forests. In chir-pine forests, there has been superficial
burning of dry bark of mature chir-pine trees. However, there has been no reports of damage to the crown
canopy of the forests.
25. Apprising the Committee of the adverse effects of the forest fire, the Forest Department of Himachal
Pradesh said that forest fires retard plant growth and also affect the fauna, where it occurs. It downgrades
the commercial value of timber. It exposes the soil through burning of ground flora which sometimes cause
soil erosion. The burning of forests releases trace gases and aerosol particles which are causative factors of
climate change.
Strategies of the State Governments to deal with the Forest Fires
26. During the meeting with the State Governments of Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal
Pradesh, the Committee desired to know about the preventive measures, mitigation measures and action
plan for fighting forest fires by the respective State Governments. Apprising the Committee of the strategies
adopted by them, the Government of Uttarakhand informed the Committee as under:
27. The directions issued by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change on forest fire dated

11
16.11.2005 recognized following main methods of preventions and control of forest fire, which have been
included in their template of Contingency Plan for Forest Fires-
(a) Constructions of watch towers for detection of forest fires.
(b) Deployment of fire watchers.
(c) Creation and Maintenances of fire lines.
(d) Involvement of local communities.
(e) Beating of fire with bushes and use of water to douse the fire.
(f) Use of Remote Sensing technology and Moderate Resolution Imagine Spectro-radiometer
(MODIS) satellite data for detection of active forest fires.
28. The Committee was informed that the Government of Uttarakhand strictly adhered to, and followed
the template given by MoEF&CC, Government of India. Based on Ministry’s directions and State’s own
past experiences, the Forest Department of Uttarakhand state had been practicing certain strategies to
manage and control forest fires. Moreover various innovative and proactive steps were also undertaken for
this particular year’s fire season.
A.  Pre-Fire Season Preparations:
29. Based on the above and past experience, the State forest department carried out the following operations
in the pre-fire season:
(i) Rotational Burning/Controlled Burning of Forest Floor Litter -  During winter season, as
per the prescription of the Working Plans/Management Plans, rotational burning of 152513 ha.
and controlled burning of 85,341 ha. Forest areas was carried out to reduce the litter load.
(ii) Clearing of Fire - Lines In the Forests-During the winter season, fires lines had been cleared
as per the Management Plans/Working Plans.
(iii) Approval of District Fire Management Plan -  Each district prepared a comprehensive fire
management plan that has to be approved by a district level committee, headed by District
Magistrate well before the commencement of fires season (15th Feb to 15th June).
(iv) Awareness Generation Programmes -  Training/Workshop, Rallies, Street plays, meetings
of Village/Block/District Level Fire Protection Committees, Distribution of publicity material
viz. pamphlets, hand bills and had been taken up for awareness generation through banners,
street plays, rallies, puppet shows, pad-yatras, fire-protection week, sensitization through local
TV channels, use of multimedia etc. was taken up. A 30 second video was broadcasted across
local television channels to enhance sensitization.
(v) Master Control Room (MCR) - A Master Control Room (MCR) is a nodal forest fire
information centre, and is generally located in each Forest Division Headquarter. The MCR are
provided with Wireless Communication Network, Fire Fighting equipments, and serves as the
base station for a fire fighting crew. The MCR is equipped with forest fire danger rating

12
system to forecast the chances of forest fire in any area and put more attention where there are
more chances of fire. The MCR is generally operated by a Ranger/Deputy Ranger, and he is
assisted by a team of Foresters, Forest Guards and a few Fire Watchers. The MCR
communicates with all the other Range Control Rooms and the Headquarters, and keeps a
stock of the situation. As soon as any incident of fire is detected, the MCR relays the information
to the concerned Range Office. The Range Office in turn relays the message to the fire fighting
crew located nearest to the area of incident, which moves to the area to combats fire. 40 such
MCRs were activated across the State.
(vi) Crew Stations -  A Crew Station is a temporary post often created within the forest. Each
Crew Station has a deployment of 4-5 Fire Watchers who reside at the post. Their lodging and
food is ensured at the Crew Station. The Crew Stations are equipped with fire fighting tools
and equipments and wireless communication network. The Crew Station is operated by a
Forest Guard, who instructs and mobilize the Crew as and when required. This year, 1166
such Crew Stations had been established and equipped with adequate resources.
(vii) Watch Towers - The watch tower serves as a view point that offers a large section of forest
to be monitored for various activities. During fire season, the Fire Watchers are deployed on
the watch towers to report any incident of fire of smoke from the forest. Upon the receipt of
such report, the information is passed on to the Range Office and MCR which in turn directs
the nearest Fire Fighting Crew to mobilize manpower and resources to the site of fire to
combat it. In case more manpower or resources are needed, the same is informed and ensured.
A total of 94 towers had been functional before the onset of the fire season this year.
(viii) MCR which in turn directs the nearest Fire Fighting Crew to mobilize manpower and resources
to the site of fire to combat it. In case more manpower or resources are needed, the same is
informed and ensured. A total of 94 towers had been functional before the onset of the fire
season this year.
(ix) Wireless Communication Network- The Divisional Headquarter, MCRs, Range Offices,
crew stations and field staff are equipped with wireless communication devices for effective
real time communication. A total of 506 base sets, 199 mobile sets, 1631 hand-sets and 35
repeater stations had been operative before the onset of forest fire season this year.
(x) Satellite Based Information System-  Capacities were developed and put in place by the
Information Technology & Geo informatics Centre (ITGC) of Uttarakhand Forest Department
(UKFD) to receive, analyse, and derive conclusions from satellite data. A map of fire most
sensitive areas were developed and circulated. With the help of Forest Survey of India (FSI),
Dehradun pre fire alerts were also provided to respective divisions. Capacities were also
developed for Daily near Real-Time Day & Night TERRA/AQUA MODIS and SNPP VIIRS
based monitoring of active forest fire points/threats with the help of Uttarakhand BHUVAN
portal that is developed in collaboration with National Remote Sensing Centre (NRSC),
Hyderabad. Recently on step ahead NRSC has initiated a refine resolution for fire monitoring
using, 750m and 375m for “Suomi National Pollar-Orbiting Partnership (SNPP), Visible Infrared.

13
Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS)” satellite data, over Uttarakhand Forest Bhuvan Portal.
Daily fire alerts received from national Aeronautics Space Administration, Fire Information for
Resource Management System (NASA FIRMS) and FSI through email were acquired and
capacities were developed to analyse such data and predict forest fire vulnerable areas.
Communication channels were developed to forward such findings to forest officials through
Bulk SMS, Email and departmental website, so that the necessary management actions could
be ensured timely. For this year in particular social media platforms such as what’s App and
Facebook were also used extensively for dissemination of information and prompt response.
This was in addition to the information available through traditional means.
(xi) Efficient Fire Fighting Tools- Forest Research Institute had designed and developed efficient
fire fighting tools. Such tools were procured by the UKFD and distributed to the Divisions.
Fire-Rakes, brush hooks, Macleod, Pulaski, sabbal, water bottles, torches, helmet, dresses,
wireless sets, first-aid boxes, hygrometers, thermometers, were made available with the fire-
fighting personnel.
B. Forest Fire Management During Fire Season:
(i) Detection of Fire Incidence:  Detection of fire incidents is being done through information
gathered from local sources, Fire Watchers, Watch Towers, patrolling teams, dedicated Whats-
App Number (7455054828), dial 108 service, Van Mitra Sewa (9208008000), Uttarakhand
Forest BHUV AN portal, SNPP VIISRS and MODIS based satellite data alerts, and other available
sources. Pre-fire alerts and warnings are issued on a weekly basis after analysis of satellite
data by the ITGC and the same is forwarded to the field officers by emails. The same is also
sent by WhatsApp messenger, and prominently displayed on the departmental website
www.forest.uk.gov.in.
Daily post fire alerts received from National Remote Sensing Center (NRSC) and Forest Survey
of India (FSI) through email as well as through SMS. Forest Department is also getting daily
post fire alerts directly from National Aeronautics Space Administration, Fire Information for
Resource Management System (NASA FIRMS) through email, that distributes near real-time
active dire data within 3 hours of satellite (TERA and AQUA) overpass from Moderate-resolution
Imaging Spectro-radiometer (MODIS). MODIS is a sensor of American Satellites which passes
over Uttarakhand at 10:30 AM approximately in the Morning and 12:30 PM noon daily. ITGC,
established at UKFD HQ, Dehradun, downloads these fire incidences and overlaid on the
administrative boundaries to indentify the near exact location where the fire incident has taken
place which is sent to concern Forest Division through email and WhatsApp messenger. Maps
and tables are also being uploaded over departmental website for public notification. Extended
weather forecast is also provided to respective officer.
(ii) Acton by the Local Crew Station/Mobile Team: Upon receipt of any information related to
fire, near-most fire crew/mobile team is alerted and mobilized to the reported area. It also
seeks assistance of local villagers if available, and ensures efforts to suppress fire with help of
tools, equipments and locally available resources. After putting off the fire, a preliminary report
is forwarded by the local crew station to the Divisional MCR.

14
(iii) Continuations of Awareness Campaign-  Banners, posters, handbills, stickers are being
displayed or distributed at all levels. Puppet shows, Street rallies, Pad-yatras,Oath ceremonies/
lectures in schools, signature campaigns etc. are being organized at local levels. Such campaign
is an ongoing process and will continue till the end of fire season. A 30 second video clip is
being shown on local television channels appealing people to prevent forest fire.
C. Recent Actions Taken:
(i) The Governor of Uttarakhand and the Hon’ble Chief Minister, Uttarakhand monitored the forest
fire issue regularly and issued instructions for prevention and control of forest fires and also
monitored the actions taken by the departments regularly.
(ii) Hon’ble Forest Minister, Additional Chief Secretary and the Principal Chief Conservator of
Forests held Video Conference with all DMs, DFOs and other officers to review the situation.
(iii) During the peak fire period, Chief Secretary and Additional Chief Secretary briefed the press
everyday regarding status of forest fires.
(iv) The incidents of fire had suddenly seen a spurt on 27th and 28th April, 2016. Taking immediate
action, decisions were taken at the highest level and necessary directions were forwarded to
the DMs, SPs, DFOs and other officers of the State.
(v) The Forest Department increased the numbers of Fire Watchers on ground from about 3000 to
over 6000 (almost doubled). These were deployed mainly in hilly regions and were used for
fire suppression activities.
(vi) One team of SDRF and 3 teams of NDRF were deployed in Nainital, Almora, Gauchar (Chamoli)
and Pauri respectively for helping the departmental Crews in fire suppression activities.
(vii) 500 employees from fire fighting department were engaged for forest fire protection in urban
and sub-urban areas.
(viii) In each district, District magistrates deployed 100-150 PRD (Prantiya Raksha Dal) Jawans for
protection of revenue (civil) forests.
(ix) Three MI-17 helicopters with Bambi Buckets of 4000 to 5000 litres capacity from the Ministry
of Defence were deployed for controlling forest fires in Nainital and Pauri districts.
(x) Water tankers were engaged for supplying water to the water holes in the Protected Areas like
Rajaji National Park, Corbett National Park, Sanctuaries and other wildlife rich areas. Instructions
were given to all Protected Areas to ensure water availability in the water holes, water tankers
be employed, if necessary.
(xi) Four Wildlife Rescue Rapid Response Squads were deployed at Rajaji National Park, Corbett
Tiger Reserve, Nainital Zoo and Nandhaur Wildlife Sanctuary. These squads are equipped with
a van with wireless connectivity, a veterinary doctor, and assistant, two forest frontline staff,
tranquilizing guns and medicines, nets, spotlights and other necessary equipment and are well
trained to deal with wildlife rescue operations. Their mobile numbers were aptly popularized
among the public.

15
(xii) In Rudraprayag, army helped forest department in dousing forest fires.
(xiii) All the Panchayats/Van Panchayat, Mahila Mangal Dals, Self Help Groups and Youth Mangal
Dals, Vanagni-Prahari and Gram-Prahari were mobilized to control the forest fires in their
respective areas.
(xiv) All the District Magistrates and Superintendents of Police engaged available police jawans,
Home Guards, PRD Jawans, Fire Service Personnel, PWD Gangs and Eco Task Force staff
(wherever available) to combat forest fires.
(xv) Every District established a District Forest Fire Control Room for monitoring and DMs were
monitoring forest fire cases on daily basis.
(xvi) The District Magistrates appointed Sector Magistrates at Nyaya Panchayat level involving
officers from different line departments. They also provided vehicles to the forest department
for swift mobilization of crew teams.
(xvii) Extended weather forecast for next 15 days was also uploaded on department’s website.
(xviii) State Emergency Operation centre number- 9557444486/0135-2710334 was functional at
Dehradun
(xix) The State Government released funds to the extent of `21.75 Crores for the control of forest
fires.
(xx) State Government remained in touch with the PM Office, Cabinet Secretariat, Ministry of
Defence and MoEFCC, Government of India, who all have assured and rendering whatever
help as sought by the State Government.
(xxi) The Director-General of Forests, MoEF&CC, Government of India held a meeting of State
Forest Officers on 29th April, 2016 on forest fires. He expressed satisfaction on the actions
being taken by the Forest Department for preventing and controlling forest fires. He also
assured that all possible central assistance shall be provided to the state.
(xxii) A Forest Fire Control Centre was made operational at the Forest Department Headquarters at
Dehradun.
30. As regards the future strategy for preventing forest fires, the Committee was informed as under:
(i) Timely availability of funds is the prime requirement of forest fire management. Funds are
required between October and December for pre-fire season preparations and between February
and June for combating forest fires.
(ii) The field staff, Fire Watchers and all the units on the ground will be kept fully equipped and on
high alert throughout the fire season.
(iii) A wareness programmes will be carried out by all possible media with greater intensity.
(iv) The sudden rise in the number of Forest Fires this year is one of the manifestations of the
climate change. To combat it in the long term, the department proposes to provide for large

16
soil and water conservation initiatives which will replenish the ground water and increase soil
moisture content.
(v) Plantation activities will be undertaken in the impacted forest areas as per requirement.
(vi) The department also proposes to make Biological Check Dams using Pine Needles for moisture
conservation which will also reduce the biological fuel load in the Pine Forests. A project is
being formulated and will be sent to Government of India for sanction of funds.
(vii) A proposal has already been sent to Government of India, MoEF&CC for removal of trees for
clearing fire-lines above 1000 meters and to reduce the biological fuel load in the Pine forests
including a proposal for thinning in reserve forests areas.
(viii) Post fire assessment of the burnt forest areas is proposed to be done with the help of NRSC
and FSI.
31. The Government of Jammu & Kashmir informed the Committee as under:
Measures adopted by Forest Department to Control the Situation:
(a) Clearing of Forest Floors & maintenance of Fire-lines:
Every year, in vulnerable forest areas, the forest floors are cleared of dry leaves, twigs and
weeds to reduce the quantum of inflammable material. During current year about 551 ha. of
forest floors were cleared in different division of Jammu region employing local people on
Daily-wage basis. Similarly 142 kms old forest fire lines have been maintained by way of bush
clearances, removal of debris etc. V ery few Fire lines of standard specifications have been
created in the forests of Jammu region. Mostly the forest roads, Nallahs, bridle paths and other
such natural features act as Fire lines which are cleared of litter as per availability of budget.
During current year, an initiative has been taken for creating permanent Fire lines in vulnerable
forests. As a modest beginning, 94 km of 30 feet broad Fire lines were created in Jammu,
Udhampur, Billawar, Nowshera, Kathua, Poonch, Ramnagar and Reasi Divisions-During
February/March this year and have proved quite effective.
(b) Setting up of control Rooms:
From April to June, forest control rooms were established at strategic locations which work
round the clock. Each control room is manned by field staff of Territorial Forest Department
assisted by Forest Protection Force personnel and forest-watchers who are the local people
engaged during fire season to assist the field staff. Each Control Room has 10-15 persons
working in 3 shifts of 8 hours each. They are provided with fire fighting equipments and
vehicles wherever available as per availability of resources. The manpower from nearest control
room reaches the place of incidence first and if required additional manpower is deployed from
adjoining control rooms.
During current fire season, 145 control rooms were working in different divisions of Jammu
regions, wherein 1215 officials of Forest Department, 162 FPF officials and 572 fire watchers
engaged on part time basis were working round the clock.

17
(c) Extension Activities to get Co-operation of Local People:
Awareness generation camps are organized at various locations to solicit assistance and co-
operation of local people and Gram Panchayats. Pamphlets are also displayed at prominent
places to create awareness amongst public to deal with the situation.
Methodology adopted to control the fires:
32. Department mostly relies on traditional methods of “Control Burning, Counter Fires and Fire beating”
using brooms of local material. Some improvised tools and equipments have also been provided to field
staff. In areas connected with roads, services of fire services are also requisitioned but such areas constitute
less than 5% of the total affected areas. In forest areas located along LoC in Poonch and Rajouri districts,
army personnel also play an important role in extinguishing the fires. During current season an active
support and assistance by Jawans and officers of Indian Army has been rendered in Menhdar and Nowshera
border belts.
Major Constraints
33. The Committee was also informed that the Department was facing the following major constraints in
ensuring effective control of Forest fires:-
1. Inadequate infrastructure:
¾ Mobility of staff to fire affected areas alongwith tools and equipments and other logistics
is a major constraint. In almost all territorial divisions, staff do not have reliable transport
facility to reach the affected areas within shortest possible time.
¾ Hardly 5% of field staff have residential quarters in their jurisdictional areas and thus
field staff face problems of comfortable stay after day’s hectic work.
¾ Field Staff do not have fire resistant dresses, head gears, and other accessories to deal
with the situation affectively and professionally.
2. Training and Capacity Building:
The field staff is not adequately trained and exposed to scientific and modern practices of Fire
control. They have been using the traditional methods of “Fire-beating” using local tools/
equipments. It reduces the efficiency and effectiveness of fire fighting operations.
3. Extent of Fire-Prone Areas and Activities undertaken under Fire Management Plan:
About 50000 Ha. Forests are highly vulnerable to forest fires and need comprehensive Forest
Fire management practices in the form of regular disposal of combustible litter, maintenance
and creation of fire lines, creation and maintenance of water points, enhanced infrastructure
and logistic support. Within given resources, they had been able to treat only 700 to 800 Ha. of
vulnerable forests annually against forest fire hazards.
The annual availability budget for forest fire management works is as under:
¾ From normal State plan : ` 8.00 Lacs.

18
¾ From CAMPA budget : ` 55-60 Lacs
¾ From IFM-(CSS) : ` 94.00 Lacs. became available during 2015-16 and
` 56.00 Lacs during 2013-14.
For current year i.e. 2016-17, a comprehensive works programme under IFM to the tune of
` 1278.00 Lacs involving both preventing and control measures has been submitted.
34. The representative of Mata Vaishno Devi Shrine Board also informed the Committee about the following
steps taken for greening of forest area and fire prevention measures:-
(i) Annual Greening Plan is prepared and implemented in the Board area for management of forest.
The plan for 2016-17 is of ` 1.75 crore covering various aspects of Forest management such
as Plantation, Protection work, Fire prevention measures, Lantana and weed clearance etc.
(ii) A High Tech Nursery has been set up by the Board, with the investment of ` 2.0 Crore. The
Nursery has a capacity to produce 4.0 lakhs saplings and seedling every year.
(iii) Since 2006 more than 20 lakhs plants have been planted in the Shrine area. During current year
there is a target to plant around 2.5 lakhs plants. The survival rate of the plants is more than
70% which is being achieved by scientific management and protection measures.
(iv) All shrine area has been fenced with Chain link fencing to protect it from encroachment and
unwanted intrusion. Around 48 km of fencing has been erected on boundary of Shrine Board’s
land.
(v) Every year fire lines are created and fire watchers are deployed to contain the forest fire in the
Shrine area.
(vi) W ith efforts of the Board the greening has increased substantially in the Shrine area.
35. The representatives of Government of Himachal Pradesh informed the Committee as under:
Strategy for Fire Prevention and Control Management in H.P.: Forest fire has been categorized
as disaster under Disaster Management Act, 2005. The National Policy on Disaster Management,
2009 prescribes Disaster Management Cycle or Contigium in managing any disaster. The steps in this
regard are as under:-
Prevention: It is important to prevent Forest fire accidents and if they occur, then to check it
instantaneously from spreading. The essence of forest fire prevention is in breaking the fire triangle
composed of furl, air and ignition source. The HP Forest Department has identified forest fire sensitive
beats and the main thrust was in the Fire sensitive areas of Dharamsala, Mandi, Bilaspur Nahan and
part of Chamba (Dalhousie Forest Division) Forest Circles due to appreciable areas of Chir Forests in
these circles. Routine measures as prescribed in Working plans like clearing of the Fires Lines,
control burning, etc. are also taken before the fire season starts in order to minimize the inflammable
material, which helps in prevention of forests fires.
Mitigation: Chir pine needles are inflammable causing forest fires in H.P. These needles can be used
in preparation of fire bricks due to their high calorific value and can be used in kilns of various

19
industries. Although start has been made in some divisions in the State but efforts are being made to
finalize the programme for collection of the pine needles where the local people through their JFMCs
will be involved to collect the needles which can then be sold to various industries etc. to be used as
a fuel. This will minimize the needle load in the forests and reduce the risk, chances and intensity of
the Forest Fire.
36. The Committee was also informed that the following preparatory steps are taken before the initiation
of fire season every year.
(i) Fire watchers and forest workers are deployed during fire season which starts from 15th April
to 15 June or till the onset of monsoons every year exclusively for the purpose of forest fire
management.
(ii) The Fire Alert Messaging System (FAMS) through the Satellite is in place in H.P. for early
detection of forest fire incidences. On detection by the satellite, messages are sent to Forest
Guard level to become active.
(iii) Daily Fire reporting of all forest fires has been adopted for better management strategy in
future.
(iv) Forest Fire control rooms are set up in division and circle headquarters for proper monitoring
of Forest Fire Management system.
(v) Forest staff is in continuous liaison with PRI & JFMC of the area for help and assistance, if
any required.
(vi) Forest field staff is on duty 24X7 during this period and no leave is sanctioned.
(vii) Before the start of fire season, Gram Sabha meetings are attended by the Forest Guards and
Deputy Rangers every year in the month of March and April to sensitize people and seek their
help in forest fire control and management.
(viii) A ward has been kept from this year to be given to Panchayat and JFMC who does not allow
forest fire to occur in their areas.
(ix) DFO/CFs also tour the areas for better action where required.
(x) Half monthly video conference is taken by Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (HoFF) for
getting insight into position of the field and if need be devising better strategy.
37. The Committee was also informed that if efforts made in preventing forest fire do not succeed and
fire actually occurs then the following response mechanism in place is put in action:-
(i) The Forest Watchers and Forest Workers try to extinguish fire.
(ii) Where they do not succeed gang of forest field staff take up position and with the assistance
of local people help in extinguishing the fire.
(iii) In severe cases help of fire brigade is taken.

20
Evacuation, Rescue and Relief: This is also part of the cycle but, such an eventuality has not arisen
in H.P. However, in case of loss of life or property assistance is given as per H.P. Relief Manual
through Revenue Department.
Rehabilitation: Such an eventuality has also not arisen in H.P. But if it arises it will be as per norms
for rehabilitation as per the Relief Manual.
Remedial Measures: The loss and area affected by forest fires are inspected and remedial measures
like afforestation and Patch sowing are taken during the rainy season to make the loss good.
38. Himachal Pradesh Forest Department also informed the Committee that forest fires in H.P. follow 3-
4 year cycle. This year was part of this cycle but the following effective steps helped in improved management
of forest fires in the State with the result that there was no loss of life or property during 2016.
(a) Introduction of Mobile gangs of field staff which continuously moves around in vehicles.
(b) Satellite based SMS system of giving fire alerts to field staff right upto Forest Guard.
(c) Communication network with linkage of officers and staff through mobiles for effective strategic
management.
(d) Monitoring of Forest Fire Management by CFs/DFOs through control rooms.
(e) Video-conferencing with field DFs/DFOs on half monthly basis by Principal Chief Conservator
of Forests.
ROLE OF OTHER CENTRAL AGENCIES
39. During the meeting of the Committee held at Mussoorie on the 7th June 2016, the Committee desired
to know about the role of Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE) in conducting
research in the field of forest fires. The Committee also desired to know the steps taken by ICFRE to make
Uttarakhand State Forest Department aware of the affects of El- Nino and its relationship with the wide
spread forest fires. The Committee also desired to know about the role of the other central agencies/
institutes conducting research in the field of forest fire.
40. In response, the Director General, ICFRE informed the Committee that El-Nino had been the bane in
India as it a main reason for the unusually warm and dryer winter season. He also stated that El-Nino might
be playing role in wide spread forest fire in Uttarakhand and other region of the country. Further, in their
background note, the Forest Research Institute, ICFRE, informed the Committee as under:-
41. The importance of taking up systematic research in the field of forest fire protection was realized as
early as in 1956 when the first expert committee of FRI headed by Prof. Champion, made a very specific
recommendations regarding the need to study and monitor forest fire in the country. Accordingly, a scheme
was formulated in 1959, but it could not be sanctioned. Moreover, the ninth and tenth Silviculture Conferences
held in 1956 and 1961 at FRI, Dehradun, recommended that FRI should take up research and development
studies to strengthen knowledge related to forest fire management in India. The Forest Research Institute,
a centre of excellence with multidisciplinary strength, has played significant role in conservation and
management of forests throughout the country. Over the years, FRI has prepared working plans, management

21
plans of several forest divisions of the country by adopting the National Working Plan Codes. Additionally,
FRI has carried out several activities with respect to forest fire management and some of the major initiatives
are given below:
(a) Awareness creation among different stakeholders:  Several visitors (students, researchers,
forest department personnel, technologists) are visiting FRI to gain knowledge with respect to
forest resource management. The institute also organizes mass awareness programs at FRI
and also in remote locations for dissemination of knowledge and creates awareness. The
institute also houses a National Forest Information Centre and a Library which is one of the
largest collections of forestry related books, journals, etc. The institute also has six specialized
museum, viz., Forest Pathology, Silviculture, Forest Entomology, Non-Wood Forest Products,
Timber, and Social Forestry museum to create awareness with respect to forest management,
issues such as forest fire, pathogenic infestations, etc.
(b) Capacity building of forest departments and other stakeholders: As an important mandate,
FRI has conducted several workshops and trainings to enhance capacity of the forest
departments for science based management of forests and conservation of biodiversity. These
training programmes have modules with respect to forest fire mitigation. Furthermore, a training
programme on ‘Forest Fire Disaster Mitigation’ for forest department officials of various
states organized by Forest Research Institute, Dehradun, in 2015 in collaboration with the
National Institute of Disaster Management, New Delhi.
(c) Research and development for better management of forests while combating forest
fire: As a scientific research and capacity building institute, FRI has taken up several projects/
studies covering different thematic areas to enhance knowledge about the different ecological
processes, forest management issues and developed technologies for better management of
forest resources of the country. FRI has also carried out few more specific studies related to
forest fire ecology. The institute has enough experience in developing tools and techniques to
combat forest fire related disasters such as pathogenic outburst, forest fire mapping, genetic
engineering, etc.
(d) Piloting technologies for mitigating forest fire: The multi-disciplinary forest research and
management institute FRI has developed several technologies for better management of forests.
These technologies have been provided to different stakeholder organization to enhance forest
management. Considering the disastrous impacts and difficulty in controlling the forest fire,
the institute has developed an in-house forest fire extinguishing kits which has been given to
forest department personnel for controlling forest fire in difficult terrains. The institute has
capability to further such types of technologies and is in the process to acquire more scientific
and latest techniques.
(e) Development of forest management plans: As premier institute in the field of forestry
research and management planning, FRI has prepared management plans and working plans
for several forested areas of different state forest departments. As an important strategy,
management plans developed by FRI have included prescriptions on forest fire management
and controlling mechanism.

22
(f) Scientific Back Stropping of Forest Department for Forest Fire Management: The research
based recommendations/suggestions will be provided to the forest department to minimize
forest fire and its associated impacts on the biodiversity and forest ecosystem services.
(g) Development of Knowledge Products (Scientific Reports, Technical Documents, etc.):
The field research based scientific reports, theme plans and knowledge dissemination; publications
will be developed and shared with the various stake holders.
42. As regards the further activities of FRI, the Committee was informed that FRI proposed to take up
the following activities:-
(i) Establishment of Centre for Forest Fires Management (CFFM): The centre for forest fire
management will be created at Forest Research Institute, Dehradun in collaboration with the
National Disaster Management Authority, Ministry of Home Affairs. In this regard, a proposal
has already been submitted. This centre will undertake activities like research, monitoring
forest fire, capacity enhancement and awareness creation. The centre need to be equipped
with specific equipments related to forest fire monitoring, documents and research. Also, a
team of scientific and management personnel need to be created. The overall activities of the
centre will be supervised by the Director of the centre (Director, FRI, Dehradun). The three
major activities are human resource development, forest fire geo-informatics and training and
capacity building unit. The details are as under:
z Forest fire mapping and modeling for predication and early warning:  For the
monitoring of fire incidences, field visits will be carried out to record forest fire incidences
for the development of prediction modeling and early warning.
z Research and development for managing forest fire: Considering the poor knowledge
on causes and factors of forest fire, research activities will be taken up with respect to
developing an understanding on the factors responsible for forest fire in Uttarakhand
state.
z Capacity enhancement through organizing trainings and workshops: A number of
training and workshops will be organized in consultation with the state forest department
on various themes related to forest fire for different target groups.
z Strengthening and management of knowledge:  Consultative workshops and
brainstorming sessions will be organized for sharing knowledge and creation of knowledge
network.
(ii) Training modules on forest fire management for Army and paramilitary personnel and
village community in Uttarakhand: In the current year 2016, forest fire have affected large
tracts of forests in Uttarakhand causing loss of property, biodiversity, animal and human lives.
NDRF, ITBP, Army, Police, Air-force and local community provided support to Forest
Department Officials in controlling the forest fires. These personnel who were involved in
controlling the fire are not fully equipped in forests fire control and mitigation especially in the
hilly terrain. FRI has, therefore, submitted a project proposal to Uttarakhand Forest Department
to organize training programs for officers and front line staff of paramilitary, army and police
as well as village communities so that they are better equipped to mitigate the disaster.

23
43. The Committee has been given to understand that Forest Research Institute, one of the
oldest forestry institutions in the country, has been undertaking basic research in forest management.
However, there seems to be a huge disconnect between the research done by FRI and its usage by
the State Forest Departments and other agencies. This has been corroborated by the fact that
NDRF, when deployed in Uttarakhand to control the forest fire, complained of having used very
rudimentary equipments, whereas FRI claims of having designed and developed efficient fire fighting
tools. Therefore, the Committee recommends to FRI to publicise among all State about the
equipments developed by them with a view to control forest fires, so that the concerned States could
procure the equipments and use them in case of forest fires.
44. The Director General, Forest Survey of India, while apprising the Committee about the activities and
efforts of FSI with respect to forest fire mapping and monitoring, stated that FSI was monitoring forest fire
hotspots throughout the country since the year 2004 using Remote Sensing and GIS technology with the
objective of detection of active forest fires at nascent stage and to inform State Forest Departments about
the forest fire incidences on near real time basis.
45. The Committee was further informed that from year 2012, the time duration between satellite pass
and the time of dissemination of forest fire signals by FSI has been reduced to nearly 2 hours, thus making
the mechanism of signal reception, processing and dissemination on a real time mode. This has considerably
minimized the reaction time towards remedial and preventive measures on ground by the state forest
departments. FSI has been using Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectro-radiometer (MODIS) data having
on-board Terrra and Aqua satellites providing data at every 6 hours thus helping in close period monitoring
of forest fire.
46. FSI is also receiving the co-ordinates of active fire spots or hotspots locations irrespective of forest
or agricultural land from NRSC. These coordinates are then projected on the forest cover map of India
prepared by the Forest Survey of India to select active fire locations within forest cover called forest fire
locations. Attributes like state, district, Survey of India toposheet’s numbers are then attached with each
coordinate of the forest fire locations so as to enrich the information carried forward by each fire location.
The entire processing at FSI takes approximately 1 hour’s time. The processed forest fire information is
then e-mailed to the appointed nodal officers of each state. The concerned SFDs are able to precisely locate
the position of hotspot (active forest fire location) at compartment level with the Google-Earth picture at the
backend. The information generated in the form of Table and Maps are also uploaded on the official website
of FSI daily 3-4 times a day. In addition, the same information is also disseminated through SMS to the State
Forest Department’s registered users to our website (www.fsi.nic.in) for confirmation as well as quick
remedial measures. FSI also intimated that the total fire points disseminated to SFDs during 2015 and 2016
were 15937 and 24651 respectively. The total number of fire alerts sent to Himachal Pradesh, J&K and
Uttarakhand between the period 1st February, 2016 to 2nd June, 2016 are as under:
Period Fire alerts sent to Fire alerts sent Fire alerts sent
Himachal Pradesh  to J&K  to Uttarakhand
1st February, 2016 to 2nd June, 2016 190 102 1498

24
47. FSI also informed that it is using an advance system for processing and dissemination of fire signals
using this kind of monitoring. FSI has recently started sending pre fire warning alerts to SFDs based on the
information on forest cover, forest types, climatic variables, recent fire signals etc. The system sends
warning to the state where forest areas are having higher risk of fire in the coming days. The pre-fire alerts
are disseminated to SFDs at division and range level, thus providing information at the base administrative
level of the SFD’s. This information is helpful for SFDs to take necessary preparation prior to incidence of
fires. FSI also informed that the burnt area extent assessment gives a closer picture of the biodiversity loss
to a greater extent. At present, the data and maps on extent of forest area burnt annually in the country is not
available. However, FSI has started estimation of Burnt areas on an experimental basis from 2015 onwards
using AWiFS imagery.
48. The Committee desired to know from the representatives of MoEF&CC whether there was any
mechanism to have advance warning of forest fires so that the State Governments may take necessary
precautions in the matter. In response, the Inspector General, MoEF&CC, informed that the Ministry is in
the process of developing early forest fire prediction mechanism with the support of NRSC, Hyderabad at
FSI, Dehradun and the early warning system will be ready by next year i.e., 2017. It was also stated that the
fire prediction system will be able to provide information with reliable accuracy (90%) to the state forest
departments (SFD) leading to preventive measures.
49. The Committee desired to know whether any crisis management plan existed in Uttarakhand forest
department and what were the budgetary provisions for the forestry sector? In response, the Committee
was informed by the representative of the State Government that the State Government has monitoring
mechanism under which control centres are established at all level, of management (block, range, division
etc.) with respect to forest fire prevention and control. He also informed that there was a mismatch between
the budget provided for the purpose and the actual budget requirements for taking necessary actions. The
Committee was also informed that the State Government is carrying out Jan Jagran (awareness creation
program) on regular basis throughout the state where there is a problem. He said the number of signages will
be enhanced in fire hotspot areas. The tourists and visitors will be sensitized throughout the yatra season in
most fire prone areas. He also said that the State Government is organizing public rallies, yatras and
disseminating information on do’s and don’ts to local communities through short films, banners, broachers,
etc. He further informed that Uttarakhand is the only state where Van Panchayts are involved in managing
significant amount of forest area of the state. The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (PCCF), Uttarakhand
informed that about 3,000 meetings were conducted before fire in different places.
50. The Committee also desired to know the status of watch towers in the States and the utilization of
funds for developing watch towers. In response, the Committee was provided the details of watch towers
and informed that the government was in the process of establishing some more watch towers at strategic
locations, which could not initially be erected due to delay in release of funds.
51. The Committee observed that a large number of posts of front line forest staff were lying
vacant and expressed doubt about the preparedness of the state forest departments to combat
forest fires. The Committee also observed that the recent forest fires may have resulted in adverse
impact on many species and desired to know the efforts made by the Government in minimizing the
loss. The Committee was informed that the Department was conducting regular surveys with respect

25
to floral as well as faunal species conservation in the state and will undertake more studies focused
towards areas where forest fires had been reported. The Committee was also informed that the
State Forest Department was taking up soil and water conservation measures in affected areas to
check possible negative impact on forests and water resources of the state. Further, a range of local
species have been reserved which will be planted to minimize soil screened along with the cantour
trances.
52. The Committee also desired to know the role of the organizations like Survey of India (Department of
Science & Technology), Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (Department of Space) and Geological Survey
of India (Ministry of Mines) in forest fire management.
53. The Committee was informed by the representative of Department of Science & Technology that SoI
is generating maps with high resolution and they are being provided to state forest department whenever
required. He further said that SoI maps contain forest fire lines and other clear demarcations which can be
used by the forest department for various purposes.
54. The representative of Geological Survey of India informed the Committee that GSI is not directly
involved in managing forest fire in the country. He informed that GSI was working on mapping and monitoring
glaciers and landslide vulnerable areas in the state. He said GSI is monitoring 968 glaciers in Himalayan
landscape.
55. The representative of ISRO, while apprising the Committee about the ISRO’s efforts in forest
management, informed that ISRO through its institutes such as NRSC and IIRS has provided various
facilities such as satellite data, thematic maps and capacity building activities. He said that IIRS which was
located in Dehradun specialized in satellite data, thematic maps and capacity building activities and its services
can be utilised by Uttarakhand Forest Department. IIRS further brought out the following:-
z Under its Disaster Management Support (DMS) Programmes, Indian Space Research
Organisation (ISRO) supports the disaster management activities in the country by means of
providing - (i) Aerial and Space based data & information services and (ii) Satellite based
emergency communication services.
z For providing near real time support to various agencies, ISRO has set up a Decision Support
Centre (DSC) in 2005 at National Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad for providing data, value
added products and information services in near-real time to concerned Central and State
departments. The DSC presently supports the needs of various natural disaster such as Cyclone,
Flood, Earthquake, Tsunami, Landslide and Forest Fire. It provides near-real time active forest
fire locations information to Forest Survey of India and in turn to all State Forest Departments.
All Fire alerts are also published on ISRO’s BHUVAN geo-portal on near real-time with a
provision to download location information.
z With regard to activities related to Forest Fire, Satellite data based temperature anomalies are
used for the detection of active fire locations. Active forest fire detection is based on flagging
fire pixels, based on thermal anomaly, using middle infrared & thermal infrared data. The
active fire alerts generated using satellite data are delivered within 30 minutes of satellite data
acquisition.

26
56. It was further informed that IIRS, being in Dehradun proactively discussed with concerned state
officials and carried out case studies on these forest fire incidents. The brief details are as under:
z Hot spot occurrence of Forest Fire for Uttarakhand. The analysis was done on 2.5 km. grid for
the entire state of Uttarakhand. The daily forest fire occurrence from satellite data was aggregated
for last 15 years (2000-2015) and regions prone to forest fire were identified as number of fire
occurrence in a grid during the past 15 years.
z Burnt Area Analysis of the National Wild Life Forest protected zones (Rajaji Tiger Reserve and
Corbett Tiger Reserve) using IRS imagery was done.
Some of the Salient Observations of the studies are as under:-
(a) Significant burnt area patches were observed inside the Rajaji National Park and Corbett Tiger
Reserve forests.
(b) Burnt areas also covered Biological Richness zones which will in turn affect wild life habitats
and medicinal herbal zones.
(c) The highest burnt areas were recorded in the vegetation types dominated by pine followed by
gregarious Sal, Sal mixed moist deciduous forest and Dry deciduous scrub.
57. IIRS has also suggested some Technology driven Remedial/Preventive Measures, which are as under:-
z Hot-spots of fire occurrences or high probable Fire Alert Zones can be used to monitor
vigorously to avoid future Forest Fire.
z There is a need to set up Network of Automated surveillance or watch towers/ observation
posts at strategic locations to provide regularly in real-time data for forest fire alerts for timely
intervention of fie incidences.
z Geospatial technology (GST) can be used effectively to monitor in real-time with the help of
dedicated Location Based Services. Specific tools like mobile apps, GIS based buffering and
routing etc. are to be worked out.
z Removal of Pine dried needles can greatly minimized the triggering of fire.
z Construction of rain water harvesting structures in the hot-spot regions for timely attending
the forest fire at initial stages.
IIRS also suggested the following measures for disaster risk reduction:-
(i) Impart training to forest rangers as well as local community (including school children and
villagers) on the use of Geospatial tools and location based services with the help of local
NGOs.
(ii) Periodic rigorous Training of Trainers (local leaders, school teachers, Divisional Forest Officers)
can be taken up in a programmatic manner.
(iii) Mock-up drill exercises need to be taken up for effective disaster risk reduction and management.

27
58. The Committee desired to know the effect of Forest Fire on Wildlife. The response of the Wildlife
Institute of India, Dehradun has been brought out in the following paragraphs.
59. Forest fire impacts wildlife habitat by altering the three main requirements of animals i.e. food, water,
and shelter. The forest fire in India is mainly ground fire and this affects the understory plants and shrubs
that provide food and forage and this loss often results in wildlife moving away to areas where food, water
and shelter are more readily available.
60. The biggest effect fire has on wildlife is the change in the composition of ground flora with more
hardy species replacing the palatable species. Fire changes the proportion, arrangement and characteristic
of habitats across the landscape. Fire can cause temporary loss of food and shelter and animal populations
may shift to adjacent unburned areas. However, on first rain shower, the vegetation sprouts and new tender
fleshy shoots supply the much needed forage resources.
61. The burned and unburned areas form a mosaic of habitats with a range of vegetative conditions from
which wildlife can find food and cover. In the winter months, just before onset of summer in the cool
season controlled fire is very beneficial for sprouting of new flush of leaves and enhances the foraging
resources of the habitat.
62. Herbivores and species that prefer herbaceous vegetation for cover, prefer the grass/forb habitats or
broad-leafed forests that often become established after a burn. Depending on the vegetation type, burning
can increase or improve forage for wildlife for a few years. In some cases, the nutritional content and
digestibility of plants will temporarily increase as well. In the short term, dead wildlife becomes food for
scavengers, bears, eagles, and herbivores. Fire-killed trees become food for millions of insect larvae and/or
snags that provide perches for raptors. Snags and downed woody debris also provide important habitat for
cavity nesters, reptiles, small mammals and even large mammals such as bears.
63. Wetlands are less likely to burn and when they do, they burn less severely than upland sites. Wetlands
provide a refuge from fires for many species of wildlife and activities such as breeding by aquatic species
may be carried out with little interruption. Fire in wetlands usually increases areas of open water and
stimulates an increase in forage.
64. Invertebrate populations tend to decrease after a fire because eggs, food supplies, and/or shelter are
destroyed. Flying insects are especially vulnerable because they are attracted to fire by heat or smoke and
are incinerated in great number. Surface insect populations, such as grasshoppers, also tend to decrease.
Other insect populations, especially bark beetles, increase after a fire, as trees damaged or killed provide
large amounts of suitable habitat.
Restoring Habitat
65. Fire may cause extensive damage to seedling, sapling and pole crop, which forms the mosaic of
habitat, provides edge effect and ecotone. Riparian areas if burnt are especially critical to wildlife habitat.
Restoration work includes amelioration of the vegetation and compensating the vegetative loss by artificial
regeneration and assisting natural regeneration. Vegetating the banks of streams, rivers and ponds will help
minimize erosion and also help keep water quality high and temperatures cool, which is especially important
for fish.

28
Prescribed Fire for Wildlife Habitat Improvement
66. Prescribed burning can benefit grassland habitat and savannah. The grasslands, herbs and shrubs will
accumulate lot of coarse unpalatable material and for rejuvenation a light burn is prescribed. Fire can help
rejuvenation of forest, depending on the nature of the ecosystem, the water and the amount of fuel load
available on forest floor. Fire helps in the following ecological processes.
1) Reduce the build-up of fuel and thus the intensity of future burns.
2) Recycle nutrients bound up in litter.
3) Reduce competition, allowing existing trees to grow larger.
4) Create forest refuge to provide nesting spots for wood peckers and other birds.
5) To remove unpalatable growth remaining from previous seasons.
6) To stimulate flush of new growth of palatable leaves.
7) To stimulate seed production or opening of cones and prepare seed beds for seeding, either
naturally or artificially.
8) To establish fire breaks in a system of protection from wildfire.
9) To induce good growth of Tendu leaves (Diospyros melanoxylon).
67. For successful use of fire as a management tool in sustainable forestry practices, it is necessary to
carry out fire-prevention measures in frequent fire-prone areas as integrated element of forestry in accordance
with scientific norms, improve airborne forest fire monitoring and ground-based fire detection and patrolling.
WII was also of the view that the following post fire restoration work is essential:
z Establish plantations by using fast-growing species in order to speed up carbon sequestration.
z Restoration of riparian forest.
z Soil and water conservation works.
z The use of GIS technology for forest fire simulation allows the integration of all the data on a
single platform simplifying the modeling and analysis of potential forest fires.
z The use of Remote Sensing technology for forest fire detection and evaluation of the intensity
and losses.
68. The Committee notes that Indian Institute of Remote Sensing and Wildlife Institute of India
have made some very useful suggestions regarding remedial/preventive measures for forest fires,
disaster risk reduction, restoration of habitat, wildlife habitat improvement and post fire restoration
work. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
and the concerned State Government should take these suggestions into consideration while
formulating strategies for prevention, mitigation and fighting the forest fires as well as post fire
restoration work.

29
ROLE OF NATIONAL DISASTER RESPONSE FORCE (NDRF)
69. The Committee observed that NDRF was deployed in Uttarakhand to douse forest fires as it had gone
out of control of local SDRF and other agencies. During its meeting held on the 31st May 2016, the
Committee also heard the Director General, National Disaster Response Force, on the role of NDRF in
combating forest fires. In response, the Director General, National Disaster Response Force informed the
Committee that NDRF is a multi-disciplinary, multi-skilled and high tech response force, dedicated completely
to deal with all kinds of national disasters, alongwith CBRN emergencies i.e. Chemical, Biological, Radiological
and Nuclear emergencies. They had never been called to douse forest fires in its ten year of existence.
However, assessing the gravity of the situation, for the first time the Government decided to deploy the
NDRF for the forest fire fighting operations. As such this was the first time that they had to deal with fire.
As such it was challenging task for all of them. They were asked to respond to the raging forest fires in three
districts of Uttarakhand, i.e. Pauri, Chamoli and Almora, and these areas already had history of forest fires
every year, but fuelled by the extraordinary dry situation, climatic conditions prevailing in the area and with
almost no rains, the fires took a very gigantic task. The dry foliage also abetted the fire and started to spill
over to other parts of the State. They neither had any equipment nor any trained manpower for the purpose
but they responded in whatever manner they felt comfortable and instructed by the State authorities. He also
stated that normally, they are a technology-based response agency and carry all kinds of sophisticated,
state-of-the-art equipment to deal with earthquake, flood, cyclone, Tsunami or chemical biological response.
But, for forest fire, they had absolutely no equipments. He also brought out the non-availability of maps of
the operational area and fire proximity suits. Further, the kind of equipment used by them for fighting forest
fire was very rudimentary.
70. He further stated that if NDRF has to be involved in such further endeavour, their manpower should
be adequately trained for such assignments. He also suggested the inclusion of more equipments in the
NDRF inventory to fight forest Fire. He also stressed the need for assessing other systems for fighting
forests fires such as chemical fogging systems being used in other countries. He also stressed the need for
community involvement in fighting forest fires and stated that NDRF conducted community awareness
programmes and community empowerment programmes. They were not only fighting disasters but also
educating the people. He expressed the need to develop support with the people not only to train and
sensitise them but also to make them owners of the forests. He stressed that NDRF should be brought into
the loop for alert, satellite imagery and other things normally associated with NDRF for the natural disasters.
71. The Committee is of the opinion that agencies like NDRF should be deployed in fighting
forest fires extremely rarely. Infact, State Governments should be asked to train their fire brigade
staff to fight forest fires as they will be in a better position to deal with it. The Committee was
informed that Himachal Pradesh has over 600 fire brigade staff. Likewise all other states will be
having their fire fighting staff who needed to be trained to suit the occasion. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, on priority
basis through Forest Research Institute, Dehradun, organize training of fire brigade officers of all
the states and equip them with proper forest fire equipments so that they can rise up to the occasion
in the event of forest fires and they do not have to depend on outside agencies like NDRF which has
already enough duties to perform at national level. The Committee also recommends that the

30
Government should also approach some other fire-prone countries such as Canada, New Zealand
and Australia to understand as to how they deal with the problems of forest fires and study the use
of other systems for fighting forest fires such as chemical fogging that is used in these countries.
72. The Committee also held discussion with the representatives of Civil Society/NGOs at Mussoorie,
Katra and Shimla on the 7th, 9th, and 11th June 2016 respectively. The representatives of Civil Society
Organisations and NGOs present during the discussions at Mussoorie, Katra and Shimla brought out various
preventive measures for forest fires, mitigation measures and plans for fighting forest fires.
INVOLVEMENT OF LOCAL COMMUNITY, WOMEN AND PANCHAYATS IN FOREST
MANAGEMENT
73. The representative of Rajpur Community, Dehradun Initiative emphasized upon the need to have
integrated policy for forest fire management in the state and the use of traditional knowledge and involvement
of local communities in forest fire management. The representative of Titli Trust Dehradun emphasized that
the key issue in forest management was the execution of activities at grassroot level and the local communities
are not well aligned in planning and management. He further suggested that local communities’ awareness
should be core to forest fire prevention and control. The representative of Develsari Environment Protection
& Technical Development Society stated that if local communities are sensitized and involved in forest
management they can make a huge difference in minimizing the forest fire incidences in the state. He was
also of the view that since Uttarakhand has large number of Van Panchayats, they must be roped in managing
the wide spread menace of forest fire. The representative of Sholi Gram Swaraj Mandal, Gopeshwar
emphasized upon women empowerment and their involvement in forest management related activities including
combating forest fire. He further suggested that local people should be involved and be incentivized by way
of creating facilities such as school, hospital, etc. depending upon the local needs. The representatives of
Umang Foundtion, Shimla, Sewahar, BCS Shimla referred to the lack of interest shown by the local villagers
in fighting the forest fires and stressed that there was a need to restore the ethical commitment of the people.
It was also brought out that since forest fires have become an annual feature, people have got accustomed
to it and are not bothered about it. The representatives of GB Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment &
Development, Kullu suggested the need for incentivizing the Panchayats which save their forests from
forest fire.
74. The Committee was constrained to note that interest and participation of local villagers/
people in dealing with the forest fires and related incidents have gone down. The Committee is of
the view that the key issue in forest management is the execution of activities at the grass root
level and hence there is an urgent need to restore the social commitment and sense of belongingness
of the people towards the forests and their involvement in planning and management of the forests.
The Committee is of the firm view that this would also help in minimising the forest fire incidents
in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Government and concerned
State Governments should take immediate necessary steps to involve the local communities, including
women, self-help groups and members of Village Panchayats and Zila Parishads in forest management
related activities. The Committee also recommends that the State Governments should also incentivise
the local people/villagers by creating facilities for them such as schools, hospitals etc. as per the
local requirements to motivate and encourage the people to come forward and participate in the
process of saving our precious forests from forest fires.

31
EXPOSURE OF VILLAGERS TO DEV ASTATION OF FOREST FIRES AND AWARENESS EFFORTS
75. The representative of Eco-park Development Committee, Dhanolti stated that his organization was
taking up awareness campaign in schools with the help of Self Help Groups (SHGs) in the area much before
the forest fire season. The representative of Rajpur Community, Dehradun Initiative highlighted that often
small fires lit by the villagers in forests spread and resulted in major forest fires and stated that villagers
should be exposed to the devastating results of such small fires. She highlighted the need for awareness
creation though visual media. She also suggested pre-forest fire efforts to educate the community, civil
defence awareness in schools, sensitizing of different departments of the government with respect to forest
fire control and protection. The representatives of GB Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment &
Development, Kullu suggested celebrating Forest Fire Week wherein different activities on preventing forest
fires such as poster competitions etc. could be organized.
76. The Committee is in agreement with the view expressed by various representatives of Civil
Society that small fires lit by the villagers in forest areas can spread and result in major forest
fires. The need for taking up awareness campaigns among the villagers and exposing them to the
devastating and horrifying results of such small fires cannot be over-emphasised. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change must impress
upon the State Governments to take all necessary measures in this regard such as posters, slogans,
campaigns in schools, hand bill etc. Since visual media is very effective in attracting people towards
a cause, it is recommended that the devastating effects of forest fires should also be shown on
electronic media in the form of short films, documentaries etc. to make the people aware of the
horrifying impacts of forest fires.
77. The Committee further recommends that short films/documentaries in regional languages
should also be shown periodically and the campaign should be sustained at least period of three to
five years so that it can impact the minds of the people and the society at large. The Committee also
recommends that Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds should also be used for advertisement
and awareness campaigns. Further, there should be training and mock fire-drills in schools and
colleges. There should also be a dedicated toll free telephone number for reporting incidents of
forest fire in each state.
78. The Committee is also of the view that people/tourists who come to the hilly areas from the
plains, have little awareness about how to behave in the hills. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the State Governments should proactively work towards putting up public signages displaying
the requisite messages in areas frequented by the tourists, to make them aware of the norms to be
followed in forest areas.
AV AILABILITY OF FIRE FIGHTING EQUIPMENTS, KITS AND TRAINING TO LOCAL PEOPLE
79. The representative of Eco-park Development Committee, Dhanaulti requested that the concerned
authorities should provide handy and efficient fire fighting equipments to the people to fight the fires in such
situations. One of the representatives of the civil society brought that while trying to douse the initial fires on
their own, they realized that they did not have the requisite equipments for the job. Further, they became
extremely hungry and thirsty, with no source of drinking water. The representative of Himalaya Research

Group, Shimla also stressed the need for updating the civil society with new technology and tools to fight
forest fires that they could work hand in hand with the Government departments in such times.
80. The Committee feels that apart from involvement of local communities in forest management
and exposing them to devastations of forest fires, there is an urgent need to provide fire fighting
equipments to the people. Further, all persons deployed to fight the fires should be provided some
bagpack kits which should contain water, packed food, fire-proof hand gloves and boots, breathing
masks, first-aid kits etc. so that they could sustain themselves for longer periods while undertaking
the job. Further, since fighting forest fire has its own intricacies, the local communities should be
updated with new technology and trained on how to use these equipments so that they could work
hand in hand with Government agencies in fighting forest fires, when required.
Presence of Chir Pine Needles
81. The representative of the NGO SA VERA and Gandhi Global Family (GGF), Jammu stated that fires
occurred because of the presence of the Chir pines which provide the fuel, which combined with the early
onset of the warm season this year led to widespread fires. Gandhi Global Family (GGF), Jammu also
opined that pine needles should be used in board making, briquette making etc.
82. The representatives of GB Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment & Development, Kullu also
suggested the need to remove the pine needles frequently and use them in developing entrepreneurship by
engaging local people. Dr. C.M. Seth, representing civil society also stressed upon the need for clearing the
road sides of chir pine needles.
83. Chir Pine needles, which are highly inflammable due to its high resin content, are a prominent
factor in occurring and spreading of forest fires. The Committee is in agreement with the view
expressed by representatives of some NGOs that the Chir pine needles should be removed and
collected frequently. The Committee recommends that the State Governments should consider
procuring sweeping machines to clear the roadsides of chir pine needles and dry leaves in vulnerable
areas. Further, steps should be taken for incentivising the clearing and collection of pine needles.
The Government should also try to involve school children, NCC, NGOs etc. in collection of pine
needles. The local communities should also be encouraged by providing remunerative emoluments
in the collection process. The Committee also recommends that broad leave trees should be planted
in the forests and, after a period of five years, there should be systematic replacement of chir pine
trees in the forests by broad leave trees as it has been seen that incidents of fires in latter forests
are minimal as compared to chir pine forests.
84. The Committee is further of the view that there is high resin content in chir pine needles and
there is a need to explore as to how it can be used for other purposes. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change should take up with the concerned
Ministries of Government of India to explore as to how best to extract resin from these needles and
how, apart from burning fuel, it could be used for other purposes.
USE OF MGNREGA FUNDS
85. The representative of Eco-park Development Committee, Dhanaulti suggested that the funds under

33
MGNREGA programme can be utilized for involving local communities in fighting the forest fire in the area.
The representatives of Himalayan Research Group, Shimla was also of the view that since the Forest
Department was facing acute shortage of manpower, services of people working under the MGNREGA
could be utilised to douse the forest fires in times of need and they could be paid for that.
86. At Shimla, the Committee desired to know from the representatives of State Government as to
whether the work relating to collection of pine needles can be undertaken under MGNREGA. In response,
the Committee was informed that the State Government had requested the Rural Development Department
to include pine needles collection as one of the activities under MGNREGA. However, since as per the
guidelines of MGNREGA, only classified works can be taken up and the work relating to pine needles was
not listed, they had made a reference in this regard to the Central Government.
87. The Committee is of the view that activities relating to collection of pine needles can not only
provide employment to a large number of unskilled workers in the hilly states but also get rid of
the chir pine needles which play a vital role in spreading of forest fires. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change should take up the inclusion
of work relating to collection of chir pine needles as one of the activities under MGNREGA with the
concerned Union Ministry so that the State Governments can initiate further action in this regard
without any hindrance.
ENCROACHMENT OF FOREST LAND AND VIOLATION OF FOREST CONSERV ATION RULES
88. The representative of Butterfly Research Centre, Bhimtal and Rajpur Community, Dehradun Initiative
highlighted the problem of encroachment of forest land by the people as well as the violation of forest
conservation rules and regulations by the builders in the forested areas of Dehradun. The representative of
the NGO SAVERA stated that most incidents of fire were caused due to people who set fire for the purpose
of encroaching on forest land or to induce growth of new grass for their livestock.
89. The Committee is dismayed to note the problems of encroachment of forest land by the
people as well as the violation of forest conservation rules in Dehradun and Shimla. Some people
purposefully cause fires to encroach on forest land, which sometimes spread to other areas as well.
The Committee recommends that the matter needs to be administratively looked into by the concerned
State Governments and ensure that there is no encroachment of forest land or violation of forest
conservation rules. Municipal and town planning agencies in the States should take effective and
practical steps to stop unplanned urbanization and encroachments of forest and open land. Local
communities/villagers should be encouraged to report any such incidents to the concerned authorities
immediately. The authorities should take prompt action in such cases. Forests are our national
property and any attempt to encroach upon them and the consequent fire in forests, whether
intentional or unintentional, should be strictly dealt with.
Creation of checkdams and ponds within the forests
90. Dr. C.M. Seth, representing civil society and the representative of the Gandhi Global Family (GGF),
Jammu emphasized the need to reinvigorate the system of ponds and checkdams within the forests rather
than planning for using helicopters for supply of water in case of fire. also emphasized on renovation and

34
creation of ponds and water harvesting structures within the forest area and inclusion of provision of
people’s participation in this work.
91. The Committee feels that creation of ponds and water harvesting structures within the forest
area not only reduces river bank erosion but can be a handy tool for supply of water for dousing
forest fires. This would not only reduce dependence on helicopters for supply of water but also
readily provide water to the locals within the forest area for fire fighting. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change should impress upon the
State Governments the need to reinvigorate the system of ponds and checkdams within the forest
areas, so that water is immediately available at hand for making efforts to douse the forest fires.
This would also save crucial time which is wasted in bringing water  from other far-off resources,
and help try to douse the fire in its initial stages and check it from spreading further.
Use of traditional methods for forest management
92. The representatives of Umang Foundation, Shimla and some other NGOs stressed the need for strict
implementation of the fire lines and drew attention to the fire incidents which occurred in forest areas where
some space had been allotted by authorities for eco-tourism. The Committee was also informed by the
representatives of some of the State Governments that they did not have adequate funds for clearing of the
fire lines.
93. Fire lines are areas which are cleaned of vegetation for stopping or slowing down a fire in
forest areas. The creation of fire lines is critical in wildland fire fighting, because without fire lines,
a fire can quickly get out of control. The Committee is of the view that such traditional methods of
containing forest fires have stood the test of time and should not be dispensed with. While use of
modern technologies for fire alerts etc. is definitely a welcome step, under the present circumstances,
over-dependence on technology at the cost of traditional methods should not be encouraged. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change should
emphasise upon the State Governments that the traditional forest operations for scientific
management of forests including forest floor clearing, controlled burning and creation of water
harvesting structures should be reviewed and utilised effectively. The Committee notes that the
traditional fire lines are not being cleared due to lack of funds at the disposal of the State
Governments. The Committee, therefore, also recommends that adequate budgetary allocations
should be made by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for the purpose and
State Governments should ensure that fire lines, which play a crucial role in preventing spread of
fires, are cleared regularly. The Committee also recommends that seasonal training, if required,
should be provided to the local people including panchayats and zila parishads for clearing of fire
lines, before the onset of forest fire season.
USE OF TECHNOLOGY IN PREVENTING FOREST FIRES
94. Dr. C.M. Seth of Jammu laid stress on prevention of fires rather than combating fires later. He
suggested the use of remote sensing and GIS technology in identifying vulnerable areas and mapping forest
fire hotspots. The representative of NGO, Savera, Jammu and Himalayan Research Group, Shimla also
emphasized the need for modern technologies to control the forest fires.

35
95. In the meetings held with the State Governments, the Committee was also informed that fire watchers
and forest workers are deployed by the State Governments during the fire season i.e. from 15th April to
15th June to till the onset of monsoons every year exclusively for the purpose of forest fire management.
The matter relating to installation of CCTVs in forest areas for forest surveillance was also discussed during
these meetings. A view was expressed that installation of CCTVs will be of limited use since they cannot be
installed in the interior dense forests.
96. The Committee recommends that instead of fire watchers, forest workers and CCTVs, the
use of Drones should be encouraged for forest surveillance and monitoring. These drones should be
deployed systematically in a day three to four times, or as felt necessary. This would enable the
authorities receive much faster information since the drones will be able to go into the interior of
the forest areas and send updates of the happenings inside the forests. The State Governments can
equip the fire watchers with new technologies so that they can detect any suspicious or untoward
incidents and report them to the concerned authorities immediately. This would not only ease the
pressure on fire watchers who are pitifully paid and have to sit observing the forests in all climatic
conditions but also provide more authentic and accurate data to the Government. It would also
enable the State Governments to evolve a quick response system.
IMPACT OF FOREST FIRE ON BIODIVERSITY AND ASSESSMENT OF BIODIVERSITY LOSS
97. The representative of Butterfly Research Centre, Bhimtal emphasized upon the monitoring of entomo-
fauna in the forest areas to understand the impact of forest fire. He further stated that instead of plantation,
efforts should be made to enhance the regenerative potential of native species. He also suggested need for
studies on biodiversity assessment of insects, butterflies and other indicator species to assess the impacts of
forest fire. The representative of Titli Trust Dehradun also stated that the impact of forest fire on biodiversity
is grossly underestimated and the loss of wildlife was not even being accounted for. He stressed the need for
a systematic study of impact of fire on biodiversity in the state and enhancing efforts with respect to
regeneration of local species in forested areas of the state.
98. The Committee desired to know from Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change as to
whether the Ministry quantified any loss due to recent forest fires? The Committee also enquired as to
whether any study has been undertaken to know losses of wildlife? In response, the Committee was provided
the following details of forest fires including the estimated losses in the States of Himachal Pradesh and
Uttarakhand:
Y ear Himachal Pradesh Uttarakhand
No. of Total area Total loss No. of Total areas Total loss
Forest Fires affected estimated Forest Fires affected estimated
(In ha.) (In `) (In ha.) (In `)
2013-14 397 3237.52 52,31,01 1 245 384.05 4,39,387
2014-15 725 6726.49 1,13,26,522 515 930.33 23,57,707
2015-16 672 5749.95 1,34,77,730 412 701.61 7,94,356
2016-17 1545 13069.00 1,53,58,143 2074 4433.75 46,50,225

36
99. The Committee is shocked to note the gross underestimation of losses due to forest fires.
The Government estimation in Himachal Pradesh comes to ````` 470 per acre and in Uttarakhand it is
````` 400 per acre. The Committee is at loss to understand who will be the actual beneficiary of this
gross underestimation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that an independent agency having
impeccable credibility must be roped in by the Ministry to estimate the losses in real terms and
properly and earmark budget for compensation.
100. As regards the studies on wildlife loss due to fires, the Committee was informed that the State Forest
Departments are undertaking assessment of wildlife and habitat loss as part of the forest fire loss assessment.
101. The Committee also desired to know whether any inventory on forest was being prepared and nursery
being created, which can conserve those species of plants? The Committee was informed by Ministry of
Environment Forests & Climate Change that the working plans prepared by the State Governments involve
the inventorying of the forest areas including the forest fie affected areas. In order to rehabilitate the degraded
forest areas due to fires, the State Forest Departments are having central and decentralized nurseries for
raising the various native local forest trees and shrub species. Further the State Forest Departments are
doing necessary ex-situ and in-situ conservation measures for conservation of rare, endangered and threatened
species also.
102. In response to a query as to what happens to the wildlife movement when forest fires take place, the
Committee was informed that burning of forest floors and vegetation in the understory degrade the habitat
of Wild animals. Many herbivore and birds species lose their homes. Change in behavior of wild animals lead
to enhanced incidences of “Man-animal” conflict in such forests and damage to crops by wild animals. State
Forest Departments take timely action to sensitize local population for ensuring safe passage of wildlife to
non forest fire affected areas. State Departments are also ensuring creation of water holes and water bodies
inside to minimize damage due to fires. The fire prevention activities also ensure minimized damage to
wildlife and its habitat.
103. The Committee also desired to know from the Zoological Survey of India (ZSI) and Botanical Survey
of India (BSI) whether they have conducted any post forest fire assessment of loss of flora and fauna and
whether there was any plan of these organisations to prevent any loss of biodiversity in the event of forest
fires. Both the organisations informed the Committee that they had not conducted any assessment of loss of
flora of the areas where recent forest fires had occurred. ZSI also informed that the plans to prevent the loss
of biodiversity in the event of forest fire are undertaken by State Forest Department. However, ZSI may
undertake the monitoring studies on the fauna of the forest areas affected/damaged by forest fire, and
evaluate the extent/intensity of damage on biodiversity in the affected/damaged forest areas. BSI stated that
they may take up assessment study in areas where forest fire occurred, if the Ministry of Environment,
Forests & Climate Change desires.
104. The Committee also desired to know from Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change the
role of National Biodiversity Authority in case of loss of biodiversity due to forest fires and measures taken
for resurrection. In response, the Committee was informed by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change that National Biodiversity Authority (NBA) is an autonomous, regulatory, statutory and
advisory body established for the implementation of the provisions of the Biological Diversity Act, 2002,

37
which regulates access to biological resources and associated knowledge and sharing of benefits arising out
of the use of biological resources. Besides, the Authority performs an advisory role on the matters related to
conservation, sustainable use, access to biological resources and benefit sharing. Hence, the subject matter
does not directly pertain to the NBA. However, NBA can take up studies in future on the effect of natural
calamities/disasters including forest fires, and remedial/preventive measures thereof on a need basis.
105. The Committee is in agreement with the views expressed by the representatives of Civil
Society that the impact of forest fire on biodiversity is grossly underestimated and the loss of
wildlife was not even by accounted for. The Committee is at loss to understand as to why the
Zoological Survey of India and Botanical Survey of India, which are also the arms of the Ministry of
Environment, Forest & Climate Change, did not take up any studies on loss of biodiversity of the
forest fire affected areas. Even the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change did
not take any initiative in this regard. Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has also
stated that National Biodiversity Authority can take up studies in future on the effect of natural
calamities/disasters including forest fires, and remedial/preventive measures thereof on a need
basis. The Committee hopes that in future, the Ministry would take a more proactive approach in
this regard and recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change should ask
its concerned organisations to undertake, on priority basis, assessment of loss of biodiversity due to
forest fires and devise plans to prevent loss of bio-diversity in the event of forest fires so that
corrective and preventive measures in this regard could be initiated at the earliest. The Committee
further suggests that the Ministry should consider making National Biodiversity Authority the
nodal agency for coordinating the efforts made by the different organizations in this regard.
106. The Committee is also aware of the availability of natural assets like medicinal and herbal
plants in our forests. The Committee feels that there are adequate nurseries in hilly areas which
are the banks of medicinal and herbal plants. The Committee is of the view that the Government
can also consider incentivising the forest dwellers to grow medicinal plants in the plains. As such it
would become a source of earning for local people. Accordingly, in case of occurrence of incidents of
fire, they would be worried about their source of income, as a result of which they will take care of
the areas and work to ensure that there are no cases of forest fires.
AVOIDANCE OF OCCURRENCE OF LANDSLIDES IN FOREST FIRE AFFECTED AREAS
107. The Committee is of the view that after forest fires, the earth around the affected areas and
the roots of the trees become weak and loose. This also contributes to the landslides in the affected
areas in the rainy seasons after the forest fires. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should impress upon the State Governments
that after the forest fires have been brought under control, a quick response system should be put
in action and immediate necessary steps should be taken for minimizing the occurrence of landslides
in the affected areas. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should also issue
suitable guidelines to the State Governments in this regard.
BUDGET CONSTRAINTS
108. The representative of the Gandhi Global Family (GGF), Jammu also dwelt on the budget constraints

38
faced by the State Forest Department and Joint Forest Management of local people and authorities for
fighting and preventing forest fires. Representatives of other NGOs also stressed the need for adequate
budgetary allocations for use of technology and equipment for fighting forest fires.
109. The Committee notes that almost all the State Governments have expressed resource crunch
and inadequate budgetary allocations to effectively invest in protecting our forests from fires. The
Committee observes that in the context of forest fires, the needs of Himalayan states are distinctly
different from the other states. The whole country depends upon the services of the Himalayan
region since they contribute much more to the forest cover of the country. Accordingly, the Committee
recommends that the budget of all the states which are in Himalayan region should be demarcated
separately from other states, with specific objectives in mind and the policies and programmes and
it should not be clubbed with other states, without taking into account the specific demands of the
Himalayan ecosystem. Further, there should be an accelerated system for the devolution of funds
to these States to enable them to prioritize the requirements of prevention, mitigation and fighting
the forest fires.
REMOV AL OF OLD AND FALLEN TREE FROM THE FORESTS
110. The Committee while visiting the states of Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh
noticed a lot of fallen chir and pine trees lying in the forests which actually enhances burning in case of a
forest fire. The Committee wanted to know the reason behind non-clearance of the fallen trees. The Committee
also pointed out that gregarious flowering of bamboo in other parts of the country causes a lot of concern
with regard to fire protection and therefore removal of the dried flowered bamboo from the forest area was
desirable to reduce the intensity of fire hazards during the summer season. In response it was informed that
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India had put a blanket ban on the removal of any tree including the dead and
fallen tree from the forests. On scrutiny it has been found out that the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, in
its interim order in Writ Petition no. 202 dated 12.12.96 has prohibited salvaging of dead and fallen trees
from the protected forest areas i.e. National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries only for the conservation of
biodiversities in that area. However, the Court has clearly permitted to remove or salvage the dead and fallen
trees in any forest area in accordance with Working Plan as approved by the Central Government. The State
Governments are obliged to make a proposal for removal of such trees and get it approved by the Central
Government and then they are free to clear the forests. The Committee strongly feels that in this
background the ball is in the court of the Central Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change to plan to remove dead and fallen tree even in the protected forest areas. The Committee
recommends that in the light of Supreme Court order of 1996, the Central Government is bound to
persuade the State Governments and approve their Working Plans for salvaging dead and fallen
trees with a view to avoid induced forest fire in future.
GENERAL OBSERV ATION
111. The Committee is of the view that forest fires have become an annual feature in the country
and have a devastating effect on environment, forest, biodiversity and wildlife. The Committee
feels that there is an urgent need to devise a policy with regard to prevention and mitigation of
forest fires and recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should, at
the earliest, come up with a national policy on the subject.

RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee observes that the funds released by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change to the States and UTs under Centrally Sponsored Scheme namely, Intensification
of Forest Management, have shown a declining trend during the last few years, as is evident from
the figures provided by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. The Committee is at
a loss to understand as to why, when most of the concerned States have been asking for additional
funds under this scheme, the Ministry has not given priority to this sector. In view of the devastations
caused due to the forest fires, particularly this year, the Committee recommends that the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should enhance its budgetary allocation under the
Scheme and provide increased allocations under the Scheme to the affected States to enable them
to take the requisite measures for prevention and mitigation of forest fires. (Para 8)
The Committee has been given to understand that Forest Research Institute, one of the
oldest forestry institutions in the country, has been undertaking basic research in forest management.
However, there seems to be a huge disconnect between the research done by FRI and its usage by
the State Forest Departments and other agencies. This has been corroborated by the fact that
NDRF, when deployed in Uttarakhand to control the forest fire, complained of having used very
rudimentary equipments, whereas FRI claims of having designed and developed efficient fire fighting
tools. Therefore, the Committee recommends to FRI to publicise among all State about the
equipments developed by them with a view to control forest fires, so that the concerned States could
procure the equipments and use them in case of forest fires. (Para 43)
The Committee observed that a large number of posts of front line forest staff were lying
vacant and expressed doubt about the preparedness of the state forest departments to combat
forest fires. The Committee also observed that the recent forest fires may have resulted in adverse
impact on many species and desired to know the efforts made by the Government in minimizing the
loss. The Committee was informed that the Department was conducting regular surveys with respect
to floral as well as faunal species conservation in the state and will undertake more studies focused
towards areas where forest fires had been reported. The Committee was also informed that the
State Forest Department was taking up soil and water conservation measures in affected areas to
check possible negative impact on forests and water resources of the state. Further, a range of local
species have been reserved which will be planted to minimize soil screened along with the cantour
trances. (Para 51)
The Committee notes that Indian Institute of Remote Sensing and Wildlife Institute of India
have made some very useful suggestions regarding remedial/preventive measures for forest fires,
disaster risk reduction, restoration of habitat, wildlife habitat improvement and post fire restoration
work. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
and the concerned State Government should take these suggestions into consideration while
formulating strategies for prevention, mitigation and fighting the forest fires as well as post fire
restoration work. (Para 68)
39

40
The Committee is of the opinion that agencies like NDRF should be deployed in fighting forest
fires extremely rarely. In fact, State Governments should be asked to train their fire brigade staff
to fight forest fires as they will be in a better position to deal with it. The Committee was informed
that Himachal Pradesh has over 600 fire brigade staff. Likewise all other states will be having their
fire fighting staff who needed to be trained to suit the occasion. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, on priority basis through
Forest Research Institute, Dehradun, organize training of fire brigade officers of all the states and
equip them with proper forest fire equipments so that they can rise up to the occasion in the event
of forest fires and they do not have to depend on outside agencies like NDRF which has already
enough duties to perform at national level. The Committee also recommends that the Government
should also approach some other fire-prone countries such as Canada, New Zealand and Australia
to understand as to how they deal with the problems of forest fires and study the use of other
systems for fighting forest fires such as chemical fogging that is used in these countries. (Para 71)
The Committee was constrained to note that interest and participation of local villagers/people
in dealing with the forest fires and related incidents have gone down. The Committee is of the view
that the key issue in forest management is the execution of activities at the grass root level and
hence there is an urgent need to restore the social commitment and sense of belongingness of the
people towards the forests and their involvement in planning and management of the forests. The
Committee is of the firm view that this would also help in minimising the forest fire incidents in the
country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Government and concerned State
Governments should take immediate necessary steps to involve the local communities, including
women, self-help groups and members of Village Panchayats and Zila Parishads in forest management
related activities. The Committee also recommends that the State Governments should also incentivise
the local people/villagers by creating facilities for them such as schools, hospitals etc. as per the
local requirements to motivate and encourage the people to come forward and participate in the
process of saving our precious forests from forest fires. (Para 74)
The Committee is in agreement with the view expressed by various representatives of Civil
Society that small fires lit by the villagers in forest areas can spread and result in major forest
fires. The need for taking up awareness campaigns among the villagers and exposing them to the
devastating and horrifying results of such small fires cannot be over-emphasised. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change must impress
upon the State Governments to take all necessary measures in this regard such as posters, slogans,
campaigns in schools, hand bill etc. Since visual media is very effective in attracting people towards
a cause, it is recommended that the devastating effects of forest fires should also be shown on
electronic media in the form of short films, documentaries etc. to make the people aware of the
horrifying impacts of forest fires. (Para 76)
The Committee further recommends that short films/documentaries in regional languages
should also be shown periodically and the campaign should be sustained at least period of three to
five years so that it can impact the minds of the people and the society at large. The Committee also
recommends that Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds should also be used for advertisement

41
and awareness campaigns. Further, there should be training and mock fire-drills in schools and
colleges. There should also be a dedicated toll free telephone number for reporting incidents of
forest fire in each state. (Para 77)
The Committee is also of the view that people/tourists who come to the hilly areas from the
plains, have little awareness about how to behave in the hills. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the State Governments should proactively work towards putting up public signages displaying
the requisite messages in areas frequented by the tourists, to make them aware of the norms to be
followed in forest areas. (Para 78)
The Committee feels that apart from involvement of local communities in forest management
and exposing them to devastations of forest fires, there is an urgent need to provide fire fighting
equipments to the people. Further, all persons deployed to fight the fires should be provided some
bagpack kits which should contain water, packed food, fire-proof hand gloves and boots, breathing
masks, first-aid kits etc. so that they could sustain themselves for longer periods while undertaking
the job. Further, since fighting forest fire has its own intricacies, the local communities should be
updated with new technology and trained on how to use these equipments so that they could work
hand in hand with Government agencies in fighting forest fires, when required. (Para 80)
Chir Pine needles, which are highly inflammable due to its high resin content, are a prominent
factor in occurring and spreading of forest fires. The Committee is in agreement with the view
expressed by representatives of some NGOs that the Chir pine needles should be removed and
collected frequently. The Committee recommends that the State Governments should consider
procuring sweeping machines to clear the roadsides of chir pine needles and dry leaves in vulnerable
areas. Further, steps should be taken for incentivising the clearing and collection of pine needles.
The Government should also try to involve school children, NCC, NGOs etc. in collection of pine
needles. The local communities should also be encouraged by providing remunerative emoluments
in the collection process. The Committee also recommends that broad leave trees should be planted
in the forests and, after a period of five years, there should be systematic replacement of chir pine
trees in the forests by broad leave trees as it has been seen that incidents of fires in latter forests
are minimal as compared to chir pine forests. (Para 83)
The Committee is further of the view that there is high resin content in chir pine needles and
there is a need to explore as to how it can be used for other purposes. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change should take up with the concerned
Ministries of Government of India to explore as to how best to extract resin from these needles and
how, apart from burning fuel, it could be used for other purposes. (Para 84)
The Committee is of the view that activities relating to collection of pine needles can not only
provide employment to a large number of unskilled workers in the hilly states but also get rid of
the chir pine needles which play a vital role in spreading of forest fires. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change should take up the inclusion
of work relating to collection of chir pine needles as one of the activities under MGNREGA with the
concerned Union Ministry so that the State Governments can initiate further action in this regard
without any hindrance. (Para 87)

42
The Committee is dismayed to note the problems of encroachment of forest land by the people
as well as the violation of forest conservation rules in Dehradun and Shimla. Some people
purposefully cause fires to encroach on forest land, which sometimes spread to other areas as well.
The Committee recommends that the matter needs to be administratively looked into by the concerned
State Governments and ensure that there is no encroachment of forest land or violation of forest
conservation rules. Municipal and town planning agencies in the States should take effective and
practical steps to stop unplanned urbanization and encroachments of forest and open land. Local
communities/villagers should be encouraged to report any such incidents to the concerned authorities
immediately. The authorities should take prompt action in such cases. Forests are our national
property and any attempt to encroach upon them and the consequent fire in forests, whether
intentional or unintentional, should be strictly dealt with. (Para 89)
The Committee feels that creation of ponds and water harvesting structures within the forest
area not only reduces river bank erosion but can be a handy tool for supply of water for dousing
forest fires. This would not only reduce dependence on helicopters for supply of water but also
readily provide water to the locals within the forest area for fire fighting. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change should impress upon the
State Governments the need to reinvigorate the system of ponds and checkdams within the forest
areas, so that water is immediately available at hand for making efforts to douse the forest fires.
This would also save crucial time which is wasted in bringing water  from other far-off resources,
and help try to douse the fire in its initial stages and check it from spreading further. (Para 91)
Fire lines are areas which are cleaned of vegetation for stopping or slowing down a fire in
forest areas. The creation of fire lines is critical in wildland fire fighting, because without fire lines,
a fire can quickly get out of control. The Committee is of the view that such traditional methods of
containing forest fires have stood the test of time and should not be dispensed with. While use of
modern technologies for fire alerts etc. is definitely a welcome step, under the present circumstances,
over-dependence on technology at the cost of traditional methods should not be encouraged. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change should
emphasise upon the State Governments that the traditional forest operations for scientific
management of forests including forest floor clearing, controlled burning and creation of water
harvesting structures should be reviewed and utilised effectively. The Committee notes that the
traditional fire lines are not being cleared due to lack of funds at the disposal of the State
Governments. The Committee, therefore, also recommends that adequate budgetary allocations
should be made by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for the purpose and
State Governments should ensure that fire lines, which play a crucial role in preventing spread of
fires, are cleared regularly. The Committee also recommends that seasonal training, if required,
should be provided to the local people including panchayats and zila parishads for clearing of fire
lines, before the onset of forest fire season. (Para 93)
The Committee recommends that instead of fire watchers, forest workers and CCTVs, the
use of Drones should be encouraged for forest surveillance and monitoring. These drones should be
deployed systematically in a day three to four times, or as felt necessary. This would enable the

43
authorities receive much faster information since the drones will be able to go into the interior of
the forest areas and send updates of the happenings inside the forests. The State Governments can
equip the fire watchers with new technologies so that they can detect any suspicious or untoward
incidents and report them to the concerned authorities immediately. This would not only ease the
pressure on fire watchers who are pitifully paid and have to sit observing the forests in all climatic
conditions but also provide more authentic and accurate data to the Government. It would also
enable the State Governments to evolve a quick response system. (Para 96)
The Committee is shocked to note the gross underestimation of losses due to forest fires. The
Government estimation in Himachal Pradesh comes to ````` 470 per acre and in Uttarakhand it is ````` 400
per acre. The Committee is at loss to understand who will be the actual beneficiary of this gross
underestimation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that an independent agency having
impeccable credibility must be roped in by the Ministry to estimate the losses in real terms and
properly and earmark budget for compensation. (Para 99)
The Committee is in agreement with the views expressed by the representatives of Civil
Society that the impact of forest fire on biodiversity is grossly underestimated and the loss of
wildlife was not even by accounted for. The Committee is at loss to understand as to why the
Zoological Survey of India and Botanical Survey of India, which are also the arms of the Ministry
of Environment, Forest & Climate Change, did not take up any studies on loss of biodiversity of
the forest fire affected areas. Even the Union Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
did not take any initiative in this regard. Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
has also stated that National Biodiversity Authority can take up studies in future on the effect of
natural calamities/disasters including forest fires, and remedial/preventive measures thereof on
a need basis. The Committee hopes that in future, the Ministry would take a more proactive
approach in this regard and recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
should ask its concerned organisations to undertake, on priority basis, assessment of loss of
biodiversity due to forest fires and devise plans to prevent loss of bio-diversity in the event of
forest fires so that corrective and preventive measures in this regard could be initiated at the
earliest. The Committee further suggests that the Ministry should consider making National
Biodiversity Authority the nodal agency for coordinating the efforts made by the different
organizations in this regard. (Para 105)
The Committee is also aware of the availability of natural assets like medicinal and herbal
plants in our forests. The Committee feels that there are adequate nurseries in hilly areas which
are the banks of medicinal and herbal plants. The Committee is of the view that the Government
can also consider incentivising the forest dwellers to grow medicinal plants in the plains. As such it
would become a source of earning for local people. Accordingly, in case of occurrence of incidents of
fire, they would be worried about their source of income, as a result of which they will take care of
the areas and work to ensure that there are no cases of forest fires. (Para 106)
The Committee is of the view that after forest fires, the earth around the affected areas and
the roots of the trees become weak and loose. This also contributes to the landslides in the affected
areas in the rainy seasons after the forest fires. The Committee, therefore, recommends that

44
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should impress upon the State Governments
that after the forest fires have been brought under control, a quick response system should be put
in action and immediate necessary steps should be taken for minimizing the occurrence of landslides
in the affected areas. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should also issue
suitable guidelines to the State Governments in this regard. (Para 107)
The Committee notes that almost all the State Governments have expressed resource crunch
and inadequate budgetary allocations to effectively invest in protecting our forests from fires. The
Committee observes that in the context of forest fires, the needs of Himalayan states are distinctly
different from the other states. The whole country depends upon the services of the Himalayan
region since they contribute much more to the forest cover of the country. Accordingly, the Committee
recommends that the budget of all the states which are in Himalayan region should be demarcated
separately from other states, with specific objectives in mind and the policies and programmes and
it should not be clubbed with other states, without taking into account the specific demands of the
Himalayan ecosystem. Further, there should be an accelerated system for the devolution of funds
to these States to enable them to prioritize the requirements of prevention, mitigation and fighting
the forest fires. (Para 109)
The Committee strongly feels that in this background the ball is in the court of the Central
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to plan to remove dead and fallen tree even
in the protected forest areas. The Committee recommends that in the light of Supreme Court
order of 1996, the Central Government is bound to persuade the State Governments and approve
their Working Plans for salvaging dead and fallen trees with a view to avoid induced forest fire in
future. (Para 110)
The Committee is of the view that forest fires have become an annual feature in the country
and have a devastating effect on environment, forest, biodiversity and wildlife. The Committee
feels that there is an urgent need to devise a policy with regard to prevention and mitigation of
forest fires and recommends that Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should, at
the earliest, come up with a national policy on the subject. (Para 111)

MINUTES

47
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 31st May, 2016 in Committee Room 'D', Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury  —  Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
3. Shri C.P. Nayaranan
4. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
5. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
6. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
7. Shri Bhupinder Singh
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
9. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
10. Kum. Sushmita Dev
11. Shri Laxman Giluwa
12. Dr. K. Gopal
13. Shri Daddan Mishra
14. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
15. Shri Nagendra Singh
16. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
17. Shri Vikram Usendi
18. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Shri Ajay Narayan Jha, Secretary
2. Dr. Sharad Singh Negi, Director General (Forest) & Special Secretary
3. Shri Vinod Ranjan, ADFG (WL)
4. Shri Anil Kumar, ADGF (FC)
5. Dr. Smt. Rekha Pai, IGF (EAP)
6. Shri V.B. Mathur, Director, Wild Life Institute of India, Dehradun
7. Dr. Smt. Sujata Arora, Advisor
8. Dr. Siabal Dass Gupta, DG, Forest Survey of India
9. Shri A.K. Mohanty, DIGF

48
***Relate to other matters.
Representatives of Directorate General, National Disaster Response Force
1. Shri O.P. Singh, Director General, NDRF
2. Shri R.K. Rana, DIG (Ops & Trg.)
3. Shri P .K. Srivastava Commandant, 08 Bn
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members, officials of the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change and National Disaster Response Force and other senior officers and informed
them that the meeting had been convened to hear their views on 'Recent Forest Fires and its effect on
environment, forest, biodiversity and wildlife and remedial/preventive measures'.
3. Initiating the discussion, the Chairperson stated the recent forest fires which occurred in the States
of Uttarakhand, Jammu & Kashmir and Himachal Pradesh engulfed huge acres of forest land causing loss of
lives and immense destruction and irreparable loss of biodiversity, wildlife and flora and fauna. The Chairperson
asked the Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to apprise the Committee of the
causes of recurrence of forest fires and failure of Central and State agencies to prepare foolproof strategy
to prevent recurrence of such fires as also the implementation of various technologies deployed for detecting,
predicting and preventing the spread of forest fires. She also desired to know what role National Disaster
Response Force saw for itself in dealing with such situation in the area of forest fires and protecting people
and animals from such disasters.
4. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change presented his views on the
subject before the Committee. A representative of the Ministry also made a power point presentation on the
subject covering various aspects such as Forest cover of India, forest fires in the country, causes and types
of fires, its impact/losses, fire management in the country, proposed initiatives, pre-warning alert system for
forest fires etc. The Director General, National Disaster Response Force also made a presentation before the
Committee on the subject.
5. Thereafter, Members also raised certain queries such as drawing of fire lines in the forests, inclusion
of forest fires in the natural calamities and devising monitoring mechanism etc. Members also pointed out
the absence of forest-fire lines, forest towers and forest watchers in the forests. The representatives of
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Director General, National Disaster Response
Force, while presenting their views, also responded to some of the queries raised by the Members of the
Committee. Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change also promised to furnish written
replies to some other queries/points raised by the Chairperson and the Members of the Committee, which
could not be replied during the meeting.
6. The witnesses then withdrew.
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
10. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5.18 
P.M.

49
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 15th December, 2016 in Room No. '63', First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury  —  Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri C.P. Narayanan
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
5. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
6. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
8. Shri Daddan Mishra
9. Shri Nana Patole
10. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
11. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
12. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
13. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. She informed
the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 292
nd and 293rd reports of
the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the
283rd report of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change and 'Forest Fires and its Effect on Environment, Forests, Bio-diversity and Wildlife and
Remedial/Preventive Measures' respectively. The Committee then considered the draft 292nd and 293rd Reports
and after some deliberations, adopted the same.
3. The Committee also decided to present/lay its 292 nd and 293 rd Reports to both the Houses of
Parliament on 16 th December, 2016. The Committee authorised the Chairperson and, in her a bsence,
Shri C.P. Narayanan and, in his absence, Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau to present the reports in the Rajya Sabha
and Shri Kirti V ardhan Singh and, in his absence, Shri Daddan Mishra, to lay the reports on the Table of
Lok Sabha.

50
***Relate to other matters.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.

ANNEXURES

53
ANNEXURE-I
List of Participants in the meeting of the Committee held at Mussoorie on 7.6.2016
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Dr. Rekha Pai, IG of Forests
2. Shri A.K. Mohanty, DIG of Forests
3. Dr. Ashwani Kumar, Director General, Indian Council of Forestry Research & Education
4. Dr. Savita, Director, Forest Research Institute, Dehradun.
5. Dr. Neelu Gera, Head, Silviculture Division, Forest Research Institute, Dehradun
6. Dr. Saibal Dasgupta, Director General, Forest Survey of India
7. Dr. R.K. Maikhuri, Scientist, G.B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment & Development
8. Dr. G.C.S. Negi, Scientist, G.B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment & Development
9. Dr. P.C. Tyagi, Scientist, Wildlife Institute of India
Government of Uttarakhand
1. Shri S. Ramaswamy, Additional Chief Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Mahajan, PCCF
3. Shri Dhananjay Mohan, APCCF
4. Shri B.P. Gupta, CCF & Nodal Officer (Fire)
5. Dr. Rajendra Dhobhal, Uttarakhand Council of Science & Technology
Ministry of Mines
1. Shri Rakesh Kumar, DDG , Geological Survey of India
2. Shri B.M. Gairola, Director
3. Shri K.S. Yadav, Regional Controller of Mines
Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Rana, DIG , OPS, National Disaster Response Force
2. Shri Gopi Chand Chhawaniya, Director, NDCC
Department of Space
1. Shri S. Kumaraswamy, Joint Secretary, ISRO
2. Shri Y .V .N. Krishnamurthy, Scientific Secretary, ISRO
3. Dr. A. Senthil Kumar, Director, Indian Institute of Remote Sensing
Department of Science & Technology
1. Shri B.S. Rawat, Joint Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Meena, DSG, Survey of India

54
Representatives of NGOs/Civil Society Organisations
1. Shri Kuldip Negi, Secretary, Dhanolti Ecotourism & Eco Development Committee
2. Mrs. Reenu Pal, Founding Chairman, Rajpur Community Initiative
3. Sh. Arun Gaur, Devalsari Environment Protection & Tech. Development Society
4. Shri Sanjay Sondhi, NGO, Titli Trust
5. Shri Murarilal

ANNEXURE-II
List of Participants in the meeting of the Committee held at Katra on 9.6.2016
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
1. Dr. Rekha Pai, IG of Forests
2. Shri A.K. Mohanty, DIG of Forests
3. Dr. Harsh Mitter, APCCF
4. Shri S.D. Sharma, CF
5. Dr. Surinder Kumar, Director
6. Dr. B.D. Suyal, Regional Director, Forest Survey of India
Government of Jammu and Kashmir
1. Shri R.K. Gupta, Principal Secretary, (Forests)
2. Shri A.K. Singh, PCCF (HoFF)
3. Shri Abdul Razak PCCF & Chairman (SPCB)
4. Shri Roshan Jaggi, CCF Jammu
5. Shri B.M. Sharma, CF East Jammu
6. Shri Sammer Bharti CF West Rajouri
7. Shri Ajeet Kumar Sahu, CEO SMVDSB
8. Shri M.K. Kumar, Addl. CEO SMVDSB
9. Dr. V .S. Senthil, DFO Jammu
10. Dr. Jitendra Kumar Singh, DFO Reasi
Ministry of Mines
1. Shri Brij Kumar, Dy. Director General, Geological Survey of India, Jammu
Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Rana, DIG, National Disaster Response Force
Representatives of NGOs/Civil Society Organization
1. Dr. Gurmeet Singh, President, SAWERA, NGO
2. Shri S.P. Verma, Chairman, Gandhi Global Family
3. Dr. C.M. Seth, Ex. Chairman WWF, J&K/Environmentalist
55

ANNEXURE-III
List of Participants in the meeting of the Committee held at Shimla on 11.6.2016
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Dr. Rekha Pai, IG of Forests
2. Shri A.K. Mohanty, DIG of Forests
3. Dr. Kulraj Singh Kapoor, Director, Himalayan Forest Research Institute, Shimla
4. Dr. B.D. Suyal, Regional Director, Forest Survey of India (NZ), Shimla
5. Dr. S.S. Samant, Scientist-in-Charge, G.B. Pant Institute of Himalayan Environment & Development
Government of Himachal Pradesh
1. Shri R.D. Dhiman, Principal Secretary (Forests)
2. Dr. S.P . Vasudeva, PCCF
3. Dr. V .R.R. Singh, APCCF
4. Shri S.K. Sharma, APCCF
5. Dr. R.C. Kang, APCCF
6. Shri H.S. Dogra, CCF (Protection & Fire Control)
7. Shri P.L. Chauhan, CCF (Wildlife)
8. Shri Alok Nagar, CF, Shimla
9. Shri Ashok Kumar Chauhan, DFO, Solan
10. Shri Anit Sharma, DFO, Shimla
11. Shri Kunal Satyarthi, Member Secretary, H.P. State Council for S&T
12. Shri D.D. Sharma, Special Secretary, State Disaster Management Authority
13. Shri S.R. Mardi, Director, H.P. Fire Service Department, Shimla
14. Shri Vineet Kumar, Member Secretary, H.P. State Environment Protection & Pollution Control Board
Ministry of Mines
1. Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Director, Geological Survey of India, Chandigarh
2. Shri K.S. Yadav, Regional Controller of Mines
Ministry of Home Affairs
1. Shri R.K. Rana, DIG , OPS, National Disaster Response Force
2. Shri A.S. Rawat, DIG Police, State Headquarters, ITBP, Shimla
3. Shri Gopi Chand Chhawaniya, Director, NDCC
Representatives of NGOs/Civil Society Organisations
1. Dr. T.N. Lakhanpal, Professor Emeritus (Retired), HPU, Shimla
2. Dr. Lal Singh, Director, Himalayan Research Group, Shimla
3. Dr. Maninder Jeet Kaur, Himalayan Research Group, Shimla
4. Shri S.K. Joshi, Sevahar, BCS, Shimla
56

57
5. Shri Sandeep Rana, H.P. Eco-development Society, Palampur
6. Professor Ajay Srivastava, Umang Foundation, Shimla
7. Dr. Sushil Tanwar, Ashadeep, Shimla
8. Shri Hari Shyam Upadhaya, Ashadeep, Shimla
9. Ms. Kamla Devi, Mahila Van Paryavaran Suraksha Smiti, Paonta-Saheb
10. Ms. Sumitra Devi, Mahila Van Paryavaran Suraksha Samiti, Paonta-Saheb
11. Shri Kidwa Ram, Van Sarankshan Samiti, Paonta-Saheb