 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTIETH REPORT 
 
 Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained 
in the Three Hundred Twenty Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Science and Technology,   Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change on 'An Expanded Role for the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) in 
Cancer Treatment in India through An Enlarged Network of the Tata Memorial 
Centre (TMC)'. 
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
 
REPORT NO. 
350 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTIETH REPORT 
 
     Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in 
the Three Hundred Twenty Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary  
Standing Committee on Science and Technology,   Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change on 'An Expanded Role for the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) in Cancer 
Treatment in India through An Enlarged Network of the Tata Memorial  
Centre (TMC)'. 
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/ Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 

 
C O N T E N T S 
   
 
  PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION  (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS  
 
(iii) 
4. REPORT 1-12 
 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been 
                       accepted by the Government 
 
2-9 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the  Committee     
does not desire to pursue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
 
10 
 Chapter III.     Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
             replies of the Government have not been accepted 
                       by the Committee 
 
11 
 Chapter IV.     Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
                       Final Replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
12 
5. FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS-  
 AT A GLANCE 
 
13-14 
6. MINUTES 
 
15-17 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh – Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2.    Shri Anil Baluni 
3.    Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
4.    Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5.    Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
6.    Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
7.    Shri Parimal Nathwani 
8.    Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
9.    Shri Nabam Rebia   
10. # Vacant 
 
 
   LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.    Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
12.    Shri Pradan Baruah 
13.    Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
14.    Shri Jashvantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
15.    Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16.    Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
17.    Shri S. Jagathrakshakan 
18.    Shri Mohammed Azam Khan 
19.    Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
20.    Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
21.    Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
22.    Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
23. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
24. Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
25. Shri Francisco Sardinha  
26. Shri Anurag Sharma 
27. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
28. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
29. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
30. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
31. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
 
 
         SECRETARIAT 
 
         Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
         Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
         Shri Rakesh Anand, Additional Director 
         Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director 
         Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
         Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
          
____________________________________________________________________                      
#Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha ceased to be the member of the Committee consequent upon his res ignation 
from the Committee w.e.f. 11th October, 2021  
 
(i) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Repo rt on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred Fiftieth  
Report on the recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Twenty Fifth  
Report on 'An Expanded Role for the Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) in Cancer Tr eatment 
in India through An Enlarged Network of the Tata Memorial Centre (TMC)' of the Department of 
Atomic Energy, which was presented to the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha and forwarded to 
Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on the 11 th November, 2019 and  presented/laid in both the Houses 
of Parliament on  19th November, 2019. 
2.   There were 15 recommendations/observations in the Three Hundred Twenty Fifth Report 
of the Committee.  Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of the Committee 
were received from the Department on 20th October, 2020. 
3. In the meeting held on held on 30th November, 2021, the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same.  
 
 
 
 
 ( JAIRAM RAMESH ) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
30th November, 2021   Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Agrahayana 09, 1943 (Saka)                                   Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha 
                         
                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 

ACRONYMS 
 
ATR Action Taken Report  
DAE Department of Atomic Energy  
TMC Tata Memorial Centre  
ATN Action Taken Note 
HBNI Homi Bhabha National Institute  
INI  institution of national importance  
CSR  Corporate Social Responsibility  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
 

1 
 
 
 
 
REPORT 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Committee deals with the action taken 
by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in Three Hundred 
Twenty Fifth Report of the Committee on 'An Expanded Role for the Department of 
Atomic Energy (DAE) in Cancer Treatment in India through An Enlarged Network of 
the Tata Memorial Centre  (TMC)'.  The Report was presented to Hon'ble Chairman, 
Rajya Sabha and forwarded to Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 11 th November, 2019 
and thereafter presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 19th 
November, 2019. 
2.  Action Taken Note (ATN) was received from the Department of Atomic Energy 
on the  recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Twenty F ifth 
Report.  This has been categorized as follows:- 
Chapter I:  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Para:- 5.2, 5.4, 5.5, 5.7, 5.8, 5.9, 5.10, 5.11, 5.12, 5.13, 5.14 and 5.15   
Total recommendations – 12.  Accepted. 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Department has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in Chapter-1 of the Report. 
Chapter II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire 
to    pursue in   view of the Government’s replies:  
                      Para:-. 5.6 
                      Total recommendations  – 01.  Not to be pursued further. 
The Committee is convinced with the replies furnished by the Department 
and, therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendation further. 
Chapter III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
                       Para:-    5.3  
       Total recommendation  – 01.  Not convincing reply. 
The Committee expresses its concern over the non -implementation of its 
recommendation contained in Chapter-III and desires that the Department 
should furnish convincing action taken steps in respect of th se 
recommendation.   
Chapter IV: Recommendations/Observations in respec t of which final replies of 
the Government are still awaited:   

2 
 
 
 
 
  Para:- 6.2 
Total recommendation - 01. To be pursued further.  
The Committee desires that the Department should furnish pointed and 
detailed Action Taken Notes in respect of the further 
Recommendations/Observations made by the Committee in Chapter I and 
III of the Report.   The Department should also furnish the updated 
information regarding the paragraph men tioned in Chapter IV of the 
Report.  
3. The details of the ATR have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters. 
  

3 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED 
BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
HUB AND SPOKE MODEL – A PROPOSAL 
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.1 The Committee acknowledges the fact that DAE , through the Tata Memorial 
Centre, has significant experience in setting up cancer centres in different parts of the 
country as well as the Hub and Spoke model of care delivery. The close link between 
radiation and radionuclide based diagnosis and treatment for cancer, and their 
experience with setting up and running the National Cancer Grid. This makes TMC 
under DAE an uniquely, ideal organization to take up the responsibility of a 
nationwide government funded Hub and Spoke network which will take high quality 
cancer care closer to the district and region of patients across the country.   (Para 5.2) 
Action Taken  
1.2 Noted a separate budgetary head for TMC (through DAE) would be necessary to 
be able to establish and run these Centres and deliver world class care, as mentioned by 
the Hon'ble Prime Minister when inviting TMC to set up a cancer hospital in Varanasi.  
Also, there is a need to make the Homi Bhabha National Institute (HBNI) an institution 
of national importance (INI); A proposal for the same is under active consideration by 
the Government of India.  All existing and proposed Cancer Centres under DAE/TMC 
should also be brought under HBNI - this is extremely important to create the trained 
human resources for these Centres.  
Further Comments 
1.3 The Committee seconds the view point of the Department of Atomic Energy 
that a separate budgetary head is necessary for making the funds available to 
Tata Memorial Centre (TMC) through Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) to 
establish and run the Hubs across the country to deliver world class ca ncer care 
in the country .  For the purpose, the Committee strongly feels that the 
Department of Atomic Energy should make a proposal to the Ministry of Finance 
and impress upon them to make the funds available to the TMC through DAE for 
establishing the cancer care units/Hubs for which a detailed proposal needs to be 
first prepared by the TMC highlighting the number of existing cancer cares, 
projected increase in cancer cases in the coming 10 -15 years, inadequacy of 
infrastructure to tackle these cases; funds required for setting up the Hubs, etc. so 
that the Ministry of Finance optimizes the fund requirement of TMC in a  phased 
manner.   

4 
 
 
 
 
1.4 The Committee is also hopeful that the proposal of making the HBNI an 
institute of national importance would see ligh t of the day soon and all the 
formalities related would be complete d in a timely manner so that the intended 
benefits could be yielded.   
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.5 The Committee strongly feels that the TMC should take all the stakeholders on 
board re lated to cancer treatment, and leverage some of the existing centres and 
upgrading them to TMC standards rather than building new de novo centres.  The 
Committee, therefore, opines that TMC should at the outset list out all such existing 
centres/institutions such as AIIMS, Central/State Government Hospitals/Medical 
Colleges, etc. which can be converted into either a hub or spoke, so that existing 
facilities of these centres/institutions can be optimised and made available to the 
cancer patients of that regi on/State which will further minimise their migration to 
other places. This model has been successfully evidenced in setting up the hub in 
Varanasi anchored in the Railways Hospital. The Committee further feels that 
selection of the existing centres/institutions be made cautiously and judiciously so as to 
avoid duplication of efforts, ensuring standardised care.                                 (Para 5.4) 
 
Action Taken  
1.6 Upgradation of the 29 regional cancer centres with increasing infrastructure and 
human resource would enable these centres to be hubs for cancer care.  In addition, the 
approximately 300 government medical colleges should start an oncology department 
which could serve as the spokes.  The larger government medical colleges like AIIMS 
could also be supported to be hubs.  This would cost less than 50% of setting up de 
novo new cancer centres.  This can be initiated a fter an order is passed by both the 
Central Government as well as the respective State Governments and run on the Tata 
Memorial Ce ntre model.  Government may provide funds for the first 10 years by 
which time these centres are expected to be self-sustaining.  
Further comments  
1.7 The Committee , while accepting the submission made by the DAE , feels 
that synergy and close co -ordination between the Central Government and State 
Governments holds the key in successfully rolling out hub and spoke model of 
TMC across the country.  However, the Committee would like to emphasis e on 
the fact that the Central government must take lead in the matter and make 
available the required funds for initially upgrading the 29 regional cancer centres 
to be the hubs for cancer care in the country and the intricacies involved may first 
be firmed up in co -ordination and consultation with the 29 regio nal cancer 
centres and the respective State Government s so that a clean picture can emerge 

5 
 
 
 
 
and a timeframe can be fixed for the completion of the task.   It may, therefore, be 
imperative on the part of DAE to sensitize the Ministry of Finance of the 
budgetary allocation required for the purpose.                                                          
Recommendation/ Observation  
1.8  The Committee is of the considered view that Hub and Spoke Model of TMC if 
rolled out/implemented in various parts of the country, in a phased and scientific 
manner, will surely go a long way in making available affordable cancer treatment to 
the cancer patients. The increased number of hubs and spokes will put TMC in a much 
more advantageous position to negotiate with the in dustry including pharmaceuticals 
and medical equipment providers, which in turn would further help in bringing down 
the overall cost of cancer treatment across the board.                                     (Para 5.5) 
 
Action Taken 
1.9 Department agrees.  The experience has been that the procurement price of 
drugs/consumables reduces with increased volumes.  Economies of scale would 
certainly play a part in decreasing cost of drugs.  It is also stated that governmental 
incentives for pro duction of generic drugs would also promote high quality low -cost 
drugs and consumables in healthcare.   
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.10 The Committee is also of the view that keeping prices low of medicines related to 
cancer treatment is paramount keepin g in view of the poor financial and social 
background of the patients.  To achieve this objective, the Committee hopes that there 
must be a robust mechanism to check the prices of essential medicines related to 
treatment of cancer.  These medicines must be  made available at the hubs and spokes 
at rate contract of Government.                                                                        (Para 5.7) 
 
Action Taken  
1.11 There have been many recent initiatives by the Government to cap the prices of 
essential drugs.  These will be made available at the Hubs and spokes at rate contract 
of Government.  
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.12 The Committee also notes that the proposa l of TMC for its Hub and Spoke 
Model expects that the land for setting up these hubs and spokes would be made 
available to TMC free of cost by the State Government.  The Committee, therefore 
strongly feels that a High Level Steering Committee headed by the Minister of State for 
Atomic Energy, the Chief Secretaries/Administrators of all the States and Union 
Territories as Members and Director, TMC as Member Secretary be constituted so that 

6 
 
 
 
 
all the modalities related to the adoption and rolling out of the Hub  and Spoke Model 
can be chalked out in a time bound manner in order to not only contain the patient 
migration but also to ensure that state -of-the-art facilities be made available as close 
as possible to cancer patients. This Committee may also be empowere d to evolve 
funding models that are tailored for the specific needs of States. The Committee also 
recommends additional funds for affordable accommodation and transit camps for 
patients and caregivers to ease their hardship.                                                 (Para5.8) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.13 It is a welcome suggestion.  An Advisory Group comprising of the Minister of 
State (Atomic Energy), Principal Scientific Advisor, Secretary, Department of Atomic 
Energy, Chief Secretaries of all States and Union Territories, Director, Tata Memorial 
Centre may be constituted.   
 
1.14 In addition, it is suggested that a Core Steering Committee comprising of the 
Secretary, DAE or his nominee, Director, Tata Memorial Centre with two additional 
representatives from TMC, representative from the Ministry of health  and Family 
Welfare, representative from the Finance Ministry and representative from the HRD 
Ministry be created to oversee and plan the creation of the Hubs and Spokes.  This 
committee would be primarily responsible for overseeing the entire effort, prio ritizing 
the phasing of the cancer treatment hubs, and monitoring and evaluation of progress 
with the project.  Chief Secretaries of specific states would be Special Invitees to the 
Core Committee meetings when their respective states hubs/spokes are being  planned 
and implemented.  
 
1.15 Decisions on phasing this programme would be based on estimated cancer 
burden, current availability of cancer treatment facilities and availability of 
appropriated centres to be taken over as DAE Hubs.  This Committee would  also 
ensure prompt clearances for land, water, environment and electricity for the creation 
of the Hubs.  The Department also agrees with the recommendation that all hubs and 
spokes should have arrangements/facilities for affordable accommodation for pati ents 
and their care-givers. 
 
  Further comments  
1.16 The Department, however, appears to have accepted the recommendation 
made by the Committee, yet no action seems to have been initiated thereon by the 
Department.  The Committee would have appreciated had the Department made 
earnest steps in the matter and forwarded a detailed roadmap for the purpose to 
the State Government s so that some action may have sta rted by now.                               

7 
 
 
 
 
The Committee, therefore, desires the Department to tak e up the matter with the 
State Governments and make necessary headway in the matter.  
Recommendation/ Observation  
1.17 The Committee underlines that the criteria for hubs and spokes cannot be 
determined based on population alone, as underserved regions could also be sparsely 
populated and geographically far -off from densely populated centres. Therefore, 
special attention s hould be paid to ease the hardship of cancer patients in remote 
areas.  Particularly, Dr. B Barooah Cancer Institute at Guwahati should be upgraded 
and developed as a common hub for the North Eastern states with immediate focus on 
infrastructure development and training of human resources at all levels, until similar 
hubs and spokes are set up in all North Eastern states. In addition, focused research 
must be carried out on the higher incidence of cancer in the entire region.    (Para 5.9) 
 
Action Taken 
1.18 It is stated that location of Hubs and Spokes should not be made on the 
population served alone; it should also take into account cancer incidence rates, travel 
distances, pre -existing centres capable of treating cancer in the region.   The 
Department also agree that the Dr. B. Borooah Cancer Institute in Guwahati should be 
upgraded and serve as a hub for most of the North Eastern India till other centres are 
set up.  Spokes in North Eastern India could be customized depending on the 
geographic necessit ies- e.g. creation of two smaller spokes rather than one bigger 
spoke, given the challenges of travel in the North East.  Research should also be 
initiated into the reasons for increased cancer incidence in the region.  
Recommendation/ Observation  
1.19 The Committee hopes that after materialisation of Hubs and Spoke in various 
States, Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) would be signed between the Tata 
Memorial Centre, Mumbai and respective State Governments clearly demarcating 
their roles, functions, respon sibilities, financial obligations (if any), areas of 
jurisdiction, etc.                                                                                              (Para 5.10) 
                                                                                                                           
Action Taken 
1.20 Noted.  A robust mechanism, which ensures that both the Hubs and Spokes run 
on the same model as that of Tata Memorial Centre with constant handholding and 
oversight, is important.  
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
1.21 The Committee very well understands that a project as ambitious as Hub and 
Spoke Model of TMC requires a tremendous amount of financial backing from the 

8 
 
 
 
 
Central Government for setting up hubs as well as the State Governments for land, 
infrastructure and for running the spokes in their respective States.  However, the 
Committee strongly feels that it is the responsibility of the Government to make 
available the state -of-the-art medical facilities to its citizens whe re their ailments can 
be cured and utmost care be taken of the  patients, especially when  two-thirds of the 
total expenditure for cancer treatment is currently being borne by patients.                     
The Committee, therefore, desires that a separate an d dedicated budget for setting up 
state-of-the-art cancer facilities in the form of these proposed hubs in various parts of 
the country be made available to the Department of Atomic Energy/Tata Memorial 
Centre from the Union Government without compromising  on the budget for other 
equally important activities of the DAE.                                                         (Para 5.11) 
 
Action Taken  
1.22 The Department agrees with the recommendation.  It is necessary to have a 
separate budgetary head for cancer treatment for TMC under DAE.  Keeping in view 
the increasing numbers of patients affected by cancer, this is an important investment.  
Recommendation/ Observation  
1.23 The Committee further notes that various schemes/projects/programmes are 
being run by the Union as well as State Governments for which financial 
assistance/support is also provided.  The Committee, however, is of the opinion that 
the current style of working in silos to address cancer treatment in India may not yield 
the desired resu lts and thus there should be synergy between all such 
Governments/authorities/agencies. The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that the 
Department of Atomic Energy/Tata Memorial Centre should work in tandem and close 
co-ordination with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India as 
well as State Governments so that concerted efforts are put to tackle the cancer 
burden.                                                                                                             (Para 5.12) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.24 The Department , along with TMC, would work closely with the Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare as well as State Governments in this initiative.  
Recommendation/ Observation 
1.25 The Committee underlines the importance of human resources of the likes of 
highly qualified doctors, skilled technicians, paramedics, nursing staff and 
administrators as the backbone of the Hub and Spoke model as proposed by TMC. 
Therefore, the Committee s trongly agrees with the recommendation of TMC that the 
infrastructure and human resources must be sanctioned in tandem for the success of 
the Hub and Spoke model.                                                                               (Para 5.13) 

9 
 
 
 
 
Action Taken 
1.26 Creating human resources sufficient to manage the different Hubs and Spokes 
under this plan would take time, and sanction of manpower needs to be made along 
with the initial approval.  That wo uld provide adequate time to up -skill general 
physicians and surgeons to treat cancer as well as create human resources adequate to 
work in these Centres. 
Recommendation/ Observation  
1.27 The Committee applauds the innovative ‘share in income’ scheme of the TMC 
to incentivize highly qualified doctors to give up the private sector and serve the public 
healthcare system. The Committee also notes the tremendous research and career 
growth opportunities provided by TMC to its staff. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Union Government and Sta te Governments to adopt such innovative 
practices and also pursue other schemes that will meet the challenge of adequate 
human resources in the battle against cancer.                                                (Para 5.14) 
Action Taken 
 
1.28 Noted. 
 
Recommendation/ Observation  
1.29 The Committee strongly recommends that ‘Institute of National Importance’ 
status be granted to ‘Homi Bhabha National Institute’ through an Act of Parliament, 
since it will be the knowledge, training and research hub for human resources to 
address cancer care in India. With the status of ‘Institute of National Importance’, the 
TMC would be in a position to recruit generalists (MD General Medicine, Paediatrics, 
MS General Surgery) who will work under the supervision of trained and qualified 
medical and surgical oncologists in these hubs and spokes.  The Committee, therefore, 
urges upon the Department of Atomic Energy/Tata Memorial Centre to pursue the 
matter and impresses upon the Union Government, highlighting the significance and 
importance of Homi Bhabha Na tional Institute being granted the status of ‘Institute of 
National Importance’.                                                                                     (Para 5.15) 
 
Action Taken 
 
1.30 The Department agrees.  The proposal of DAE for converting HBNI into INI 
through an Act of Parliament is under active consideration with Government of India.   

10 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DOES NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S 
REPLIES 
 
HUB AND SPOKE MODEL – A PROPOSAL 
Recommendation/ Observation 
2.1  The Committee is of the considered opinion that since creation of infrastructure 
and research for treatment of cancer requires huge investment of money and human 
resources, the Department of Atomic Energy/TMC may chalk out strategy for linkages 
with various industries/companies for funding under Corporate Social Responsibility 
(CSR) in lieu of knowledge sharing, technology transfer etc.  The industry tie -up may 
further aid in kick starting ‘Make in India’ initiatives for pharmaceuticals and 
advanced medical equipment for cancer treatment.                                         (Para 5.6)  
 
Action Taken  
 
2.2 While some part of the investment into upgrading existing centres or 
establishing new cancer departments in medical colleges may come from CSR funds, 
this is likely to be a small proportion of overall funds required.  Meaningful 
Upgradation of existing regional can cer centers and developing oncology departments 
in government medical colleges would require funding support which will not be 
feasible by CSR funding alone.  
  

11 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE 
 
HUB AND SPOKE MODEL – A PROPOSAL 
Recommendation/ Observation 
3.1 Taking note of the Hub and Spoke Model submitted by Tata Memorial Centre, 
the Committee is of the considered opinion that this model caters to not only the 
existing infrastructural requirements of the cancer patients but for the future demand 
as well. The Committee also notes that the government expenditure on TMC for cancer 
treatment is proving to be of immense value as evidenced by the rising demand from 
cancer patients all over the country for treatment at TMC.  The Committee, therefore, 
finds merit in the proposal of TMC with regard to immed iately embark on a mapping 
exercise to determine the phasing of its Hub and Spoke model, so that the first few hubs 
can be set up in the regions where incidences of cancer have been increasing and 
facilities for the cancer care is woefully inadequate.  The  Committee, therefore, urges 
upon TMC to evolve a mechanism so that the mapping exercise identifies locations 
where TMC would like to set up its hubs and recommend spokes for State Governments 
to be started and completed in a time bound manner.                                      (Para 5.3) 
Action Taken  
3.2 It is stated that TMC is also strengthening the existing system of cancer centres 
through the National Cancer Grid & a large network of 198 cancer centres, research 
institutions, patient groups and professional societies in India are already a part of this 
Grid.  
Further comments  
3.3 The Committee , while t aking note of the steps being taken by TMC for 
strengthening the existing system of cancer centres through NCG  feels that t he 
action taken does not include the actions actually taken on the recommendations 
of the Committee w.r.t.  embarking a napping exercise to determine the phasing of 
the Hub and Spoke model .  The Committee  would have appreciated had TMC 
furnished the details of the actions taken thereon.  The Committee, thus, finds the 
reply of the Department incomplete in nature and content.  T he Committee, 
therefore, reiterates its recommendation and desires TMC to initiate action and 
the issues/challenges  encountered, if any, may be brought to the notice of the 
Committee for their speedy and timely disposal.  

12 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER – IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
 
Recommendation/ Observation 
4.1 Finally, the Committee is well aware that the primary mandate of the 
Department of Atomic Energy is to rapidly increase the generation of nuclear power 
generating capacity. Even so it is conscious of the fact that one of the spin -offs from 
the country’s nuclear programme has been the Tata Memorial Centre’s cancer 
treatment network. The Committee is of the considered opinion that there is urgent 
need to expand this network in support of national health goals. This expansion does 
not, in any w ay, clash with the objective of increasing nuclear power generating 
capacity. The Committee is submitting this report in the hope that the Government of 
India will take a comprehensive view instead of having the report examined by the 
Department concerned and a routine Action Taken Report submitted to Parliament. 
The Committee expects that such an Action Taken Report will be submitted after its 
recommendations are examined by the Department of Atomic Energy and the Ministry 
of Health and Family Welfare jointly and a holistic view taken.                     (Para 6.2) 
 
Action Taken 
4.2 Not submitted by the Department. 
 
 
  

13 
 
 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS 
Further recommendation/Observations 
 The Committee seconds the view point of the Department of Atomic Energy 
that a separate budgetary head is necessary for making the funds available to 
Tata Memorial Centre (TMC) through Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) to 
establish and run the Hubs across the country to deliver world cl ass cancer care  
in the country .  For the purpose, the Committee strongly feels that the 
Department of Atomic Energy should make a proposal to the Ministry of Finance 
and impress upon them to make the funds available to the TMC through DAE for 
establishing the cancer care units/Hubs for which a detailed proposal needs to be 
first prepared by the TMC highlighting the number of existing cancer cares, 
projected increase in cancer cases in the coming 10 -15 years, inadequacy of 
infrastructure to tackle these cases; funds required for setting up the Hubs, etc. so 
that the Ministry of Finance optimizes the fund requirement of TMC in a  phased 
manner.                                                                                                           (Para 1.3) 
 The Committee is also hopeful that the proposal of making the HBNI an 
institute of national importance would see light of the day soon and all the 
formalities related would be complete d in a timely manner so that the intended 
benefits could be yielded.                                                                              (Para 1.4) 
 The Committee , while accepting the submission made by the DAE , feels 
that synergy and close co -ordination between the Central Government and State 
Governments holds the key in successfully rolling out hub and spoke model of 
TMC across the country.  However, the Committee would like to emphasis e on 
the fact that the Central government must take lead in the matter and make 
available the required funds for initially upgrading the 29 regional cancer centres 
to be the hubs for cancer care in the country and the intricacies involved may first 
be firmed up in co -ordination and consultation with the 29 regional cancer 
centres and the respective State Government s so that a clean picture can emerge 
and a timeframe can be fixed for the completion of the task.   It may, therefore, be 
imperative on the part of DAE to sensitize the Ministry of Finance of the 
budgetary allocation required for the purpose.                                          (Para 1.7)                                                         
 The Department, however, appears to have accepted the recommendation 
made by the Committee, yet no action seems to have been initiated thereon by the 
Department.  The Co mmittee would have appreciated had the Department made 
earnest steps in the matter and forwarded a detailed roadmap for the purpose to 
the State Government s so that some action may have sta rted by now.                               

14 
 
 
 
 
The Committee, therefore, desires the Department to take up the matter with the 
State Governments and make necessary headway in the matter.         (Para 1.16) 
3.3 The Committee , while t aking note of the steps being taken by TMC for 
strengthening the exist ing system of cancer centres through NCG  feels that t he 
action taken does not include the actions actually taken on the recommendations 
of the Committee w.r.t.  embarking a napping exercise to determine the phasing of 
the Hub and Spoke model .  The Committee would have appreciated had TMC 
furnished the details of the actions taken thereon.  The Committee, thus, finds the 
reply of the Department incomplete in nature and content.  The Committee, 
therefore, reiterates its recommendation and desires TMC to initiate action and 
the issues/challenges  encountered, if any, may be brought to the notice of the 
Committee for their speedy and timely disposal.                                         (Para 3.3) 
 
  

15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________________________ 
  

16 
 
 
 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 30 th November, 2021 in 
Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
             MEMBERS PRESENT 
1.  Shri Jairam Ramesh -- Chairman 
              RAJYA SABHA 
2.   Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3.   Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
4.   Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
5.   Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
6.   Shri Nabam Rebia 
             LOK SABHA 
7.   Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
8.   Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
9.   Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
10.   Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
11.   Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
12.   Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
13.   Shri Anurag Sharma 
14.   Shri Ram Shiromani 
             SECRETARIAT 
             Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
             Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
             Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
             Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
             Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the 
Committee.  The Committee decided to take up the consideration and adoption of 
the draft 348 th, 349th, 350th, 351st, 352nd, 353rd, 354th, 355th, 356th and 357th  reports 
of the Committee on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations/observations contained in the 316 th Report on 'Air Pollution in 
Delhi and National Capital Region'; the 324th  Report on ‘Status of Forests in India; 
the 325 th  Report on ‘An Expanded Role for the Department of Atomic Energy 
(DAE) in Cancer Treatment in India through An Enlarged Network of the Tat a 

17 
 
 
 
 
Memorial Centre (TMC)’; and 351 st to 357 th Reports on the Demands for Grants 
(2021-22) of the Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; Biotechnology; 
Scientific and Industrial Research; Science & Technology; Space; Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, respectively. The Committee, then, 
considered the draft 348th to 357th reports and adopted the same. 
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned reports in both the 
Houses of Parliament on the 1 st December, 2021.  The Committee also authorised 
the Chairman to decide the names of the Members for presentation/laying of the 
reports in both the Houses of Parliament.  
4. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10.25 a.m. 
 
 
 
 