PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Two Hundred Fifty-ninth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2015-16) of the Department of Biotechnology
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)
274
REPORT NO.

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY FOURTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained
in the Two Hundred Fifty-ninth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2015-16) of the Department of Biotechnology
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ........................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-7
5. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 9-12

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September , 2015)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
9. Shri Bhupinder Singh
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakraborty
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar

(ii)
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
30. Shri Vikram Usendi
31. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Two Hundred Seventy-fourth Report on the Action Taken by the Department of
Biotechnology on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Fifty-ninth Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2015-2016) of the Department of Biotechnology, which was presented/laid in
both the Houses of Parliament on 7th May, 2015.
2. There were thirteenth recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Fifty-ninth Report of the
Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the
Department on 4th November, 2015.
3. In the meeting held on 15th January, 2016, the Committee considered the Report and adopted the
same.
N
EW D ELHI; ASHWANI KUMAR
15 January, 2016 Chairman,
Pausha 25, 1937 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
RE : Revised Estimate
BIRAC : Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council
TAC : Technical Appraisal Committee
HRD : Human Resource Development
(iv)

REPORT
INTRODUCTION
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on
the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Fifty-ninth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2015-16) of the Department of Biotechnology, presented to both the Houses of Parliament
on 7th May, 2015. There were thirteen recommendations in the Report of the Committee. Action Taken
notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Department on 4th November,
2015. The Department has intimated that it has accepted all the recommendations of the Committee. The
Committee, on examination of Action Taken Notes, however is not satisfied with action taken by the
Department in respect of two recommendations (para nos. 7.3 and 9.11) and would like the Department
to take further action in respect of these recommendations as indicated in the Report.
The Committee's recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the
Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology are set out in the subsequent paragraphs:-
FINANCIAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT
Recommendation
The Committee feels that although the Department of Biotechnology had been able to spend 97.76
per cent and 99.19 per cent of the allocations made during 2012-13 and 2013-14, the allocation of the
Department were not only allocated on pro-rata basis during first three years of the Twelfth Plan period
but it has been reduced at RE stage in each of the first three years of the Plan period. The Committee
is of the considered view that the Biotechnology will play a very important role in the development of
the nation in the years to come and reduction in the allocations of the Department at the RE stage, when
the Department has demonstrated capability to utilize the allocated amounts, results in avoidable delay
in the implementation of programmes and achievement of the targets fixed, thereby adversely affecting
the scientific and technical advancement of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
budgetary allocation of the Department should be increased at the RE stage during the current financial
year and the Department should be provided the full amount as it is capable of utilizing the same during
the remaining period of the Twelfth Plan. (Para 4.3)
Action Taken by Government
As a follow-up of this recommendation and the trend of expenditure as on September, 2015,
Department has communicated the demand of ` 150.00 Crores as additional grant at the Revised Estimate
(RE) stage to Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance for their consideration along with the
observation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee.

2
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry of Finance would positively
consider the demand of the Department.
MONITORING MECHANISM OF THE DEPARTMENT
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that a strong and potent monitoring mechanism is extremely important
for achieving the set objectives and implementation of the schemes and, therefore, recommends that the
Department should continue with its monitoring mechanisms to ensure that there are no time and cost
overruns in respect of its schemes / programmes. (Para 5.2)
Action Taken by Government
The Department noted the recommendation to continue its monitoring mechanisms to avoid time
and cost overruns. Therefore, in large projects involving multiple agencies additionally Project Management
and Monitoring Committees have been constituted which besides site visits monitors physical technical
and financial achievements of individual components of the project.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation
The Committee notes that inspite of making utilization of its allocated funds in respect of Research
and Development scheme, the allocation under R&D had been considerably reduced during the 2014-
15. The apparent increase in allocation during 2015-16 is actually due to merger of 'International
Collaboration' under R&D scheme. The Committee is of the view that for facilitating R&D and
encouraging young scientists in the extremely important area of biotechnology, increased allocations to
this sector are in order. Genomics, synthetic biology and chemical biology are frontier areas of big ticket
science and for India to establish itself as a global leader in these areas, funds should never be an issue.
We need to invest in our future now. Biotechnology holds the key to some of the critical challenges that
we face. (Para 6.4)
Action Taken by Government
Department remains encouraged at the recognition of importance of increase investments in
biotechnology R&D for pursuing cutting edge technologies. As detailed in action taken report for
recommendation 4.3, additional budget has been requested for consideration by Ministry of Finance at
RE stage.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply. Since biotechnology holds the key to some of our critical
challenges, the Committee hopes that the Department would be able to convince the concerned
authorities in Finance Ministry for increase in allocation for R&D at RE stage.

3
PRIV ATE SECTOR INVESTMENT IN RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance
Council (BIRAC) to encourage and involve the private sector in the field of Biotechnology. The
Committee is of the view that involving / facilitating private sector is extremely important for accelerating
the growth of biotechnology in the country and recommends that BIRAC should accelerate its efforts to
attract / facilitate private sector participation and increase global competitiveness of Indian biotech
industry. International partnership should be entered in the frontier area of biotechnology and the results
thereof should be clearly verifiable. (Para 7.3)
Action Taken by Government
The recommendation has been communicated to BIRAC for accelerating the efforts in accordance
with the directions of the Committee.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the fact that BIRAC has been intimated for accelerating the
efforts in accordance with the directions of the Committee. But the Committee feels that what
action BIRAC has taken in pursuance of the recommendation of the Committee, has not been
communicated. The Committee therefore is of the view that action taken by BIRAC needs to
be intimated.
PROGRAMME FOR PROMOTION OF EXCELLENCE AND INNOV ATION
Recommendation
The Committee notes the reasons for underutilization of allocated funds for 'Programme for Promotion
of Excellence and Innovation' during 2014-15 and feels that they are of administrative nature and that
underutilization of funds was avoidable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should strengthen its administrative and monitoring mechanisms to ensure that funds allocated for
important projects are not underutilized. (Para 8.4)
Action Taken by Government
The concerned Programme Division has already undertaken appropriate steps to ensure that the
funds allocated for Centres of Excellence scheme are fully utilized. An advertisement for fresh call for
proposals from institution / universities has been made. 32 proposals have been shortlisted after scrutiny
on techno-economic feasibility by Technical Appraisal Committee (TAC) of experts. Therefore, additional
budget has also been requested at R.E. stage from Ministry of Finance for funding of these proposals
at cutting edge of excellence.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed of the progress made in the
above direction during the consideration of Demands for Grants 2016-17 of the Department.

4
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (HRD)
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the allocation for Human Resource Development at the RE stage has
remained almost the same during the last three years. Although the Department was not able to fully
utilize the allocation made to the programme during 2013-14, it could utilized most of the outlays during
2012-13 and 2014-15. The Committee notes the schemes initiated by the Department to attract and
develop quality human resource skilled and quality manpower is an important and key component for
scientific development in multidisciplinary areas of biotechnology. The Committee, recommends that the
Department should be allocated additional funds for this sector to ensure completion of schemes initiated
for scientific development in multidisciplinary areas of biotechnology. The Committee also recommends
that the Department on its own part, should ensure that funds allocated for Human Resource Development
are utilized not only fully but optimally. (Para 9.9)
Action Taken by Government
Department is highly encouraged on the recognition to the schemes of Human Resource Development.
As mentioned in Action Taken to recommendation 4.3, an additional budgetary requirement of ` 30.00
Crores has been proposed at R.E. stage for consideration by Ministry of Finance.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee notes with concern the reasons outlined by the Secretary, Department of Biotechnology
for not-filling top posts in scientific institutions. The Committee is of the view that the situation that
has arisen due to retirement age of scientists in universities vis-a-vis the Department's institutes needs
to be rectified to create a good research base in the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Department should evolve a suitable mechanism to contain this problem of brain drain from institutes
to universities and adhocism. Considering the actual role of experts in the field of biotechnological
advance and also the need for the best minds to provide a leadership role in the area, the challenges
outlined above need to be proactively and imaginatively dealt with. Hence retaining and engaging the
best minds is of critical importance. (Para 9.11)
Action Taken by Government
The observations of the Committee have been followed up in some cases of autonomous institutions
with required results.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply. However, the Committee would like, as per its
recommendation, to be apprised of the details of the mechanism evolved in this regard.

5
INDIA'S RANKING IN INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH PUBLICATIONS
Recommendation
The Committee notes the improvement in the global ranking of the country in various fields of
Biotechnology but expresses its concern over India lagging behind China in the field of foundational
sciences. The Committee also notes that the Department has not let the budgetary constraints come into
the way of its excelling in the field of biotechnology and earning India a place in the top countries of
the world. The Committee exhorts the Department to attain excellence and improve India's global ranking
in Biotechnology and must specifically endeavor to be amongst the first five countries as per established
parameters. A time frame for achieving the milestone should be fixed and a purposive / concrete Action
Plan be formulated to achieve this ambitious national aspiration. The Committee feels that Department
should adore the number of patents granted to its scientists as one of the measures to judge the quality
of research. This area requires a special focus. Commercialization of patents is a week area. The reasons
therefore need to be identified and suitable correctives should be applied. (Para 10.4)
Action Taken by Government
Department has noted the recommendation and has made efforts to draft a new Biotechnology
Development Strategy for achieving the goals. The patent facilitation cell in DBT and interface between
BIRAC and DBT project investigators from public sector have also been strengthened for increased
public private partnership and product development.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that action taken by the Department would yield
the desired results.
STEPS TO CONTAIN BRAIN DRAIN
Recommendation
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Department for attracting the required talent available
with the country in the field of Biotechnology through various fellowships / schemes, both for students
and scientists. The Committee feels that there is no dearth of talent in the country. The need is to tap
this talent and provide all necessary wherewithal for achieving excellence in the field of Biotechnology.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be no let up in the efforts of the Department
to attract talented people in the field of Biotechnology. The Department should spearhead an accelerated
efforts not only to woo the talent available in the country but also attract top Indian talent in other
countries to the field of Biotechnology in India. Apart from initiatives already in place, the Department
should explore other meaningful initiatives to establish strong foundations for an onward and long
journey to achieve a leadership role in the various areas of biotechnology. The Committee feels that
excellent leadership has been provided in the past by the Department of Biotechnology but for the
Department to play its rightful role in meeting challenges of the future, it must inspire the best minds

6
to join the Department and continue with various schemes. Allocating fiscal and career progression
related incentives should be put in place for the purpose. (Para 11.5)
Action Taken by Government
The Recommendation has been discussed in the Scientific Advisory Committee (overseas) of DBT
and also in the Scientific Advisory Committee in each of the autonomous institutions. Accordingly, the
schemes such as centres of Excellence, Ramalingswami Fellowships, Welcome Trust - DBT Alliance
Programme and Network have been strengthened with new opportunities for career development. Additional
efforts are planned for 2016-17, depending on availability of funds.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply and feels that details of schemes strengthened may
be provided.
BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation
The Committee notes the contributions made by the Department in the field of bio-fertilizer production,
vermicomposting, apiculture, poultry, fish production and rearing, artificial insemination, mushroom
cultivation, goat rearing, fruit plant nurseries, sericulture, post-harvest processing technologies, hybrid
seed production, use of quality planning materials and women and child health care for societal development
through biotechnology. The Committee recommends that the Department should ensure greater involvement
of Civil Society organizations, NGOs, local representatives at the Panchayat level in the implementation
of its schemes / programmes so that the benefits of the programmes percolate to the rural areas and
weaker and lower sections of the society in real terms.
The Committee notes that although the Department has outlined the multifarious benefits of the
programme, the fact remains that, in spite of its earlier assurance to the Committee to undertake the
survey to assess its impact as to how it actually helped / benefitted society in terms of employment and
entrepreneurship, the survey has not been conducted so far. The Committee recommends that the Department
should institute a survey to assess the impact of its societal benefit programmes / schemes in actual terms
and report the results to the Committee. (Para nos. 12.7 & 12.8)
Action Taken by Government
This programme is implemented to help the community for the socio-economic upliftment through
training and demonstrations activities in biotech based interventions through diffusion of proven and field
tested technologies. The aim of this programme is to support socially relevant activities to demonstrate
the R&D leads and delivery of the technological know-how for the benefit of the community through
self-help groups, science based NGOs and Rural Universities.
The programme is implemented as competitive grant system similar to R&D scheme. A special
committee of experts, social workers and eminent rural leaders is operational for need assessment,
project appraisal and monitoring. All the beneficiaries submit regular progress reports and make presentations

7
on yearly-basis to special committee. The implementations of these schemes have been regularly reviewed
with a strong monitoring and assessment mechanism of the department. Also the schemes/ projects are
being regularly monitoring through the Task Force mechanism and site visits by the experts, wherever
essential. With this the actual deliverables have been assured to assess the benefits to the end users for
the upliftment of the target community.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
GENERAL
Recommendation
The Committee also recommends that special efforts should be made to disseminate information and
knowledge of the schemes of the Department in far flung districts and particularly in the states of North
East. (Para 12.9)
Action Taken by Government
Under the Departmental scheme of North-Eastern Region- Biotechnology Programme Management
Cell (NER-BPMC) large funding is being provided both for R&D and diffusion of technology relevant
to the North-Eastern region through dissemination of appropriate technological intervention and knowledge
gain to the target community. This is to provide extensive benefits to the north eastern states in India
by mandatory 10% funding of the DBT Gross Budgetary Support as a policy measure. With the diffusion
of technological know-how, benefits, have been provided to the educated youths, women SHGs and to
the farmers by undertaking various income and self-employment generation activities for the socio-
economic upliftment in the North-Eastern region.
Comments
The Committee hopes that the steps taken by the Government to disseminate information
and knowledge of schemes in the states of North East would help in the socio-economic upliftment
of the people of these states.
Recommendation
Parliamentary oversight through the work of the Standing Committee would be meaningful only if
the recommendation of the Committee are implemented in their true spirit and not ignored under the usual
pretexts. The Committee hopes that the Recommendation made are implemented proactively and within
a stipulated time frame. (Para 12.10)
Action Taken by Government
The Department assures that the recommendations are implemented in true spirit and shall report the
challenges to the Committee during implementation for suggestions.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

MINUTES

VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Friday, the 15th January, 2016 in Committee Room 'A', Ground
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Shri Bhupinder Singh
5. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
6. Kum. Sushmita Dev
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Shri Laxman Giluwa
9. Dr. K. Gopal
10. Shri Daddan Mishra
11. Shri Nagendra Singh
12. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
** *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
*** Relate to other matters.
11

12
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. The Committee then considered the draft 271st to 276th Reports of the Committee on Action Taken
by the Government on recommendations/observations contained in reports of the Committee on the
Demands for Grants (2015-16) pertaining to Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy, Science &
Technology, Space, Earth Sciences, Scientific and Industrial Research and Biotechnology and adopted the
same.
14. * * *
15. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5.29 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.