PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJY A
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/25th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:02]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
 AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1995-96)
TWENTY -FIFTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1995-96) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS (DEMAND NO. 87)
(Presented on May 15, 1995)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI
May, 1995lVaisakha, 1917 (Saka)
CONTENTS
PAGES

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJY A
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/25th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:02]
1.                 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ..
2.       INTRODUCTION                                                                                                    
3.                  REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4.         MINUTES OF THE COMMITTEE
     
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMI'ITEE ON
 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1995-96)
1. Syed Sibtey Razi-Chairman
RAJYA SABRA
2.      Dr. M. Aram
3.      Shri Ajit P.K. logi
4.      Dr. Murii Manohar Joshi
5.      Shri K. ltahman Khan
   6.      Prof. M.G. K. Menon
     7.    Shri  Suresh Pachouri
    8.     Shri N. Oirl Prasad
    9.     Shri Salchidananda
10
      Shri W. Kolabidhu Singh
    11.   Dr. Ranbir Singh
12.  Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
   LOK SABHA
13.   Shri E. Aiamed
  14.  Shri P.C. O1acko
15. Shrimati Bbawa Olikhalia
16. Shri Jitendra Nath Das 
17.   Shri Sharad Dtghe
18.  Shrimati Saroj Dubey
19.  Shri Oscar Farndes
20.  Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
21.   Shri  P. Kumarasamy
22.   Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
23.   Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
24.    Shri M.V.V.S Murthy
25.    Shri Harpal Panwar
26.    Shri Balraj Pasi
27.       Shri Bhim Singh Patel
28.
       Shri Chandresh Patel
29.       Shri Vijay Naval Patil
30.       Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
31.       Shrimati Vasundbara Raje
32.       Shri Rama Chandra Rath
33.       Shri M.G. "Reddy
34.       Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
35.       Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
36.   Shri Harchand Singh
   37.   Shri Ram Prasad Singh
38.    Shri K.G. Shivappa
39.    Shri Bapusaheb Thite
40.    Kumari Sushiia Tiriya
    41.  Kumari Frida Topno
   42.  Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJY A
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/25th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:02]
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
 
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been, authorised
 by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, present this Twenty Fifth Report, on the Demands for Grants
 pertaining to the Department of Electronics for the year 1995-96 (Demand No. 87).
2. In its meeting held on April 21, 1995 the Committee considered the Demands for Grants of the Department of
 Electronics on the basis of the documents made availaple to it and the submission made before it by the Secretary and
 the other representatives of the Department.
3. The Committee thanks the officers of the Department for providing necessary information to the Hon'ble
 Members to facilitate consideration of its Demands for Grants.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on May 10, 1995.
 
 
NEW DELHI SYED SIBTEY RAZI
May 10, 1995 Chairman
 Committee on Science & Technology, Environment and Forests
 
 
REPORT
Electronics is amongst the world's largest and fastest growing industries. During· the past two decades, worldwide
 production in the electronics sector bas shown a faster growth state than achieved in any other industrial sector. The
 Department of Electronics has been vested with the responsibility of formulation, implementation and review of
 national policies in the field of electronics. The other tasks of the Department include development of appropriate new
 technologies through R&D programmes, promoting applications of electronics particularly export oriented, creation of
 infrastructure for standardisation , testing and quality certification, development of manpower resources and co-
ordination of various applications of electronics.
2. The Secretary of the Department in his presentation before the Committee Outlined the measures being taken,
 and the approaches that are being followed, by the Department on the application of electronics in different sectors.
 Indian electronics industry, according to him, is doing very well; the growth during the years 1992-93, 1993-94 and
 1994-95 has been 17.5%, 15.5% and 18.2% which may be compared with the overall industrial growth which has been
 much less va., 1.3%, 5% and 8%. Exports are also moving at a faster pace, being 33.3% during 1994-95 as compared to
 29.4% in 1993-94. Currently, out of total electronics exports of Rs. 2000 crores, the share of software is 70% and that
 of hardware 30%. There is, however, considerable ·scope for improvement ,. to raise it to substantially higher levels.
 The Department has been focussing its attention on research and development in certain thrust areas. Funds have been
 earmarked for specified important schemes/projects such as C-DAC for the development of parallel processors,
 identified technology missions, technology development for Indian industries, standardisation , testing and quality
 control, Special Manpower Development Programme, Photonics Development Programme and Electronic Materials
 Development Programme. Projects for infrastructure development such as Software Export Promotion Programme,
 Advanced Technology Programme in Computer Networking, High Speed Data Network, etc. have been pursued.
 Technology development programmes, under the aegis of Technology Development Council, National Radar Council,
 Electronics in the Health and Rural Sector, Development and Application of Industrial Robots, National High Voltage

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJY A
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/25th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:02]
 Direct Current (NHVDC) and Industrial Electronics Promotion Programme are being supported. The approach of the
 Department is to I bring about the development of indigenous technolo ,8Y for mass application, with the commitment
 and financial participation of other agencies and users. In this context, the Secretary cited the examples of development
 of linear accelerator being used in the Post Graduate Institute for Medical Research and Education Chandigarh, HVDC,
 and technology development for Indian languages in association with the Department of Official Languages, Ministry
 of Information and Broadcasting, etc. A model has been developed for supporting technology ­based development
 programmes in the private sector. A major initiative which the Department has taken is towards the forming of a society
 for ERNET, and using it for strengthening the educational infrastructure. of the country.
3. A total outlay of Rs. 180.15 crores--Rs. 147 crores in the Plan Sector and "Ra. 33.15 crores in the non-Plan
 Sector-bas been proposed for the Department for the year 1995-96, as against the revised estimates of .Rs. 178.70
 crores during the year 1994-95.  This represents an increase of just Rs. 1.45 crores. In the total budgetary outlay of the
 Department, as reflected in its Demands for Grants for the year 1995-96, the Plan provision of Rs. 147 crores
 comprises Rs. 103 crores as local component and Rs. 44 crores as external aid. The total non-Plan provision of Rs.
 33.15 crores comprises Rs. 14.35 crores towards administrative expenditure, Grants-in-aid to Departments, societies,
 etc., and Rs. 18.80 crores towards adjustment of the value of equipment received as aid from abroad.
4. After listening to the presentation made by the Secretary, Department of Electronics, the Committee examined
 the Demands for Grants of the Department for the year 1995-96 at some length, particularly from the broader angle of
 his mandate, objectives, international scenario in the area of electronics and the role of electronics in building the
 national industrial base. In this process the Committee also made an evaluation of the plans and programmes of the
 Department, particularly its focus during the remaining period of the 8th Plan.
5. Before going into details of the Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics, and the thrust of its
 programmes as reflected through the allocations made for these, the Committee went into two preliminary issues: of its
 annual plan allocations vis-a-vis the total plan outlay projected/approved for the entire 8th Plan period; and the status of
 utilisation of money allocated for its different programmes/activities. the approved Plan outlay for the Department for
 the entire 8th Plan period
' has been kept at Rs. 713.98 crores. Against this, the annual plan outlays of the Department
 during the years 1992-93, 1993-94 and 1994-95 have been Rs. 67.70 crores, Rs. 164 crores (R.E.) and Rs. 140.60 crores
 (R.E.) respectively. Against these annual plan outlays, the actual utilisation for these years has been Rs. 67.70 crores,
 Rs. 153.17 crores and Rs. 140.60 crores; and if the Budget Estimates of the Department for the year 1995-96 in the Plan
 Sector are added to the funds actually utilised during the first three years of the 8th Plan period, then the total would
 come to Rs. 508.47 crores which implies that, during the last year of the 8th Plan (1996-97), about Rs. 205 crores will
 be available to the Department to carry out plan programmes . Going by the figures of expenditure for the first four
 years of the 8th Five Year plan, it appears to the Committee that the Department would be left with a much larger sum
 during the year 1996­97 than, it has been spending annually. This is a rare phenomenon not in tune with the needs of
 development of such an important sector.
6. The Committee, in its 14th Report, had noted that the position of utilisation of allocated funds by the Department
 was .not satisfactory and accordingly stressed the need for urgent steps to improve its performance in the promotion of
 R&D and the use of budgetary allocations. During the year 1994-95, as per the tentative figures furnished to the
 Committee, the utilisation has been of the order of Rs. 145.75 crores (both Plan and Non­-Plan) against an amount of
 Rs. 176.32 crores which was the total budgetary outlay for the year. This shows that there has not been any
 improvement in so far as the pattern of budgetary spending by the Department is concerned. There are three areas
 namely National HYDC, Technology Missions and Semiconductor complex Ltd. (SCL) which have contributed to the
 much lower utilisation  of money by the Department. Rupees five crores were earmarked for National HVDC against
 whiCh only Rs. 2.25 crores could be spent. The reason given was that less demand was made on the Department as its
 contribution. Similarly, on Technology Missions a sum of Rs. 8.04 crores could be utilised  against a Budgetary
 provision of Rs. 10 crores. The reason advanced by the Department for savings in this area was that the tying up of the
 commitment of users/industry with regard to their financial participation took more time. The major factor, however,
 for non-utilisation of the full budgetary outlay of the Department was that the amount of Rs. 27.18 crores which was
 earmarked for semiconductor complex Ltd., SAS Nagar (Mohali) remained unspent because the project for rebuilding
 the complex was under review and kept on hold. The Committee also noted that there are other programmes  of the
 Department, in the areas of Technology Development Council (TOC), TDIL National Radar Council (NRC), SECO,
 STQC, IEPP, ATPCN, SEPP, Japanese language, industrial robots and information support on which the allocated

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJY A
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/25th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:02]
 amount have not been utilised fully; but the variations in these cases are relatively small. The expenditure in the area of
 photonics/FOSSAP of Rs. 2.65 crores has been somewhat in excess of the allocated amount of Rs. 1.70 crores.
7. The Committee had a general look at the pattern of allocations for different programmes of the Department of
 Electronics during the year 1994-95, and the ones proposed for the year 1995-96; and found that there are some areas
 such as Software Export Promotion Programme , Technology Development Council, National Radar Council, Fifth
 Generation Computer System (FGCS) Development Programme, and Advanced Technology Programme in Computer
 Networking for which comparatively smaller allocations have been proposed vis-a-vis those of the previous years. The
 Committee, therefore, wanted to know the reasons for these lower allocations. The reasons given by the Department
 seriatim are as follows:
Software Export Promotion Programme: The total budgetary outlay for this programme , for the entire 8th Plan
 period, was Rs. 20.6 crores; and since this would be exhausted during the first three years of this· Plan period, the
 Department sought an enhancement of allocation at the time of mid-term review of the Plan. It projected an amount of
 Rs. 33.25 crores against Rs. 20.6 crores approved earlier for the Plan period. In other words, the Department had sought
 an additional funding of Rs. 12.65 crores for activities connected with creating additional capacity/strengthening data
 communication infrastructure, and improvement in productivity and standards by promoting software engineering
 practices. The request for additional funds was not acceded to by the Planning Commission and the total allocation for
 Software Export Promotion Programme stood at Rs. 20.6 crores as originally approved. The Department, however, had
 further discussions with the Planning Commission, and managed to get an additional allocation of Rs. 4.25 crores for
 the year 1995-96, which was Rs. 35 lakhs less than that of the previous year.
Technology Development Council: An amount of Rs. 3 crores was requested for initiating a bilateral industrial
 R&D programme  with Israel in addition to TDC projects. But, only an amount of Rs. 1.50 crore was allocated. The
 Department is trying to use this amount as seed money for the US $ 8 million project and hopes to get it enhanced at
 the stage of preparation of revised estimates.
National Radar Council: At the time of discussions with the Planning Commission during October, 1994, the
 Planning Commission officials did not raise any' question about this programme  and were generally appreciative and
 happy with some of the specific results obtained under this programme. It was the recommendation of the 1991 Review
 Forum for the NRC Technology Development Programme, as well as that of the Planning Commission Working Group
 during-the formulation of the 8th Five Year Plan, that the annual outlay for the NRC Technology Development
 Programme should be incre3sed to a level of about Rs. 5-6 crores per annum. The Department had asked for a Budget
 allocation of Rs. 2 crores for NRC during the year 1995-96, but was given only Rs. 85 lakhs.
Fifth Generation Computer System (FGCS) Development Programme: The knowledge Based Computer System
 (KBCS) Programme was launched by DOE with UNDP assistance in the year 1987 with the objective of gaining
 extensive expertise in this area through research, design and development and demonstration of KBCS technology
 based solutions to selected problems and thus point the way to its full exploitation to solve major socio-economic
 problems. In addition to a number of software packages developed under this programme  a pool of skilled software
 professionals has also been generated; and these professionals are now being used for software development in specific
 areas. It has now been decided to close this project in its present form. However, the project proposals received from
 various institutions for software development in this area are being considered under the Technology Development
 Council of the Department.
Advanced Technology Programme in Computer Networking: Out of a total amount of Rs. 12 crores allocated in
 1994-95, Rs. 10 crores was in fact adjustment of UNDP funds. The annual budgetary support for 1994-95 was thus
 only Rs. 2 crores. The budget of Rs. 7.08 crores for 1995-96 would enable the Department to achieve the targets of this
 programme.
8. The Committee feels that since the software constitute a significant proportion of our export earnings, the
 programmes/schemes of the Department directed towards promoting software capabilities and exports should be given
 not only necessary encouragement but also adequate budgetary support. The allocations for software Export Promotion
 Programme of the Department were reduced during the years 1994-95, and again they have been further reduced in the
 proposed budgetary outlay of the Department for the year 1995-96. This gives an impression that this area Is not
 getting the importance it deserves. The Committee is of the view that the Planning Commission should look into the
 priorities of the Department in this vital sector and enhance budgetary outlays suitably. Technology Development
 Council and National Radar Council have been the pioneering bodies over the years in promoting R&D projects which

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJY A
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/25th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:02]
 have led to technology development and led to end products particularly in important strategic areas, but the reduced
 allocations for both these bodies seem to undermine their importance. Both of them have demonstrated their ability to
 contribute to the Development of a number of technologies, and their extorts  should not suffer on account of financial
 constraints. The present allocations provided by the Planning Commission and the amounts in comparison to what has
 been provided for other areas of the department's activities are entirely unsatisfactory. National HVDC Project,
 Technology Development Mission for Electronics in Health, and Development of Application of Industrial Robots are
 some of the other programmes  of the Department for which lesser allocations have been proposed during the year
 1995-96. The Committee would like to emphasise  that if the programmes  of this nature have to yield positive results,
 then the export has to be a viable one for which allocations above a critical minimum are called for. This is not so in
 these areas.
9. The Committee has noted that a substantial increase in financial outlay has been proposed for the year 1995-96
 for: Photonic Development Programme /FOSAPP; Standardisation, Testing and Quality Control (STQC); Special
 Manpower Development Programme ; Value Added High Speed Data Communication Network for Software Export;
 Rural Electronics; and Information Support. The Committee, therefore, wanted to know as to what the Department
 expected to achieve through these additional allocations. The details furnished by the Department are as follows:
Photonic Development Programme/FOSAPP: The allocation has been enhanced to meet the commitment of two
 approved major projects, namely: Fibre Optics System and Products Project; and Optoelectronics Technology Project.
 New initiatives have been taken up on Photonics Switching Technologies and Applications to converting these efforts
 for commercialization.
Standardisation, Testing and Quality Control (STQc): The aim is to improve quality and reliability of electronic
 products, which is particularly important for exports.
Responding to a query from the Committee about the revenue being generated by STQC labs, the Secretary of the
 Department stated that the earnings by the STQC labs during the years 1993-94 and 1994-95 have been of the order of
 Rs. 3.2 crores and Rs. 5.5 crores respectively, and during the year 1995-96 these were expected to be of the order of Rs.
 8.5 crores. He, however, clarified that the earnings of the STQC on this account do not remain with the Department, but
 are .credited to the Consolidated Fund of India, the reason being that STQC is an attached office of the Department and
 not a society. The Department is, however, trying to ensure that the revenue so generated by STQC remains with it, so
 that the dependence on budgetary support is reduced to the minimum. With that purpose in view, the Department has
 also started a Society for Electronics Test Engineering (SETE).
Special Manpower Development Programme: There has been no increase in the external budgetary support from
 the World Bank and the Swiss Government for the Electronics Industry Development Project (EIDP) which would be
 confined to Rs. 23.70 crores during the year 1995-96.as was the case in 1994-95. The net budgetary support for EIDP
 (excluding external component) has been in increased from Rs. 50 lakhs in 1994-95 to Rs. 5.98 crores in 1995-96 for
 meeting expenditure on taxes and duties on procurement of equipment, software and components. The combined
 budget for other projects, namely, DOE-UGC Programme, audio-visual aids and generation of special manpower for
 computers has been reduced from Rs. 1 crore last year (1994-95) to Rs. 85 lakhs this year (1995-96). As per the original
 schedule, the EIDP is due for completion in December 1995. The project has been reviewed by the Swiss Development
 Corporation and by the World Bank separately in March 1995. They have suggested extension of the project till march
 1997, i.e., till the end of 8th Plan for which an application is being submitted by the Department. The other projects will
 also continue till the end of the 8th Plan.
The Committee wanted to know from the Secretary some details of the Special Manpower Development
 Programme. The Secretary informed the Committee that the Programme presently covers 32 institutions, 6
 polytechnics, 6 CEDTs and various engineering colleges. This is now being funded by the World Bank and Swiss
 Development Corporation; its three main components are; providing some equipment; making available learning
 material and developing some text books; and lastly, imparting training to teachers to enable them to teach in these
 specific areas. The Committee felt that the benefits of this Special Manpower Development Programme did not
 percolate enough as enough publicity was not given to the Department's .projects/schemes under this programme , and
 people by and large remained unaware of them. The Committee also felt that thousands of engineering colleges and
 polytechnics were spread over the country, and just providing some equipment, learning material, text books and
 training to the teachers to a limited number was not going to help achieve the desired results in this thrust area. It is
 clear that manpower emerging from our educational institutions do not have sufficient expertise in computer science
 and electronics. This needs to be rectified on a massive scale not with just a token efforts but by involving the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJY A
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/25th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:02]
 Department of Education and the professional societies in Electronics, using audio visual and printed media, non formal
 Education etc. The Secretary of the Department conceded that the programme  did not have the publicity it should have
 been given, and the Department was undertaking a review of this project. There are many possibilities being looked
 into by the Department, Including using the professional societies In electronics for the purpose.
Value Added High Speed Data Network for Software Export: The enhanced allocation of Rs. 2.08 crores for the
 Value Added High Speed Data Communication Network will be useful to expand the activities of SATCOMM.
 SATCOMM now has a total of 45 circuits of 64 Kbps each, at Bombay, Madras and Delhi. The capacity utilisation is to
 the extent of 80%. The increased allocation will help develop the capacity from 45 to 90 circuits.
Rural Electronics: An increase from Rs. 10 lakhs to Rs. 16 lakhs has been sought to promote and develop
 appropriate electronics technology for rural applications and productionisation .
 Information Support.: With the enhanced budgetary provision of Rs. 20 lakhs as compared to Rs. 10 lakhs in 1994-
95, it is proposed to develop a technical database for use of electronics industry.
10. The Committee has noted the reasons advanced by the Department for increase in the allocations for these areas
 in the budgetary outlays for 1995-96. The Committee trusts that these allocations would give the necessary thrust to
 these programmes of the Department, and enable concrete results to be achieved. The committee,  notes that the
 budgetary allocations for rural electronics have been raised by Rs. 6 lakhs during the year 1995-96, and the Department
 has initiated a study to assess the real needs of the people at large in rural areas, particularly in the areas of health and
 education. The Committee hopes that, based on this study, necessary details of schemes will be worked out and funds
 will be enhanced to benefit a large segment of population, in rural area. The Committee is disappointed that in such an
 area, involving such a large part of our population, the allocations are so minimal (almost a token provision to indicate
 that the Department is working in this area) and there are no concrete projects and results.
11. The Committee notes that the STQC laboratories are fulfilling their mandate and their earnings are showing
 improvement. However, some mechanism has to be worked out by which the income generated by these labs is
 allowed to be ploughed back into the STQC to enable it to operate on a self-sustaining basis. A significant part of the
 outlay for the Department Is going into this area which Is primary to benefit industry and exports-and these sectors
 have dearly to pay tor these services adequately so that they are not dependent on budgetary outlays which should be
 used for more promotional; catalytic and upstream! newly emerging important areas.
12. A strong R&D base is the key to building up substantial self reliant growth of electronics. This is necessary if
 India has to emerge as a global player on this scene. This is not to deny the importance uf high quality production of
 items needed on a mass scale and of sophisticated strategic items; for establishing manufacturing technology and
 providing the necessary skills, training and attitudes. The Committee has noted that a major chunk of the budgetary
 outlay of the Department will be spent on R&D projects. The thrust of the Department, however, appears to be on the
 software and not on the hardware and on specified ongoing areas. The Committee in its 14th Report had examined in
 detail the R&D aspect of its programmes  and felt that the Department did not have any major promotional effort in
 R&D e.g. under TDC, NRC etc. commensurate with the technology requirements of the post-GAIT era. The
 Committee had accordingly emphasised that the Department should take urgent steps to improve its performance for
 promotion of R&D and that the budgetary allocations approved therefore be used to yield optimum results. The
 Committee was informed that an internal committee of senior officers of the Department of Electronics had been set up
 to evolve a new strategy keeping in view the resource constraints. The Committee accordingly wanted to know as to
 whether any study had been conducted by this committee and what action the Department had taken to priorities its
 R&D efforts. It was submitted by the Department that the. report of the internal committee on new R&D strategy has
 been submitted and an action plan has been. finalised; a new R&D funding model to bring in participation of industry
 (including private sector) has been developed and is under implementation. The essence of the revised model,
 according to the Department, is co-financing of high value R&D projects by industry users and the Department as
 co­operative R&D projects. This has become necessary with the limitation on resources available to the Department.
 Necessary guidelines for funding R&D in electronics for industry have been formulated. Under the new R&D funding
 model 50% contribution will be from industry and 50% is to be contributed by the Department; the intellectual property
 rights on the technology developed can be retained and exploited by the private party on an exclusive basis for a period
 of three years. On that basis the Department has already cleared five cases in the field of automatic high speed switches
 etc. for a joint effort with the private sector. In the National Photonics Project, a component of equipment engineering
 has been brought under this R&D funding model; the contribution of the Department will be Rs. 4 crores and Rs. 12

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJY A
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/25th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:02]
 crores will come from other participating organisations. Touching upon the aspect of revenue earning, the Secretary of
 the Department stated that the strategy which had been evolved basically consists of three elements, namely, co-
ordination with other S&T departments, user agencies, industries, synergise the interaction and then oversee the whole
 effort. The Department is also building up a database to create a pool of information about the work in electronics
 undertaken by other departments. He, however, emphasised  that in order to ensure better co-ordination, and to achieve
 better results in electronics, an R&D Council would be a desirable preposition. The Department is also concentrating
 on developing information technology applications as well as promoting electronics to increase efficiency and
 productivity. In this context he alluded to the recommendation made by the Committee in its 4th Report to the effect
 that every department should earmark a fixed sum in its budget for its electronification  in view of universal nature of
 electronics. In the light of the Committee's recommendations the matter was pursued by the Department with the
 Planning Commission which suggested that the Department could do it on a bilateral basis. The Department, however,
 felt that from a national point of view the application of electronics and information technology should be generally in
 the entire spectrum covering all the departments, with the Department of Electronics playing the role of a consultant.
 Another step which the Department feels should be taken to boost R&D in the electronics sector is that indigenous
 technology development by our laboratories be exempted from excise duty. H these laboratories are exempted from
 payment of excise duty they can become micro-factories. Indigenous technology will, in that case, have ample
 opportunities for getting productionised. The Department is taking up this matter with· the Finance Ministry so that
 special dispensation is provided to these laboratories, particularly in the high tech areas of production.
13. The Committee has noted the efforts of the Department of Electronics in developing necessary R&D
 infrastructure in the country to boost electronics production. Its funding scheme to encourage private participation is a
 welcome step in that direction. The Department is also strengthening its co-ordination with other Departments engaged
 in R&D work in the electronics sector. The Committee feels that the information database proposed to be created by the
 Department on a centralised  basis will be of value in helping entrepreneurs But overall the Committee feels that the
 priority)' given to R&D earlier in this field no longer exists and needs to be restored with much greater support for
 TDC, NRC, NMC etc.
14. The Committee is, however, not sure whether the efforts the Department has mounted for developing co-
ordination with other Departments would succeed on their own. The work relating to electronics is done not only in the
 Department of Electronics but also by other Government Departments and agencies and public sector specially
 Ministry of Defence in DRDO, and in the services, BEL, HAL, BDL, MIDHANI etc.; Department of Space, CEL
 (Department of Scientific and Industrial Research) CSIR CEERI, NP~, etc),· Department of Atomic Energy,
 Department of Telecommunications and a host of others; there is also today some R&D effort in the private sector.
 Consequent upon the setting up of the World Trade Organisation, following the Uruguay Round of Trade Negotiations,
 Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) will playa significant role in the future. It is, therefore, imperative that the initiatives
 taken by the Government are properly co-ordinated  at all levels and by all concerned. Besides, with the increasing
 application of information technology in different departments of the Government, it would be desirable that the
 Department of Electronics assumes a greater role to provide technical assistance and consultancy and is kept in the
 picture in decision and policy making relating to the Electronics. The Committee is given to understand that when the
 import regime was more controlled, the Department acted as a nodal agency ·and had an . important role with regard to
 licensing, import clearances etc. This DO longer exists in the new liberalized regime. However, its nodal role ill
 respect-of an information· base in electronics, being consulted in regard to policy and decision making, coordinating
 the thrusts in electronics (even though these are implemented by diverse organisations) must continue. There is need for
 an appropriate institutional mechanism for this such as an electronics  R&D Coordination Council. This is all the more
 necessary with the abolition of the Electronics Commission which was a hip level policy making body. The Committee
 would also like to reiterate its earlier recommendation, made in its Fourth Report,
 that a fixed percentage of the budget (1-3 per cent) in ea department should be earmarked for applying electronics and
 information technology in the activities relating to that particular department; and the Department of Electronic should
 extend, any help to all such departments to obtain optimum result. The Committee would like to emphasise  that in the
 post-liberalization period, if the country has to build up a strong infrastructure for the development. of electronics, it is
 very essential that the Government formulates a comprehensive electronics policy. The· Committee would also like to
 reiterate its recommendation made in its 4th Report that in view of the increasing importance of the electronics sector,
 Electronics Commission should be revived.
15. In the course of his evidence before the Committee, the Secretary of the Department made a submission that

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJY A
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/25th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:02]
 the Department was fully conscious of the imperative needs of the post-GATT regime; and had accordingly set up a
 cell 0'0 Intellectual Property Rights (~PR) within the Department. A related issue with the IPR was the need to
 generate patents literacy within the country to enable our scientists to become aware of their innovations from the
 viewpoint of intellectual property rights and have their patents registered abroad. In this context the Secretary mooted
 a suggestion that an amount of Rs. 200 crores be set apart as a national fund to set up a facility for patent awareness
 and literacy and taking out of patent. This fund could also be utilised  to give necessary assistance where patent
 infringement takes place .
16. The Committee notes that the Department of Electronics has taken the initiative to set up an IPR Cell to boost
 registration of our patents: But mere setting up of the cell is not going to be of much value unless this is professionally
 managed. So far as scientific discoveries and inventions are concerned, there is need for an integrated and decentralized
 approach by different departments/agencies engaged in RAD work. Each department will need to set up its own cell, to
 deal with aspects .specif"1C to its area of responsibility and working. But nationally there will be need for an integrated
 and coordinated approach since this aspect of IPR is going to assume ever increasing importance in the future.
17. The Committee notes that, during the year 1993-94, a provision of Rs. 75 crores was made in the Revised Estimates
 for Semi conductor Complex Ltd. (SCL), and again a provision of Rs. 27.18 crores was made for this establishment
 during the year 1994-95. SCL was devastated by a fire in February 1989, in which a significant part of the fabricating
 including process R&D facility was destroyed. The Cabinet Committee on Economic Affair (CCEA) had in May, 1990
 rightly approved the proposal for re-building the VLSI fabrication facility at SCL in view of the strategic imperative to
 have a national standing in this core technology. The total cost then was Rs. 182.29 crores. Since then, for various
 reasons, principally on account of delays there has been cost escalation of immense proportions. A major factor was the
 devaluation of 1991. Thus the field has been moving ahead so fast that it was necessary to upgrade the earlier
 proposals, and there were some lacunae also in the proposals for rebuilding this. The cost of Capital Equipment to be
 imported from abroad had also gone up significantly. The net result is that the re-building of SCL has not been
 completed. The Revised Cost Estimate has been worked out to Rs. 315.13 crores, which was approved by the Cabinet
 in March, 1993. Imposition of 'Counter Veiling Duty (CVD)' in the 1~95 Budget, coupled with some other factors,
 resulted in the cost of rebuilding going further up. The allocation of Rs. 27.18 crores made during 1994-95 could not be
 utilised because the whole project was under review and has been kept on hold.
18. The Committee is most concerned that In an area central to the development of electronics, there has been so much
 delay and lack of coordination, as a result of which the only facility of its kind in the Country is non operational in
 terms of fabrication facilities. SCL was conceived in 1972. It was approved by the Cabinet In 1976. It has been dogged
  by delays on the part of Government ever since. Meanwhile scientists working at SCL have done a very fine Job In
 upgrading the Intimacy Imported technology from a 5 micron to dose to 1 micron level. A determined effort to find
 there sources and complete this project is called for meanwhile DRDO and Department of Space are establishing a
 VLSI prototyping faculty, named SITAR at m Banglore at a cost of Rs. 60 crores as admitted by Secretary, Department
 of Electronics; and DOE has had no say in this decision In spite of being the nodal Department of Government in the
 field of electronics the lack of coordination on the put of Government in this area is unbelievable. In the view of the
 Committee Government should lift the hold on further progress of the project immediately to allow to be completed
 with  scaled down objectives and scope and within the approved capital outlay; Based on this the company should be
 able to fund resources for upscaling  when needed. There should be no farther delay in this matter   Government should
 also involve the Department of Electronics, all considerations relating to -the proposed  SITAR project.
NEW DELHI SYED SIBTEY RAZI
May 10, 1995 Chairman
 Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests
 
 
______________________________________________________________________
MINUTES
___________________________________________________________________________

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJY A
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/25th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:02]
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT­RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
 COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 1.00 p.m. and again from 3.00 p.m. to 4.37 p.m.,on Friday, the 21st
 April, 1995 in Room No. 139, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi-Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.    Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
3.Shri K.Rahman Khan
4. Prof. M.G.K.Menon
5.ShriSuresh Pachouri
6. Dr. Ranbir Singh
LOK SABHA
7.
    Shri Oscar Fernandes
8.    Shri Balraj Pasi
9. Kumari Frida Topno
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint
 Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter Shri Jagdish Kumar,
 Committee Officer
Representatives of the Department or Electronics
Shri 'N. Vittal, Secretary
Dr. V.P. KodaIi, Advisor
Shri S.S. Oberoi, Advisor
Shri S.W. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
                                                                                 Shri J.K. Tyagi, AFA      
Shri O.N. Vaid, Joint Secretary
Shri N. Gopalaswami , Joint Secretary Dr. A;K. Chakravorty,
 Senior Director Shri G. Soni, Senior Director
Dr. U.P. Phadke, Senior Director
Shri R.K. Srivastava, Senior Director
Shri V.K. Dharmadhakari , Senior Director Shri S.L. Sarnot, Senior
 Director
Dr;' Gulshan Rai, Director
Shri W.R. Despandey, Director Shri R.K. Arora, Director
Shri Rajiv Rastogi, Additional Director Shri B.B. Bahl, Deputy
 Director
2. The Committee took up for consideration the Demands for Grants (1995~96) of the Department of Electronics.
 The Secretary of tile Department briefly explained for the benefit of the Members the allocations on different
 activities/projects of the Department as proposed in its Demand for Grants. The Members then sought clarifications
 from him and other representative of the Department on various points relating to the Demands _for Grants which were
 given by them.
 The discussion on the Demands for Grants (1995~96) of the Department of Electronics was concluded.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 4. The Committee then
 adjourned at 4.37 p.m.
TENTH MEETING

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJY A
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/25th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:02]
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 10th May, 1995 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New
 Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi-Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.    Shri K. Rahman Khan
3.Prof. M.G.K. Menon
4. Shri Satchidananda
LOK SABHA
5.    Shri Jitendra Nath Das
6.    Shri Sharad Dighe
7.    Shrimati Saroj Dubey
8.    Shri Oscar Fernandes
9.    Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
10.   Prof. Radhika RanjanPramanik
11.   Shri Harchand Singh
12.   Shri Ram Prasad Singh
13.   Shri K.G. Shivappa
14.   Kumari Frida Topno
15. Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint
 Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
.
2. The Committee took up consideration of its draft Twenty-fourth Report ion the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of
 the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (Ministry of Science and Technology) and adopted the same
 unanimously.
3. The Committee decided to present this Report to both the Houses of Parliament on the 12th May, 1995. The
 Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Prof. M.O .K. Menon to present this Report to the Rajya  Sabha
 and Shri Oscar Fernandes and in ~s absence, Shri Harchand Singh to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration its draft Twenty-fifth Report on the Demands for Grants
 (1995-96) of the department of Electronics and adopted the same unanimously.
5. The Committee decided to present this Report to both the Houses of Parliament on the 15th May, 1995. The
 Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Shri K. Rahman Khan to present this Report to the Rajya Sabha
 and Shri Sharad Dighe and in his absence, Prof. Radhika  Ranjan Pramanik to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok
 Sabha.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 10.20 a.m.