PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT -RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
(1996-97) 
THIRTY-THIRD REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1996-97 OF THE DEPARTMENT 
OF SPACE 
(DEMAND No. 91) 
(Presented on August 27, 1996) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August , 1996/Bhadra, 1918 (Saka) 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. CoMPOSITION Of THE Cor-t!\ ·iirl u : . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . ..... . . . .. . .. . . ... . .. .. . ... . .... . . . . . . (i)-(ii) 
2. Rt:POI~T OF THe CoMMIT! E b. ... .. .. ................ ... .. .... .... ..... .............. .......... ..... 1-14 
3. l\.11NUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE ......................... ..... ............... 17-19 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITIEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1996-97) 
1. Shri V. Narayanasamy-Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt 
4. Shri N. Giri Prasad 
5. Shri K.R . Jayadevappa 
6. Shri K. Karunakaran 
7. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
8. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty 
9. Shri Narendra Pradhan .. 
10. Dr. Alladi 1>. Rajkumar 
11. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
12. Shri G . Swaminathan 
13. Shri Prakanta Warisa 
LOK SABRA 
14. Shri Mahubir Lal Bishvakarrna 
15. Shri Ranjib Biswal 
16. Shri A.B.A. Gani Khan Choudhury 
17. Prof. Jitendra Nath Das 
18. Shri Mohd. Ali Ashraf Fatmi 
19. Shrimati Muneku Gandhi 
20. Shri K.C. Kondaiah 
21. Dr. ·Ramkrishan Kusmaria 
22. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
23. Shri Shivaji Mane 
24. Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta 
25. Shri Punnu Lal Mohle 
26. Shrimati Alka Nath 

27. Shri Sharad Pawar 
28. Prof. Radhika 'Ranjan Pramanik 
29. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
30. Shri Kalpnath Rai 
31. Shri A. Raja 
32. Shrimati Vasundhara Raje 
33. Shri P.V. Rajendran 
34. Shri K.B. Raut 
35. Shri S. Ramachandra Reddy 
36. Shri Harivansh Sahai 
37. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
38. Shrimati Vijayaraje Scindia 
39. Kumari Selja 
40. Capt. Satish Sharma 
41. Shri Soumya Ranjan Patnaik 
42. Sushti Uma Bharati 
43. Shri Srikanta Dutta Wadiyar 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri O.D. Sharma , Under Secretary 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer 

REPORT 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests, 
having been authorised by the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf , present this 
33rd Report on the Demands for Grants pertaining to the Department of Space ft. r the year 
1996-97 (Demand No. 91). 
2. The Committee held in aJI one meeting on August 9, 1996. In the meeting held on 
August 9, 1996, while deliberating on the Demands for Grants of the Department of Space, 
the Committee sought detailed clarifications and explanations from the representatives of the 
Departm ent of Space. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of the 
Department of Space for placing before it the requisite material and answering the queries 
raised by Members on various aspects of the Space Programme and related aspects to enable 
it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants. 
3. The Committee considered and adopted a draft report at its meeting held on August 
23, 1996. 
4. The Indian Space Programme assumes significance in the context of advances made 
in the space technology and its varied applications in the field of national development on a 
sustainable basis in key areas like communication, meteorology, natural resources 
management and environmental monitoring, in a timely, cost effective and self-reliant 
manner. Remarkable developments in space technology and its application have thus 
contributed significantly towards utilization of our natural resources. 
5. The setting up of the Thumba Equatorial Rocket Launching Station (TERLS) in 
early sixties marked the beginning of the Indian Space Programme. The Space Commission 
and the Department of Space were established by the Government in 1972 with a view to 
promote unified development and application of space science and technology for identified 
national objectives. Many advanced countries, which pursued Space programme~ since 1950s, 
were motivated by the desire to be at the forefront of exploration and Science to stay at the 
cutting edge of technology in aerospace, to establish human presence in space and to exploit 
commercially the benefits that accrued from these efforts . It is because space provides 
advantage point to view the planet Earth in its totality and to facilitate connectivity, cutting 
across physical barriers and trans nat_ional boundaries. 
6. The thrust of our Space Programme is towards the goal of self-reliant use of space 
technology for national development mainly in the following areas: 
(a) Satellite communications for various applications, 
{b) Satellite remote sensing for resources survey and management, environmental 
monitoring and meteorological services, and 
(c) development and operationalisation of indi&enous satellite systems and launch 
vehicles and associated ground segment for providing these satellite based 
services. 
7. The Indian Space Programme was formally organised with the setting up of the Space 
Commission and the Department of Space in 1972. The Department of Space is responsible 
for carrying out the policies framed by the Space Commission. The programmes are 
implemented through the Indian Space Research Organisation {ISRO), the National Remote 
Sensing Agency (NRSA), the Physical Research Laboratory (PRL), the National 
Mesosphere-Stratosphere-Troposphere Radar Facility (NMRF) and other agencies. The 

overall coordination and fll&nagement of the INSAT system rests with the Secretary-level 
INSAT coordination Committee (ICC). The National Natural Resources Management 
$ystem (NNRMS) is coordinated .at the national level by the Planning Committee of 
NNRMS (PC-NNRMS) which pro\iides guidelines for the evaluation of the system and also 
ovenees the progress of remot.e sensing applications in the country. NN~S Standing 
Committee (NNRMS-SC), set up with user Ministries and Departments, ensure coordinated 
fun<:tioning of different elements. 
DEMAND FOR GRANTS 1996-97 
8. The budgetary allocation in respect of Department of Space for the year 1996-97 is 
esthnated at Rs. 922 crores, The Non-Plan and Plan break-up of the provision is as under : 
. . 
Budget Estimates 1996-97 (Gross) 
~udget Estimates 1996-97 (Net) 
Non-Plan 
168.60 
168.00 
(Rs. in crores) 
Plan 
753.40 
750.00 
Total 
922.00 
918.00 
9, The Department has been following the Zero Base Budgeting methodology for 
formulation of Annual budgets. Detailed reviews are carried out at various levels in the 
orgpnisation to arrive at the minimum essential cash flow for each Project, Programme and 
Centre/ Unit, based on the programmatic priorities , total cost, scheduled targets , progress 
achieved so far and tlle milestones planned for the budgeting period. 
10. A provision of Rs. 922 crores has been made in BE 96-97 for the following projects/ 
pro$rammes : 
Provision 
(i) Rs. 200.00 Crores 
(ii) Rs, 49.00 Cro.-es 
(iii) Rs. 48.00 Crores 
(jv) Rs. 10.42 Crores 
(v) Rs. 39,25 Crores 
(vi) Rs. 93.40 Crores 
Brief Project Details for whic:J 
provision has been made 
Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle 
(OSLV) Project, the first developmental flight of 
which is scheduled in 1997-98. 
Cryo Upper Stage (CUS) Project, which 
envisages the indigenous development of a 
restartable cryogenic stage for the upper stage of 
OSLV. 
Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle Continuation 
(PSLV-C) Project. PSLV Cl/C2/C3 are 
scheduled for launch in 1996-97, 1997-98 and 
1998-99 respectively. 
Indian Remote Sensing Satellite 1D (IRS-1D), 
the launch of which is scheduled ;n 1997-98. 
IRS-P3 and IRS P4 (OC~ANSAT) . IRS-P4 IS 
SCHEDULED FOR launch in 1996-97. 
INSAT-2D/ 2E Satellites. 

Provision 
(vii) Rs. 128.74 Crores 
(viii) Rs. 13.09 Crores 
(ix) Rs. 1.85 Crores 
(x) Rs. 5.54 Crores 
(xi) Rs. 6.96 Crores 
(xii) Rs. 300.27 Crores 
(xiii) Rs. 24.71 Crores 
(xiv) Rs. 0.53 Crores 
(xv) Rs. 0.24 Crores 
ToTAL: Rs. 922.00 Crores 
Brief Project Details for which 
provision has been made 
Payments to Mls. Arianespace, France for 
launch services for INSA T-2D and 2E and for 
their insurance payments. 
Major application programmes of National 
Natural Resources Management System 
(NNRMS), National Resources Information 
System (NRIS), Remote Sensing Applications 
Mission (RSAM), Microwave Remote Sensing 
Programme (MRSP), Integrated Mission for 
Sustainable Development (IMSD), Gramsat 
utilisation and Gramsat Pilot Projects. 
Space Sciences including ISRO Geosphere 
Biosphere Programme, Sounding Rockets for 
Space Science Experiments, Space Science Data 
Centre and Space Science Promotion. 
Sponsored Research, Joint International Projects 
etc. 
Advance Actions/Parallel Ordering and 
Indigenisation. 
Technology Development, R&D, facility 
refurbishment, salary, facility operation of 
Centres/Units. 
Housing and Civil Works for technical facilities. 
Other projects including token provision for G. 
Sat (to be flown on the first developmental flight 
of GSL V), second launch pad and common 
facilities, IRS-P5/P6, IRS-2, INSAT-III and 
technical pay load for developmental flights of 
GSLV. 
Payment t0 M/s. Antrix Corporation, a wholly 
owned Government Company, registered under 
the Companies Act, 1956, in September, 1992. 
11. At its sitting held on the 9th August, 1996, th~ Comm ittee took up for the 
consideration the Demands for Grants in respect of the Department of Space and heard the 
Secretary in the Department on the budgetary allocation, functioning of the Department and 
performance of some of the on-going projects as also the programmes planned for the next 
few years. The Secretary in the Department of Space informed the Committee that the 
Department had projected a Demand of Rs. 3500 crores for the entire Eighth Five Year 

Plan period. The Planning Commission had initially approved only Rs. 1804 crores but had 
subsequently indicated that Rs. 3500 crores would be made available to the Department 
through the annual plan allocations (Paragraph 6, lOth Report). The Department has 
projected a net demand of Rs. 918 crores (Plan as well as non-Plan). 
12. The annual cash outflow for the Department of Space during the Eighth Plan period 
is as under: 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Year Non-Plan Plan Total 
1992-93 (Actuals) 130.89 360.03 490.92 
1993-94 (Actuals) 147.97 547.36 695.33 
1994-95 (Actuals) 154.91 604.17 759.08 
RE 1995-96 164.00 754.56 918.56 
BE 1996-97 168.60 753.40 922.00 
•TOTAL (1992-97): 766.37 3019.52 3785.89 
13. The Secretary informed the Committee that during the Annual Plan 1996-97 
discussions, the Planning Commission after critically assessing the requirements of space 
programme had agreed for a net Plan Outlay of Rs. 1050 Crores Further additional 
provision of Rs. 80 Crores is required for postponed committed contractual payments for 
INSAT-2 Project from 1995-96. However, considering the resource position, after a critical 
review and programmatic prioritisation, items worth Rs. 80 Crores have been identified by 
the Department to be postponed beyond current financial year, even though it would have 
some programmatic implications. Hence, a minimum plan allocation of Rs. 1050 Crores was 
considered inescapable for 1996-97 as given below : 
(i) For payments to Russia for Cryogenics stage for GSL V 
(ii) For other contractual payments for GSL V 
(iii) For INSA T-2D/2E satellites 
(Rs. in crores) 
175.00 
95.00 
110.00 
(iv) For payments to Ws. Arianespace, France for launch services for 
INSA T-2D and 2E and for their insurance payments 
(v) For development of cryogenics stage 
(vi) For IRS-1DIIRS-P4 and the PSLV vehicles to launch these satellites 
(vii) For 0-SAT to be flown in the first GSL V flight and other critical 
projects/programmes 
(viii) For facility refurbishment, technology development and plan salary 
component 
203.00 
85.00 
146.00 
70.00 
133.00 

(ix) For housing and civil works for technical facilities 33.00 
ToTAL: 1050.00 
The Committee is of the view that in view of the benefits that accrue, by pursuing the 
Space Programme, in various sectors like communications, meteorology, environmental 
monitoring, remote sensing, disaster warning and management of natural resources the 
Committee recommends that the Demands of the Department of Space should be met in full. 
Financial Performance (1994-95 & 1995-96): 
14. During 1994-95, the details with regard to budgetary allocation and actual 
expenditure are as follows : 
(Rs. in crores) 
Non-Plan Plan Total 
Budget Estimates 1994-95 155.00 600.00 755.00 
Revised Estimates 1994-95 155.00 606.77 761.77 
Actual Expenditure 154.91 604.17 759.08 
Shortfall with respect to RE 2.67 
The total grant for 1994-95 was Rs. 761.77 crores including the supplementary grant of 
Rs. 6.77 crores. Against this, the actual expenditure was Rs. 759.08 crores i.e., 99.65% of 
the funds were utilised . 
Budget Estimates 1995-96 
Revised Estimates 1995-96 
Non-Plan 
162.20 
164.00 
(Rs. in Crores) 
Plan 
754.56 
754.56 
Total 
916.76 
918.56 
Earlier, during 1993-94, a sum 
of Rs. 22.73 crores was not utilised - Rs. 14 crores 
mainly on account of delay and uncertainty in many contracts signed with M/s. Glavkosmos 
of Russia for supply of materials and a sum of Rs. 8.73 crores due to non-materialisation of 
orders for machinery largely for reasons beyond the control of the Department. This 
includes a saving of Rs. 1.41 crores on account of variations in exchange rates. 
The Committee note with satisfaction that the rmancial allocations during 1994-95 were 
fully utilised. 
15. The Secretary in the Department of Space informed the Committee that the 
Department of Space has activities which are primarily application driven related to the 
development needs of the country. Broadly, these applications are involved in two 
directions; one is telecommunication, television, broadcasting and meteorology. They are 
known as space based services, namely, INSAT system. Secondly, is a series of satellites 

called the Indian Remote Satellites that enable the acquisition of images over the land and 
ocean which are used in the context of agriculture and resource management. To 
complement the two systems is the necessary institutional framework estabJished over the 
years in the context of INSAT in regard to direction and the requirements for the future, its 
utilisation and review of utilisation-this is done by a high level Committee of Secretaries 
comprising of Secretary, Telecommunications, Secretary, Information & Broadcasting, 
Secretary, Science & Technology representing the three major services of the IN SAT 
system, i.e., telecommunications, television, broadcasting and the meteorological system. 
16. On the other side is a national natural resources management system for remote 
sensing. The management system has got a Planning Committee with the membership of 
Secretaries of user departments namely, Secretary, Agriculture, Secretary, Science & 
Technology, Secretary, Mines, Secretary, Water Resources who are all Members of the 
Committee. The Committee is chaired by Member (S&T) Planning Commission. 
17. In the area of Science, there is an advisory Committee of Space scientists consisting 
of some of the scientists from within the country who promote astronomy and oceanography 
in the country. They provide inputs to ISRO in the field of Space Science. After the 
Coordination Committee has persued these inputs, they get into specific missions known as 
Satellite missions. They are implemented by ISRO. 
As part of self-reliance there is a developmental programme which in totality carriers 
various activities to Indian industry. The R&D programme of the Government and its 
various departments help the industry to play their role. 
The Department of Space has the specific responsibility of completing the satellite to 
make it operational, satellite managing as well as corresponding infrastructural development. 
18. In the last one year, the Department had three major missions, one was of course 
successfully launched-INSAT-2C from French Guinea. This would be used for 
communication, television etc. INSAT 2C and other systems have been fully made into 
operational service. INSAT 2C togetherwith INSAT 2A and 2B launched in July, 1992 and 
July, 1993 respectively have 50 transponders which provide services to the DoT as well as to 
many other users. INSAT 2C was launched on 9th December, 1995, with the help of 
European Ariana Launch Vehicle. It is working satisfactorily. 
19. Self-reliance in satellite systems and launch capability has been important goal for 
providing cost-effective space based services on an ensured basis. The INSAT-1 series 
satellites were built by an American company to our design specifications. Subsequently, 
development of second generation INSA T satellites and Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) 
satellites were taken up in the country in tbe 1980's. The launch vehicle development was 
initiated in the early 1970's through SLV-3, followed by the development of Augmented 
Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV), and Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) and 
Geosynchronous Launch Vehicle (GSLV), development is now in progress. 
20. IRS-1C .launched on 27th December, 1995 is the most sophisticated civilian remote 
sensing satellite in the world today. On board a Russian launcher, it has a Panchromatic 
Camera with 5.8 m and with resolution 70 kms. with stereo viewing capability. the LISS-III 
Camera provides multi-spectral data with a spatial resolution of 23 meters in visible in near 
infrared region and 70 meters in short wave infrared region, imaging the same region every 
24 days. Wide Field Sensor data with spatial resolution of 188 meters resolution is available 
every 5 days for the whole country. The constellation of IRS satellite include IRS-1-C, IRS-
1-B, IRS-P2 and IRSP-3 has become an international system recently with a US-based 
company entering into a commercial agreement with India for reception and marketing of 
IRS data world-wide. 
The satellite remote sensing applications using IRS system have proliferated into almost 
every facet of our national development and the data are now used regularly for agri­
cultural crop average and yield estimation, drought monitoring and assessment, flood. 

mapping, land use and land cover mapping, wasteland management, water resources 
management, marine resources survey and management, mineral prospecting forest 
resources survey and management. 
21. In the launch vehicle area, significant progress has achieved over the last three 
decades. The initial efforts were on the development of sounding rockets for space science 
experiments. SL V -3 provided capability to inject 40 kilogram class satellites into near-earth 
orbit. The capability was further built up through ASLV. The successful developmental 
flights of PSLV viz., PSLV-D2 of October 1994 and PSLV-D3 of March 1996 enabled India 
to place IRS-P2 and IRS-P3 satellites in the desired polar orbit. Thus India realised a 
capability to launch 1000 kg. class IRS satellites into polar sun-synchronous orbit . 
Development of GSLV for achieving indigenous capability to launch INSAT class satellites is 
progressing for the scheduled first developmental launch in 1997-98. Indigenous development 
of cryogenics engines and stages is making good progress. 
22. The major developmental tests would be completed by the end of this year. 
Secondly, realisation of the other systems is there. They are going to have the test for strap 
on motors. This is an upgradation of second stage liquid propulsion motor of PSLV . 
23. The next major effort on the GSLV is the procurement of the cryogenic stage. 
Under the current contract, it is a supply contract. The Russian agency, Glascomos, is 
delivering by the end of this year, the first of the flight stage of the Cryogenic for GSLV. 
The other things are, one ground mock-up stage. These are expected to be delivered some 
time in the next few months. As per the present planning, the realisation of the first 
developmental flight of GSLV is expected to be in early 1998. With the availability of the 
cryogenic stage by the end of this year as well as the realisation and tests of major sub­
systems and systems during this year, by the realisation of the remaining hardware for the 
flight model expected early next year. The mobile service Tower to PSLV at Sriharikota is 
being modified to launch the GSL V also. This mobile service Tower is 3000 tonnes, and is 
the largest moving system in the country. That is the kind of facility where the rockets are 
integrated. The modification of the mobile service tower is required to assemble 4 liquid 
propulsion strap on stages of GSL V and to take care to servicing the cryogenic upper stage. 
Other preparatory activities in Sriharikota are going on. They include facility for handling 
liquid hydrogen and liquid oxygen which are primary fuels and oxidizer , powering the 
cryogenic engine, as well as other types of fuels which are needed for the lower stages. 
These handling systems as well as· monito ring controls have also been set up. The first 
development lanuch of GSLV is expected to be in the early part of 1998. 
24. On the application side, there are several applications of IRS data in hydrology, 
forestry and so on. The remote-sensing data is used by the Department of Agriculture for an 
early estimate of crop, one month before harvest. They want 90 per cent confidence and 
90 per cent accuracy. The satellite system is able to provide. On a specific question whether 
they coulc cover over 20% of the cropped areas, the Secretary informed the Committee that 
when the IRS-lC would come into the picture, they would be able to improve the capability 
of the existing system so that these areas could also be covered. The second major 
application, of course, is ground water. Ground-water exploration using geomorphological 
maps generation using Satellite Data enable . to identify ground-water. As of now, it is 
extensively supported by satellite imageries. They provide a good signature of the type of 
fields geo-lythology, where ground-water could now and charge subterraneous regions. Once 
these maps are available and analysed, they could come out with reasonably accurate 
assessments of ground-water. 
The most important application in the last 2-3 years is the Integrated Mission for 
Sustainable Development. Comprising the satellite imageries, assessment of water in the 

identified areas for ground-water and surface water as also the assessment of soil, s lope 
characteristic, vegetative cover and many scientific parameters relevant to management of 
water in a better scientific way and sustainability of water for agricultural and o ther type of 
activities · and a master plan which would specify areas growing rice, where water would 
deplete fast or how to arrest sand movement, etc. All these prescriptions which are specific 
to regions are identified. 
25. The other part is interesting, managerial arrangement to implement this which 
involves the local functionaries, district collector and others·as well as NGO's and people in 
the locality. They all participate once this information is available. And this has been carried 
out in six districts with visible results-Bhiwani in Haryana, Chandrapur in Maharashtra, 
Anantapur in Andhra Pradesh, Dharmapuri in Tamil Nadu. There are six districts, in which 
this has been done. In 15 districts it is under implementation. They have action plan for 174 
districts which is roughly 45 per cent of the areas of the country. These districts have been 
identified by the Planning Commission and also reviewed by the Department of Rural 
Development and the current priority areas for tile integrated mission for sustainable 
development are those identified by the Department of Rural Development 
and it has identified 94 watersheds to be immediately taken up for generation of action 
plans. They have already completed 54. The remaining are under progress. Scientific 
information from satellites i~ used for socio-economic development, to have geographic 
information system which is user-friendly. It is working satisfactorily. In the coming years 
one would see visible changes 'in many problem districts because of the scientific approach. 
The limited results currently indicate that there is very good potential in the context of 
developing many regions all over the country. 
26. India continues to play an important role in the international space fora including 
the UN Committee on peaceful use of outer space. A UN Asia-Pacific Regional Centre for 
Space Education has been set up in India and this is a recognition of expertise India has 
built and its role in sharing its experience in the development and application of space 
technology for societal benefits. 
27. The Asia Pacific U.N. Centre for Science and Technology education, is in operation 
for the last 6-8 months. It has started the first course and it is going on successfully. The 
important thing is that there are quite a number of regional competitors for this. Considering 
our ability to impart education in space science and its application and also noting the type 
of infrastructure we have created for this kind of job, the UN selected India to set up this 
prestigious Centre . Already 14 countries are represented in getting education in this are a. 
Twenty-six students are now participating in the course being conducted at Dehradun where 
the primary centre is located. 
So far as the budget requirements are concerned, it is Rs. 922 crores which comprises a 
Non-Plan component of Rs. 168.6 crores and a Plan component of Rs.753.4 crores. The 
original request to the Planning Commission was that their budget should be Rs.l,l35 
crores. The reason is, the overall VIII Five Year Plan share was Rs.3,5 00 crores. Out of 
this, they have roughly spent about half of it in the first three years of the Plan period. The 
remainder is what is supposed to be spent in the last two years of the Plan period. This 
being the last year of the Plan, taking into the total requirements and the milestones which 
have been made on which expenditure has already been incurred and is likely to be 
incurred, they requested for Rs.l,135 crores. Subsequently the Departm ent of Space 
reported its absolutely ess~ntial requirement of Rs.l,OSO crores. The Planning Commission 
had told them that they would get Rs.750 crores which was at the level of last year. This 
would essentially mean that some of their approved programmes which they have already 

committed and which have got ramifications in terms of services to the country in 
telecommun ications, televisio n broadcast, meteorology, remote sensing satellites, launch 
vehicles-it is a critical area for India-all these things would get affected and some other 
things might get delayed. Consequently, they did make a representation expressing their 
concern about the budget situation. The Prime Minister suggested to the Planning 
Commission to take a review of the budget requirements of the Department of Space 
keeping in view its critical importance. 
28. Regarding the implications of a budget pegged at Rs.750 crores, the Secretary 
mentioned the problems on continuing their contractual commitments on the cryogenic 
front. This was one area where they could have difficulties. The second, of course, was the 
upper cryogenic de velop ment which was a purely indigenous effort. This was going on a 
parallel basis. This is the kind of impact on the cryogenic technology programme which is 
·· being pursued based on our capability. Another area which was likely to be affected was 
the continuation of the PSL V programme. The subsequent launch of PLSVs might not be 
possible at the frequency at which they have been planned for launching them. They may 
fail to demonstrate that India was in the forefront in that area. Even the GSLV would get 
affected if they were to starve of funds because these were long-term programmes having 
international ramifications. The remote sensing satellite system was a system which was 
becoming a global system and it is critical for the national development. It is important for 
them to get as much as possible out of Rs.l,OSO crores which they have indicated as 
absolutely essential requirement. 
29. Starting with ARYABHATTA in 1975, experimental satellites such as 
BHASKARA-1 & 11, APPLE and ROHINI satellites were realised in the country by the 
eatly 80's. The INSAT-1 series satellites were built by an American Company to our design 
specification. Subsequently, development of Indian Remote Sensing (IRS) satellites, second 
generation INSAT-2 satellites and SROSS satellites were taken up in the country in the 
80's. The launch vehicle development was initiated in the early 70's through SLV-3 . This 
was followed by the development of Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle (ASLV) and 
Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV). Geosynchronous Launch Vehicle (GSLV) 
development is now in progress. Self-reliance in satellite systems and launch capability has 
thus been an important goal for providing cost effective space based services on an assured 
basis. 
DECADE PROFILE 
30. Asked in the context of decade profile (1990-2000) whether any mid-term appraisal 
had been done and any programme has been chalked out for the period beyond 2000, the 
Secretary infromed the Committee that the goals for the Indian Space Programme sought 
to be covered in the decade profile had been approved by the Space Commission and 
endorsed by the Planning Commission. The major programmatic elements of this decade 
profile were as follows: 
1. Sustain lNSAT System and IRS System on an assured basis and with enhanced 
capabil ities to meet the identified application needs. 
2. Operationalisation of the Space applications/services. 
3. Indigenous development of satellites and launch vehicles, interlocked with the 
application needs. Indigenous capability for SROSSIIRSIINSAT satellites and their 
launch from India through ASLV/PSLV/GSLV. 
4. R&D, technology development , applications development, experimentati on with 
new techniques. 

5. Infrastructure development to support the missions and programmes targeted for the 
decade. 
6. Advanced R&D to prepare for the pragrammes of 2000 AD and beyond. 
7. Maximal utilisation of industrial infrastructure and establishment of Space industry 
with appropriate linkages, . ·and 
8. Commercialisation/expo~ of Space services and systems. 
31. The Secretary apprised the Committee that the Annual Plan allocation of Rs. 753.40 
crores in 1996-97 which was at the level of 1995-96 and the Interim budget was grossly 
inadequate to maintain the tempo of the Space programme and also the contractual 
commitments with the international agencies, an enhancement of Rs. 300 crores atleast, was 
considered essential. The Department has · been informed that the Prime Minister has 
directed the Planning Commission to increase the allocation for DOS by atleast Rs. 150 
crorcs over and ubove the level of Interim b!Jdget, and that if the Planning Commission has 
difficulty in doing so, it may be taken up in September-October, 1996 for consideration in 
the Revised Estimates. 
The CommiUee recomends that adequate funding of the Department of Space is necessary 
not only to meet the requirement of the Space Programme and the bearing it has on vital 
ureas of national development but also to honour international commitments and contractual 
obligations. It is needless to say that the cooperation with internationaJ agencies is very 
ne<:essary in this prestigious field of national importance. The paucity of funds should not be 
allowed to stand in the way of the programmes. The Committee is satisfied with the directions 
issued by the Prime Minister to the Planning Commission and hopes that the t·esult of the 
review of budgetary allocation would be favourable to the Department of Space. 
1\fAJOR PROGRAIHMES 
IRS Satellites 
32. The Committee was informed that IRS-lC is the most sophisticated civilian satell ite 
in the world toady. IRS-lC provides multi-spectral data with a spatial resoluti on of 23 
metres invisible in near-infrared region and 70 metres in shortwave infrared region , imaging 
the same region every 24 days. Wide Field Sensor data with spati al resoluti on of lSS metres 
resolution is available, every 5 days, for the whole country. The panchrom atic datu with a 
spatial r esolution of 5.8 metres and stereo-viewing capability enables generation cf dig ital 
t crr~!i n models, better contour mapping and thematic mapping at 1:10,000 scale Earlier, 
lRS-l A followed by IRS-lB, IRS-lC and IRS-P2 satellites were realised and launched 
successfully. Another Satellite IRS-P3 has also been launched recently. T hese satellites ha\'e 
fonr.ed a unique constellation of operational remote sensing satellit es. 
This IRS constellation has become an international system recently, with a US-based 
•·Jm pany, EOSAT, entering into a commercial agreement with India for reception and 
i'·iarkc ting IRS data world-wide. 
:.alional Natural Resources Management System and Remote Sensing Applications 
33. National Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS), instituted in the early 
80's seeks to ensure effective integration of the space systems , ground systems and 
application efforts during planning and implementation stage. 
34. The satellite remote sensing applications using IRS system have proliferated into 

almost every facet of national development and the data , were being used regularly for 
agricultural crop acreage and yield estimation, drought monitoring and assessment, flood 
mapping, land use and land cover mapping, wasteland management, water resources 
management, ocearvinarine resources survey and management, mineral prospecting, forest 
resources survey and management, etc. IRS has been the Integrated Mission for Sustainable 
Development (IMSD), launched in 1992. Under IMSD, action plans for sustainable 
development are generated for select water shedS/blocks in 174 districts in the country using 
data from IRS satellites and collateral socio-economic data. 
35. Regarding INSAT Satellites, the Committee was informed that INSAT-2A was 
launched in July, 1992, followed by INSAT-2B in July, 1993 and INSAT-2C in December, 
1995. These three satellites are, today, providing operational service for the country, along­
with the last of the first generation satellite i.e. INSAT-1D. The communication payloads 
on-board the first two satellites of INSAT-2 series viz. INSAT-2A and INSAT-2B comprise 
of 12 transponders in C-band, 6 transponders in extended C-band and 2 transponders in S­
band. These two satellites carry meteorological payloads consisting of a Very High 
Resolution Radiometer (VHRR) with 2 Km. resolution in visible band and 8 Km. resolution 
in infrared band. These satellites have transponder for receiving distress alert signals for 
search and rescue mission. INSAT-2C satellite, in addition to carrying the C-band and 
extended C-band communication transponders as in INSAT-2A and 2B, incorporates Ku­
band transponders for business communication, transponders for mobile satellite services and 
extended coverage of C-band transponder to enable TV programmes outreach beyond the 
India catering to the population from South East Asia to the Middle East. The International 
Telecommunication Satellite Organisation, INTELSAT, has entered into an agreement with 
India for leasing transponders from India's INSAT-2E on a commercial basis and accordingly 
additional capacity is being built into INSAT-2E which will also have an improved 
meteorological payload. 
36. The Committee was apprised that the INSAT System, established in 1983, is a joint 
venture of the Department of Space, Department of Telecommunications, the Indian 
Meteorological Department, All India Radio and Doordarshan. It represented India's first 
step towards implementing an operational Space System for identified national requirements. 
Besides revolution ising the telecommunication and TV telecast scenario in the country, the 
INSA T system has been used for educational TV programmes, radio networking, interactive 
distant education and training, weather forec.ast, disaster warning, business/data 
communication, satellite-aided search .& rescue and mobile communications. 
37. Educational television service through INSAT has been introduced both at 
university level in the national network in addition to primary school level in several States 
including Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, Maharashtra, Gujarat and Uttar Pradesh. A char1nel on 
the INSAT has been dedicated for development of education and training. This provides 
several interactive programmes in continuing education like programmes on development of 
women and children in rural areas, watershed development, training in Panchayati Raj, 
training for the staff of State Bank of India, etc. A two-year pilot project for demonstration 
of satellite-based developmental communication and training has been taken up in Jhabua 
district of Madhya Pradesh. 
38. It was further stated that the ground-based experiments, balloon-borne experiments, 
scientific pay-loads flown on sounding rockets and the recent SROSS satellite mission, have 
enabled India to make significant contributions in the area of Space Science. A number of 
nationally coordinated programmes in Space Sciences and the Universities have played a 
major role in this area. 
39. Besides , a major ground-based facility called Mesosphere-Stratosphere-Troposphere 

Radar (MST Radar) has been commissioned near Tirupati for research in atmospheric 
dynamics. 
The Committee was informed that PSLV is designed for launching 1000 Kg. class of 
remote sensing satellites into 900 Km. Polar sun-synchronous orbit. It has a lift-off weight 
of about 283 tonne and is 44 m. tall with four stages. The first stage is of 2.8 m. diameter 
and has 129 tonne of solid propellant. Six solid propellant strap on motors are attached to 
the first stage. The 2.8 m. diameter liquid propulsion second stage carries 37.5 tonne of 
propellant. The third stage is a 7.2 tonne solid propellant motor and the fourth stage is again 
a liquid propellant motor with 2 tonne of propellant. 
40. In the launch vehicle area, significant progress has been achieved over the last three 
decades. The initial efforts were on the development of sounding rockets for space science 
experiments. SLV-3 provided capability to inject 40 Kg. class satellites into near-earth orbit. 
The capability was further increased through the Augmented Satellite Launch Vehicle 
(ASLV). The two successful flights of ASLV, in May, 1992 and May, 1994, helped place 
SROSS satellites in near-earth orbits for space science experiments. The successful 
developmental flights of PSLV viz. PSLV-D2 of October, 1994 and PSLV-D3 of March, 
1996 enabled th~ country place IRS-P2 and IRS-P3 satellites in the desired polar orbit. India 
realised a capability to launch 1000 Kg. class IRS satellites into polar sun-synchronous orbit. 
Some more flights of PSLV have been planned for launching IRS series satellites. 
Development of GSL V for achieving indigenous capability to launch INSAT class satellites, 
is progressing for the scheduled launch in 1997-98. Indigenous development of cryogenics 
engines and stages was making good progress. 
41. Operational Satellites and launch vehicle systems call for a host of advanced 
technologies and multi-disciplinary development efforts, covering chemicals, materials, 
propellant processing, propulsion, aerodynamics, structures, mechanisms, inertial guidance 
and navigation systems, optical and inertial sensors, control systems, servo actuators, power 
systems, thermal control systems, data handling systems, transponders, high resolution 
imaging systems, systems engineering and mission management. The long lead-time required 
for development of these technologies to meet the stringent performance and reliability 
specifications for the space systems, call for initiation of developmental effort, well in 
advance. Focussed R&D and technology development activities were accordingly, taken up 
on a time-bound manner. • 
The Committee is satisfied with the progress made by the Department of Space in respect 
of the Space related programmes. The Committee is strongly of the view that the Space 
programme should not be allowed to stagnate. Adequate advance planning in this field in 
necessary and the Department of Space should go ahead in right earnest to plan its vision 
beyond the year 2000. To that end necessary goals and requirements of technology should be 
identified so that the programme does not suffer any set back. The Committee reiterates that 
the shortage of funds should not be allowed to stand in the way of space programmes. 
42. While the Committee seeks to ensure that the Department of Space is not starved of 
funds in order to carry out its space programmes, the attention of the Committee has been 
drawn to some of the audit observations in respect of Physical Research Laboratory (PRL), 
Ahmedabad, as have appeared in the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of 
India, for the year ended 31st March, 1993 (no. 6 of 1994). Some of these observations are 
reproduced below: 
- There were no norms for scientific, technical and non-technical staff requirements. 

As a result, an expenditure of Rs. 7.82 crores was incurred on excess 
supporting staff. (Para 10.1.2) 
- Out of 50 in-house programmes including 25 undertaken during 1987-93, only 14 
were completed and 36 were continuing at the end of 1992-93. Four programmes 
were ongoing for more than 10 years. 
- Out of 13 sponsored projects including nine projects undertaken during 1987-93, 
eight were completed. There was cost overrun ranging from Rs. 1.15 lakhs to Rs. 
61.50 lakhs and time overrun of 12 months to 50 months in these completed projects. 
- In April 1976, PRL decided to set up an infra red telescope (IRT) at Mount Abu for 
research purposes at a total cost of Rs. 52 lakhs. The cost was revised to Rs. 192.44 
lakhs in December, 1984. Even after 16 years and spending Rs. 367.16 lakhs, IRT 
has not been Commissioned. Department of Electronics (DoE) entrusted the 
project: 'Appropriate Automation Promotion Programme' (AAPP) to PRL in 
January, 1984 for automation of textile industry. This was not within the purview of 
PRL as PRL's main objective was to conduct research in space science for DoS. The 
project had not been completed even after nine years and spending Rs. 199.92 lakhs 
by DoE against the estimated period of five years. 
- Department of Science and Technology (DST) approved a project in April, 1977 for 
setting up of Inter-planetary Space. (IPS) stations at a cost of Rs. 27.76 lakhs for a 
period of six years. Although three stations at Thaltej (Ahmedabad), Surat and 
Rajkot were set up at a cost of Rs. 40.11 lakhs, and with delay of three years, the 
Surat station was closed in April, 1992 and the Rajkot station was not giving 
continuous data. Thus, due to closure-non-working of the two IPS stations 
expenditure of Rs. 27.40 lakhs on their setting up had proved unfruitful. The fate of 
the third station at Thaltej is also uncertain due to radio broadcast interference. 
- Department of Commerce, United States of America approved a project: 
'Coordinated Studies of Solar X-ray and optical wave length and travelling inter­
planetary phenomenon during s9lar maximum year and beyond' in April, 1987 at a 
cost of Rs. 89.90 lakhs for a period of five years. The objectives of the project to 
collect data from 1000 stellar radio sources and transfer of IPS data to USA had not 
been achieved even after lapse of six years and spending Rs. 92.95 lakhs. 
- DST approved a project: 'Faint Object Astronomy with charged Coupled Devices 
(CCD) Camera' in August, 1984 at a total cost of Rs. 16.22 lakhs for a period of 
four years. Although PRL developed a CCD camera at total cost of Rs. 23.63 lakhs 
with a delay of more than two years, the ultimate objective of use of CCD camera in 
Indian telescopes had not been achieved. (Para 10.1.6) 
- Physical verification of stores at PRL and other subsidiary units at Mount Abu, 
Udaipur and Thaltej had not been conducted since inception. (Para 10.1.8) 
- Due to non-investment of excess funds in term deposit, PRL incurred loss of interest 
of Rs . 1.09 crores. (Para 10.1.HJ) 

The above list is only illustrative and not exhaustive. 
While appreciating the work and performance of the Department of Space, the 
Committee would like the Depar tment of Space to attend to the audit observation in respect 
of the Physica l R esea rch Laborato ry, Ahmedabad. The Committee may be apprised of the 
action taken in the matt er . 
After making a deta iled s crutiny of the Demands for Grants of the Department of 
Space and assessing the progress of various important programmes and projects administered 
by it, the Committee recommen ds that the Demands for Grants of Rs. 922.00 crores, as 
sought by the Department of Space for the year 1996-97, under Demand No. 91 may be 
approved. 
NEw DELHI; 
August, 23, 1996 · 
V. NARAYANASAMY 
Chairman, 
co,/;mittee "m Science and 
Technology, Environment and Forests. 

MINUTES 

Ul 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met from 11.00 A.M. to 1.25 P.M. and again from 3.10 P.M. to 
4.50 P.M. on Friday, the 9th August, 1996 in Committee Room 'E', Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri V. Narayanasamy --Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri K. Karunakaran 
4. Shri Parnub Mukherjee 
5. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar 
6. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma 
8. Prof. Jitendra Nath Das 
9. Shri Mohd . Ali Asraaf Fatmi 
10. Prof Ajit Kumar Mehta 
11. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
12. Shri A . Raja 
13. Shri K.B . Raut 
14. Dr. Swami Sukshiji Mahar.aj 
15. Kumari Selja 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sat ish Kumar, Joint Secret ary 
Shri H .K. Chunana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer 
Representatives of the Department of Space 
Dr. K. Kasturirungan, Secretary 
Shri K. V. lrniraya , Additional Secretary 
Shri K. Narayanan, Project Director (INSAT) 
Dr. M.G. Chandrasekhar, Scientific Secretary 
Slui K. Radha Krishnan, Director, PEA 
Shri S. Krishnamurthy, Director P&R unit 
Shri M. V. Sundntwmiah, Deputy Director (LVPO) 
Shri K.S. Krishn an, OSD 

2. The Chairman rriade a reference to the Quit lrtdia Movement which was launched on 
this day in 1942. The Members of the Committee observed a minute's silence with all of 
them standing as a mark of respect in the meniory of those who laid down their lives in 
freedom movement. 
3. The Committee took up oopsidetadon of the Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the 
Department or Space. The Secretary of the Department gave a presentation on the 
(unctioning of the Department ot Space and the allocations on different projects. The 
Members then sought datificadons on J>O'nts relating to the Demands for Grants and the 
Space Programme. 
• • • 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 
the 13th August, 1996. 

VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met from 11.00 A.M. Friday, the 23rd August, 1996 in Committee 
Room 'Main', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri V. Narayanasamy -- Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri N. Giri Prasad 
4. Shri K.R. Jayadevappa 
5. Shri K. Karunakaran 
6. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
7. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma 
9. Shri Guman Mal Loda 
10. Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta 
11. Shri Kalpnath Rai 
12. Shri K.B. Raut 
13. Shri S. Ramachandra Reddy 
14. Shri Harivansh Sahai 
15. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary 
Shri D.P . Ahuja, Committee Officer • 
2. The Committee took up consideration of the Draft Reports on Demands for Grants 
(1996-97) of (i) the Department of Science and Technology (ii) the Department of 
Electronics (iii) the Department of Space and (iv) the Department of Biotechnology. After 
some discussion, the Committee adopted the same with minor amendments. 
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the date on which these reports 
may be presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha. The Committee 
authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Shri G. Swaminathan or Dr. Mahesh Chandra 
Sharma to present these Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta and in his 
absence Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj or Shri K.B. Raut to lay these Reports on the Table of 
the Lok Sabha. 
4. The Committee placed on record its appreciation for the excellent work done by the 
Secretariat in preparing the Draft Reports and circulating the same to the Members in a 
record time. 
5. The Committee adjourned at 12.20 P.M. 