Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
REPORT NO.
290
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on st December, )1 2016
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on st December, )1 2016
TWO HUNDRED NINETIETH REPORT
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Eighty-second Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on
the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the
Department of Atomic Energy


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED NINETIETH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Eighty-second Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
on the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the
Department of Atomic Energy
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-13
5. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 15-18

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-17)
 (Constituted on 1st September, 2016)
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury    —   Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
5. Shri C.P. Narayanan
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
8. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Shri Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
31. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Ninetieth Report on the Action Taken by the
Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations contained in Two Hundred Eighty-second
Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2016-2017) of the Department of Atomic
Energy, which was presented/laid in the both the Houses of Parliament on 9th May, 2016.
2. There were twenty two recommendations in the Two Hundred Eighty-second Report of the
Committee.  Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from
the Department on 19th September, 2016.
3. In the meeting held on 29th November, 2016, the Committee considered the draft Report and
adopted the same.
RENUKA CHOWDHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
1 December, 2016 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Agrahayana 10,  1938  Science & Technology, Environment & Forests,
Rajya Sabha
(iii)

ACRONYMS
LWRs : Light Water Reactors
INIP : Creation of Indian Nuclear Insurance Pool
CLND : Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage
NPCIL : Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited
NDP : Neighbourbood Development Programme
KKNPP : Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project
BARC : Bhabha Atomic Research Centre
SHRI : Sludge Hygi enization Research Irradiation
BRIT : Board for Technology Transfer & Collaboration
FBR : Fast Breeder Reactor
IREL : Indian Rare Earths Limited
INO : India-based Neutrino Observatory Project
LIGO : Laser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory
TMC : Tata Memorial Centre
LAXPC : Large Area X-ray Proportional Counters
SXT : Soft X-ray Telescope
CZTI : Cadmium-Zinc-Telluride Imager
AERB : Atomic Energy Regulatory Board
F AC : First Approach to Criticality
PFBR : Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor
NPPs : Nuclear Power Plants
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Atomic
Energy on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Eighty Second Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Department of Atomic Energy, which was
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 9th May, 2016. The Committee had in all made
twenty two recommendations/observations in the report.  Action Taken Note on the report was
received by the Committee on 19th September, 2016.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on
the Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy are set out in the following paragraphs:-
MAJOR PROGRAMMES
Recommendation
The Committee notes with satisfaction that in the last sixty two years of its existence, the
Department of Atomic Energy has mastered a host of highly complex technologies particularly in
the field of medical radiology, nuclear agriculture, desalination, food irradiation, radio astronomy,
supercomputing, particle accelerators, plasma and cryogenics. True to the visions of Dr. Homi J.
Bhabha and Jawaharlal Nehru of envisaging the usage of atomic energy to make a difference to
the social life of Indians, the DAE should now strive to scale it up and take it to the next level.
The Committee feels that the share of nuclear power which accounts for only 3.3 per cent of
India’ s total electricity generation, needs to be increased to the higher proportions and efforts
should be made in this direction. (Para 2.7)
Action Taken by Government
The views of the honourable Committee are noted.
The Government has taken a host of measures to increase nuclear power generation and its
share in the country’s electricity production. These include:
z Agreements with foreign countries for setting up of Light Water Reactors (LWRs);
z Provision of fuel in required quantity (from both domestic and imported sources) to
ensure that the reactors are operated at rated power by opening of new mines and
processing facilities, and also by signing fuel supply contracts with several countries for
import of fuel for reactors under IAEA safeguards. In respect of future projects to be
set up with international cooperation, lifetime fuel supply guarantees are being
incorporated in commercial contracts;
z ‘In-Principle’ approval of sites of proposed reactors;
z Creation of Indian Nuclear Insurance Pool (INIP) and obtaining of Insurance policy by

2
operator for meeting its liability under the Civil Liability for  Nuclear  Damage  (CLND)
Act-2010;
z Amendment of the Atomic Energy Act to facilitate Joint Venture companies to set up
nuclear power plants;
z Recent budget speech announcement by the Honourable Finance Minister to augment
investment in nuclear power over a period of 15 years.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
FINANCIAL PROGRESS IN TWELFTH FIVE YEAR PLAN
Recommendation
The Committee takes serious view of the fact that in the first four years of current Plan
nearly 55.74% of the allocations have been disbursed. The major share i.e. 44.25% of the
allocation has accumulated for the remaining one year. Even if the Department is disbursed entire
amount, it seems impossible to utilise 44% of the plan allocation during the remaining one year .
While taking serious view of the fact that pro-rata allocations are not made annually, the
Committee recommends that in the remaining one year of the Plan period, allocations should be
made and utilised on pro-rata basis to catch up the Plan targets. The Department also needs to
improve upon the utilisation of funds. (Para 6.4)
Action Taken by Government
The observation of the honorable Committee is noted. In this regard, the following are further
submitted :-
With the approval of Ministry of Finance, funds were re-appropriated from Demand No.4 to
Demand No.5 and the Department could utilise 97% of the plan  budget allocations, in 2015-16.
Further, merger of Demand  No.5  with Demand  No.4 and Rationalisation of the Schemes,
are  likely to improve the capacity  of the Department in utilisation of the budget allocation. Review
meetings have been conducted by Secretary / Additional Secretary  periodically. In addition to
monitoring of the Project/Schemes, scrutiny at micro level is also being undertaken.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply and would like the Department to pursue the
matter with Ministry of Finance for disbursement of full XII Five Y ear Plan allocation.
UTILISATION OF THE APPROVED OUTLAY IN 2015-16
Recommendation
On overall analysis, the Committee finds that Plan expenditure by the Department under
Atomic Energy and Nuclear Power scheme is satisfactory but there is considerable scope to improve
upon the performance because Actual utilisation of funds in Plan schemes is 93% of corresponding
period the previous year. (Para 7.3)

3
Action Taken by Government
The observations  of the honorable Committee are  noted.  Action plan has been  chalked
out to improve upon the performance.
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) has been utilizing the funds provided
to it by the Government almost completely excepting that provided for Neighborhood Development
Programme (NDP) - Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project (KKNPP). With regard to NDP, utilization
of funds is subject to progress of work of  housing which is being implemented by the
Government of Tamil Nadu.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like the Department to constantly monitor
the utilisation of funds.
Recommendation
The Committee observes that there is a tendency of underutilisation under Nuclear Power
Schemes. During the Demands for Grants meeting the Committee was provided explanation for
underutilisation in Demand No. 5. The Committee understands the logic put forward by the
Department. The Committee takes note of Merger of Demand no. 5 (Nuclear Power Scheme with
Demand No. - 4 (Atomic Energy Programmes) and hopes that merger of the two schemes will result
in better utilisation of precious budgetary resources. (Para 7.5)
Action Taken by Government
The observations of the honourable Committee are noted.
Periodical Reviews have been introduced at the department, unit and divisions level to ensure
better utilisation of precious budgetary resources.
Comments
The Committee appreciates the monitoring at micro level and hopes that this will
result in increased utilisation of allocated resources.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION IN 2016-17
Recommendation
The Committee feels that reduction at B.E. to the tune of
 `  6538.16 Crore against the
projected outlay of  `  25,220.64 crore and especially to the tune of  `  4613.11 crore under Plan
Head against projected Plan BE of  `  10813.11 crore is unjustified. It has adversely impacted the
Plan and Non plan projects of the Department particularly reduction in Non-Plan allocation as it
affects the day-to-day functioning of the Department. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Ministry of Finance should consider the proposal for increase in outlay at RE stage particularly
under Non Plan Research & Development, Industries and Minerals Sectors. (Para 9.5)
Action Taken by Government
Department accepts the observations of the honorable Committee and  the same shall be
brought to the notice of Ministry of Finance for their kind consideration at RE 2016-17 stage.

4
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the progress made in
the matter.
Recommendation
The Committee welcomes the additional allocation of 3000.00 crore by the Finance Minister
in his budget speech under clean energy Programme and the recommends that in the area of critical
national importance and clean energy, the Ministry of Finance should give maximum financial
support for the programmes of the Department under the appropriate financing mechanism.
(Para 9.6)
Action Taken by Government
Department accepts the recommendations of the honourable Committee. Department in
consultation with Ministry of Finance is working out the appropriate financing mechanism.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to  be apprised of the progress made
in the matter at regular interval.
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
Recommendation
The importance of having an independent and credible nuclear regulatory body at par with
similar regulators in other countries is beyond question. The Committee feels that construction of
new building of Headquarters and Regional Regulatory Centres of Atomic Energy Regulatory Board
is one of the definitive steps for capacity building of AERB for effective monitoring. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that construction of building must be expedited and completed
as per the schedule. Also, AERB should also augment their manpower requirement at various levels
and adequate budgetary provision should be made for the same. The Committee is also of the view
that more and more radiation generating Plants outside nuclear installations should be registered
with Atomic Energy Regulatory Board to avert accidents. (Para 10.9)
Action Taken by Government
The observations of the  Honourable  Committee has been  taken note of. The Statutory
approval from Municipal Corporation  in respect of new building at AERB HQ is awaited. Proposal
for setting up of regional centre at New Delhi  is initiated and work is in progress in respect  of
other regions.  Scientific/technical manpower sanction has been  received in November,  2015.
Induction of manpower has started. In view of the shortage of office space, appointment in full
scale can be started after the new building at HQ is completed. Accounts/ Administration manpower
sanction is  awaited. More and more radiation generating Plants are being registered  through
eLORA  software and  awareness programs are  being conducted.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that Department would take the all

5
necessary steps to ensure that the work relating to construction of Atomic Energy
Regulatory Board building is completed as per the schedule.
BHABHA ATOMIC RESEARCH CENTRE (BARC)
Financial Performance
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the activities undertaken by BARC and allocation of
 `  2850.75
crore under Power , Industries and Research & Development Sector and hopes that a concrete action
plan would be prepared to fully utilise the allocated budgetary resources and important projects
would be completed on time. (Para 11.6)
Action Taken by Government
Efforts are being made for optimum utilization of budgetary allocations. Project & expenditure
review meetings are being held at periodical intervals to address the challenges encountered during
project execution. This has resulted in more than 96% of expenditure over RE 2015-16. The
process of review is being  continued, to complete the  important projects on time.
Comments
The Committee notes the fact that BARC had utilized 96% of RE allocation in 2015-16
and hopes that the BARC will continue utilising its entire allocated budget.
Recommendation
The Committee notes the important contributions made by the BARC in providing potable
water to people, reprocessing and waste management and supercomputing. The Committee is hopeful
that BARC will maintain its service of ensuring delivery of fruits of nuclear science & technology
to the common people. (Para 11.12)
Action Taken by Government
The observations of the Honorable Committee are noted.  The following activities are being
progressed :-
1. Providing Portable Water to People:
(i) One technology on high solute rejecting reverse osmosis membrane has been
developed and transferred to private entrepreneur for commercial scale production
and deployment. These membranes are capable of desalinating seawater.
(ii) The technology of online domestic water purifier based on ultrafiltration membrane
has been transferred to Vishwakarma Institute of Technology, Pune under AKRUTI
program of DAE for deployment in the rural areas.
2. Supercomputing :
BARC has embarked on an ambitious programme of developing supercomputing capacity
of 1000 Teraflops as a part of its XII plan activities. It has developed ANUPAM-AGGRA

6
parallel supercomputer in 2013 which had sustained performance of 110 Teraflops. In
2016, BARC has developed a new supercomputer ANUPAM - AGANYA which has
sustained performance of 270 Teraflops. BARC will continue to develop state-of-art
supercomputers indigenously which will aid the scientific community to solve
challenging problems and result in tangible benefits to the society.
3. Reprocessing and Waste Management:
India, has adopted “closed fuel cycle” and treats spent nuclear fuel as a material of
resource. 99% of the material in spent fuel is useful material. The closed fuel cycle
aims at optimum utilisation of fuel resources by reprocessing of spent fuel, recovering
U and Pu from spent fuel and recycling them to reactor as fuel. This finally leads to
a very small percentage of residual material present in spent nuclear fuel requiring better
management as radioactive waste.
Safe management of nuclear waste has been accorded highest priority right from the
inception of our nuclear energy programme. As a waste management philosophy, no
waste in any physical form is released / disposed off  to the environment unless the
same is cleared, exempted or excluded from regulations. A comprehensive radioactive
waste management is established taking into account the operational capability for the
management of radioactive waste and an independent regulatory capability for its
overview. The nuclear waste management practices are on par with international
practices following the guide lines of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Utmost emphasis is given to separation/recovery of radio-isotopes present in waste for
their deployment for societal application, waste volume minimization, effective
containment and isolation of radio-activity followed by near zero discharge of
radioactivity to the environment.
In this regard:
(i) Ceasium-137, a prominent fission product, has been recovered in large quantity from
nuclear waste and deployed for blood irradiator in non-dispersive glass form.
(ii) Extraction of Stronium-90, another fission product, from nuclear waste could be
demonstrated at laboratory scale using indigenously developed novel extractants.
Stronium-90 has been extracted in small quantity and deployed for generation of
Yttrium-90, which has use for radiotherapy in medical application. The novel extractant
is being manufactured in bulk amount to recover Stronium-90 in larger quantity for its
utilisation as heat source in space applications.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee commends the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre for contributing in ensuring
food and health security of the Nation and recommends to BARC to execute its strategy to

7
aggressively market its socially beneficial technologies such as Nisarguna Biogas Plant for
handling biodegradable wastes; Sludge Hygienization Research Irradiation (SHRI), KRUSHAK,
Gamma Radiation Processing Plan, etc. including its technology on food preservation, nuclear
medicine and healthcare, through Technology Transfer & Collaboration Division (BRIT) so that
more and more people get benefitted. (Para 11.19)
Action Taken by Government
The recommendation of the honorable Committee is noted. In this regard, actions taken under
socially beneficial technologies are detailed.
1. Nuclear Agriculture:
BARC is  actively involved in the  production of breeders’ seeds and foundation seeds
of various BARC varieties through various Agricultural Universities, Krishi Vigyan
Kendras and progressive farmers. Recently BARC has also initiated the seed production
programme at Vizag in new BARC campus. These efforts will generate good quality and
quantity seeds of pulses and groundnut in Eastern part of the country especially for
North East States, Odisha and Andhra Pradesh. Jawaharlal Nehru Krishi Vishva
Vidyalaya, Jabalpur has taken up the pulses seed production of BARC varieties on a very
large scale. Mahatma Phule Krishi Vidyapeeth, Rahuri, University of Agricultural
Sciences, Raichur, Indira Gandhi Krishi Vishva Vidyalaya, Raipur and Dr. G. B. Pant
University of Agriculture and Biotechnology are also actively involved in the  crop
improvement programmes of BARC.
2. Food Preservation
BARC is  now actively conducting various programmes for food merchants, fruits and
vegetable growers, various farmers’ cooperatives and societies to make them aware of
the importance of food preservation using irradiation especially in the light of proposed
withdrawal of use of fumigants in the  next few years on international level. These
efforts are proving successful.
3.  Solid Waste Management
Nisargruna :
BARC has entered into  MOU with Municipal Corporations of Mumbai, Chennai,
Tuticorin, Rajkot, Chandigarh and Delhi Zoo to proactively install the Nisargruna plants and
prove the technology in their premises. Many of these plants are already in place and working
fairly well. Many more Municipal Corporations and Urban Development Ministry of
Government of India and States like Punjab, Karnataka, Gujarat, Maharashtra are trying to
make use of this technology in their  SWATCHH BHARAT mission. BARC is actively
supporting these efforts.
Sludge Hygienisation :
BARC has Developed radiation technology for Dry sewage sludge hygienisation. First of
its kind in India, the fully automatic facility can hygienise 100 tonnes of dry sludge every day.

8
Moreover, the hygienised sludge will be inoculated with useful bacteria to improve Nitrogen,
Phosphorous and Potassium contents of the sludge for use in agriculture. First such facility
is being setup at Ahmadabad under an MoU between BARC and Ahmadabad Municipal
Corporation. The facility is expected to be operational by the end of 2017. Efforts are also
on to set up more such plants in the country through MoU with local bodies.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
INDIRA GANDHI CENTRE FOR ATOMIC RESEARCH (IGCAR), KALPAKKAM
Recommendation
The Committee notes the identification of the Fast Reactor Fuel cycle Facility project as an
independent project. The Committee while taking note of achievements of the Centre hopes that
concerted efforts made by the Centre will make India self sufficient in Fast Breeder Reactor (FBR)
Technology. (Para 12.6)
Action Taken by Government
All out efforts are being  made to make India self sufficient in Fast Breeder Reactor (FBR)
Technology.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
INDIAN RARE EARTHS LIMITED (IREL)
Recommendation
The Committee finds that the target of IEBR generation by Indian Rare Earths Limited is
somewhat fluctuating. While the Committee appreciates the hurdles faced by the IREL, it hopes that
with setting up of new mining facilities at Tamapara, Andhra Pradesh and shifting of its facilities
to northern part of the country, Indian Rare Earths Limited will be able to increase the production
of Rare Earth Minerals and increase generation of Internal & Extra Budgetary Resources also.
(Para 13.6)
Action Taken By The Governmen t
The observations of the Committee has been brought to the notice of IREL and also for
increasing the generation of  IEBR.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps
taken by Indian Rare Earths Limited in this regard.
INDIA BASED NEUTRINO OBSERV ATORY PROJECT (INO)
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the progress that has taken place in setting up of India-based

9
Neutrino Observatory at Pottipuram, Theni and infrastructure development at Inter Institutional
Centre for High Energy Physics, Madurai. The Committee hopes that in years to come, India based
Neutrino Observatory, a joint collaboration between Tata Institute of Fundamental Research,
Department of Atomic Energy and the Department of Science & Technology, will prove to be a
huge success and will be a role model for other Ministries/Departments. The Committee recommends
that adequate budgetary provisions should be made for the observatory. (Para 14.6)
Action Taken by Government
Department accepts the strong recommendation of the Committee that adequate budgetary
provisions should be made for the observatory.
Based on the physical progress of the Project, budgetary provisions for INO shall be
augmented.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
LASER INTERFEROMETER GRA VITATIONAL-WA VE OBSERV ATORY (LIGO)
Recommendation
The Committee believes that the proposed LIGO-India project has tremendous potential to
unravel the myriad mysteries of the universe. It is likely to become a tool for the Indian astronomy
in keeping up the level of excellence in research in astronomy and astrophysics of the country. The
Committee hopes that the LIGO-India project would help the country to embark on truly world class
international science collaborations and help India become a force to reckon with in this field.
(Para 15.6)
Action Taken by Government
The observations of the Honorable Committee have been noted.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
TATA MEMORIAL CENTRE (TMC)
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Tata Memorial Centre should make more realistic
assessments for its financial requirements for the project and avoid underutilisation of the funds
allocated. The Committee also recommends to the TMC to ensure that precious budgetary resources
allocation are utilised fully and efficiently in expanding facilities and services. The Committee
expects that TMC will be able to complete Hadron facility which is first of its kind facility in the
country which will help in treating paediatric cancer and tumours without any further delay.
(Para 16.5)
Action Taken by Government
The recommendation of the honorable Committee is noted for utilization of the funds
allocated. The status of Hadron facility project is as follows :-

10
The order for the hadron  therapy equipment has since been released on M/s. IBA SA
Belgium. Tender is under finalization for construction of the facility. Since this is a  highly complex
facility, the building has to be made as per the specification and with the full involvement of the
manufacturer  of the equipment. The inputs have been received from M/s. IBA and the drawings
are being finalized.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that TMC would fully utilise the allocated
resources and Hadron facility project will be completed as per schedule.
Recommendation
The Committee is happy to know about commencement of population based cancer Registries
at Homi Bhabha Cancer Hospital at Vizag in September, 2015 and Sangrur in Punjab. The
Committee hopes that construction of cancer Hospital in Punjab will start by June, 2016 and the
projects will be completed at the earliest. (Para 16.7)
Action Taken by Government
Comments of the honorable Committee is noted . In this regard, the following is further
submitted :-
The tendering  action  for the construction of the Hospital in Punjab  is in progress.  Cancer
registry work is in progress.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that construction of Cancer Hospital in
Punjab will be completed as per the schedule.
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that as soon as the results of the study are out and if at all, any
co-relation between eating roasted ‘liver fluke’ affected sweet water fish and gallbladder cancer in
Gangetic Belt is established, results of the study needs to be given wider publicity among the
common people. (Para 16.9)
Action Taken by Government
The recommendation of the honorable Committee is noted.
If the results of the present study establishes  any co-relation between eating roasted “ liver
fluke” affected sweet water fish and gall bladder cancer in Gangetic Belt  the same will be given
wider publicity among the people.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
CONTIBUTION TO ASTROSAT MISSION
Recommendation
The Committee congratulates the Department particularly Tata Institute of Fundamental

11
Research, Mumbai for successful operationalisation of Large Area X-ray Proportional Counters
(LAXPC); Soft X-ray Telescope (SXT); Cadmium-Zinc-Telluride Imager (CZTI) of ASTROSAT and
hopes that India’ s first national observatory for astronomical observations will yield desired results
and will be of great help to the researchers in India. (Para 17.5)
Action Taken by Government
We are thankful to the Committee for the observation that this observatory will help to the
researchers in India.
The first phase of the Astrosat mission, for calibration purposes, was successfully  completed
on 21.03.2016. All three instruments are performing as per specifications, in some cases exceeding
design values. Currently (April 14th – October 14th) dedicated time has been given for
experimentalists who have built the instruments. Preliminary data already  suggests exciting new
discoveries.
Comments
The Committee is happy to note that instruments made by the Department are
performing well and wishes all success to ASTROSAT Mission.
POWER SECTOR
Recommendation
The Committee understands the hurdles were faced by the Department in completion of
Kudankulam unit-II but it is of the view that considering the enormous energy challenge and the
grim energy situation of the country, the Department must work harder and needs to be fully
supported by all concerned in this regard. The Committee hopes that the second unit of
Kudankulam Nuclear Power Project would start in the first quarter of financial year 2016-17.
(Para 18.14)
Action Taken by Government
V arious useful and important suggestions made by the honorable Committee are  noted.  In
this regard, the following are further submitted ;-
Kudankulam project (KKNPP-1&2) was delayed because of local protests, subsequent time
taken in complying with the directives of the Honourable Supreme Court and obtaining various
regulatory clearances in first of a kind reactor.
KKNPP , Unit-1 has generated 8020 MUs of electricity as of May-2016 (including 2243 MUs
of infirm power) since its grid connection.
KKNPP, Unit-2 is under advanced stage of commissioning. Initial fuel loading (IFL) is
completed.  The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) has given permission on June 08, 2016
for First Approach to Criticality (FAC). The KKNPP-2 attained first criticality (attaining controlled
self-sustaining nuclear fission chain reaction in the Reactor for the first time) on 10.07.2016.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

12
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that the Department must expedite the pace of construction of
nuclear reactors and accelerate the speed of the average construction time taken. The Committee
recommends that the Department should make a firm resolve, mobilise its resources and intensify
its efforts to ensure that all proposed nuclear projects are completed and commissioned within the
scheduled deadline. (Para 18.15)
Action Taken by Government
The start of the proposed nuclear projects and their completion would be contingent to
completion of pre-project activities like land acquisition and obtaining statutory clearances,
availability of resources, supply of long delivery/critical equipment/ components commensurate with
manufacturing capability/ capacity of vendors within the country for major / critical equipment,
conclusion of techno-commercial discussion in respect of reactors to be set up with foreign co-
operation, resolution of CLND related issues, etc.
The recommendation of the honourable Committee is noted.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
BHARTIYA NABHIKIYA VIDYUT NIGAM LTD. (BHA VINI)
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that setting up of Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor, the second
stage of the Indian Nuclear Power Programme is crucial for energy security of the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department must make the Prototype Fast Breeder
Reactor Unit 2 operational by revised target of completion, i.e. first quarter of financial year
2016-17 and start its commercial operation as scheduled. (Para 19.4)
Action Taken by Government
The recommendation of the honorable Committee is noted. The following are further
submitted :-
Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR) internals have been kept in poised condition for pre-
heating prior to Sodium filling in Main V essel. BHA VINI  would start the process of Sodium filling
as sodium is the coolant in this reactor. This activity will be followed by fuel loading for
approaching towards first criticality. Initially there could be zero power and power would be
stepped up gradually. Essential physics experiments at low  and high power levels need to be done
to reach the 100% power ultimately. Being first-of-its-kind reactor in the country, many
unanticipated safety and regulatory requirements are emerging in various stages of commissioning
that are being met to make the reactor operation safe. With this all efforts are being made to make
the reactor operational by March 2017 followed by commercial operation in October, 2017.
Application for sequential commissioning has been submitted to Atomic Energy Regulatory Board
(AERB).

13
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that there should be no let up in the
efforts of the Department to ensure that first-of-its kind Reactor based on Fast Breeder
Reactor Technology starts commercial operation by March, 2017. Any further delay in
commissioning of the Reactor must be avoided.
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Department should make concerted efforts to tap Nuclear
Energy to surmount the rising energy need of emerging India. The Department at the same time
must do away with the deficiencies in the realm of safety framework so as to make the nation safe
from nuclear accidents. (Para 19.5)
Action Taken by Government
V arious useful and important suggestions made by the honorable Committee is noted.
Safety is accorded utmost priority in all phases of Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs) from sitting,
design, construction, commissioning and operation. The nuclear power reactors are provided with
multi-layer safety provisions and series of physical barriers to prevent the release of radioactivity
beyond acceptable limits and thereby protect the personnel, public, and the environment.
The safety aspects of the nuclear power reactors to be set up in the country are extensively
reviewed at every stage by the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB), and the reactors are set
up and operated strictly in accordance with its stage-wise clearances. The operation of nuclear
power plants is carried out by highly trained and licensed personnel, strictly in line with the
approved procedures and technical specifications.
Safety is not static and improvements/ upgrades are effected in NPPs based on evolving
global standards, events and operating experience feedback. Multitier safety reviews by AERB
during all phases of NPPs is in place. Further, review of Indian NPPs by OSART- IAEA has also
been done. The feedbacks obtained from such reviews are suitably incorporated in all the Indian
nuclear reactors as appropriate.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

MINUTES

17
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3,00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 29th November, 2016 in Room No. ‘67’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury  —  Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
6. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOKSABHA
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
8. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
9. Kum. Sushmita Dev
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Shri Laxman Giluwa
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Chirag Paswan
14. Shri Nana Patole
15. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
16. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
17. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
18. Shri Vikram Usendi
19. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. She
informed the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 286th,
287th, 288th 289th, 290th and 291st reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations/observations contained in reports of the Committee on the Demands for

18
Grants (2016-17) pertaining to Departments of Biotechnology, Space, Scientific and Industrial
Research, Science & Technology, Atomic Energy and Ministry of Earth Sciences. The Committee
then considered the draft 286th to 291st Reports and after some deliberations adopted the same.
3. The Committee also decided to present/lay its 286th to 291st reports to both the Houses of
Parliament on 1st December, 2016. The Committee authorised the Chairperson and, in her absence,
Shri Prasanna Acharya and in his absence Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan to present the reports in the
Rajya Sabha and Shri Vikram Usendi and, in his absence, Shri Laxman Giluwa, to lay the reports
on the Table of Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.05 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.