149th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/149threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:13]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY-NINTH  REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY ON THE
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED FORTIETH REPORT OF
 THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
 ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON THE
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-2006)OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY
 
PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE   22ND  DECEMBER, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 22ND  DECEMBER, 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2005/ AGRAHAYANA, 1927 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
   
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE   
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                             
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE  
4.MINUTES OF THE MEETING
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2005)
----------
 
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Dr.Prabha Thakur
4. Shri Dilip Singh Judev
5. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav
6. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
7. Smt. Kum Kum Rai
8. Shri Birabhadra Singh
    *9.   Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha
  Ф10.   Vacant
            LOK  SABHA
 
11. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
12. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad            
13. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty

149th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/149threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:13]
14. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
15. Shri Mohan S. Delkar  
16. Shri Francis Fanthome 
17. Shri Anantrao Gudhe
18. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
19. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik           
20. Shri Brahmananda Panda
21. Smt. Neeta Pateriya
22. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil        
23. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
24. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
25. Shri Rakesh Singh
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                              
27. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh   
28. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar                     
29. Shri D. Venugopal
30. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
31. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
 
SECRETARIAT
      Shri N.C.Joshi, Additional Secretary
      Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
 Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Forty-ninth Report
 on the Action Taken by the Department of Science & Technology on the recommendations contained in One Hundred Fortieth
 Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Science &Technology.
2.         The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Science &Technology on the
 recommendations contained in the One Hundred Fortieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Science &
 Technology which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25th April, 2005.
3.         There were nineteen  recommandations contained in the One Hundred Fortieth Report of the Committee.  Action Taken
 Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Department on 23rd August, 2005.
4.         In the meeting held on 20th December, 2005 the Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report and adopted the same.
 
NEW DELHI ;                                                                                                                                        P.G.NARAYANAN 
December 20, 2005                                                                                                                                               Chairman,
                                                  Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
                                            Science & Technology, Environment & Forests. 
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of  Science & Technology on the
 Recommendations contained in the One Hundred fortieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
 Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department
 of Science & Technology, presented to both Houses of Parliament on 25 th April, 2005.  There were eighteen
 Recommendations contained in the Report Action Taken note on those Recommendations was received from the
 Department on 23
rd August, 2005.The Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report in its meeting held on 18th
 November,2005 and decided to seek clarification/additional information on certain points contained in paras
 18,21,27,40,46,49,56,70

149th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/149threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:13]
The Committee’s Recommendation, Action Taken thereon by the Department of    Science & Technology, points raised by the
 Committee (where necessary), clarification by the Department and comments of the Committee thereon are set out in the succeeding
 paragraphs:-
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendation
            The Committee is not fully convinced with the reply of the Department.  Even if the plea of the Department is
 accepted, the Department will be spending Rs.523.61 crores in the fourth quarter i.e. January and March, 2005 and
 Rs.328.44 crores in March, 2005 alone in case it is able to make full utilization of the R.E. of Rs.1337.63 crores.  This likely
 spending by the Department in the last quarter of 2004-05 does not compare favourably vis-à-vis the previous three quarters
 as far as the pace of expenditure is concerned.  The Committee, therefore, observes that the Department may make sincere
 efforts to maintain uniform pace of expenditure throughout the year, to the extent possible, for proper utilization of funds
 and desist from last minute spending.  The Committee would be interested to know the expenditure figure in the
 last                  quarter of 2004-05.                                                                                                  (Para 10)
Action taken by the Department
            Appropriate administrative action has been taken in order to ensure even flow of plan and non-plan expenditure
 throughout the year, to the extent possible, for proper utilization of funds and desist from last minute spending.  All
 concerned officers have been sensitized on this requirement.  In the current year, expenditure during last quarter will be
 strictly restricted to 33% of the grant provided in the BE Unlike last year, no relaxation will be allowed in this regard, in the
 current financial year.  Accordingly, schedule of activities for the financial year 2005-06 will be planned accordingly.  The
 Controller of Accounts will be instructed to restrict release of plan and non-plan funds in the last quarter to 33% of
 respective BE provisions. Quarterly expenditure monitoring meeting will be held to keep track of expenditure and
 efficiently utilize the budget.  The monthly spending under different schemes will be published in the website of the
 Ministry so that expenditure decision can be expedited.  The expenditure during the last quarter of FY 2004-05 was Rs.
 463.39 crores Plan and Rs. 114.06 Non-Plan totaling Rs. 577.45 crores out of the total expenditure of Rs. 1272.86 crores.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply with satisfaction.  The idea of publishing monthly spending on the website of the
 Ministry may not only bring transparency but may also help in better coordination and monitoring of spending.
 
Recommendation      
The Committee recommends that the above obsolete equipments may be replaced on priority basis with the
 budgetary allocation as IACS is 128 year old premier Institute, which has been contributing in the areas of chemical
 sciences, physical sciences, non-conventional energy sources, biological services etc.                                            (Para
 12)        
Action taken by the Department
            Recommendation of the Committee has been noted and action on the same has been initiated.
 Comments
            The Committee notes the reply. It feels that institutes like IACS should be provided with all possible help to maintain
 contemporary standards so that research being conducted by such institutes may not suffer as a result of lack of funds and
 equipments.
PHARMACEUTICAL RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT FUND
Recommendation
            The Committee notes the reply of the Department and hopes that from the financial year 2006-07, there will be only
 one entry relating to Drugs and Pharmaceutical Programmes in the Departments’ Demands for Grants to avoid any scope of

149th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/149threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:13]
 confusion.                                                                                            ( Para 14)
Action taken by the Department
            The Department has noted the recommendations of the Committee for guidance while making the proposal for BE
 for 2006-07 for PRDSF programme.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
            The Committee feels that a mission mode programme should be started or worked out for the Drugs &
 Pharmaceuticals Research to develop drugs on a priority basis for disease that are most common in tropical regions, like
 malaria, tuberculosis, malfunctioning of stomach and liver, cough and  cold etc.  which need special focus as they are still
 the cause of  sickness and mortality in our country.  The Committee is of the opinion that there is a need for better
 coordination and sharing of research information among concerned departments, which are involved in the Drugs and
 Pharmaceuticals Research.                                                                                                                 (Para 18)
Action taken by the Department
            A number of R&D projects have been initiated under PRDSF programme in this period on TB, Kala-Azar, Malaria. 
 The Department has noted the recommendations of the Committee for future guidance.
Points raised by the committee
A detailed pointed reply may be furnished.
 
Clarification by the Department
 
DST has been operating Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research Programme since 1994-95 at the initiative of the
 Planning Commission.   Since 2004-05 the programme  has two tier mechanism for providing policy guidelines through
 Drug Development Promotion Board (DDPB) under the Chairmanship of Secretary – DST and  an Expert Committee under
 the Chairmanship of an eminent scientist nominated by Secretary – DST for screening and recommending industry
 institutional collaborative R&D project proposals for grants-in-aid and Pharma industry R&D proposal seeking soft loan.  
 The Composition of Drug Development Promotion Board is :
-  Secretary DST – Chairman
-  Director General CSIR,
-
                     Secretary – Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals,
-                     Secretary – Department of Health and Family Welfare
-                     Secretary – Department of AYUSH,
-                     Director General – ICMR,
-                     Representative from Planning Commission (Industry Division)
-                     JS / FA, DST.
-                     Chairman – Expert Committee PRDSF,
-                     President – Indian Drug Manufacturers  Association
-                     President – Bulk Drug Manufacturers Association
-                     President – Indian Pharmaceutical Alliance
-                     President – Indian Medical Association
-                     Member Secretary – Head – Technology Transfer Division, DST
The Expert Committee comprises of the following members :
Chairman – An eminent scientist nominated by Secretary, DST.
(Padma Vibhushan – Prof. M.M. Sharma was associated as Chairman for 9 years and the present Committee is Chaired by

149th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/149threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:13]
 Dr. C.M. Gupta, Director, CDRI, Lucknow).
Representative of D/o Chemicals & Petrochemicals
Representative of D/o Health and Family Welfare
Representative of D/o AYUSH 
Representative of  Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR)
Representative of  Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) 
Representative of Department of Biotechnology (DBT)
Director, National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (NIPER)
Head, Technology Transfer,  DST.
Four experts to be nominated by Secretary DST.
Member Secretary – Coordinating Officer in Technology Transfer Division.
           The above composition has involved concerned departments / agencies and thus it is expected to take care of
 duplications, overlapping with the similar activities. Further,the DDPB and the Expert Committee have  resolved to give
 preference for the R&D projects addressing the neglected / life style diseases such as TB, Malaria, Diarrhoea, Filiariasis,
 Dengue, Diabetes, Psychosomatic disorders etc. Under this  programme during 2004-05,   collaborative R&D projects on
 Kala-Azar, Multi-drug resistant tuberculosis, Malaria and soft loan for diseases like Dengue, Cataract, Cancers of
 Gastrointestinal tract (Colon, pancreas and stomach) , Lung and  Dementia have been supported. The Department has noted
 the concern and the recommendations regarding developing a mission mode programme in this direction.
Commets
            The Committee notes the reply. 
SEISMOLOGY
Recommendation                                                                              
            It is a well-known fact that exact prediction of earthquake is not possible and the science of earthquake prediction
 has not reached a mature stage as yet, though seismologists all over the world are working hard in this area.  It will be a
 great service to humanity if the seismologists succeed one day in their efforts and save the humanity from great devastations
 from time to time.  Till then, we may try to minimize the effect of this natural catastrophe. This can be ensured by enforcing
 suitable building laws in the country, especially in the areas which are more sensitive seismologically.  It has to be ensured
 that all construction activities are undertaken with due regard to earthquake.  As regards the existing structures, the
 Department may prepare a plan how to protect them from possible earthquakes in future. The Committee also feels that the
 Department needs to carry out its study on earthquake more vigorously in collaboration with other countries as they are
 equally concerned in this regard.                                                                     (Para 21)
Action taken by the Department
            The Department is mandated to evolve and support R&D projects on different aspects of earthquake.  Outcome of
 the related schemes/projects has been used by Bureau of Indian Standards from time to time in preparing/updating the
 guidelines for earthquake resistant design of structures.  Also, a few pilot studies are being taken up for microzonation of
 selected cities, like Jabalpur, Guwahati, Delhi and Bangalore to help in hazard preparedness and risk reduction as well as
 for future land use planning and development.  Government has also set-up recently a mechanism in the form of Earthquake
 Risk Evaluation Center, which is mandated to collate, integrate the data sets and prepare the site-specific risk maps.  A few
 bilateral programme with Taiwan and Russia have also been initiated in the area of seismic evaluation/retrofitting of
 building, setting up of test facilities for equipments and structures.  As far as the enforcement of building byelaws is
 concerned, MHA is the nodal agency and they are formulating the regulations in this regard.
Points raised by the committee
         What is the progress in these pilot studies?  To what extent will they be helpful in risk assessment of earthquakes? 
 What can be done to make the prescription based on such studies mandatory for town planners to minimize destruction by

149th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/149threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:13]
 earthquakes?  It has also been informed that site-specific risk maps will also be prepared.  When will the site-specific risks
 maps be available?
Clarification by the Department
The Seismic Microzonation studies of Jabalpur, which was taken up to establish the methodology, has been completed on
 1:50,000 scale and the report has now been released.  For Delhi, First level Microzonation maps at 1:50,000 scale is almost
 complete and the various maps are being finalized.  However, these maps will be refined on higher scale by IMD/SERC,
 which is mandated for preparing the site specific risk maps.  The work is excepted to be completed by the end of 2006.  The
 Microzonation studies of  Bangalore and Guwahati city are at various stages pf completion.  The preliminary Microzonation
 maps of Guwahati city at 1:50,000 scale will be ready in another six month.  Bangalore Microzonation has recently been
 launched and a few maps related to Geotechnical characters have been prepared.  Based on the Microzonation studies,
 Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) may prepare the revised building codes for city planners as per their mandate.
Comments
            The Committee notes with some satisfaction that the Bureau of Indian Standards is using the outcome of the research
 done by the Department in preparing the guidelines for earthquake resistant design of structures. The dissemination of such
 research output should be made vigorously among the Urban and town planners to make use of these guidelines.   The
 Committee is, however, of the view that we have to go a long way in this area and this may be possible with the sustained
 and vigorous efforts of all the concerned Departments/Ministries.
 
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR MEDIUM RANGE WEATAHER FORECASTING (NCMRWF) NOIDA
Recommendation
            The Committee feels that thrust of weather forecasting should be on its accuracy and recommends that the
 Department should consider enhancing the spatial resolution, range and accuracy of forecasts and advisories by constant
 improvement in mathematical models with the use of available, reliable and accurate satellite data and techniques.     (Para
 27)
Action taken by the Department
            The NCMRWF continuously makes efforts to improve accuracy and range of its forecasts and advisories.  This is a
 achieved by improving in various components of its numerical weather prediction system, such as quantity of data that is
 ingested in the forecast system, quality control of various data available for ingesting in the system, maximize use of
 satellite data, develop algorithms for assimilation of new types of data both from Indian satellite and satellite of other
 countries.  The accuracy and range of forecasts based on numerical weather prediction (NWP) model, which are complex
 general circulation models, depends upon the representativeness of initial conditions, proper representation of physical
 processes and most importantly the resolution.  Even though the predication over tropical and Indian Monsoon region still
 remains a formidable challenge for the modeling community of the world, the effort to improve the forecast nevertheless
 continues.  At NCMRWF we have experimented with various physical processed such as boundary layer, radiation, and
 cumulous convection processes to improve the forecasts.  We have also significantly enhanced use of non-conventional data
 from satellite in our assimilation system.  Most importantly, we have increased resolution of our NWP model.
            At NCMRWF the global model is being run at a higher spatial resolution of wave number 170 (equivalent to
 horizontal resolution of 75 km) in experimental mode and the operational model which is of 150 km resolution is running
 regularly up to a time scale of one week.  Also the operational model is run for extended range of 45 days once in month to
 get the accumulated monthly rainfall for the next month. Improvement in the accuracy of forecast is a continued process
 and experiments in insertion of accurate and reliable satellite data and improved techniques of data assimilation are
 continuing.  Also regional model with spatial resolution of about 30 km are being run regularly to supplement the global
 model forecasts.  At NCMRWF, we are also in the process of development collaboration with major global NWP centers,
 notably that of the USA and UK, to improve our mathematical models.
            The number of Agro Advisory Services (AAS) units is being continuously augmented and now stands at 107.
Points raised by the committee
What are the services offered by Agro Advisory Services (AAS)? How effective have they been in helping farmers?
 
Clarification by the Department
Agro-meteorological Advisory Service (AAS) of NCMRWF
Services offered by AAS
         The main objective of NCMRWF is to provide medium range weather forecast based AAS to the farmers of the
 country.The NCMRWF is providing AAS on experimental basis to the farming community, at the scale of agro-climatic
 zone, based on location specific medium range weather forecast. The country is divided into 127 agro climatic zones with
 each zone covering about 3 5 districts. At present NCMRWF has established AAS units in 107 agro climatic zones.  The
 location specific forecasts valid for 4 days comprising of six meteorological variables, viz., total precipitation, average
 cloudiness, average wind speed, predominant wind direction, maximum temperature and minimum temperature are derived

149th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/149threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:13]
 NWP model outputs. These forecasts of weather elements are subjected to fine tuning through statistical and synoptic
 techniques to obtain final location specific weather forecast. They are disseminated biweekly to AAS units on every
 Tuesday and Friday over Telephone, Fax or Internet system. In addition to these parameters, forecast for weekly cumulative
 rainfall is also sent. Agricultural scientists of AMFUs which are located at SAUs, prepare weather based farm advisory
 bulletins on receipt of MRWF from NCMRWF. These bulletins contain location specific and crop specific farm level
 advisories prepared in local language & incorporate the available knowledge on crop  weather relationships.  Weather
 based agro advisories take into account the prevailing weather, soil & crop condition, and based on the weather prediction
 suggest measures/practices to minimise the losses and also, optimise input  in the form of  irrigation, fertiliser or pesticides. 
 Real time weather and climatic information are essential ingredients for development of agroadvisories. These agro-
advisories are made available to the farming community through print and electronic media and also through direct contact
 by the AAS personnel. The NCMRWF issues forecast  to Ministry of Agriculture, Government of India a week in advance
 for weather condition likely to be experienced in different parts of the country. This is being used to assess the whole
 gambit of agricultural operations viz., crop, seed, fertilizers, insecticide  situations in the country and accordingly forewarn
 concerned State Governments and other agencies with suitable remedial actions.
Usefulness of AAS to the farmers
           A need is felt to continuously monitor and evaluate the usefulness of the agro-advisory service of NCMRWF and
 refine the projections made in the project in terms of benefit from economic view points.  In order to achieve this goal, a
 separate project has been launched in collaboration with National Centre for Agriculture Economic and Policy Research
 (NCAP), New Delhi to evolve and implement an Impact assessment criteria in such a manner that one can very easily
 evaluate that how far a farmer can be benefited to save available natural resources, cost and time by utilising agroadvisories
 in making tactical decisions during his management practices. Therefore, worthiness of AAS can be judged by
 implementing this Impact criteria. The results from the project will be evaluated in due course.
        Some of the units are already assessing economic benefits accrued to the farmers in qualitative terms. For example, the
 farmers of Kovilpatti (Tamilnadu) region adopted weather based advisory of early sowing of Sorgum, Cotton and Pulses as
 good rainfall was predicted during 3
rd week of September 1995 nearly 20 days before the normal date of commencement of
 North-East monsoon rainfall. They reported substantial increase in yield in all the three crops. On the other hand, the
 farmers of Pune region who could not follow the advisory on delayed onset of southwest monsoon faced complete failure of
 crop due to inadequate moisture for germination. Farmers of Ludhiana could save 30% of the total production of Potato and
 Tomato due to frequent and light irrigation of the crop as the NCMRWF predicted occurrence of frost on account of
 considerable fall in the minimum temperature. Minimum temperature had fallen by 6-8 deg. below normal and the frost was
 realised. About 6 thousand hectares of area under potato crop was affected by frost. For Coimbatore, advisories on strong
 winds during July,1995 have helped saving standing Banana crop worth Rs 10,000 per acre. The farmers of Raipur could
 saveupto Rs.5000/- in the case of Chilly and upto Rs 10,000/- in the case of Potato per hectare due to skipping of one
 irrigation after heavy rainfall forecastat crucial phenophase  of the crops. Following the wind speed and direction forecasts,
 they saved at least 20% cost of the insecticides. Based on the cloud and temperature forecasts, they could plan their harvest
 and marketing of vegetables etc. At Madras, Specific instances have shown that by timely forecast of rainfall, farmers could
 prevent spoilage of feed, chick mortality, coccidiosis, lung infection among birds and other bacterial infections. A sudden
 increase of 2-3 deg C in the day temperature during April month in Tamilnadu (particularly in Nammakal region) may lead
 to attack of viral disease to 5-6 weeks old chicks with mortality rate upto 90%. Wide diurnal variations in temperature leads
 to chronic respiratory infection in chicken, which causes 40 to 50% loss in egg production. These results are suggestive of
 success. Clear picture may emerge on completion of systematic study being conducted.
Comments
            The Committee observes that even though the country has made technological advancements by way of acquiring
 sophisticated equipments, the System of weather forecasting is still not accurate.  It hopes that constant  efforts will be made
 by the Department to achieve perfection.  The Committee takes special notice of the Agro Advisory Services (AAS) which
 could be of invaluable help to Indian Agriculture.
 
NANOTECHNOLOGY AND ITS ENVIRONMENTAL AND HEALTH IMPACTS ASSESSMENTS OF
 PARTICLE TOXICITY
 
Recommendation                     
The Committee, therefore, is of the considered opinion that it is extremely vital that both positive and negative effects of
 nanotubes should be assessed with equal potential and efficiency.         
                                                                                 (Para 32)        
 
Recommendation
The Committee while appreciating the gravity of the statement by the Secretary, DST feels that a suitable mechanism should

149th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/149threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:13]
 be put in place to assess the toxicity of particles before the findings of the researches of nanotechnology are transferred to
 industry for applications for production of consumer products, particularly cosmetics. The Committee also advocates that
 industries using nanoparticle technology for the purpose of production must be issued a guided publication containing the
 details of safety tests and precautionary measures to be taken by industries before the applications of novel properties of
 nanoparticles.  In view of the increasing research in the field of nanotechnology, the Committee feels  that DST should
 develop a model that would predict the toxicity of certain nanoparticles. The Committee, as a precautionary measure,   
 recommends that   release   of   nanoparticles   towards environment be minimized until its adverse effects are suitably
 understood.  A constant review of the mechanism should also be made, from time to time for ensuring lower exposure
 levels of manufactured nanoparticles in order to provide proper protection to workers engaged in industries and
 laboratories.  The Committee urges upon  the Department to fix a minimum exposure standard of manufactured particles
 after thoroughly examining the international regulatory limit in the field so that properly examined norms of exposure could
 be finalized from the point of view of possible medical hazards of nanoparticles.    (Para
 34)                                                                                                           
 
Recommendation
The Committee is of the opinion that since consequential findings of the application of nanotechnology bring with it a
 number of trade-offs in terms of potential environmental damage and health risk, the primary attention of DST is required in
 the field so that precautionary measures could well be designed before a complete technology base for research in the field
 is finally designed.  The Committee is of the opinion that any commercialization in the field of application of
 nanotechnology should proceed cautiously until scientific toxicological data catch up to the technology.  The scientific
 policy makers, therefore, should move swiftly and responsibly to place a moratorium on the release of new nanoparticles
 into the environment until lab protocols can be established and until toxicology studies can be undertaken and their results
 verified.  It is understood by the Committee that many nanoproponents insist that modifications should be made to the
 particles such as coating them to ensure that they are safely bio-compatible. The Committee feels that at the planning stage
 to test toxicity on several kinds of nanoparticles, a detailed programme should be made and insistence may be placed on
 user industry to reveal precise formulae which they are using to make their novel nano-products.  The Committee also feels
 that the Department of Science and Technology needs to develop an educational programme so that future engineers and
 scientists could understand the adverse health consequences of nanotechnology.                                              (Para 35)         
Recommendation
In India, since nanotechnology research is at its nascent stage, most involving dangerous products could be on a relatively
 manageable scale but the Committee apprehends that in future when relatively larger scale researches would be  undertaken,
 the extreme nanotechnology products can cause even ecological damage, which may become difficult to contain.          
                                                                     (Para 36)
Recommendation                                                            
            In view of the above, the Committee strongly feels that at each step of the product, development from raw-materials
 to the final formula, in vitro
, safety evaluation should be done and further investment in the product development should be
 done only if the previous tests in the nanotechnology development is proved to be negative, in vivo, on human volunteers.
 (Para 37)
 
Recommendation                   
                                                   
            The Committee also feels that an altogether new way of classifying nanoparticles needs to be created that takes into
 account other aspects of the nanoparticles than the toxicity being created by its size.  The full spectrum of toxicities should
 be examined minutely that might arise from nanoparticles of different compositions before its final commercial
 applications.                                                                                       (Para 38)                    
Action taken by the Department-on Recommendations 7 to 12
1.         As Nano technology, on a wide scale, is a new technology, concrete data and studies on its potential health hazards
 and toxicity effects are only slowly emerging even internationally.  Even the physical parameters of nanoparticles, which
 correlate with  health risks, toxicity, etc.  are not completely known, and methods of their measurement outside laboratory
 set-ups not very well established so far.
2.         India may be in an advantageous position to deal with such environmental risks of nanotechnology.  The work in the
 country, at the moment, is mostly limited to small-scale lab investigations on scientific aspects. Large-scale industrial
 applications are expected to take some time.  In view of this national scenario, and the world-situation mentioned above,
 DST, through the existing Nano Science and Technology Initiative (NSTI) (and the proposed Nano Science and Technology
 Mission (NSTM), has adopted the following multi-pronged approach---
At this stage of development in the subject, awareness and education is the best method of prevention. All scientists are
 being educated about the environmental and toxicity aspects of nanotechnology during the peer view of their projects and

149th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/149threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:13]
 through interaction meetings etc.  Slowly, as the data becomes more concrete and standard, well-designed documents and
 sensitization programmes would also be developed.
Laboratories (and industries) desirous of pursuing research in Nanotechnology are being instructed to ensure that
 nanoparticles do not escape into the environment and are also being advised to take necessary precautions in the laboratory. 
 Their plan in this regard are evaluated by experts before research projects are being sanctioned.
Close watch is being kept on the evolving toxicity data and studies worldwide         
and this knowledge base is being used while evaluating research programmes before they are being funded./  It is expected
 that relevant regulatory guidelines will be issued once the toxicity effects are well understood and the responsible
 parameters and their measurement procedures become well known and standardized.   
Comments
            Taking account of the fact that nano-technology is a relatively new area of research world over, the Committee
 understands the nature of obstacles faced by the Researchers in the field.  The Committee believes that the department will
 adopt a gradualist approach in developing nano-technologies so that things remain under control.  As awareness and
 education are the best ways of prevention at this stage, the Committee hopes that awareness and sensitization programmes
 would be given top priority.
 
INDIA METEOROLOGICAL DEPARTMENT (IMD)
Recommendation
            The Committee feels that on the one side, the occurrence of cyclones is very frequent in coastal regions of India and
 on the other monsoon is not regular.  This requires setting up of a network of Doppler Weather Radars and upgradation of
 computer system along the coasts for accurate weather and rainfall prediction. The Committee would appreciate if this is
 taken up on priority and is linked with the tsunami prediction mechanism, which is likely to be put in place in the near
 future. This would prove to be an effective solution to problems faced due to weather phenomena.                    (Para
 40)                                          
Action taken by the Department
(A) Setting up of Network of Doppler Weather Radars
.
            Doppler Weather Radar at Machilipatnam, A P has been installed and commissioned on 8th December, 2004.
            The equipment for installation of another Doppler Weather Radar at Visakhapatnam has already arrived.  Installation
 and commissioning of the radar is expected to be completed by the end of this year.
            CMAS in its 58
th meeting on 21st March’2005 has approved the procurement of 2 Nos. of indigenous Doppler
 Weather Radars through an MoU with M/s BEL, Banglore.  The Radars will be installed at Bhuj and Cochin.  EFC proposal
 for thse radars has been sent to DST for approval.
            CMAS in its 58th meeting on 21st March’ 2005 has also approved the procurement of 2 Nos. of imported Doppler
 Weather Radars for installation at Paradeep and Mumbai.  EFC proposal for these radars has also been sent recently to DST
 for approval.
Action has been initiated to tap various sources of funding (World Bank and Japan Govt.) for strengthening of cyclone
 Detection Radar network on the East and West coasts of India.
            (A) Upgradation of Computer System
.
A scheme on the establishment of state-of-art computing system for weather forecast services in IMD was submitted for
 consideration in the recent CMAS-58 meeting held on 21st March’ 2005.  It was decided in the CMAS meeting that the
 scheme is required to be screened by CMAS members.  Hence justification for “Establishment of state-of-art computing
 system for weather forecast services in IMD” along with the RFP was sent to CMAS members for their information and
 comments.
Points raised by the committee
(i) Why is the need for tapping various sources of foreign funding? Are our internal resources not sufficient?
(ii)What has been the progress on the establishment of State-of-art computing system for whether forecasting
 services?
Clarification by the Department
(a) IMD received a circular fromMinistry of Finance, Department of Economics Affairs Japan II Section vide No.
 F1/5/2004-Jap II dated 23.6.2004 regarding “Invitation of proposals for Japanese Grant Aid  Programme for the year 2006-
07.   This is a general circular announcing for possible availability of grant aid for Govt. of Japan for construction of
 facilities and procurement  of products and services necessary for development projects.  On the basis of above, IMD
 submitted a draft proposal for modernization of IMD’s existing Meteorological Radar Network and Seismological
 Observational Network entitled “Disaster Preparedness & Early Warning System”.
(b) Further, Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has formulated a proposal entitled  “National Cyclone Mitigation Project”
 with World Bank’s Assistance. The Disaster Management Division in MHA is responsible for overall management and co-
ordination of this project.  Based on the  discussion with world bank mission a draft proposal entitled “Early Warning

149th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/149threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:13]
 System for Cyclone Disaster Preparedness”  as advised by MHA was prepared for augmenting & strengthening Cyclone
 Detection Radars, Surface Observational Network AWS, Wind Profiler, Raingauges,  DCWDS and upgradation of
 computing facilities.
(c) Both the above schemes have not yet been approved by concerned authorities.
(ii)        Progress on the establishment of state-of-art Computing System for Weather Forecast Services in IMD.
RFP for High Power Computer System (HPCS) was circulated to CMAS members or their critical views in April 2005.
 Based on the inputs received from a few members, the RFP was further modified and the updated version was submitted to
 the CMAS meeting held on 23
rd September 2005.                   
While approving the HPCS for running an advanced NWP system at IMD headquarter, CMAS also suggested that IMD
 should provide suitable computing power to out-stations like Pune and other major Meteorological Centres to run high
 resolution Numerical models for their respective regions of responsibility. In view of this, CMAS advised IMD to get the
 RFP reviewed by an expert committee for further processing.
Based on these suggestions, DGM, IMD constituted an expert committee with members from various scientific departments
 for finalizing the RFP of High Performance Computing System (HPCS) for Global Data Processing and Numerical Weather
 Prediction (NWP) for Weather Forecast Services in India. The committee held the first meeting on 08
th November 2005 and
 examined the RFP and suggested further updation.
The second meeting of the expert committee was held on 26th November 2005 and the RFP formulated was discussed by
 committee members in detail. The final document brought out was approved with some minor modifications by the
 committee members. The RFP is being submitted tothe DGM, IMD for further action.
Comments
            The Committee notices with satisfaction that in addition to indigenous Doppler weather Radar to be set up at Bhuj
 and Cochin two more radars are likely to be imported for installation at Paradeep  and Mumbai.  It is a subject of common
 knowledge that natural calamities cannot be totally controlled but science has given us technological know-how to forewarn
 our people and minimise the damage.  Indigenous development of Radars is encouraging. The Committee hopes that once
 state-of-art computing system for weather forecast services in IMD is  installed, it would result in better weather
 forecasting.
 
SURVEY OF INDIA
Recommendation
            The Committee feels that maps prepared using GIS by the Survey of India should be easily made available to urban
 and town planners and other user agencies as it would help in checking the large scale urbanization, occupation of valuable
 land by unscrupulous elements and construction of illegal structures. Besides, this would also help in planned development
 of new townships and suburban areas.              (Para 43) 
                                                                                         
Action taken by the Department
 
Survey of India has taken up a scheme for upgradation of topographical maps on 1:50,000 scale using satellite
 imagery/Aerial photographs in a span of  03 years, i.e. by 2007 for the whole country.
 
Survey of India has prepared large scale maps for 07 metros, i.e. Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai, Bangalore, Hyderabad
 and Ahmedabad and the same will be available for public use after security clearance from  MOD.
 
            It is confirmed that maps with GIS ready data prepared by Survey of India will be easily made available to urban and
 town planners and the other user agencies as per the existing order/guidelines.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
S&T PROGRAMME FOR EMPOWERMENT OF WOMEN
Recommendation
            The Committee would like the Department to consider starting more programmes which would lead to self
 employment, self reliance and income generation of women and other weaker sections of society. The Committee
 recommends that special incentives should be given to market the products manufactured through women cooperatives. 
 The Committee would also like to know the number of women benefited by the programme during 2005-
06.                                                                                                      (Para
 46)                                                                                 
Action taken by the Department
            Two coordinated Programmes exclusively for women have been initiated on Fodder and animal feed aimed at
 transfer of improved year round fodder production technology to rural women for income generation, another programme

149th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/149threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:13]
 on prevention and intervention strategies for nutrition related non-communicable disorders among         post- reproductive
 period women with an aim to identify the health problems of the elderly women with particular reference to nutrition has
 also been launched.  It is proposed to initiate more such coordinated programmes in the country particularly based on
 natural resource utilization for income generation by rural women.  There are programmes aimed at empowering other
 weaker sections of the society through utilization of S&T.  Every year new projects are funded in new areas with an
 objective to enhance self-employment, self-reliance and income generation opportunities.
            The Department is also exploring various possibilities for marketing products manufactured by women trained in
 projects. In one of such initiatives, the women trained at the Women Technology Park (WTP) at Dehradun, have formed a
 cooperative called ‘WISE” (Women’s Initiative for Self Employment) through which they plan to market their products. 
 WISE has also hired a marketing expert.  One of the objectives of the Women Technology Park is to provide both forward
 and backward linkages especially in terms of marketing support to women entrepreneurs in the rural areas.  More and more
 WTPs would be encouraged to take on marketing of products emerging from the WTPs.
            In the year 2004-05, about 7500 women have been trained in different location specific technologies at the Women
 Technology Parks.  Since the mandate of the scheme is development and adaptation of technologies for women, it is not
 possible to exactly quantify the number of women beneficiaries.  However, in some select capacity building
 projects supported under this scheme, about 2500 have directly been benefited while 5000 women have  been indirectly
 benefited.  For the year 2005-06, the data will only be available at the end of this financial year.
Points raised by the Committee
What are the details of this programme?  How many women have so far benefited and in which part of the country? 
Clarification by the Department
The Department of Science and Technology has been implementing a scheme ‘Science & Technology for Women’ with a
 view to empowering women through inputs of science and technology.  The broad objectives of this schemes are to promote
 development and adaptation of appropriate technologies, transfer of proven technologies and demonstration of live
 technology models to benefits women.  Several initiatives on promoting aquaculture, marine and fresh water fish
 processing, integrated approaches for repair of nets, etc., have been developed under this schemes for fisher-women.  Due to
 the efforts of the last two decades this programme of DST has made a distinct impact through its innovative approach,
 gender sensitivity and involvement of S&T based voluntary organization having strong linkages at the grass root.
            Science the inception of this scheme about 750 projects have been sponsored in all the states and 4 Union Territories
 including remote areas of Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, A&N Islands and Lakshadweep. 1,50000 women have
 been benefited directly or indirectly.
Comments
            The Committee feels that initiatives like ‘WISE’ (Women’s Initiative for  Self- Employment) are a very good
 beginning and many more such initiatives are the need of the hour.  Economic empowerment of women at grass-root and
 rural level holds tremendous potential to transform the whole rural landscape. Such initiatives will have a direct impact on
 social indicators like literacy rate  and family planning.  Professional help in the form of marketing experts and other
 logistic inputs should be provided at all costs to make such experiment a big success so that they can serve as models for the
 rest of the country. 
 
YEAR OF SCIENTIFIC AWARENESS
 
Recommendation
            The Committee recommends that the science awareness should not conclude with the culmination of the year and it
 should be a continuous process and special efforts should be made to tap the talents of young students in rural areas who
 even though have high aptitude for science could not pursue it as they are not exposed to good laboratories and teachers. To
 sustain the development of science, there is a need to improve the opportunities for well-trained young scientists to pursue
 innovative research, to educate the next generation to apply science in areas of importance for the health, prosperity and
 security of the nation. This has become more important in view of disinclination of younger generation to join science
 related activities.                                (Para 49)                            
Action taken by the Department
            The reports of activities from different states are being complied.  The progress under the campaign is being
 consolidated which will develop a road map for science communication activities in states.  For providing opportunities to
 children not having access to laboratories various programs at capacity building of middle and high school science teachers
 are being organized.
Points raised by the Committee
         What are the details of such programmes?  Where are they being run in the country?  How effective have they been?
Clarification by the Department
The campaign has been able to reach out to nearly 15000 schools located in 579 districts all over the country.  Block level

149th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/149threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:13]
 Resources centre on a pilot basis are being set up in Kerala and Rajasthan this year.  Six mobile vans with science based
 hands-on activities will be moving through different states for 12 months.  Results of impact studies are being examined but
 preliminary reports indicate that the campaigns were able to address specific science needs of the communities in different
 regions.
Comments
            The Committee feels that the Department should consider giving enough incentives, monitory or otherwise, to the
 younger scientists. 
 
YEAR OF PHYSICS 2005
 
Recommendation
            The Committee is concerned about the fact that most of the meritorious students are not attracted to R&D and
 teaching career  in science. Thus, the need to retain talent for scientific career should be given priority, as science is one of
 the foundations of economic growth, industrial and technological progress. In order to retain talent there is a need for
 curricular reforms in school science and strengthening talent search schemes, nurturing programmes for motivating study of
 physics and strengthening scientist-teacher linkages could go a long way in retaining talent in science.            
                     (Para 51)                                                   
Action taken by the Department
            The Department is fully aware of the recent trend of meritorious students moving away from basic R&D and
 teaching careers in science. The Ministry has already instituted several schemes to attract, train and help retain students in
 basic science & basic research.  The Children’s Science Congress, Integrated Science Olympiad Programme, the Kishore
 Vaigyanik Protsahan Yojana, the CSIR Programme on Youth for Leadership in Science are some of the attractive schemes
 for students from the school to the Pre-doctoral stage.  At the doctoral and post-doctoral levels, the Shyama Prasad
 Mukherjee Fellowships, Swarnajayanti Fellowships, Better Opportunities for Young Scientist in Chosen Areas of Science
 and Technology (BOYSCAST ) Fellowships, Biotechnology Fellowships, Fast Track Projects etc. are in operation.  The
 Women Scientists Scheme offers opportunities to Women Scientists till 50 years of age for re-entry into mainstream
 Science.  Almost all scientific departments and agencies fund research projects to individual researchers in basic sciences. 
 The newly launched Ramanna Fellowships will offer uninterrupted support to performing scientists through flexible
 research grant irrespective of their age.  The Government is constantly thinking about this challenge and responding to the
 needs in a dynamic fashion through innovative programmes. The Department is also participating in celebrating the year
 2005 as the ‘International Year of Physics’ wherein the importance and relevance of ‘Physics’ in the curriculum is being
 highlighted.
Comments
            The Committee, while noting the comments of the Department, feels that the initiatives/steps taken by it did not have
 the desired result, as the moving away of meritorious students from basic science and research, still continues.  In view of
 this the Department needs to go into the reasons for this state of affairs and take suitable remedial measures therefore.
 
SREE CHITRA TIRUNAL INSTITUTE FOR MEDICAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY (SCTIMST),
 THIRUVANANTHAPURAM
 
Recommendation
            The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Institute in demonstrating a significant success in the
 development of international quality technologies.  It is mainly due to successful commercialization of many technologies
 like blood bag, oxygenators, hydrocephalus shunt, artificial heart valve etc.  The Committee also notes with satisfaction the
 effort of the Institute with its industrial partners that led to the growth of medical device in the country. However, the
 Committee recommends that this Institute should focus on biomedical research and not only confine itself to a super
 specialty hospital.                                                                                                                     (Para 56)
Action taken by the Department
Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Thiruvananthapuram, has been contributing significantly
 to the basic sciences of relevance to the area of health.  The Institute has several programmes and research projects towards
 this goal.
 
Points raised by the Committee
What are the details of the various programmes and research projects?
Clarification by the Department
R & D and Basic Science activities of the Institute
Over the last 3 years, the Institute has successfully transferred 5 technologies for commercial production and sale.

149th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/149threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:13]
Large Diameter Vascular Graft (Chitra-SITRA).
Membrane oxygenator
Dental composites including a radio-opaque glass filler.
Chitosan based Wound dressings.
Retinal Bands
The technology for 6 products / technologies are in the process of being transferred and commercialized, which is expected
 to be completed during 2006.
Centrifugal pump
Haemo-concentrator for use in paediatric cardiac surgery.
Field kit for Antibiotic sensitivity testing of mastitic milk.
Bioactive ceramic materials for orthopaedic / Dental applications.
Chitra Calcium Phosphate injectable cement for dental & orthopedic applications
Advanced dental composites and bonding agents
The development work on 5 products is at an advanced stage and is expected to reach clinical evaluation during 2006-07 and
 commercialization thereafter.
New model of the Chitra Tilting disc heart valve
Chicken egg-yolk derived anti-viper venom.
Polyurethane Orthopaedic casting tapes.
Rapidly gelling polymer system based wound dressing materials
Glass-ionomer cements for dental repair and treatment.
At present we have 33 externally funded projects (including 4 by industry) totaling over Rs.2.5 crores in sanctioned amount
 and 37 intramurally funded projects covering research, exploratory developments, etc. These projects are expected to yield a
 continuous stream of technologies during next 5 years.
This period also saw the implementation of a quality system for its testing activities for the safety and efficacy evaluation of
 biomaterials and medical devices and getting it accredited to international standards by the French agency COFRAC.
During this period, the Institute came out with a VISION 2020 policy of supporting the growth of the medical devices in the
 industry, so that by the year 2020, the Indian industry will be able to meet 50% of the indigenous market demand against
 the current level, which is estimated at 15 -20%.
As a part of this, the Institute has embarked on expanding and restructuring it’s functioning as an Investor (in R&D and
 HRD), Facilitator (testing support to industry and promotion/incubation of entrepreneurship) and Catalyst (as an
 Information service centre for knowledge based growth and development). This proposal has been approved under the 10
th
 plan with an estimated investment of Rs.100 crores and is under implementation.
In addition to the R&D work motioned above, the Institute has been conducting basic and advanced research on diseases like
 Epilepsy, Parkinsons’ disease, congenital neurological abnormalities, influence of diet and use of coconut oil on coronary
 artery diseases, new disease entities like mucoid vasculopathy, and on brain infections.
The Achutha Menon Centre for Health Science Studies, the public health wing of the Institute has been conducting
 population based studies on non-communicable diseases, cessation of tobacco use, reproductive health, ethical and gender
 issues in health care and has also developed a collaborative working model with a neighboring Block Panchayath to study
 the incidence and progress   of diseases in the population of the Panchayath
 I may be allowed to point out that the above account of the Institute on R&D and basic science research helps to dispel the
 understandable apprehension of the Parliamentary Committee on confining the Institute to a super specialty hospital alone. 
 The super specialty hospital of the Institute facilitates R&D work in health care technology as well as basic sciences
 research and thus plays a secondary role to research; not the other way round.
 I hope that the above account satisfies the Committee and helps to allay the apprehension of the members.
 
Comments
            The Committee takes note of the reply.  
NATIONAL MISSION ON BAMBOO APPLICATIONS
 
Recommendation
The Committee appreciates that the Department has launched  the Mission Mode Programme for Bamboo products and
 hopes that benefits of this programme would reach the stakeholders i.e. especially the tribal communities who inhabit the 
 bamboo growing areas. The Committee is of the opinion that increased use of bamboo should be sustainable and should not
 cause large-scale destruction of bamboo forests.  The Committee further feels that the programme for Gasification of
 bamboo for generation of electricity should be vigorously pursued as it shows an enormous potential to solve the energy
 crisis facing our country.                                                                                (Para 70)                                                              
Action taken by the Department

149th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/149threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:13]
            The National Mission of Bamboo Application is aimed at using the bamboo raw material available particularly in the
 North-East region of the country, where gregarious flowering is resulting in death of bamboo is prevalent at present.  The
 Mission also aims at replenishing the stock of raw materials and also supplying planting materials to the interested farmers. 
 The Mission has installed gasification plants in the North-East region for field trial and will install many more if the result
 of the field trial is encouraging.
Points raised by the Committee
By when result of field trial is likely to be available?
Clarification made by the Committee
The results of field trial is likely to be available by April, 2006.
 
Comments
            The Committee feels that some more steps have to be taken to popularize cultivation of Bamboo by not only
 providing good quality, high yielding plant material and weeding out parasitic varieties which hamper the growth of such
 plants, but also offering the farmers such plantations in the form of a commercial package providing expertise and help right
 from the stage of plantation to marketing of the harvest.
            Feasibility studies done on the basis of field trials for gasification of Bamboo to generate electricity, if found
 encouraging, should pave way for electrification of far-flung areas.  Positive externalities in the form of clean environment,
 cheap and continuous supply of raw material and forward and backward linkages in concerned regional economies are an
 added advantage.        
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 03.30 p.m. on Tuesday, the 20
th December, 2005 in Room No. 121 (Committee Chairman’s Room),
 First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
                        PRESENT
 
1.         Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Prof. Saif-ud-din Soz
Dr. Prabha Thakur
Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
Shrimati Kum Kum Rai
 
LOK  SABHA
 
Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
Shri Rakesh Singh
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
 
SECRETARIAT
                       
Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee took-up consideration of revised draft 147
th, ***,  ***, ***, *** and 152nd Action Taken Reports of
 the Committee on the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in its One Hundred Forty-third,
 ***, ***, ***, *** and *** reports on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) relating to Departments of Ocean Development;

149th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/149threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:13]
 ***; ***; ***; ***; and ***, respectively.  After discussion and suggesting a minor change in 147th report, the Committee
 adopted all the reports.
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy to present the
 Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Sujan Chakraborty, and in his absence, Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli to lay the Reports
 on the table of the Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 22
nd  December, 2005.
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy to present the
 Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Sujan Chakraborty, and in his absence, Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli to lay the Reports
 on the table of the Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 22nd  December, 2005.
 
4.         The Committee, then, decided to hear the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and
 Forests in respect of control and supervision on experiments on Animals for the purpose of Drugs and Pharmaceutical
 Research, in its next meeting to be held on the10
th January, 2006. The Committee also decided to hear the Drugs Controller
 General of India and representatives of Indian Council of Medical Research in the matter in its future meetings.
 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 04.35 p.m.
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                                                                 C. B. RAI
December 20, 2005                                                                                                                     UNDER SECRETARY
 
☼ Pursuant to the adoption of the 5th Report of the Committee on Ethics on 13.12.2005, the Member was suspended from the Rajya Sabha pending the presentation of the final
 Report of the Committee on Ethics.
Ф Shri Jaswant Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  11th August, 2005 consequent upon his resignation from  the Committee.
 
*** Related to other matters.