152stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/152ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT &
 FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-SECOND REPORT
ON
ACTION  TAKEN   BY  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF  BIO-TECHNOLOGY ON  THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED FORTY-FIRST REPORT OF
 THE DEPARTMENT
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT &
FORESTS ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2005-2006) OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF BIO-TECHNOLOGY
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 25TH APRIL, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 25TH APRIL, 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2005/ AGRAHAYANA, 1927 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
                                                                                                  
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                       
4.MINUTES OF THE  MEETING                                                       
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2005)
----------
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Dr.Prabha Thakur
4. Shri Dilip Singh Judev
5. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav
6. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
7. Smt. Kum Kum Rai
8. Shri Birabhadra Singh
    *9.   Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha
  Ф10.   Vacant
LOK  SABHA
11. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
12. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad            
13. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
14. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
15. Shri Mohan S. Delkar  
16. Shri Francis Fanthome 
17. Shri Anantrao Gudhe
18. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
19. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik           
20. Shri Brahmananda Panda
21. Smt. Neeta Pateriya
22. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil        

152stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/152ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
23. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
24. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
25. Shri Rakesh Singh
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                              
27. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh   
28. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar                     
29. Shri D. Venugopal
30. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
31. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
SECRETARIAT
      Shri N.C.Joshi, Additional Secretary
      Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report
 on its behalf, present this One Hundred Fifty-Second Report on the Action Taken by the Department of Bio-technology on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty-First Report of
 the Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Bio-technology.
      2.   The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of               Bio-technology on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty-First Report of the
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Bio-technology which was
 presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25
th April, 2005.
      3.   There were  nineteen recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty-First Reportof the Committee.  Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from
 the Department  on 5th July, 2005. 
      4.   In the meeting held on 20th December, 2005, the Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report and adopted the same.
NEW DELHI;
December 20,2005
   P.G.NARAYANAN
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on  Science & Technology, Environment & Forests. 
 
R E P O R T
The Report deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Bio-technology on the Recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty First Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
 Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Bio-technology, presented to both Houses of Parliament on 25 th
 April, 2005.  There were nineteen Recommendations contained in the Report. Action Taken note on those Recommendations was received from the Department on 5 th July 2005.  The Committee
 considered the draft Action Taken Report in its meeting held on 18 th November, 2005 and decided to seek clarification/additional information on certain points  contained in paras 22, 26, 34 and 37. 
 The Departments clarification/additional information on the points was received on 2nd December, 2005
The Committee’s Recommendations, Action Taken thereon by the Department of Bio-technology, points raised by the committee (wherever necessary), clarifications by the Department and
 comments of the Committee thereon are set out in the succeeding paragraphs:-
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
Recommendations
            The Committee notes that the Department has made efforts towards the optimum use of the funds allocated to it over the last three years of the Tenth Plan, which points towards the effective
 and proper management of funds by the Department. The Committee hopes that this positive trend of proper utilization of funds would continue to be maintained by the Department to achieve
 significant targets set by it in future.
(Para 15)
Action Taken by the Department
The Department is thankful to the Committee for appreciating the effective and proper management of funds.  The Committee’s recommendation has been noted.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

152stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/152ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
NATIONAL BRAIN RESEARCH INSTITUTE (NBRI), GURGAON
Recommendations
            The Committee understands that although the Brain Research Institute is doing state-of-the-art investigation in the field of various neuro-degenerative disorders and pathological mechanism of
 various ailments relating to human brain, there are still some important areas left where the institute needs to concentrate for giving brain research a holistic
 dimension.                                                                                              (Para 17)                                                                                        
            In the opinion of the Committee, such areas involve detailed investigations into the causes of the fatally life threatening brain cancers like oligodendro glioma, glioblastomas and other forms of
 complicated cancerous brain disorders.           (Para 18)                                                    
             Although the institute is pursuing a research project about the mechanisms of L-BOAA mediated neurotoxicity, the Committee would also like to advocate that research should be initiated by
 the institute regarding secretion of common brain hormones from substantia nigra and artificial development of L-DOPA to deal with basic mechanisms of neuro
 toxicity.                                                                                                        (Para 19)                      The Committee would further like to suggest that researches on endogenous opiates like enkephalin
 and endorphin should also be initiated for understanding the chemistry of pain for designing a comprehensive pain management strategy in case of certain killer disease like cancer etc.             
                                                         (Para 20)                                                                                                     
            The Committee has also noticed that no substantial research has been initiated on PRIONS (Proteinaceous Infectious Particles) by the institute, a Stanley Pruisner concept, which is the main
 cause of BSE (Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy).  The Committee has been given to understand that due to lack of P-2 containment facility available with the institute, no research is being carried
 on PRIONS and PRIONS related disease.   The Committee urges that since such type of disease may take alarming form in future, primary investigation of the causes of such diseases is the need of the
 hour through development of P-2 and even P-3 containment facility with the institute which at present the institute is lacking.                                                                                           (Para 21)
The Committee also understands that problem of Alzheimer, which is a common form of brain disease, particularly at senile age requires more research  as it is gradually on the rise among civil
 population. Latest research reports in the advanced countries show that real culprit in Alzheimer’s ailment is a copper and zinc build-up in the brain. It is believed by the scientists that accumulated
 metals mix abnormally with a protein called beta amyloid in the brain, oxidizes, literally rust and destroy nerve cells.  Amyloid protein plays a helpful role in the brain: absorbing metals like a sponge. 
 But in Alzheimer’s victims, the metals overwhelm the protein.  Copper mixes abnormally with amyloid, releasing hydrogen peroxide and other toxic chemicals and damage the nearby cells.  Some of
 that protein breaks free, becomes “rogue” amyloid, and mixes with zinc to form clumps that leak more hydrogen peroxide - metals as the real culprits. The scientists are of the opinion that excess
 copper and zinc built up in the brain dissolves the protein clumps in the brains, which has already been experimented in animal model.  Since the disease may assume alarming proportion in future due
 to increased stress owing to phenomenal rise in urban conglomerates and modernization, this aspect of the disease requires deep research so that a target drug for controlling the ailment could be
 designed for future medication. The Committee, therefore, recommends that researches in the following fields need to be given greater attention by the Institute:                             (Para
 22)                                                                
Cure for Alzheimer’s;
i)
                    Researches in the field of PRIONS related diseases;
ii)                   Investigation in the field of pain hormone related issues being secreted from Substantia Nigra by brain like enkephalin and endorphin;
iii)                 Cure for  fatal brain cancers like oligodndrogliomas etc. and
iv)                 Investigation into the causes and cure of Multiple Sclerosis (MS).
Action taken by the Department
            National Brain Research Center (NBRC) has already started work in the area of Alzheimer’s disease and currently evaluating and exploring ways of enhancing the efficacy of traditional Indian
 medicines for potential cure of Alzheimer related symptoms.  The center is also taking steps to initiate research in the area of glioma.  Recruitment of a scientist, who is an expert in this area, is under
 process.  Regarding the other areas of research that the Committee has suggested-pain management, prion related diseases, multiple sclerosis and further research into the area of neurotoxicity, NBRC
 is planning to expand and work on these important brain related diseases as and when the current constraints of resources, including manpower resources, faculty positions and other resource
 constraints, such as availability of P3 research facility are overcome.
Points raised by the Committee
            What has been the progress in enhancing the efficacy of traditional Indian Medicines for potential cure of Alzheimer related symptoms?
Clarification by the Department
Several Indian medicinal plants have been extracted and their efficacy for the treatment of Alzheimer’s disease is being evaluated using cell culture and animal models of Alzheimer’s disease. 
 These animals contain some of the defective genes that cause Alzheimer’s disease and they develop the behavioural (loss of memory) and pathological symptoms (formation of plaques) in the brain as
 seen in Alzheimer’s disease.  Using these models, it is noted that some of the plant extracts have the capability to reduce the toxic effect of amyloid βpeptide, which is a key factor in the cause of
 Alzheimer’s disease.
Point raised by the Committee
Is there any blue print made by NBRC to expand and work on important brain related diseases? What has been done to overcome the above mentioned constraints?  

152stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/152ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
Clarification by the Department
NBRC has a vision plan for research on brain related diseases, which is a two pronged approach; (i) to understand how brain disorders are caused and (ii) to find rational therapies and cures for
 brain disorders.  Under the first approach, NBRC has initiated research in the areas of Parkinson’s Disease, Alzheimer’s Disease, Huntington Disease, Spinal Cord Injuries, Japanese encephalitis (brain
 fever) and the neurological consequences of HIV.  In the second approach, NBRC has initiated research on stem cells and this is focussed on the use of stem cells for treatment of disorders, such as
 brain and spinal cord injuries. The development of cognitive re-training paradigms for treatment of intractable epilepsy and post head injury disability has also been initiated. NBRC has tried to
 overcome the constraints by the approval of grant for additional laboratories, which are currently under construction. 
Comments
             The Committee notes the work done at NBRC and hopes that the Centre  would vigorously pursue its research on the brain-related diseases and their cure and develop effective treatment for
 them.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF IMMUNOLOGY (NII), NEW DELHI
Recommendation
The Committee has noted that although this premier research Institute in the field of immunology has not undertaken any work relating to the production of interferons, it has, however, designed
 an appreciative investigation in the field.   The Committee has noticed that interferons have been implicated as signals controlling the way in which the immune system detects and recognises antigenic
 proteins of viruses, including those viruses associated with certain cancers.  Recent studies have shown that interferon-alpha therapy is beneficial in the prevention of liver cancer in patients with viral
 Hepatitis caused by Hepatitis B and C viruses.  Recently, NII has developed and patented a genetically manipulated mouse model of liver cancer to facilitate in-depth studies of preventive as well as
 curative effects of molecules such as interferons and other drugs.   The Committee feels that once these findings from the interferons research proves successful, it could be shared with other premier
 Oncoligical Research Centres in the country.                                                                                                                  (Para 24)
            The Committee has noted that the Institute has not been conducting any research relating to the treatment of some life threatening autoimmune diseases like Wegener’s Granulomatosis,
 myasthenia gravis and pemphigus vulgaris.  Although the Committee knows that these are rare type of auto-immune diseases among human population, the Committee is, however, apprehensive that
 they may become severely life threatening in distant future due to rapid increase in stress related syndrome owing to unabated urbanization and
 modernization.                                                                     (Para 25)                                                                                                                                                  
            Keeping this in view, the Committee feels that such type of auto-immune diseases also require deep investigation for establishing their causes and cure through promising research projects so
 that some concrete answer to these ailments could   be   designed   by medical science before they assume   any    life   threatening proportion. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Institute
 should consider   primary   investigation in the field of the following auto-immune diseases through the production of ‘interferons’: -
           
i)
                    Wegener’s Granulomatosis
ii)                   Myasthenia Gravis
iii)         Pemphigus Vulgaris                                                                           (Para 26)
 
Action taken by the Department
            Interferon-related investigations, addressing both their production and signaling characteristics, have been initiated.  NII scientists have initiated investigations in the way that interferons,
 particularly interferon-gamma, signals to phagocytic cells of the immune system so as to enable them to overcome the resistance of pathogenic bacteria, such as mycobacteria which cause tuberculosis,
 and protozoa such as Leishmania that cause kala azar.  Researchers at NII are also examining the cascade of signals that allow the immune system to determine whether to make interferon-gamma in
 the course of a T cell response.  This decision is crucial for generating a protective immune response against major diseases, such as typhoid fever, tuberculosis and kala azar.  The pathogenesis of
 autoantibody-dependent auto-immune syndromes such as the ones noted by the Committee depends critically on the formation of autoantibodies, and on their effect on cells such as neutrophil
 leucocytes (in Wegener’s granulomatosis).   Investigations to study some of these issues have been initiated at NII.  The genesis of autoantibodies in humans is being investigated by a genetic
 approach, using hybridomas generated from patients suffering from another, somewhat more common, autoimmune disorder, systemic lupus erythematosus.  The target specificities and the genetic
 structures of these autoantibodies are issues being dissected.  As clinical material becomes available, these studies will be extended to other autoimmune disorders mentioned above.  The molecular
 pathways by which neutrophil leucocytes undergo death in response to a number of stimuli are under active investigation in NII.  As insights are gained, these studies will be extended to autoantibody-
mediated death pathways.
Point raised by the Committee
What are the obstacles in obtaining clinical material to study life threatening autoimmune diseases?  What can be done to remove these obstacles?
Clarification by the Department
Obtaining clinical material for cutting-edge immunological investigations such as enumeration of autoantigen-specific T cell populations from disease states is difficult because large and
 multiple serial blood and tissue samples are required.  This is particularly relevant given that large numbers of clinical samples with well worked – out provenance and clinical as well as laboratory

152stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/152ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 follow-up are needed to address the multifactorial nature of such complex disorders.  This poses both ethical and practical difficulties.  The difficulties are rendered severe if the disease is relatively
 uncommon such as the autoimmune diseases under discussion here.  They are easier to deal with if the disease is relatively common, such as diabetes mellitus or systemic lupus erythematosus, on
 which NII is working with clinical collaborators from other institutions.  Ways of establishing closer research linkups between clinical and basic biological research organizations are being explored by
 DBT for the purpose of promoting rigorous study of such life-threatening complex diseases.
Comments
 The Committee notes with satisfaction the efforts made by NII in research relating  to life threatening autoimmune diseases. However, it feels that the lack of clinical material required for
 conducting research in the field is a great challenge before it.
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR CELL SCIENCE (NCCS), PUNE
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that NCCS, Pune may procure the necessary equipment and upgrade the existing equipment, which have now become obsolete to carry out the research activities in
 an effective and meaningful manner.             (Para 29)                                                   
   Action Taken by the Department
            Most of the old and some of the existing equipment have been declared obsolete through a special committee constituted for the purpose after following the appropriate procedures.  Also, the
 equipment have been replaced by the new equipment.  Some of the existing equipment have also been upgraded as deemed fit.  Further process on upgrading and acquiring new equipment for
 modernisation of laboratories in certain new disciplines have been initiated.
Comments
The Committee acknowledges the modernization programme initiated by the National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS), Pune. However, it observes that modernization programme should also
 involve manpower training so that new equipment acquired is appropriately put to use.
CENTRE FOR DNA FINGERPRINTING AND DIAGNOSTICS (CDFCD), HYDERABAD
Recommendation
            The Committee appreciates the contribution of the Centre towards DNA fingerprinting, diagnostics in addition to basic research in related areas. The Committee, however, notes that such
 Centres of excellence are very few in number and recommends that more such Centres should be set-up in the country in near future.              (Para 34)                                                                         
                                                                    
Action taken by the Department
The Committee’s recommendation has been noted.
Point raised by the Committee
The Committee would like to have the detailed comments of the Department to its recommendation.
Clarification by the Department
The Department has invited applications to establish Centre of Excellence in the emerging areas of biotechnology. The proposed Centres of the Department are : National DNA Training Centre,
 Hyderabad;   Centre for Stem Cell Research, CMC, Vellore; Stem Cell Training Centre, Bangalore and Translation Research Centre, Faridabad. Animal biotechnology and seri biotechnology Centres
 are under consideration by the Department. Applications for Centre of Excellence will be invited twice in a year by the Department and will be supported based on the merit of the proposal.  
 Comments
The Committee hopes that during the coming years more DNA Finger Printing centres would be established in the country, particularly in the areas/regions which do not have any such centre at
 present.
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR PLANT GENOME RESEARCH (NCPGR), NEW DELHI
Recommendation
            The Committee believes that agriculture can be made sustainable only through the use of biotechnology.  Since agriculture is the main source of livelihood for a substantial portion of population
 of this country, improving the techniques used in agriculture will lead to the general upliftment of the quality of life of the rural people. This can only be achieved by developing better varieties of
 plants which are better yielding, having higher nutritional value and are resistant to various diseases and pests, through genetic modification. The Department should ensure that the results of the
 achievements in the laboratories are disseminated to the farmers at the earliest.                                         (Para 37)                                                                                                                                 
Action taken by the Department
            The Department has identified Agricultural Biotechnology as one of its priority areas and has been funding various research and other programmes to promote this area in the country.  The main
 objective of the programme is on improving productivity of crops, reducing their yield losses due to various biotic and abiotic stresses, improving their nutritional quality, etc.  The programme makes
 use of various biotechnological interventions like genetic transformation, engineering male sterility for hybrid seed production, molecular marker aided selection and molecular breeding.  In addition,
 programmes are also supported on Plant Genomics and on cloning and characterization of novel and useful genes.  The priority crops identified for the programme are rice, wheat, cotton, mustard,
 chickpea, pigeon pea, maize, potato, tomato, sorghum, pearl millet, groundnut, etc.

152stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/152ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
            The Department is making efforts to undertake joint programmes with ICAR for testing and evaluation of transgenic materials developed under the research programmes.  Under our research
 programmes transgenic lines of  Brassica juncea (Mustard) have been developed using barnase and barstar genes responsible for male sterility and fertility restoration respectively.  These lines would
 be used for hybrid seed production.  Contained open field trial has been carried out for assessing yield potential of hybrid TMH 1 developed by crossing transgenic barnase and barstar lines.  A
 significant yield advantage was recorded in the hybrid over the national control-Varuna and now a programme is being developed for further testing of the hybrid under multi location trials in different
 agro-climate zones in accordance with the RCGM guidelines.  These trials are likely to be conducted in collaboration with the National Centre for Plant Genome Research (NCPGR), New Delhi has
 developed transgenic potato lines with improved protein contents, which have been tested at three different locations namely Central Potato Research Institute Stations at Jallandhar, Modipuram and
 NCPGR, New Delhi.  In addition, efforts are being made for developing a collaborative programme between International Crops Research Institute for Semi Arid Tropics  (ICRISAT), Hyderabad, and
 few selected research institutions for open field-testing of the Pod Borer Resistant Bt. Chickpea and Pigeonpea.  Thus, the Department is making efforts to develop suitable crops and test them in the
 fields in accordance with our regulatory system and if found useful they would be given to farmers.
 Point raised by the Committee
What are the various research programmes being funded by the Department in Agriculture Biotechnology?  What is the breakup of funds for such programmes?
Clarification by the Department
The major activities in the area of crop Biotechnology relate to multi-institutional projects in various priority crops like wheat, rice, mustard, cotton etc for development of superior genotypes by
 making use of biotechnological interventions like transformation, hetrosis breeding, molecular breeding and marker aided selection.  There are two major projects in the area of functional genomics of
 rice i.e. strategic research and  other on development of transgenic rice for resistance to various pests and pathogens. Also some research activities are being continued at four Plant molecular biology
 units in different parts of the country.  The details of these projects along with objectives, institutions involved and breakup of funds are as follows: -
A.        Network projects
1. Development of varieties with durable resistance to leaf and stripe rusts using molecular marker technology in bread wheat (5-Institutions )
(i) Institutions : Directorate of Wheat  Research, Karnal and Exptl Station, Simla, Punjab Agricultural University , Ludhiana, Agharakar Research Institute, Pune and National Chemical Laboratory,
 Pune
(ii) Objectives:
Identification of molecular markers for some important genes conferring seedling and adult plant resistance (APR) to leaf and stripe rusts of wheat.
Pyramiding important APR and seedling resistance genes (SRG) in the cultivars having yield potential of more that 6.0 T and being cultivated in the most productive NWPZ, by using a
 combination of host-parasite interaction (HPI), morphological markers and molecular markers.
Distribution and agronomic evaluation of the extracted lines carrying required resistance gene combinations for wider adaptability.
Total Cost: Rs.66.42 lakhs for 5 years for 5 institutions
2. Salinity and dehydration stress tolerance in rice: cloning of responsive genes, their promoters and development of transgenics (5-Institutions) 
(i) Institutions  :  ICGEB, New Delhi, University of Delhi South Campus, New Delhi, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, Bose Institute, Kolkata and University of Hyderabad,
 Hyderabad.
(ii) Objectives:
·
        To isolate and clone the specific stress induced genes from rice Pokkali and Porteresia for salinity stress and in rice for dehydration stress.
·        To isolate promoters of those genes whose expression would be regulated under salinity and dehydration stress and in a tissue specific manner.
Total Cost: Rs.202.12 lakhs for 5 years for 5 institutions
 3. Functional Genomics Rice-Gene expression profiling during flower  and seed development and functional validation of identified genes (5-Institutions) 
(i) Institutions :  University of Delhi South Campus, New Delhi, Directorate of Rice Research, Hyderabad , Indian Institute of Sciences, Bangalore, Osmania University, Hyderabad and Madurai
 Kamraj University, Madurai.
(ii) Objectives:
·
                    Genome-wide expression profile   genes with specific reference to regulatory factors and signal transduction components   microarray analysis.
·                    Genes associated with rice panicles, reproductive organs, embryo, endosperm, grain development and meristem determination will be identified.
·                    Function of selected genes, promoters, tools, and resources for genetic    enhancement of rice will be evaluated.
·                    Germplasm diversification by utilizing transgenic rice with promising improved traits will be initiated.
Total Cost: Rs.669.74 lakhs for 5 years for 5 institutions
4. Functional Genomics Rice-Identification and functional analysis of genes related to yield and biotic stresses (6-Institutions)
 (i) Institutions :   Directorate of Rice Research, Hyderabad, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana, Indira Gandhi Agricultural University,

152stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/152ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 Raipur, Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, Hyderabad and Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore. 
 (ii) Objectives:
·        To use tools of functional genomic including transcriptomics and bioinformatics and to identify novel pest and disease resistance genes, yield related and also genes involved in host-
pathogen interaction
·        To fine map already identified yield enhancing QTLs from wild species for the identification of candidate genes
·        To dissect the functional aspects of these genes and to utilize the information generated in the functional genomics studies for development and deployment of durable pest and disease
 resistant high yielding rice cultivars through marker assisted selection. 
 Total Cost: Rs.719.25 lakhs for 5 years for 6 institutins
5. Development and evaluation of salt and drought tolerant transgenic rice . (Indo-US collaboration)
(i) Institutions :   Directorate of Rice Research, Hyderabad , Central Soil Salinity Research Institute, Karnal, ICGEB, New Delhi and Cornell University, USA) 
(ii) Objectives:
·
                    To develop transgenic rice in the background of IR64 through genetic transformation with TPSP gene(s) using a “marker free” gene construct through Agrobacterium mediated
 transformation.
·                    To screen and test the performance of transgenic rice lines developed under glasshouse and field conditions.
·                    To utilize promising transgenic lines in the genetic background of IR64 as a prebreeding material for introgression of transgenic trait into popular indica  cultivars of regional importance
 through marker assisted backcross breeding.
·                    To coordinate development and evaluation of drought and salt tolerant transgenic rice in the country.
Total Cost: Rs.127.10 lakhs for 5 years for 4 institutions
6. Development of transgenic Cotton, Rice, Mungbean & Tomato against biotic stresses (7-Instt )
  (i) Institutions : University of Delhi South Campus, New Delhi, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi,  Madurai Kamraj University, Madurai. Indian Institute of Sciences, Bangalore,
 National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, Haryana Agricultural University, Hisar and M.D.University, Rohtak.
(ii) Objectives:
·
        In the case of cotton objectives are: Transgenics for resistance to lepidopteran insect pests, Identification of new Bacillus thuringiensis strains, Bt toxin genes and protease inhibitors
 effective against bollworms
·        In rice objectives are: Transgenics for resistance to rice tungro disease caused by rice tungro spherical virus (RTSV) and rice tungro bacilliform virus (RTBV)
·        In mungbean, development of transgenics resistant to mungbean yellow mosaic virus (VMYMV) and in tomato, development of transgenics with resistance to tomato leaf curl virus
 (ToLCV), Tomato mosaic virus (ToMV) and cucumber mosaic virus (CMV)
Total Cost: Rs.613.84 lakhs for 5 years for 7 institutions
7.
          Molecular characterization and field trials of mustard (Brassica juncea) transgenics for hybrid seed production, low-till cultivation and resistance to Alternaria blight (3-Inst)
(i) Institutions: University of Delhi South Campus, New Delhi,, IARI, New Delhi, National Research centre on Weed Sciences,  Jabalpur
(ii) Objectives:
·
        Molecular characterization and field trials of B.juncea transgenics for hybrid seed production.
·        Test the male sterile lines and the identified homozygous barstar restorer lines at a different centres
Total Cost: Rs. 69.23 lakhs for 3 years for 3 institutions
8. Multi-site evaluation of transgenic mustard hybrid (DMH-11) based on barnase/barstar system (2-Inst )
(i) Institutions : University of Delhi South Campus, New Delhi and National Research Centre on Rapeseed mustard, Bharatpur
 (ii) Objectives:
·
        To test the potential of DMH-11 transgenic mustard hybrid based on barnase/barstar genetic male sterility system in multi-site trials
Total Cost Rs.18.40 lakhs for 2 years for 2 institutions
9. Development and analysis of cotton transgenics for resistance to insect pests  Bollworm Complex. (UDSC and IARI, New Delhi)
(i) Institutions : University of Delhi South Campus, New Delhi and  IARI, New Delhi
(ii) Objectives:
Continuation of development of transegenics with 35 Sde cry 1Ac gene and analyzing the expresson levels to identify a high expression line.
Development of novel constructs to express cry 1Ac at high levels using combinations of FMVde and 35Sde promoters.

152stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/152ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
Development and characterization of transgenic containing above-mentioned constructs.
Testing of the transgenic lines
Total Cost Rs.87.10 lakhs for 2 years for 2 institutions
10.              Use of Molecular Marker Technology Approach in Wheat Quality Breeding (7- Institutions)
(i) Institutions : Genetics Division and NRCPB, Indian Institute of Agricultural Research, New Delhi;   National Chemical Laboratory and Agarkar Research Institute,Pune; Directorate of Wheat
 Research, Karnal; Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana & CCS Meerut University, Meerut)
(ii) Objectives:
·
                                To analyze parental and recombinant inbred lines at multilocations representing different agro-climatic conditions to study the effect of environmental factor in each case.
·                                To identify additional markers for each QTL, of all the traits under study and to study their respective contribution to phenotypic variation.
·                                To fine map the molecular markers linked to various traits.
·                                To validate the identified markers in the same varietal background from where they were identified as well as the varieties.
·                                To develop and characterize NILs for HMW glutenin alleles in a specific wheat background using molecular markers.
·                                To use the markers already developed for breeding of improved quality wheat.
Total Cost Rs. 212.08 lakhs for 6 institutions for 3 years
 
11.
              Development and applications of biotechnological tools for millet improvement (13 – Institutions  NRCS, UAS, Dharwad,  RRS, MAU,            TNAU,  UAS, Bangalore, ARS, (RAU),
 ICGEB,   CPMB, Osmania University,  NRCS, Hyderabad,  IGFRI,  Coordination cell NRCS)
(i) Institutions : National Research Centre for Sorghum, Hyderabad, University of Agricultural Sciences(UAS), Dharwad;  Regional Research Station, Bijapur; Marathwada Agricultural University, 
 Parbani; Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbatore;  UAS, Bangalore; Rajasthan Agricultural University, Jodhpur;   ICGEB, New Delhi; Osmania University, Hyderabad; Indian Grassland and
 Fodder Research Institute, Jhansi, Central Arid Zone Research Institute, Jodhpur)     
(ii) Objectives:
DNA market assisted improvement of rabi sorghum
Comparative mapping and saturation of linkage maps of millets for identifying useful genes
Transgenic of millets to improve pest resistance and quality
Improvement of millets for human, animal and  plant nutrition and food/feed safety
Drought tolerance in Dual-purpose millets
Pyramiding of down mildew and terminal drought tolerance of pearl millet for western Rajasthan.
Total Costs: Rs. 318.00 lakhs for 3 years for 10 institutions
12. Exploration of the molecular diversity and insecticidal spectrum of the isolates of Bacillus thuringiensis  of the Western Ghats of India and the NE Hill regions, establishment of Repository
 at UAS Dharwad and cloning novel insecticidal genes
(i) Institutions : University of Agricultural Sciences, Dharwad; Tamil Nadu Agricultural University, Coimbator, Kerala Agricultural University, Thrissur;  Smt. CHM College, Ulhasnagar )
(ii) Objectives:
To make an extensive collection of B.thuringiencsis isolates from the hotspots of biodiversity, the Western Ghats of India, Himalayan ranges and North Eastern Hill range and establish a Bt
 repository at Institute of Agri Biotechnology, UAS, Dharwad.
Characterization of the isolates for
(a)        Toxicity against important insect pests.
(b)        Molecular diversity finger prints of isolate using a set of random primers.
(c)        Classification of the isolates by rep-PCR genomic finger printing
(d)
               Cry/vip  gene profile and sequence analysis of PCR signature.
Ø      To predict insecticidal activities of new B.thuringiensis isolates from PCR product profiles using cry vip specific primers.
Ø      To identify the novelty among the cry/vip genes of new B. thuringiensis isolates by nucleotide sequencing of PCR products obtained by using known cry/ vip  specific primers.
Ø      To clone the diverse cry/vip genes
B.        Plant Molecular Biology programmes:
1. Development of transgenic Blackgram with yellow mosaic virus  resistance   and development of transgenic cardamom with cardamom mosaic virus resistance (Madurai Kamraj University,

152stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/152ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 Madurai)
Objectives:
·        The aim is developing transgenic Blackgram (cv CO5) plants expressing, (a) coat protein, (b) antisense Rep, (c) variant movement protein BC1, (d) dsRNA of the CR of DNA A for
 transcriptional gene silencing and (e) dsRNA of Rep coding sequence for post-transcriptional gene silencing.
·        Cardamom plants containing the protein gene and the RNA polymerase gene in separate lines are the anticipated products to be evolved and has the potential to improve the export of cardamom
 and thus is likely to have a positive influence on the socio-economic well being of the plantation workers.
Total cost Rs.57.27 lakhs for 5 years
2. Development of molecular markers for leaf folder, brown plant hopper and yellow stem borer resistance in pyramiding insect resistance genes in rice (Tamil Nadu Agriculture University,
 Coimbatore)
Objectives:
·
        Molecular markers flanking the genetic loci of leaf folder resistance will be identified.  These markers would be useful for early selection of leaf folder resistant rice plants in breeding
 programmes.  Also the markers would be useful to map and tag the gene/s of leaf folder resistance.
·        Mapping population generation which can be also useful to map another gene(s) of interest. Marker identification  for yellow stem borer resistance.  Marker assisted breeding will be
 facilitated once stable markers are identified.  This will open research window for map based cloning for YSB resistance gene.
·        Molecular markers tightly linked to the gene of BPH resistance will be identified.  These markers would be useful for early selection of BPH resistant rice plants in breeding programs.  The
 linkage map constructed will help to tag other traits in rice.
Total cost Rs.78.80 lakhs for five years
3. Engineering inositol metabolic pathway for raising salt-tolerant rice plants (Bose Institute, Kolkata)
Objectives:
·
        The ongoing activities have already generated a patentable gene (PINO1 which will be used for the rice transformation work. It is expected to isolate at least one more gene from porteresia.  The
 transgenic rice plants with a salt – tolerant character is the ultimate product being visualized.
Total cost Rs.38.23 lakhs for 5 years
4. Gene regulation, photoreceptor and signal transduction elements, genetic engineering of cereals and abiotic stress studies in rice (University of Delhi, South Campus, New Delhi)
(4 sub-projects)
I)          Structure and function of elements involved in gene regulation
 II)        Photoreceptors and signal transduction elements and their genes in 
            Arabidopsis and Wheat
III)       Tissue culture and genetic engineering in cereals (Rice and Wheat)
 IV)       Characterization of genes responsive to abiotic stresses in cereals
Total cost Rs.236.05 lakhs for 5 years
C. National Centre for Plant Genome Research (NCPGR), New Delhi
          The Centre has a mandate to work on Genomics of important crops and manipulate genes/genomes to breed improved varieties of food and industrial crops. Presently the Centre is working on crops such
 as Chickpea (pulse), Catharanthus (medicinal plant), Potato, Tomato, Lathyrus (Kesari Dal), Rice, Sweet Potato and Cassava. Besides working on nutritional aspects, improvement in shelf-life of vegetables
 and fruits, development of resistance/tolerance against diseases and abiotic stresses, the Centre is also making efforts for enhanced   production of medicinal alkaloids from Catharanthus plant.
One of the important programme of the Centre is on nutritional enhancement of potato and several commercial Indian potato cultivars (Kufri varieties) have been transformed with AmA1 gene.   The
 NCPGR will submit an application to GEAC to get necessary clearance for conducting large scale trials of the AmaA+ potato. Oxalate Dedecarboxylase (OXDC) gene was also transferred into tomato, and
 the transgenic tomato lines have been found to be tolerant to some root fungal pathogens and the fruits to have low content of oxalate. 
The Centre has also identified certain genes which can be used in increasing the shelf- life of fruits and vegetables. In addition to pursuing basic and applied research, the Centre is making a significant
 contribution towards scientific manpower development in the advanced areas of plant molecular biology and genomics.
Annual Plan:  2005-06    -    Rs.12.70 crores (BE)
Comments
             The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Department in the field of Agriculture Biotechnology and is of the opinion that it can lay foundation of a second Green Revolution in the
 country with its sustained and vigorous efforts.
 BIOTECH FACILITIES, CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE AND PROGRAMME SUPPORT

152stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/152ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
Recommendation
            The Committee appreciates that the budgetary allocation for the ‘Biotech Facilities, Centres of Excellence and Programme Support’ has been increased, keeping in view the future requirements
 and the strict implementation of the Intellectual Property Rights rules from 2005. The Committee also commends the Department for earmarking sufficient funds for development of infrastructure
 facilities, which is a prerequisite in the field of science and technology. The Committee hopes that the utilization of these funds would be monitored regularly to ensure their proper
 utilization.                          (Para 40)
       Action taken by the Department
            The progress of the on going infrastructure projects is regularly scrutinized by the Task Force and during the current financial year the Department plans to conduct two meeting of the Task
 Force to monitor the progress of the on-going projects and decide on the funding for new project proposals in the identified thrust areas.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
            The Committee is of the opinion that there is an urgent need to streamline guidelines and procedures for approving genetically engineered pharmaceutical products, as this is a complex process
 involving multiple ministries and regulators that lack systematic coordination. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Department should set-up an autonomous body like “National
 Biotechnology Regulatory Authority” to approve biotechnology products — and dispense with similar tasks being handled by the Genetic Engineering Approval Committee of the Ministry of
 Environment and Forests.  The proposed authority should also incorporate separate divisions in areas like agricultural products and transgenic crops; pharmaceuticals and industrial products; and
 transgenic food, feed and animal aquaculture.                                                   (Para 42)
Action taken by the Department
            For approving genetically engineered products in the country, the department has already proposed an independent National Biotechnology Regulatory Authority (NBRA) during the
 deliberations of the Mashelkar Committee Report preparation, which has been set up for DNA pharma products.  For agriculture products, Dr. Swaminathan Committee has also recommended the
 same structure.  Once these reports are accepted by the appropriate authorities, the department would make efforts to set-up an independent National Biotechnology Regulatory Authority.  As far as
 dispensing with GEAC of  MoEF is concerned, it is not within the purview of the department as this committee has been formed under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986.  Once the independent
 NBRA is in place after the acceptance of the two reports as stated earlier, the role of approval of all biotech products would rest with the Authority and not the GEAC, as desired in the report of the
 Committee.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply. It believes that an independent National Biotechnology Regulatory Authority (NBRA) will soon be put in place so that regulatory bottlenecks can be removed
 and single window clearance could be made in case of genetically engineered pharmaceutical products
 Recommendation
            The Committee also recommends that besides clarifying regulatory mechanisms, there should be adequate focus on developing human resources — students specializing in biotechnology,
 researchers, teachers of biotechnologycourses and technicians. The Department should also plan setting up new Centers of excellence in food biotechnology, herbal medicine, molecular medicine,
 biomaterials and devices, and bioinformatics.                                                                                                                                         (Para 43)           
Action taken by the Department
            The areas referred to in the para have already been included as thrust areas in the draft National Biotechnology Development Strategy document.  Accordingly, while considering the new project
 proposals, the Department would encourage setting up of new Centers of Excellence in these specific areas.  Efforts would also be made to generate viable project proposals in consulatation with the
 experts available in these fields.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation
The Committee notes that most of the funds allocated for Human Resource Development have been utilized for Graduate/Post Graduate/fellowships. The Committee feels that priority has still
 not been accorded to developing Human Resource at the under graduate level. The Committee recommends that proper resource allocation should be made at the under graduate level in consultation
 with the University Grants Commission and various Central/State Boards of Higher Secondary Education.                      (Para 46)
Action taken by the Department
            In the year 2001, DBT had convened a meeting of the agencies involved in biotechnology education, namely, UGC, AICTE and universities, to discuss the issue of appropriate level for
 biotechnology teaching.  The meeting was chaired by Secretary, DBT and attended by Vice Chairman, UGC; Chairman, AICTE and other eminent educationists.  The general consensus in the meeting

152stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/152ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
 was that biotechnology teaching at under-graduate level should not be encouraged.  It was felt that the basic knowledge of Life Sciences / Biological Sciences (Zoology, Botany, Microbiology,
 Biochemistry etc) is essentially required to study the multidisciplinary area of Biotechnology at post graduate level.  The recommendation of the meeting not to encourage / support Biotechnology
 courses at undergraduate level was circulated to all the agencies like UGC, AICTE etc.  In addition, it was also recommended that AICTE may consider the Biotechnology courses in engineering
 colleges / technical institutions having strength in Chemical Engineering, Biochemical Engineering, Bioprocess Engineering.  During the discussion on the National Biotechnology Development
 Strategy, the dominant view also has been that at the B.Sc. level there should be general exposure in life science subjects and specialization in biotechnology be considered only at the M.Sc. level. 
 Therefore, DBT does not consider it necessary to support teaching programmes at the B.Sc. level.
Comments
            The Committee decides not to pursue in view of the Department’s reply.    
Recommendation
            The Department of Biotechnology should also devise such a programme so that bright scientists working overseas are attracted back to Indian universities. The Committee is of the view that
 today much of the basic research in India is done in national laboratories, away from universities and this means that the teaching Centres and research Centres are disassociated, a situation that needs
 to be addressed seriously. Attracting young Scientists from abroad and involving them in coordinating the research in India would also tackle the problem of Brain Drain.                                        
 (Para 47)
          Action taken by the Department
            Department of Biotechnology is in the process of developing a programme for attracting bright Indian scientists working overseas to Indian universities.  This issue has also been widely
 discussed while preparing National Biotechnology Development Strategy.  The Strategy provides for the following specific measures in paras 2.1 (v) and (viii).  These paras provide as follows.
●          Para 2.1 (v) : Strengthening of teaching and R&D in life sciences and biotechnology in the university system.
●          Strengthening of R&D in life sciences and biotechnology in the university system will be accorded high priority.  This is considered important for improving the quality of education and
 providing exposure to new technologies for students at various levels.  Specific mechanisms to achieve the goal will include:
 
●          Creation of inter-disciplinary centers of excellence with world class infrastructure in key areas
●          Programme support to encourage inter-departmental networking
●          Visiting Professorship and creation of industry sponsored chairs in partnership with the Department of Biotechnology.
            Para 2.1 (viii): Arresting and reversing brain drain
●          The number of post-doctoral fellowships offered by the Department of Biotechnology will be increased to 200 per annum in order to attract talent.
●          Outstanding young investigator grants in biotechnology will be introduced. This will provide a package including salary support, research grant, equipment and opportunities to attend national
 and international conferences.  The salary support under the scheme will be at par with that of entry-level faculty positions.
●          Information on availability of positions in education/research establishments and industries will be provided on a website to facilitate employment of scientists with specific skills at appropriate
 positions.
●          A data base of scientists working in different areas of biotechnology within and outside the country will be created to utilize the expertise appropriately.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.  It hopes that the above measures will be implemented at the earliest.
 STEM CELL RESEARCH
Recommendation
            The Committee feels that extensive research needs to be carried out in the field of stem cell research specially keeping in view the fact that it can treat many diseases for which there seems to be
 either no cure or the alternate therapies are very expensive.  However, the Committee is of the opinion that as the research in this field is at nascent stage, publicity by various research institutions
 should be avoided.  The Committee is also of the view that research work on stem cell should be undertaken in coordination with all the concerned research
 institutions.                                                          (Para 52)                                                                     
 Action taken by the Department
            In order to initiate coordinated work in the area of stem cell research, city cluster programme on stem cells have been supported at Vellore and Pune by involving a number of basic researchers
 and clinicians.  More city cluster programmes on stem cells are being considered at Hyderabad, Bangalore and Delhi.
 
            Focused, targeted network programmes are also being initiated on human stem cell research with the clinicians after ascertaining their requirements for stem cell therapy by organising disease
 specific meetings.

152stReport of Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/152ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:15]
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 03.30 p.m. on Tuesday, the 20th December, 2005 in Room No. 121 (Committee Chairman’s Room), First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
            PRESENT
1.   Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-din Soz
3. Dr. Prabha Thakur
4. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
5. Shrimati Kum Kum Rai
LOK  SABHA
6. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
7. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
8. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
9. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
10. Shri Rakesh Singh
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
SECRETARIAT
                        Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
2.   The Committee took-up consideration of revised draft 147
th, ***,  ***, ***, *** and 152 nd Action Taken Reports of the Committee on the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations
 contained in its One Hundred Forty-third, ***, ***, ***, *** and *** reports on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) relating to Departments of Ocean Development; ***; ***; ***; ***; and ***,
 respectively.  After discussion and suggesting a minor change in 147th report, the Committee adopted all the reports.
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Sujan Chakraborty, and in his absence, Shri
 Aruna Kumar Vundavalli to lay the Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 22
nd  December, 2005.
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Sujan Chakraborty, and in his absence, Shri
 Aruna Kumar Vundavalli to lay the Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 22
nd  December, 2005.
4.         The Committee, then, decided to hear the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests in respect of control and supervision on experiments on Animals for
 the purpose of Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research, in its next meeting to be held on the10 th January, 2006. The Committee also decided to hear the Drugs Controller General of India and
 representatives of Indian Council of Medical Research in the matter in its future meetings.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 04.35 p.m.
NEW DELHI;
December 20, 2005
                          C. B. RAI                         UNDER SECRETARY
 
☼ Pursuant to the adoption of the 5th Report of the Committee on Ethics on 13.12.2005, the Member was suspended from the Rajya Sabha pending the presentation of the final Report of the Committee on Ethics.
Ф Shri Jaswant Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  11th August, 2005 consequent upon his resignation from  the Committee.
 
*** Related to other matters.