Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
265
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 23rd July, 2015)
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 23rd July, 2015)
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIFTH REPORT
Reported Forecast of a Major Earthquake in uttarakhand

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY FIFTH REPORT
Reported Forecast of a Major Earthquake in Uttarakhand
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the  23rd July, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the  23 rd July, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—11
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS - AT G LANCE .................................................................. 12
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 14—27
7. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 29—32

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1 st September, 2014-15)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri Bhupinder Singh
 9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Beig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
22. Shri Nana Patole
23. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
24. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
25. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
27. Shri Nagendra Singh
28. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
*31. Shri Chirag Paswan
*  Nominated w.e.f.  25 th March, 2015.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
& Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred and Sixty-fifth Report on ‘Reported Forecast
of a Major Earthquake in Uttarakhand’.
2. In its meeting held on the 23
rd May, 2015, the Committee heard the views of the
Ministries of Earth Sciences and Environment, Forest & Climate Change, National Disaster
Management Authority and Government of Uttarakhand on the subject.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministries of  Earth
Sciences and Environment, Forest & Climate Change, National Disaster Management Authority
and Government of Uttarakhand for placing before the Committee the required material and
replying to the clarifications sought by the Members on the subject.
4.      In its meeting held on 9 th July, 2015, the Committee considered the draft report and
adopted the same. 
ASHWANI KUMAR
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
July 9 , 2015 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Shravana 18, 1937 Science and Technology, Environment and Forests
Rajya Sabha

(iv)
ACRONYMS
GPS : Global Positioning System
EEW : Earthquake Early Warnig
BMTPC : Building Material and Promotion Council
NDRF : National Disaster Response Force
SOPs : Standard Operating Procedures

REPORT
The Himalayan region witnessed a devastating earthquake on April 25, 2015 of 7.9
magnitude with its epicenter located 77 km NW of Kathmandu in Central Nepal. The
earthquake was followed by a series of aftershocks with the largest of magnitude 7.3 which
occurred on May 12, 2015. Three strong aftershocks of magnitude 6.6, 6.9 and 6.2 occurred
on April 25, 26 and May 12, 2015 respectively. The information about the earthquakes was
disseminated to all stake holders and put in public domain within 10 minutes of occurrence of
earthquake.  These data were used to create damage scenario maps which were made available
to the Crisis Management Group for rescue and relief. Seismological analysis of these data has
confirmed that this earthquake occurred on the detachment. The detachment is the contact
surface between the under thrusting Indian shield rocks and the overlying Himalayan wedge.
The presence of transverse structure into the Himalayas has played pivotal role in confining the
aftershocks only to the eastern part of the epicenter.
2. Earthquake occurrences in the Himalayan region are due to convergence between the
Indian and Eurasian plates. The Indian plate under thrusts beneath Tibet, not steadily but
through episodic slip on the gentle north dipping detachment. The detachment under the
Himalayas remains locked while accumulating strain and when the accumulated strain exceeds
the strength of the rocks, it gets released in major (M 7-8) or great (M>8) earthquake.  Global
Positioning System (GPS) measurements show that the Indian plate moves towards northeast
at a rate of about 5 cm/year and about 2 cm/year of this convergence is accommodated in the
Himalayan region through episodic slip on the detachment. In the past hundred years several
major and great earthquakes have occurred, namely, the 1897 Shillong (M 8.1), 1905 Kangra
(M 7.8), 1934 Bihar-Nepal (M 8.1), 1950 Assam earthquakes (M 8.6) and the 2005 Kashmir
earthquake (M 7.6). In recent years, three strong (M 6-7) earthquakes, namely, 1991
Uttarkashi (M 6.8), 1999 Chamoli (M 6.5), and 2011 Sikkim (M 6.9) causing significant
damage have occurred.
3. In this context, it was reported that the geologists from Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for
Advance Scientific Research, Bengaluru, had earlier warned about Nepal earthquake.  The same
geologists had published their study indicating a deadly earthquake in Uttarakhand, similar to
the recent one in Nepal that killed over 7000 people.
4. Concerned with the report, the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests decided to assess the state of preparedness
of the various agencies concerned with this matter and  held a meeting on the 23 rd May 2015
with the representatives of Ministry of Earth Sciences, Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change, National Disaster Management Authority and the State Government of
Uttarakhand. A list of Representatives present in the meeting, is placed at ANNEXURE-I.
5. In the meeting, initiating the interaction, the Chairman asked the representatives of
Ministry of Earth Sciences and Indian Meteorological Department of  their assessment of the
impugned forecast and initiatives taken to augment Uttarakhand with dense seismic network
with real time connectivity. They were also asked about steps taken for development of
Earthquake Early Warning System in Uttarakhand and the progress made in respect of seismic

2
microzonation which was considered vital for mitigating future earthquakes.  While
understanding the fact that with the current scientific knowledge it may not be possible to
predict the occurrence of earthquakes with accuracy in terms of size, time and space, the
Chairman asked the Ministry to apprise the Committee of the alternative preventive measures
undertaken to minimize the loss of life and properties.
6. In response, the Committee was informed by the Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences
that the continued northward movement of Indian plate and its under-thrusting beneath
Eurasian plates since 50 million years ago results in storing of strain energy across Himalayan
region thereby making it seismically active. This energy is periodically released during large and
great earthquakes.  It has been observed that during past 200 years, less than 50% of the
Himalayan arc has ruptured during great earthquakes. Large earthquakes in these unbroken
segments along the Himalayan belt cannot be ruled out. The part of the Himalayas between the
ruptures of 1905 Kangra and 1934 Nepal Bihar earthquakes has not released strain in past few
years and is named as the Central Seismic gap. GPS measurements in the region provided
unequivocal evidence of strain accumulation in the region. However, when the accumulated
strain energy will be released through a great or major earthquake, is not known. The Garhwal-
Kumaon Himalaya of Uttarakhand fall in this gap region and thus have high seismic hazard
potential.  The last major earthquakes in the region probably occurred in 1505 and 1833,
however, the sizes and locations of these earthquakes are uncertain.  But this much information
is not enough to forecast earthquake or to even state that the next large earthquake will occur
in Central Seismic Gap before it occurs anywhere else in the Himalayas. A lot more information
in terms of strength, roughness, competency, brittle/ductile behavior (thermal condition),
coupling/friction of the faults along with precise slip rates is required to forecast an
earthquake.  These parameters are difficult to measure all along the length and breadth of the
fault systems as these faults lies few tens of kms beneath ground and sometimes hidden.
Nevertheless, ESSO-MoES has taken several initiatives to focus on this gap area.
7. On the issue of effect of earthquake of magnitude of 8 and 9, the Secretary, M/o Earth
Sciences explained that the earthquake of magnitude of 9 will be catastrophic.  Elaborating the
point further he stated that if earthquake of magnitude of 8 is one then earthquake of 9 would
be 32  and of 8.5 magnitude would be of 15 to 16 times.  He also stated that damage due
to earthquake also depends on the soil cover.  If soil cover is hard rock the damage would
be much less but if the same magnitude earthquake is felt in a place having large soil cover,
it would have much larger impact.  Uttarakhand has large soil cover.
8. On Earthquake Early Warning System in Uttarakhand, the Ministry of Earth Sciences
informed that a pilot project for development of Earthquake Early Warning (EEW) System in
Uttarakhand is being undertaken.  In this project, 100 sensors will be installed in Uttarakhand
which will be connected with central recording station which is being established at IIT,
Roorkee.  These sensors will detect the ground motion radiating from an earthquake rupture
and estimate the resulting ground shaking that will occur later either at the same location or
some other locations.  The Ministry also informed the Committee that the warning time will
range from a few seconds to a little more than a minute and will primarily be a function of
the distance of the user from the epicenter.  It was also informed that a successful Earthquake
Early Warning System can provide a lead time of about 60-90 seconds to Delhi in case a major

3
earthquake occurs in Himalaya.  It was also informed by the Ministry of Earth Sciences that
to disseminate the information and warning of an earthquake through mobile communications
and T.V . channels, the Ministry was devising measures to improve the communication of the
information to public at large and certain vital installations.
9. About seismic microzonation, the Ministry informed the Committee that Seismic
Microzonation was a priority area of seismic hazard mitigation programme by generating inputs
for design code.  The Ministry was in the process of carrying out seismic microzonation of
30 cities in India in first phase.  The seismic microzonation of Delhi, Lucknow, Kolkata,
Bengaluru, Ahmedabad and Chennai, had been completed.  Along the Himalayan belt, Seismic
Microzonation of Dehradun, Jammu, Chandigarh, Sikkim and Guwahati had also been
completed.  It was also informed that in view of the growing fear about earthquake risk among
the public in NCR, a comprehensive study conducted by a dense seismic network in and
around NCR confirmed low level of local seismicity in NCR.  However, the region is more
vulnerable to shaking from large earthquakes in Himalayan region.
10. The Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences suggested that mock drills should be
performed in all seismically active areas and a particular day should be fixed for the
performance of such drills.  He also stated that the people should know in advance what to
do if the earthquake occurs during the day time or in the night.
11. When asked about the preparedness, resources, competence and capabilities of
Uttarakhand State to face the challenge of earthquake the Chief Secretary, State Government
of Uttarakhand informed the Committee that the state falls in Zone IV and V of Earthquake
Zoning Map of India and has witnessed two moderate magnitude earthquakes with epicenters
at Uttarkashi and Chamoli in 1991 and 1999 respectively and has been experiencing earthquakes
of lesser magnitude frequently. Tremors related with the recent Nepal Earthquake were also
experienced in many parts of the State. In view of the high earthquake vulnerability of the
state, government was taking all precautionary mitigation measures. He stated that the
Department of Earthquake Engineering of the erstwhile University of Roorkee has
recommended a series of measures including the need to construct the earthquake resistant
buildings.
12. Further, he informed that after the cloudburst of 2013, reconstruction of houses were
undertaken by the State Government in which each house was designed in a manner that it can
withstand any good earthquake.  2400 buildings under construction are using totally earthquake
resistant technology.  The said buildings would be completed in the next three to four months.
13. The Chief Secretary further informed that they had realized that a hilly state like
Uttarakhand must have a good rescue system available.  In that direction, helicopter service
in the region was a must.  He stated that during the 2013 floods in Uttarakhand, Indian Air
force had provided them about 52 helicopters and the State government had their own twenty
private helicopters in service.  However, they found that they could not reach many places
because there were no helipads/landing grounds.  After 2013 disaster, they were constructing
60 helipads so that they could land at different points and start rescue works.  The work on
60 helipads was going at a very good pace and was likely to be completed in another 18
months time.  There were ten helidromes which could accommodate three to four helicopters

4
at a given point of time.  They also had helipads where they could have three to four
helicopters.  They also had normal helipads where they could simply land at a small village,
pick people from there and start rescue operations.
14. He thereafter emphasized on the need for small helicopters and helipads for rescue
operations to be able to reach people in remote corners in disasters like earthquakes in hilly
state like Uttarakhand.
15. The Committee enquired as to how many families are likely to be affected in case of
a major earthquake of magnitude 8 strikes in Uttarakhand.  The representative of the State
Government informed the Committee that five districts of Uttarakhand on the Indo-Nepal and
Indo-Tibet border come in seismic zone-V and were very sparsely-populated.  The population
ranged from 5 lakhs to 7 lakhs in a district.  Accordingly, a population of about 30 to 35 lakh
people was likely to be affected.  As regards relocation of people to safer places the Committee
was further informed by the representative of the State Government that they have indicated
their requirement to the Government of India about the need to shift 400 villages, which were
the most vulnerable to disasters, lying in the highest threat zone to safer region.  The
Committee was also informed that a detailed report on this had been sent to the Government
of India and funds to the tune of Rs.10,000 crores had been sought for this.  The
representative also informed the committee that people in these villages had made up their mind
to be relocated to the safer place from these vulnerable places.
16. In response to a query relating to measures/rescue operations after the earthquakes,
the Committee was informed by the representative of the State Government that trauma
centres were set up at various locations next to the helipads and the helipads were also to
be used as a medical and shelter facility.  The State Government also informed the committee
about the requirement of resources for setting up of trauma centres including mobile trauma
centres.
17. The Committee enquired from the representatives of National Disaster Management
Authority regarding the steps taken by them in this direction.  The representative of the
National Disaster Management Authority informed the Committee that guidelines have been
issued by the Authority to all the State Governments on earthquake management and on seismic
retrofitting of buildings and structures, wherein they had guided as to how the buildings can
be retrofitted, at least, the lifeline buildings, which include schools, hospitals and priority
structures, which can be used at the time of earthquake as a shelter also.  These guidelines
are already issued to all the States and some of the States are working on that.  The
Committee was further informed that for the disaster-resistant construction, the Bureau of
Indian Standards under the Ministry of Consumer Affairs was revising codes and they were
coordinating with them.  Most of the codes had already been revised by them.  It was also
informed that presently, the earthquake codes are force-based, and a new initiative has been
taken to make performance-based codes, which exist only in a few countries like America,
Switzerland and New Zealand.  The Bureau has already started working on that, and, in the
time to come, these codes will be available.  In case the intensity of the earthquake is very
high, say, 8 or above, these types of codes will help these buildings to be classified as the
lifeline buildings from the very beginning itself.  After the earthquake, these buildings can be
occupied and could be very useful buildings.

5
18. The Committee desired to know about the coordination of the National Disaster
Management Authority with the State Government of Uttarakhand.  The representative of
National Disaster Management Authority informed about the guidelines issued to the State
Government for earthquake management and seismic retrofitting of structures.  The Committee
was also informed that a lot of documentation and books have been released through the
Building Material and Promotion Council (BMTPC) and the Ministry of Home Affairs for the
construction of earthquake resistant buildings which are even useful for retrofitting of these
buildings.  Regarding capacity buildings, they had an annual calendar for training to conduct
mock exercise in all the States including Uttarakhand.  They had done 13 mock exercises in
Uttarakhand, out of which, eight were related to earthquake.  A mock exercise was also done
in Dehradun, and they were planning one such exercise in Rudraprayag where all the
stakeholders, the Central as well as State authorities will be available, and, this mock exercise
will be done to see as to how the coordination between the concerned agencies is done at the
time of earthquake.
19. The Committee was further informed about the meeting held in Uttarakhand on 9
th
January, 2015 in which NDMA guided the State Government to devise a State Disaster
Management Plan which will take care of all types of disasters including earthquakes.  The
Authority also informed the committee that National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) was
being used to train the State Disaster Response Force set up by Government of Uttarakhand.
On being enquired by the Committee, the State Government also expressed its satisfaction on
the requisite support from the National Disaster Management Authority.
20. As a follow-up of the meeting of the Committee held on 23
rd May, 2015  the Committee
was informed by the Government of Uttarakhand vide  its communication dated 3 rd July, 2015,
that it has taken a number of precautionary measures consisting of  institutional, capacity
building, vulnerability assessment and resource mapping and awareness generation.  A copy of
the measures taken are at ANNEXURE-II.
21. The Committee takes note of the fact that worldwide current scientific knowledge
is not sound enough to forecast the earthquake in terms of location, magnitude and
time and even after some information on the past earthquake has been obtained by
paleoseismological investigations, the uncertainties involved in the magnitude, location
and dating still remains large.  But with the undertaking of Earthquake Early Warning
(EEW) System in Uttarakhand and its possibility to provide a lead time of about 60-90
seconds to Delhi in case of a big earthquake occurs in Himalayas, the responsibility lies
on the Ministries of Earth Sciences, Information and Broadcasting and Home Affairs to
coordinate not only to make the information public in real time through accessible
means of communications to the likely affected public but also to educate the people at
large  about preventive steps to be taken before occurrence of earthquake, precautions
during earthquakes and steps to be taken after its occurrence. The coordination with
State Government alongwith coordination of National Disaster Management Authority
with State Disaster Management Authority is vital in such disasters.  The Committee
recommends establishing an institutional mechanism for better planning, forecasting and
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for dealing with the catastrophe of earthquake
that is being predicted in Uttarakhand.

22. Besides this, the Committee was also informed by the representatives of the State
Government that they have indicated their requirement to the Government of India about the
need to shift 400 villages, which were the most vulnerable to disasters, lying in the highest
threat zone to safer region.  A detailed report on this alongwith requirement of Rs.10,000
crores for this had been sent to the Government of India.  The representative also informed
the committee that the people in these villages had made up their mind to be relocated to the
safer place from these vulnerable places.
23. The Committee feels that initiative of the State Government to relocate the
people of most vulnerable 400 villages to safer places seems well-placed and preventive
steps to save the people from any possible natural disaster need to be taken.   The
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Central Government to examine the financial
as well as material requirement received from the State Government of Uttarakhand,
for relocation of people of these villages to safer regions, not only sympathetically but
expeditiously.  The State Government of Uttarakhand should also make available all the
information to the Central Government that may be needed for taking a decision in the
matter.
24. The Committee also feels that public awareness can play a very important role
in ensuring the level of preparedness needed on the occurrence of earthquake.  The
committee, therefore, recommends that the Government of Uttarakhand should conduct
mock drills on a regular basis.  Further, awareness campaigns and programme should
also be conducted frequently so that the people could be mentally prepared for such
situations and the level of alertness and preparedness towards any occurrence of the
earthquake may all the time be in place.
6

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
1 The Committee takes note of the fact that worldwide current scientific knowledge
is not sound enough to forecast the earthquake in terms of location, magnitude and
time and even after some information on the past earthquake has been obtained by
paleo seismological investigations, the uncertainties involved in the magnitude, location
and dating still remains large. But with the undertaking of Earthquake Early Warning
(EEW) System in Uttarakhand and its possibility to provide a lead time of about 60-90
seconds to Delhi in case of a big earthquake occurs in Himalayas, the responsibility lies
on the Ministries of Earth Sciences, Information and Broadcasting and Home Affairs to
coordinate not only to make the information public in real time through accessible
means of communications to the likely affected public but also to educate the people at
large about preventive steps to be taken before occurrence of earthquake, precautions
during earthquakes and steps to be taken after its occurrencc. The coordination with
State Government alongwith coordination of National Disaster Management Authority
with State Disaster Management Authority is vital in such disasters. The Committee
recommends establishing an institutional mechanism for better planning, forecasting and
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for dealing with the catastrophe of earthquake
that is being predicted in Uttarakhand. (Para 21)
2. The Committee feels that initiative of the State Government to relocate the
people of most vulnerable 400 villages to safer places seems well-placed and preventive
steps to save the pcople from any possible natural disaster need to be taken. The
Committee, therefore, recommends to the Central Government to examine the financial
as well as material requirement received from the State Government of Uttarakhand,
for relocation of people of these villages to safer regions, not only sympathetically but
expeditiously. The State Government of Uttarakhand should also make available all the
information to the Central Government that may be needed for taking a decision in the
matter. (Para 23)
3. The Committee also feels that public awareness can play a very important role
in ensuring the level of preparedness needed on the occurrence of earthquake. The
committec, therefore, recommends that the Government of Uttarakhand should conduct
mock drills on a regular basis. Further, awareness campaigns and programme should
also be conducted frequently so that the people could be mentally prepared for such
situations and the level of alertness and preparedness towards any occurrence of the
earthquake may all the time be in place. (Para 24)

MINUTES

XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Saturday, the 23rd May, 2015 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
3. Shri C.P. Narayanan
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
5. Shri Bhupinder Singh
6. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Shri Laxman Giluwa
9. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
10. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
11. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
12. Shri Nagendra Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
Representatives of the Ministrv of Earth Sciences
1. Dr. Shailesh Nayak, Secretary
2. Shri Anand S. Khati, Secretary
3. Shrimati Anuradha Mitra, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
4. Dr. L.S. Rathore, Director General, India Meteorological Department
5. Dr. B.K. Bansal, Advisor
11

12
6. Dr. A.P. Mishra, Scientist ‘F’
7. Dr. Sumer Chopra, Scientist ‘E’
8. Dr. Vineet Gahalaut, Scientist ‘E’
9. Shri B.R. Arora, Consultant
10. Shri Vivek Mishra, Director (Parliament)
Representatives of the Ministrv of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
1. Shri Shashi Shekhar, SpeCial Secretary
2. Dr. S.S. Negi, Additional Director General of Forest
3. Shri Bishwanath Sinha, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. J.R. Bhatt, Advisor
Representatives of the National Disaster Management Authoritv
1. Shri A. K. Sanghi, Joint Secretary, Mitigation
2. Shri R.K. Singh, Director
Representatives of the Government of Uttarakhand
1. Shri N. Ravishankar, Chief Secretary
2. Shri Rakesh Sharma, Additional Chief Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman after welcoming the Members of the Committee and
officers of the Ministries/National Disaster Management Authority/Government of Uttarakhand,
informed the purpose of the presentation in the meeting i.e. reported forecast of a major
earthquake in Uttarakhand. The Chairman referred to the report by some geologists on the
issue and enquired about the assessment and the preparedness and initiatives taken by various
agencies and related Ministries to combat the possible disaster. The Chairman wanted to know
the development of Earthquake Early Warning System in Uttarakhand, initiatives taken by
National Disaster Management Authority, public outreach programmes for sensitization and
coordination mechanism between State and Central Governments to meet the future challenge
of Earthquake in the State.
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences, in his presentation informed about the
measures taken to disseminate information regarding earthquake via certain installed networks
and the measures like performing a drill, locating a safe place in buildings and retro fitting
making it to be earthquake resistant and creating awareness among students will ensure
preparedness against earthquake.
4. On the query of the Chairman, regarding magnitude of the possible disaster, the
Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences explained that if the magnitude of the ea!1hquake
increases from 8 to 9, then the destruction capacity will be increased by 32 times and even
well built structures can be destroyed in an earthquake of 8.5 magnitude. The Secretary also

13
explained that it depends on the volume of the soil and since Uttarakhand being a hilly terrain
has a large soil cover, the damage will be more.
5. The Chairman, thereafter, enquired from the representatives of the Uttarakhand
Government about the resources, capabilities and competence needed for combating the
disaster. To this, the Chief Secretary, Uttarakhand replied that State Department of Disaster
Management had been created within which the Disaster Management and Mitigation Centre
had been set up which undertakes risk mitigation measures. He also informed about mock drills
are being done on a regular basis.
6. Additional Chief Secretary, Uttarakhand informed the Committee that after the disaster
of floods in 2013, houses under construction are being designed to withstand any effect of
earthquake. Also, helipads and helidromes are being constructed to ensure landing of
helicopters for search and rescue operation and trauma centres are being set up. He also
requested for support of Central Government in matters of resources and funds. The Additional
Chief Secretary also informed that a representation was made to the Central Government for
the requirement of Rs. 10,000 crores package needed for the relocation of 400 villages which
are vulnerable to disasters like cloud bursts and earthquakes.
7. The Chainnan further enquired on the coordination of the Disaster Management with the
State Government of Uttarakhand and the measures taken by Central Government to assist
State Government. One Member enquired from the Additional Chief Secretary about the
availability of mechanism to train the personnel in disaster management and the people. He
replied that State Disaster Relief Force on the lines of NDRF has been set up. Also, the
company headquarters and companies manned by women have been set up for combating the
disaster.
8.  Further, the National Disaster Management Authority informed the Committee about
the guidelines issued to all the States on earthquake management and on seismic retrofitting of
the buildings. Codes will also be available by the Authority to classify the buildings. The
Authority informed about having an annual calendar for training and completing 13 mock
exercises in Uttarakhand out of which eight were related to earthquake. The Authority further
informed that a meeting was held in which NDMA with State Government has proposed a State
Disaster Management Plan. State Disaster Response force is also being trained.
9. The Additional Chief Secretary submitted that the Central Government should be
advised to activate a plan for relocation of 400 villages and secondly, the Indian Air Force
should be requested to have a fleet of small helicopters for immediate rescue operation and
trauma centres also need to be set up.
10. Another Member enquired from the Secretary of Ministry of Earth Sciences about the
Department of Atomic Energy doing research on seismology and the report on landslide in
Malin in Maharashtra. The Secretary explained the research being made by the Department of
Atomic Energy and a detailed report on the Malin mishap made by the Geological Survey of
India. The Secretary also informed about the-research done by BARC on seismology and
reasons for tremors in Cochin and Trivandrum.

11. The Chairman, at the end, thanked everyone and hoped that all possible assistance will be
provided to State Government of Uttarakhand by all concerned Departments to the possible
challenge. The Chairman asked the officials and the representatives to furnish materials to the
secretariat for preparing a report on the subject.
12. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
13. The Committee then adjourned at 12.15 p.m.
14

XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 02.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 9 th July, 2015 in Room No. ‘139’,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe,- New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
3. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
LOK SABRA
4. Shri Ning Ering
5. Dr. K. Gopal
6. Shri Daddan Mishra
7. Shri Nana Patole
8. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
9. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
10. Shri Vikram Usendi
11. Shri Chirag Paswan
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh., Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
1. Shri Ashok Lavasa, Secretary
2. Shri Susheel Kumar, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad, Joint Secretary
4. Shri A.K.Mehta, Joint Secretary and Chairman, CPCB
5. Dr. Rashid Hasan, Advisor
6. Dr. J .R. Bhatt, Advisor
7. Dr. A.B. Aholkar, Member Secretary, CPCB
15

Representatives of Central Ground Water Board
1. Shri K.B. Biswas, Chairman,
2. Dr. Dipankar Saha, Member
3. Shri G. C. Pati, Member
2. At the outset, The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and apprised
them that the Committee inter alia proposed to consider and adopt *** draft report in the
meeting. The Committee thereafter, considered the draft *** 265 report on *** ‘Reported
Forecast of a Major Earthquake in Uttarakhand’ respectively and adopted the same.
3 . *                            *                            *
4 . *                            *                            *
5 . *                            *                            *
6 . *                            *                            *
7 . *                            *                            *
8 . *                            *                            *
9 . *                            *                            *
1 0 . *                            *                            *
1 1 . *                            *                            *
1 2 . *                            *                            *
1 3 . *                            *                            *
1 4 . *                            *                            *
1 5 . *                            *                            *
1 6 . *                            *                            *
1 7 . *                            *                            *
1 8 . *                            *                            *
1 9 . *                            *                            *
2 0 . *                            *                            *
2 1 . *                            *                            *
22. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
23. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.10 P.M.
*** Relate to other matters
16

MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 21 st July, 2015 in Room No. ‘67’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
3. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
5. Shri Bhupinder Singh
LOKSABHA
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapshinh Chauhan
7. Kum. Sushmita Dev
8. Shri Ninong Ering
9. Shri Laxman Giluwa
10. Shri Daddan Mishra
11. Shri Nana Patole
12. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
13. Shri Nagendra Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas,  Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2 . *                            *                            *
3 . *                            *                            *
4 . *                            *                            *
5 . *                            *                            *
6. The meeting of the Committee, then, adjourned at 3.45 
P.M.
17
*** Relate to other matters

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE -I
List of offieials present in the meeting of the Committee held on 23 rd May 2015
Representatives of Ministry of Earth Sciences
1. DL Shailesh Nayak, Secretary
2. Shri Anand S. Khati, Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati.Anuradha Mitra, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
4. Dr. L.S. Rathore, Director General, India Meteorological Department
5. Dr. B.K Bansal, Advisor
6. Dr. A.P. Mishra, Scientist ‘F’
7. Dr. Sumer Chopra, Scientist ‘E’
8. Shrf B.R.Arora, Consultant
9. Shri Viek Mishra, Director
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
1. Shri Shashi Shekhar, Special Secretary
2. Dr. S.S. Negi, Additional Director General of Forest
3. Shri Bishwanath Sinha, Joint. Secretary
4. Dr. J.R. Bhatt, Advisor
Representatives of National Disaster Management Authority
1. Shri A.K. Sanghi, Joint Secretary, Mitigation
2. Shri R.K. Singh, Director
Representatives of Government of Uttarakhand
1. Shri N. Ravishankar, Chief Secretary
2. Shri Rakesh Sharma, Additional Chief Secretary
21

22
ANNEXURE -II
Earthquake preparedness of the Government of Uttarakhand
Institutional Mechanisms
1. Separate Department of Disaster Management with the creation of the new
State.
2. State Disaster Management Authority constituted under the Chairmanship of the
Hon’ble Chief Minister. Other members of the include Hon’ble Disaster
Management :Minister, Hon’ble rvledical and Health Minister, Hon’ble Drinking
Water and Irrigation Minister, Hon’ble Transport Minister, Hon’ble Rural
Development Minister, Chief Secretary, Principal Secretary, Finance and
Principal Secretary, Disaster management
3. District Dsaster Management Authorities constituted under the Chairmanship of
the DM with the Chairman of the Zila Panchayat being Co-Chairperson.
4. Specialised institute, Disaster Mitigation and Management Centre (DMMC), set
up for disaster related matters and for assisting the Department of Disaster
Management. DMMC accorded autonomous status in 2001.
5. Disaster Management Advisory Committee constituted for expert advise on
various disaster management related issues.
6. State Disaster Response Force (SDRF) constituted and equipped.
7. State and District Emergency Operations centre operationalised on 24 X 7 basis.
8. State Disaster Management Plan prepared and approved by SDMA.
9. Disaster Management Plans of all the districts prepared and approved by
DDMA.
10. Earthquake Response Plans prepared by all the districts. -
11. Disaster Management Plans and Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) being
prepared by all the departments.
12. Disaster Management Cells being set up in all the departments.
13 Government Order issued for incorparating earthquake resistant features in all
buildings in the urban areas.
14 Building bye laws of all the Municipal Areas being revised.
15. Inclusion of Structural Design Base Report made compulsory for all government
canstruction works.
22

23
Capacity Building
1 First phase of  National Programme for Capacity Building of , Engineers in
Earthquake Risk Management (NPCBEERM) completed successfully. Activities
of the second phase initiated.
2. 248 State Government engineers trained under NPCBEERM (National Program
an Capacity Building of Engineers in Earthquake Risk Management).
3. 526 engineers and 37 architects trained under various other programs.
4. Hands on mason training ptrogrammes in earthquake safe canstruction being
organized regularly throughout the State. So far 1,225 masans have been trained
in earthquake safe construction’ practices.
5. Guidelines prepared in vernacular for earthquake safe construction.
6. Seismic retrofitting of 04 Government Inter Calleges in Dehradun and Tehri
done in collaboration with NTU Singapare and IIT Roorkee. Seismic retrofitting
of 02 schools being undertaken under National Schaal Safety Program of
NDMA.
7. Search and Rescue training programmes being organized regularly for Police,
Revenue, HG personnel, as also for volunteers. 2,961 State Government
persoIh’1el and 8,550 volunteers trained in Search and Rescue and First Aid
through 20 and 10 day programs respectively.
8. Two sets of technical and non-technical search and rescue equipment provided
in all Tehsils. Lighting and advanced search and rescue equipments provided to
SDRF and at district level.
9. 55 volunteers and DMMC staff trained in HAM radio communication (V oice and
Morse).
Vulnerability assessment and resource mapping
l. Resource mapping undertaken on GIS environment.
2. Earthquake risk assessment being undertaken for major townships. Earthquake
risk assessment exercise completed for Mussoorie, Nainital and Bageshwar.
3. Seismic vulnerability of Rudraprayag, Joshimath, Dehradun, Haridwar, Srinagar,
Pauri, Uttarkashi, Kausani and Pithoragarh being assessed using RV A technique.
4. Detailed seismic vulnerability assessment of four important buildings of Nainital
town including Nainital Collectorate carried out together with socia-economic
vulnerability

Awareness Generation
l. Disaster Management included in the school curriculum.
2. Large volume of audio-visual and print material prepared for mass awareness
and is being widely disseminated.
3. Quarterly journal on Disaster Management related issues being brought out.
4. Training manuals and awareness material prepared and is being disseminated.
5. Documentation of the traditional DM practices being undertaken.
24

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.