15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
                                 COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
                                          ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1994-95)
 
FIFTEENTH REPORT
ON
THE ANNUAL REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SPACE FOR THE YEAR 1993-94
 (Remote Sensing Application Projects and Satellite Based Disaster Warning System)
 
 
(Laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha on December 22, 1994)
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on February 14, 1995)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
February, 1995/Magha 1916 (Saka)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONTENTS
1.Composition of the Committee
2.Introduction 
3.Report of the Committee
4.Annexure
    Cotton Average Estimates
5.Minutes of the Meetings of the Committee
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1994-95)
 
RAJYA SABHA    
1.Syed Sibtey Razi -- Chairman    
***2.Dr. M. Aram    
3. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi    
4.Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi    
***5.Shri Suresh Kalmadi    
***6.Shri K. Rahman Khan    
7.Prof. M.G.K. Menon    
8.Shri Suresh Pachouri    
9.Shrill. Giri Prasad    
10.Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh    
**11.Dr. Ranbir Singh    
12.Shri Ram Gopal Yadav    
LOK SABHA    
13.Shri E. Ahmed    
14.Shri P.C. Chacko    
15.Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia    
16.Shri Jitendra Nath Das    
17.Shri Sharad Dighe    
18.Shrimati Saroj Dubey    
19.Shri Oscar Femandes    
20.Shri Shankarrao D. Kale    

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
21.Shri P. Kumarasamy    
22.Shrimati Mahendra Kumari    
*23.Shri Pramothes Mukherjee    
24. Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy    
25.Shri Harpal Panwar    
26.Shri Balraj Pasi    
27.Shri Bhim Singh Patel    
28.Shri Chandresh Patel    
29.Shri Vijay Naval Patil    
30.Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik    
 *Nominated w.e.f August 22, 1994
 **Nominated w.e.f. October 4, 1994.
***Nominated w.e.f. November 16, 1994.
   
 
31.Shrimati Vasundhara Raje      
32. Shri Rama Chandra Rath      
33.Shri M.G. Reddy      
34.Pt. Vishwanath Sharma      
35.Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh      
36.Shri Harchand Singh      
37.Shri Ram Prasad Singh      
38.Shri K.G. Shivappa      
*39.Shri Bapusaheb Thite      
*40.Kumari Sushila Tiriya      
41.Kumari Frida Topno      
42.Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav      
SECRETARIAT      
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary      
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director      
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary      
Shri N.K. Singh, Deputy Director      
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer      
** Nominated w.e.f. August 22, 1994 vice Sarvashri P.R.Kumaramangalam and Praful Manoharbhai Patel resigned.
 
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
 Forests having been authorised by the Committee to present the report on its behalf, present this Fifteenth Report of the Committee.
 This Report deals with the Remote Sensing Application Projects and Satellite-based Disaster Warning System of the Department of
 Space.
            2. The Committee held in all five meetings on July 11, 12, 21 and 22 and December 21, 1994. In the meetings held in the
 month of July, 1994, apart from listening to the presentation made by the Secretary, Department of Space, the Committee heard the
 views of various user agencies viz., the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry' of Water Resources and
 Central Water Commission, Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of Textiles; Department of Science and Technology,
 Department of Ocean Development, Ministry of Mines and Ministry of Environment and Forests. The Committee also received a
 feedback on the remote sensing operations of the Department of Space from the BAIF Development Research Foundation, Pune, a
 voluntary organisation.
            3. The Committee expresses its appreciation of the officials of the Department of Space for giving the Committee necessary
 information, and placing before it the relevant papers/background note, which facilitated the Committee to undertake an indepth
 examination of the remote sensing activities of the Department. The Committee also thanks the representatives of the user
 Ministries/ Departments who appeared before the Committee and from whom valuable feedback was received. The Committee also
 wishes to express its thanks to the representative of BAIF Development Research Foundation, Pune for placing the views of his
 organisation on the remote sensing operations of the Department of Space before the Committee.

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
4. The Committee considered and adopted the report at its meeting held on the 21st December, 1994.
 
NEW DELHI;
December 21, 1994
SYED SIBTEY RAZI
Chairman,
Committee on Science and Technology Environment and
 Forests.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REPORT
 
General Background
 
            Remote sensing implies sensing things which are at a distance and detecting and measuring some of their properties without
 actually coming into contact with them. The phrase "remote sensing" is now commonly used to described sensing various aspects of
 the earth system through detectors placed on satellites, aircraft or balloons. Through remote sensing one can know about forest
 cover, vegetation index, soil moisture content, geological aspects, mineralogical conditions of soil, forecast crop yields, detect crol3
 diseases, detect environmental pollution, predict optimal locations for drilling for underground water and so on. It can add to our
 knowledge of changes in climatic conditions, provide accurate and timely information with regard to snow-cover conditions in
 watershed areas and thereby help in making forecasts about the volume of snow-melt run-offs, delineate patterns of urbanisation and
 present a clear picture about the status of environment etc. Through application of remote sensing, and related new mapping
 techniques surveys can be made more accurate and meaningful.
            2. Space-based remote sensing is the process of obtaining information about the earth largely from instruments on board an
 earth observation satellite. Remote sensing satellites have extended the sweep and scope of our observational powers. Detectors
 carried on remote sensing satellites relay an immense amount of data, which must be used wisely and efficiently. Though the data
 generated by these satellites are important, it must be stressed that to get a complete and meaningful picture, this has to be used in
 association with data obtained with aircraft/balloon based remote sensing, data obtained on the ground and other information of an
 economic, sociological, census and statistical nature.
            3. Remote sensing is a very valuable tool for a country like India of vast geographical dimensions and diversity. There is no
 other way in which one can obtain so much relevant information on a rapid, repetitive, real-time basis.
 
            4. The remote sensing programme was initiated in India in the year 1970 when aerial surveys were conducted using a
 Hasselbled camera to obtain IR imagery to study coconut wilt disease in Kerala. Indian space scientists also took advantage of the
 'LANDSAT system’, which was made available by the United States; and developed ground stations and analysis capabilities to
 make full use of data from these satellites. Before venturing on our own operational remote sensing satellite system, like Indian
 Remote Sensing Satellites (IRS), Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) embarked on two experimental remote sensing
 missions viz., Bhaskara-I and II during 1975-1982. Having gained experience from these missions, the satellite-based remote
 sensing system was established in the country with the launch of the first operational Indian Remote Sensing satellite IRS-IA on
 March 17, 1988, which was followed by the successful launch of IRS-IB on August 29, 1991. These satellites are now providing
 unique opportunities to use remote sensing data for monitoring and measurement of our natural, resources and environment. From
 the viewpoint of the functioning of the hardware e.g. satellites, detectors and ground systems, these have been working to absolute
 perfection and to prescribed specifications. At; present remote sensing data are being used for several applications such as:
 agricultural crop acreage and yield estimation; drought monitoring and assessment; flood mapping and damage assessment;
 landuse/landcover mapping for agro-climatic zone planning; wasteland management; water resources management; ocean/maring
 resources survey and management; urban planning; mineral prospecting; forest resources survey and management, etc.
            5. In order to know about the coordination mechanisms which exist between the Department of Space (DOS) and the major
 user Ministries/Departments' at the Centre and in the States and to know whether the remote sensing data are being found useful by
 the user agencies, the Committee took up the examination of the remote sensing operations of the Department of Space, and invited
 user Ministries to present a feedback on the data supplied to them. The examination of the remote sensing activities of the
 Department of Space was undertaken by the Committee on the basis of the Annual Report of the Department of Space for the year
 1993-94.
 
            6. In his presentation, the Secretary, Department of Space informed the Committee about the status of various remote sensing
 application projects and gave his viewpoint as to how the remote sensing data were being utilised by the various agencies. The
 Committee was informed that IRS-IA & IB are today supplying important data which are being utilised under the National Natural
 Resources Management system (NNRMS). This System was set up to facilitate optimal utilisation of the country's natural resources
 by preparing a proper and systematic inventory of the availability of resources. This will help in reducing regional imbalances
 through effective planning and promote long term sustainable development. Data obtained from IRS Satellites are used for several
 applications by various agencies of the Central Government; and of the State Governments, which have set up their Remote Sensing
 Centres. At present there are 22 States which have set up their own, Remote Sensing Centres. There are also a number of
 applications of remote sensing data which are currently being used by private entrepreneurs and voluntary agencies. The Department
 of Space, as the nodal agency for NNRMS, Coordinates the activities between various agencies of the Central and the State
 Governments, NNRMS has become operational to a large extent.
            7. As regards the coordination mechanism which exists between the Department of Space and the other user Departments, the
 Committee was informed by the Secretary of the Department of Space that a Planning Committee of NNRMS (PC-NNRMS),
 chaired by Member (Science), Planning Commission, with Secretaries of the concerned Central Government Departments as
 members., coordinates and guides this effort at the national level. Six Standing Committees in various major areas of application,

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 namely, Agriculture & Soils, Bio-Resources, Oceanography, Geology, Technology & Training and Water Resour­ces, chaired by
 the Secretaries of the concerned Central Ministries/Departments, provide necessary guidance and direction for ensuring effective use
 of remote sensing techniques in the respective areas. These Committees meet regularly and review various projects undertaken under
 NNRMS, in coordination with State Remote Sensing Centres and Central  State user agencies/cells.
 
            8. The Committee was also told that the Department of Space is also coordinating activities relating to imparting' training and
 education in the area of remote sensing; for this there exists a Standing Committee on Technology & Training under NNRMS. The
 Indian Institute of Remote Sensing, Dehra Dun, National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad, Space Applications Centre,
 Ahmedabad, Regional Remote Sensing Service Centres and other user organisations are conducting training programmes at various
 levels. So far, about 4,000 scientists from user Departments have been trained in remote sensing. Remote sensing has also been
 included in some educational curriculum. Specific training programmes are also arranged for project scientists.
 
            9. Under NNRMS a major mission called Integrated Mission for Sustainable Develop­ment (IMSD) is also being executed
 by the Department of Space with the active participation of the States, concerned Departments/agencies of the Central Government
 and the Planning Commission. Under this Mission, 157 districts have been identified, which cover nearly 45% of India's
 geographical area. The implementation of the action plan initiated under IMSD will contribute to the overall sustainable
 development of the country, as the Mission addresses most of the problems concerning water and soil conservation and better
 management of land resources. Further, the programme that has been initiated to establish a spatial information system at various
 levels under the Natural Resources Information system (NRIS) would lead to the availability of up-to-date resource information for
 decision making at different levels. The IMSD approach involves integration of thematic information on various natural resources
 derived from satellite data, and integrating it with other relevant ancillary information, meteorological and socio-economic data, in a
 Geog­raphic Information System (GIS) environment, to arrive at locale" specific prescriptions for development. The locale-specific
 action plans, as informed to the Committee, would include recommendations on water harvesting, soil conservation, afforestation,
 agro-forestry choice of crops and rotation, agro-horticulture, fuel wood and fodder development, land-use planning sand-dune
 stabilisation, mining and other related conservation measures etc.
 
            10. The Committee was also apprised by the Secretary of the future plans of the Department of Space with regard to remote
 sensing. The Committee was informed that the second generation remote sensing satellites IRS-IC and IRS-ID are expected to be
 launched during the year 1994-1995 and 1996-1997 respectively which would cater to various user requirements such as continuity
 of data, improved spatial resolution of better than 10 metres, enhanced spectral coverage, revisit capabilities and stereo viewing.
 Highlighting the special characteristics of IRS-IC and ID satellites, the Committee was informed by the Secretary of the Department
 of Space that the United States of America has entered into agreements with India to receive data from IRS-IC and ID. Presently,
 India has an agreement with the US to market the IRS products. After the failure of their satellite LANDSAT-6, IRS-IC and ID will
 be the key satellites which the US will Use. This puts IRS-IC and ID at a global level, and as a preliminary step, IRS-IB is already
 operating for a ground station in the US. Secretary, Department of Space also informed the Committee that with the successful
 launch of the PSLV, India has the capability not only to build and use remote sensing satellites of the IRS class but also capabilities
 to launch them.
 
            11. Besides the presentation made by the Secretary of the Department of Space, the Committee also heard the representatives,
 of the Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Rural Development, Ministry of Water Resources and Central Water Commission,
 Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of Textiles, Department of Science & Technology, Depart­ment of Ocean Development,
 Ministry of Mines and Ministry of Environment & Forests. The Committee also invited a representative from the Bhartiya Agro-
Industries Foundation (BAIF) Development Research Foundation, Pune, a voluntary organisation to find out as to how the voluntary
 organisations are making use of the remote sensing data obtained from the Department of Space. The Committee heard the Secretary
 of the Department of Space again on the points arising out of the discussion which the Committee had held with the representatives
 of the Central Ministries/Departments and the representative of the voluntary organisation.
 
            12. The Committee heard at length some of the user Ministries/Departments on various aspects of the application 0f remote
 sensing techniques in their areas of jurisdiction and in order to ascertain the relevance of data being supplied by the Department of
 Space to them. It was thus able to ascertain the varied use for which the data generated through remote sensing are put to by the
 various Ministries/Departments including a voluntary organisation. A summary of the details provided by them together with the
 views of the Committee is given below.
 
MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE AND CO-OPERATION
 
            13. The Ministry of Agriculture is one of the major user Ministries/Departments of the IR data. The Department of Space
 informed the Committee that three important operati6m application projects viz., (i) Crop Acreage and Production Estimation
 (CAPE) (ii) National  Agricultural Drought Assessment and Monitoring System (NADAMS) and (iii) Mapping c Saline/Alkaline
 soils, were being carried out with the assistance and co-operation of the Department of Agriculture and Co-operation in the Ministry
 of Agriculture.
Crop Acreage and Production Estimation
            14. Remote sensing estimates on area under cultivation and production of foodgrains such as wheat, rice, sorghum and oil
 seeds (like groundnut, mustard) for regions/districts identified jointly by the Ministry of Agriculture and the Department of Space
 are generated every season this project is carried out in close cooperation with users from the States and with funding support from
 the Ministry of Agriculture. Production figures are provided one month  in advance of the harvest. They meet the accuracy criterion

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 of 90/90 (90% accuracy on 90% occasions) for single crop dominated regions. For wheat and rice, regions covering 85% reduction
 of the country are being covered under this project.
 
            15. When the Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture was asked by the Committee about the usefulness of crop production
 estimates being provided by the Department 6f Space, based on emote sensing, he submitted that the Ministry did not find remote
 sensing technology to be particularly relevant, particularly in the regions where practice of mixed-cropping was in vogue. a States
 such as Punjab, Haryana and U.P. (western parts) where there was a continuous ~.retch of the same crop, the remote sensing
 estimates were found to be quite accurate. But 'here farmers took two or more crops together, remote sensing technology was not of
 much help in arriving at crop production estimation.
 
            16. When this fact was brought to the notice of the Secretary, Department of Space, he formed the Committee that for
 heterogeneous multi-cropped regions covering 25-30% of cropped areas in the country, a methodology was being developed to
 improve accuracy through better sampling techniques and use of high resolution data which would be available in the near future
 from the IRS-IC satellite onwards. IRS-IC would provide data with 23m resolution in multispectral bands including short wave
 infra-red along with data from an additional camera  viz., Wide Field Sensor with 5 day receptivity this would further improve the
 accuracy of crop acreage estimation and yield forecasts for dryland/multicropped/small field regions.
 
            17. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department of Space has already initiated steps for improving the accuracy
 of crop acreage and production estimates by incorporating more sophisticated facilities in the IRS-IC which is going to be
 operational soon. It is only by carrying L such experimental studies, in association with user departments, that one can arrive at
 solutions that are relevant for dealing with the real situation and felt needs of our country. In this the strength and self-reliance of our
 space programme. In contract, if one were to be wholly pendent on what is available from elsewhere in the world that would be for
 very large areas covered by single crops-which is very different from the Indian agricultural pattern. The Committee feels that there
 is a need to improve the accuracy of data for heterogenous/muilticropped  regions and also to check on absolute accuracy of figures
 arrived at both by remote sening and conventional methods. A Joint effort in this regard is called for on the part of the Ministry of
 Agriculture and the Department of Space.
 
National Agricultural Drought Assessment and Monitoring System (NADAMS)
           
            18. The Department of Space informed that, since 1986, Normalised Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI) information is
 being generated for the entire country at 1 km resolution. This information is being used for assessment and monitoring of
 agricultural drought conditions at district level in 11 States, and it is provided to the Department of Agriculture and Co-operation on
 a regular basis. Currently, sub-district level (tehsil/block mandal) assessment of drought conditions is also being done in Karnataka,
 Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Orissa. It is proposed to extend this programme, in due course, to cover all the drought-prone
 States. The feedback on the information on drought assessment, received from the district collectors/officials has been encouraging;
 and based on the feedback, information on storage levels of reservoirs, fuel/fodder availability, likely impact of drought on
 agricultural production, etc., is being included in the drought assessment reports. Weekly district-wise rainfall summary from the
 India Meteorological Department (IMD) is used in the National Agricultural Drought Assessment and Monitoring System
 (NADAMS). Comparative evaluation Index (VI) based drought assessment with regard to rainfall and aridity anomaly has been
 conducted. IMD issues short-term forecasts (upto 72 hrs.) and long-term seasonal forecasts, which are too general to be used for
 drought monitoring. However, the medium range forecasts of 7-10 days duration issued by the National Centre for Medium Range
 weather Forecasting (NCMRWF) could be used to predict vegetation response. These forecasts are presently experimental. An
 Expert Committee consisting of IMD and National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA/DOS represen­tatives has discussed twice, in
 1993, about the integration of IMD inputs with NADAMS. As part of R&D studies, using the database in Vegetation Index
 generated under this project, biomass estimation and vegetation dynamics at regional scale have been taken up.
           
            19. The Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture told the Committee that the application of remote sensing technology in drought
 monitoring, and assessment based on Vegetation Index (VI) of an area, was also not without its limitations. VI of a particular area
 certainly gave an idea about the extent of greenery, which helps to determine the status of drought in that area. Since such methology
 involved comparison with the data of last year, an accurate assessment become impossible if that year happened to be abnormal. If it
 was either less or more than last year, one really was not able to know about the position in the current year. IMD, no doubt, was
 doing weather forecasting which was of a general nature, and it was not a sub-division level forecast. In view of this, the Secretary,
 Ministry of Agriculture, suggested that there was a need to establish a linkage between the forecast made by IMD, the actual data of
 rainfall and. the VI during a particular period, and by combining all these indicators some kind of model could be developed for the
 future. The Committee feels that the suggestions made by the Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture need to be examined with a view to
 building a more fool-proof model.
 
Mapping of Saline/Alkaline Soils
 
            20. The Committee was informed that mapping of saline/alkline soils in the States of Punjab, Haryana, Gujarat, West Bengal,
 Bihar, Orissa, Maharashtra, Kerala, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Andaman & Nicobar
 Islands and Andhra Pradesh had been completed. Maps for most of these States have been reconciled with National Bureau of Soil
 Survey and Land use Planning (NBBS & LUP), Nagpur; and the rest is in progress. Mapping of salt affected ~oil on 1:50,000 scale
 has been proposed in Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Tamil Nadu. Soil mapping on 1:1 million scale of the entire country, using
 1:250,000 scale satellite imagery and extensive ground information, is under way at the NBSS & LUP, Nagpur. This will also lead to

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 the preparation of State level soil maps at 1:250,000 scale. The Committee hopes that this work would be expedited and maps would
 be available to all the agencies which are dealing with the development of the saline and alkaline soils.
 
Identification of Potential Fishing Zones
 
            21. Information on features such as water colour, turbidity, sea state, jetsam and jetsam, wave size and direction, wind
 patterns and climatic conditions has direct influence on fishing strategies. Timely forecast of potential fishing area can help in
 maximising the gains and optimising the efforts and time put in by the fishing fleets. The advent of remote sensing satellites, with
 their capability to cover large spatial areas over oceans on a repetitive basis, can prove to be of substantial economic benefit,
 particularly for a nation like India having a large coastline and extensive Exclusive Economic Zone. Although direct spotting of fish
 schools is not possible from satellites, indirect methods of identifying potential fishing zones have been found to be feasible. The
 Department of Space has initiated efforts to utilise space borne remote sensing on an operational basis to aid the fishing operations
 on the Indian coast:
 
            22. Presently, the fisheries forecasts are being made on the basis of the Sea Surface Temperature (SST), with the help of
 which zones are delineated where there is temperature gradient. The PFZ information consisting of latitude and longitude positions,
 bearing in degrees, distance in kilometres from the coast, depth in meters and validity period with reference to particular fishing
 centre are disseminated on a near real time basis. The forecasts are normally valid for a period of 3-5 days. Presently, the fisheries
 forecasts are disseminated by FAX/Felex to State Fisheries departments and concerned fishermen associations. It is put up on the
 notice bords in vernacular language for the convenience of fishermen. Local newspapers also publish it. It is also being broadcast
 through the All India Radio. It has been observed that, by and large, the notified grounds, as per the fishery forecast, are found to
 yield better catches of pelagic fishes (increase in catch per unit effort to the extent of 2 to 3 times) compared to unnotified grounds. It
 has also been observed that there is significant increase in catch per unit effort in demersal varieties of fishes in the inshore areas.
 
            23. The Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture agreed that the information of PFZs generated by the Department of Space through
 remote sensing had been found to be useful. The efficiency of the system to bring the information to the fishermen, however, needs
 to be . improved. In actual practice, benefit of this information was being cornered by the fishing trawlers; and small scale fishermen
 remained unaware of it.
 
            24. When the attention of the Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture was drawn to the fact the Department of Space had informed
 the Committee that the information was being broadcast through All India Radio in some States, he replied:
 
"Our feed-back so far is not very encouraging. But technology is there. It is question how we can put the technology to use. It
 is also our shortcoming. The issue is how to use it."
 
            25. The Committee notes that feedback received from the Ministry of Agriculture in this regard was different from the one
 received from the Department of Space. As regards data relating to PFZ not being available to small fishermen the Department of
 Space contended that the question did not arise because the information provided through the PFZ charts was mostly valid beyond
 ten kms. from the coast; these areas are exploited by those with trawlers, whereas traditional fishermen are confined within ten kms.
 On the basis of this information supplied by the Department of Space, the Committee finds that the satellite based PFZ charts
 facilitate mainly the commercial of fishing operations which are being carried out by fisheries departments and fishermen's
 associations who have necessary where withal to fish beyond ten kms. The PFZ maps presently appear to have limited use or no use
 for small fishermen who generally fish within ten kms.
 
            26. The Committee notes the view expressed by the Secretary, Ministry of Agriculture that the Department of Space should
 see to it that satellite based data regarding PFZs should be such as to benefit small fishermen also instead of being utilized largely by
 the fishing trawlers. It also devolves on the State fisheries departments and the local administration to make necessary arrangements
 to disseminate the information in a suitable way. The Committee accordingly recommends that the Ministry of Agriculture should
 coordinate with State fishery departments to take necessary steps to ensure that the satellite based information generated by the
 Department of Space reaches the small fishermen living even in remote villages.
 
            27. In view of the fact that PFZ charts prepared by the Department of                                                   ~Space have limited use
 for the small fishermen, as it is basically valid beyond ten kms., the Committee feels that the Department of Space should make
 efforts to integrate more oceanographic parameters than are being presently made use of, to make fisheries forecast more effective
 for near shore waters.
 
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
 
Wasteland Mapping
 
            28. About 16% of India's land area is considered as Wasteland due to various reasons including salinity of soils caused by
 excessive use of fertilisers and improper irrigation procedures, degradation due to the prolonged agricultural usage, deforestation,
 desertic conditions, snow cover, barren rocky and steep slopy areas, etc. The use of remote sensing for mapping wastelands in the
 country was started in 1985. The Department of Space had prepared Wasteland maps for the entire country on 1:1 million scale fin
 that year using Land sat data; and about eight wasteland categories were identified and mapped in that study. From this mapping

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 activity, it was estimated that the total wasteland in the country was 53.3 million hectares. Subsequently, towards the reclamation of
 the extensive wasteland tracts of the country, Government launched a programme to green 5 million hectares every year. Although
 this was a gigantic task, a pre-requisite for this was to identify wastelands rapidly on a sufficiently detailed scale (1:50,000), showing
 village boundaries. As the Department of Space had already mapped the wastelands on 1:1 million scale, it was assigned the task of
 preparing detailed wasteland maps of the country on 1:50,000 scale using satellite remote sensing data.
 
            29. The Committee was informed that the wasteland mapping on 1:50,000 scale had been taken up in different phases. A total
 of 237 districts had been mapped for wastelands, and this included 146 districts having more than 15 per cent of the geographical
 area under wastelands, and 91 districts having 5-15% of geographical area under wastelands. 13 wasteland categories were mapped
 on 1:50,000 scale and this included gullied and/or ravinous land, upland with or without scrub, waterlogged and marshy land, land
 affected by salinity/alkalinity, coastal/inland, shifting cultivation area, underutilised/degraded notified forest land, degraded
 pastures/grazing land, degraded land under plantation crop, sands (coastal and desertic), mining/industrial wastelands, barren
 rocky/stony waste/sheet rock area, sloping area and snow covered and/or glacial area.
 
            30. The final maps were handed over to the National Wasteland Development Board (NWDB) and also to District
 Magistrates, District Development Officers, Chief Planning Officers, Divisional Forest Officers, Sub-divisional Officers, Tahsildars
 and other concerned department officials for further follow-up action for reclamation. Since the amount of work involved had been
 enormous, as many as 18 different work centres distributed all over the country were involved in the task.
 
            31. The Committee was informed that under the wasteland-mapping project, being carried out with funding by NWDB,
 mapping had been completed so far for 237 districts. The mapping of the remaining 192 districts in the country was proposed to be
 taken up and would be completed in 2 years' time from the date of approval of the project.
 
            32. Apart from the mapping of wasteland categories the Department of Space has also taken up projects on a pilot-scale at the
 behest of National Afforestation and Eco-development Board (NAEB), for wasteland reclamation using Geographic Information
 System (GIS) techniques, where different resource maps and socio-economic data are integrated to suggest plans for wasteland
 development. Pilot scale projects have been completed in 10 districts by the Department of Space and 5 other scientific and technical
 institutions in the country. The districts covered are Durgapur, Purulia, Bellary, Sundargarh, Nasik, Madurai, Gurgaon, Alwar,
 Kheda and Almora.
 
            33. As for the feedback, the Committee was apprised in detail by the representative of the Ministry of Rural Development
 about the usefulness of the wasteland maps prepared by the Department of Space. The Committee was told that the District Rural
 Development Agency (DRDA), responsible for implementing the Integrated Wasteland Development Scheme, was making use of
 the data supplied through Remote Sensing while preparing the Wasteland development plans. This data was used in conjunction with
 the traditional data available in the field. When asked about the extent of wasteland in the country, the Committee was informed that
 the data provided by the Department of Space were different from those obtained through surveys conducted by departments other
 than the Department of Wasteland Development. These were being harmonised or reconciled by inter-Depart-mental consultation.
 The main emphasis of the Ministry was to see that the limited resources available with the NWDB were used for actual
 implementation of the schemes for the development of wastelands.
 
            34. The Committee inquired about the manner and extent to which the remote sensing data were being utilised by the
 Department while planning for the wasteland development, and wanted to know if the Department was finding the data adequate.
 The representative of the Ministry informed that the Integrated Wasteland Development Plan was prepared at the district level
 through a multi-disciplinary team by making use of the remote sensing data provided by the Department of Space. The knowledge
 and requirement of local people was also taken into account. As regards the adequacy of the remote sensing data, the representative
 of the Department submitted that the process of reconciling the data on wastelands received from different sources was on. Referring
 to the work done by the Department of Space for the preparation of Natural Resources Management System-based plan for the
 District of Chandrapur, the representative of the Department described remote sensing as "a very powerful and important tool"
 which could be used effectively in Area Development Schemes.
 
            35. The Committee observes that the wasteland maps prepared on the basis of remote-sensing data have been found to be very
 useful in planning for the wasteland development and commends the work done by the Department of Space for the preparation of
 Natural Resources Management System based plan for the district of Chandrapur and hopes that the encouraging results of this plan
 would guide the planning efforts at the national level also.
 
Ground Water Targetting
 
          36. Presence of ground water can be indirectly deduced by studying such factors as lothology (rock type), landforms,
 associated geological structural features, soil, landuse/cover, etc. and remote sensing data provides information on these factors.
 Groundwater targetting was among the early highly successful applications of satellite remote sensing inIndia; from the time of
 setting up of the National Natural Resources Management System. early successes were in Gujarat, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and
 Madhya Pradesh including difficult hard rock terrains. Recognizing this established potential of remote sensing technology for
 groundwater studies, the preparation of hydrogeomorphological maps, indicating the potentials of groundwater, was taken up under
 the National Drinking Water Mission. The mission had the primary objective of providing drinking water to all villages. While the
 Department of Rural Development was identified as the nodal agency to carry out the mission, the department of Space was

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 entrusted with the responsibility of preparation of hydrogeomorphological maps (groundwater prospect zone maps) by using remote
 sensingdata, which forms one of the important components for locating borewells. For the first time, the hydrogeomorphological
 maps, along with detailed legends indicating ground water prospects in terms of probability of ground water occurrence, was
 mapped on a 1:250,000 scale for the entire country. Copies of these maps were submitted to the concerned State/Central
 Government Departments, such as Ground Water Department, Public Health Engineering Department/Central Ground Water Board,
 National Geophysical Research Institute for further hydro geological and geophysical investigations and for selecting suitable sites
 for borewells. It was observed that when ground water prospect zone maps, prepared using remote sensing methods, were used along
 with the conventional  hydro geological and geophysical) methods the success rate of locating borewells with good yield was as high
 as about 90%, as against 45-55% achieved using only conventional methods. With the  increased rate of success achieved in drilling
 the borewells using remote sensing technique in conjunction with the conventional methods, there were considerable savings in
 terms of time, money and labour. The entire exercise showed that the ground water potential zone maps, prepared on the basis of
 remote sensing data, were very useful in narrowing down the target teas for ground water exploration. In addition, mapping of
 hydrogeomorphological feature on 1:50,000 scale using IRS data was also done for identified problem villages in the country.
     37. Apart from mapping the ground water prospect zones, remote sensing data have also been found useful in locating sites/areas
 for check dams, anicuts, and subsurface dikes. percolation/recharge tanks and inverted wells, etc. which are essential for maximising
 the round water recharge. Studies are also being carried out to assess the suitability of sites identified for setting up major chemical
 industries, in order to avoid pollutants entering the ground water sources.
     38. When the Committee wanted to know as to why all the States could not fully utilize e data generated by the Department of
 Space, the representative of the Ministry informed at all States did not possess capabilities for utilising this data. For example, many
 of the States in the North-East were not in a position to utilise the remote sensing data in this regard, largely because they did not
 have well organised ground water departments. The Committee was further informed that this data was in a sophisticated form and
 further that this data alone did not serve the purpose. This data had to be utilised alongwith     conventional sources of geophysical
 and hydrological data.
 
            39. In the light of the feedback received from the Ministry of Rural Development, the Committee feels happy over the fact
 that the data obtained through remote sensing has been found to be very useful in identifying and locating the ground water in many
 States, particularly those suffering from arid conditions with a success rate of as high as 90%. The Committee, however, notes that a
 number of States were not capable of utilising this valuable data due to lack of infrastructurel facilities required for this purpose. It,
 therefore, recommends that efforts should be made at the Central and at the State level to fully utilise there mote sensing data on
 groundwater targetting, generated by the Department of Space. The Department of Space should also impart training to the
 personnel working in the Rural Development Departments or other such departments which are concerned with providing water to
 the people at the State level. The Committee strongly recommends that the remote sensing inputs provided by the Department of
 Space should be integrated very closely with the Rajiv Gandhi Drinking Water Mission by the Ministry Rural Development.
 Presently, the remote sensing technology is being applied in preparing geomorphological maps indicating the probability of
 occurrence of groundwater at a particular place. It does not, however, give any idea about the identity of water; in the absence of this
 it is not possible to know as to how long a particular source would last. In view of this, the Committee feels that apart from
 indicating potential ground water zones, efforts should also be made for measuring the size and age of groundwater reservoirs so that
 it gives an idea as to how long the source located is going to last and also if it has any recharge value. For this radio isotope
 techniques using beryllium-10, carbon-14, and tritium would be valuable; .the Department of Atomic Energy which has capabilities
 in this area should be brought into support this programme.
 
Ministry of Water Resources
 
            40. The Department of Space undertakes flood mapping and flood damage assessment, snow mapping and command area
 studies with the help of space imageries; the main users for these are the Central Water Commission, Flood Control Boards, State
 Irrigation Departments, etc. The Department of Space has been doing near real-time flood mapping and assessment of crop damage
 due to floods since 1987. Hood maps have been prepared on 1:250,000 scale for larger floods and on 1:50,000 scale for detailed
 assessment of crop damage:. Using multidate satellite data, different waves of floods that occurred in the Kosi River basin have been
 mapped, and flood risk zones delineated. Flood maps were prepared in near real time using visible infrared and microwave sensors
 (on IRS, Landsat and ERS'I SAR) covering Assam, Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab and West Bengal. Information on marooned
 villages and length of roads submerged was also estimated. Hood damage information system is being developed for Marigaon
 district in Assam for assessing flood damages, together with ground information. During 1993, flood damages at mouza level for
 Marigaon district were estimated.
 
            41. The Committee was informed that the Department of Space had also done snow-mapping with a view to delineating
 features of the snow-covered area, and estimation of snow melt run--off. Snow melt run--off estimation had been done for the
 Bhakra-Beas catchment-- both on short-term (seasonal) and long term (whole season) basis. These estimations were found to be
 within + 5% of actual run-off.
 
            42. The Committee was apprised of the use of satellite data for predicting the amount of snowmelt run-off into the rivers. A
 major part of the northern side of the country is covered by snow. Remote sensing plays an important rote in predicting the snow-
melt run-off because most of snow-covered areas are inaccessible, and the use pf traditional instruments to measure the actual
 snowfall is very difficult. Through the space imageries the areas covered by snow in different months can be delineated. How much

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 melting of snow takes place in that area can also be ascertained. Snow-cover information through satellite imageries, coupled with
 the corresponding quantitative analysis is having a very good application in the area of snowfall and snow forecast. This will also be
 useful in the area of hydel power generation, micro-hydel and mini-hydel schemes which are coming Up in the northern parts of the
 country.
 
            43. When the Committee asked if it was possible measure the amount of snow in a particular area with the help of remote
 sensing data, and also if the total mass of snow was actually increasing or decreasing, the Committee was told that remote sensing
 data in this regard relate mostly to the area covered by snow and not on its depth and density, Information regarding density of snow
 was being obtain from some stations located at different places but because of inaccessibility of snow covered area, information on
 depth and density was not available for most of the parts. For measuring the amount of snow more stations need to be put at high
 altitude, though snow ~i surveys were being conducted for which teams go to specific areas periodically. It is possible to have
 unmanned instrumented stations to measure snow fall, snow depth and density, with the data being relayed to satellites passing
 overhead which can command these stations; and these satellites can be queried to obtain the needed data. R&D efforts are to
 progress to include run-off from permanent glaciers to improve accuracy. Based on remote sensing data, an Atlas of Glaciers in
 Himalayas had been prepared. It has been possible to, identify the spatial extent of different glaciers and also the ablation zones.
 
            44. Besides, command area studies had also been undertaken with the help of remote sensing data for monitoring of crops
 irrigation status in command areas. The Committee sought to know from the Ministry of Water Resources and the Central Water
 Commission about the use of remote sensing data by them and how far these were found useful by them in regard to command area
 development, flood +mapping, and snow cover mapping, etc. The Committee also invited suggestions for making the data obtained
 through remote sensing more effective and useful for these purposes.
 
            45. The Committee was informed that the data generated by the Department of Space through remote sensing were not being
 used for command area development per se, but efforts were on to use the data for improving the irrigation and water management,
 and the operation Of Water management facilities, etc. in different command areas. The data enabled one to identify area which did
 not get enough water. Normally, while the head reaches got enough water, the tail reaches did not get even the required quantity of
 water. One had to ensure that the tail reaches in a command area also got adequate water. The process of getting information
 physically from all areas and then managing the water system was a costly affair both in terms of time and money. Since remote
 sensing data is available almost every eleven days from satellites, operating at current IRS altitudes, enough information is available
 about areas not getting water; this facilitates the issuing of instructions to improve the situation. Elaborating on flood management
 and disaster management and the use of remote sensing data for these operations, the Secretary, Ministry of Water Resources said:
           
            "    In the case of flood management and disaster management on a real time basis, we intend to use the remote sensing data
 for preparing maps of flood-prone zones. If we can scan the data for the last 10 to 25 years, we know at what frequency
 different areas are getting flooded. This information will be useful for taking loss-preventive measures like constructing
 temporary shelters, raised platforms, etc."
 
            To a query regarding the possibility of predicting flash floods, it was explained to the Committee that the remote sensing
 technology could not be used for prediction of floods because this technique could give only the density of clouds b0t how much of
 it would precipitate could not be found out. However, an idea about how much area was prone to flood could be gathered
 adequately. However, if a flash flood occurred while a satellite was overhead, warnings could be issued to down stream areas.
 
            46. The Committee was further informed that satellite imageries provided an idea about the trend of migration of rivers; and if
 any such trend was observed, adequate preventive measures could be taken with a view to avoiding possible loss to human life and
 property. Such exercise had already been done for the rivers Kosi and Ganga at Farakka. As regards sedimentation, satellite
 imageries, particularly of water reservoirs, helped to determine the rate of sedimentation. One of the finest laboratories to use such
 remote sensing data, the C0tnmittee was told, was set up under the Central Ground Water Board (CGWB).
 
            47. The Committee wanted to know if the Ministry had found the data adequate or there was a need for improving the remote
 sensing data on various aspects of its functioning. The Secretary of the Ministry of Water Resources replied:
"In the flood maps prepared, we do not have the cloud penetrating capacity. For this, we have to use the French satellite. In
 the monsoon period, when there is a cloud-cover, to have a real, effective, flood management capability, we need the cloud
 penetrating capacity. To that extent, improvement is required.
Regarding water conservation, it is difficult to say as to how far the remote sensing technique helps. One help is, you can
 have Geographical Information System (GIS) for a particular basin or a watershed through the remote sensing satellite
 imageries."
As regards water-logging the Secretary of the Ministry of Water Resources said:
"We are, particularly in the Ministry of Water Resources, concerned with the amount of water-logging that takes place in the
 flood prone areas. At the moment, we are not having any technique which can tell us about the amount of water-logging
 because of rise in water table".
 
            48. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the data made available through the space imageries are being utilized for
 flood-mapping and damage assessment, snow-cover mapping, groundwater targetting, etc. The Committee, however, feels that
 technique of remote sensing needs to be improve with a view to acquiring such capabilities as cloud penetrating capacity (for which
 microwave sensing capabilities would be needed on the satellites), flood prediction, measuring of snow density and water-logging,

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 etc. Though the Committee has been assured that the remote sensing satellites to be launched in coming years would, to a great
 extent, generate improved and more accurate data, the Committee feels that more research needs to be done for improving the
 understanding of the complicated data that would be made available through future satellites. For this personnel in the user
 Departments are required to be given proper training.
 
Ministry of Urban Development
 
            49. The Department of Space informed the Committee that, in addition to aerial remote sensing surveys being regularly
 carried out for urban cities by National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA), multidate data from Remote Sensing Satellites are being
 operationally used to map urban sprawl and landuse. Satellite data have been used to map 12 major cities with' over one million
 population; and studies in respect of current landuse and trends of their urban growth have been carried out. Besides, Geographical
 Information System (GIS) based studies have been undertaken for integrating resource information with socio­economic and
 demographic data to arrive at urban development plans. In this context, the Department of Space referred to three specific examples
 of utilisation, namely: (i) the  notification issued by the Bombay Metropolitan Development Authority that remote sensing based
 inputs were to be used for clearance of the development planning subsequent to the study on urban stability zones; (ii) planning of
 the National Capital Region; and (iii) alignment of Ring Road in Bangalore city. It was also explained by the Department that with
 the availability of IPS-1C Satellite. 6m resolution data with stere0viewing capability would be available which would help in the
 preparation of maps with sharper features. As regards contour mapping, the point made by the Department was that the same would
 be possible mostly through availability of stereo data and the high resolution (better than 6 meter) with stereo viewing capability.
 The Committee was also apprised by the Department of the fact that, pursuant to the objectives of nationwide mapping for landuse
 cover for agro-climatic zones on 1:250,000 scale, all the districts in the country have been mapped; and similarly, under the project
 'Urban Studies', urban sprawl maps for Madras, Hyderabad, Nagpur, Calcutta and Bombay have been prepared.
 
            50. In his presentation made before the Committee, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development underlined the importance
 of urban planning in the context of rural-urban migration and increasing population, and growing urban agglomerations; and focused
 on the efficacy of remote sensing as an instrument for urban planning. He emphasised that in view of the current nature of urban
 spread, it was very important to have accurate maps on urban sprawl, landuse and coverage in order to find out the infrastructure
 developing in these towns; and in the area of mapping the role of the Department of Space could not be minimized. Citing an
 example, he stated that when the Ministry wanted to prepare the Master Plan of Delhi in 1951 it took them almost 10 years to have a
 map because, for collecting necessary data the whole exercise had to be undertaken manually and people engaged in the task had to
 go to different areas. This is in contrast to what is possible today. The Secretary, however, clarified that the satellite imagery being
 provided as now to them cannot be put to extensive use for the reason that it does not have the kind of resolution needed for detailed
 urban planning. No doubt, for regional planning such as Singrauli area, or to see the extent of urban sprawl in Bombay in order to
 find out how the urban area is developing, satellite data have been used. Similarly, in National Capital Region, remote sensing data
 provided by the Department of Space has been used. In view of the constraints imposed by the existing limited capability in
 resolution, the Ministry of Urban Development is using aerial photography which helps them in detailed planning; but the aerial
 photography is far too expansive. Therefore, what the Ministry is hoping for is that the Department of Space would be able to
 provide the needed resolution with higher capabilities in the next one or two years when IRS-IC and ID become operational. The
 Ministry intends to use aerial photography as well as remote sensing data because the former is extremely useful in certain areas and
 the latter will help it in covering large numbers of towns. With that end in view, the Ministry has decided to sustain the efforts of the
 Department of Space. A sum of Rs. 5 crores given to the Ministry by the Planning Commission for taking up development of 25
 towns on pilot basis has been given to the National Remote Sensing Applications Centre. Another reason for the Ministry to have
 close liaison with the Department of Space is that the latter has assured that with the help of new technology which is proposed to be
 inducted, contour mapping too will be made available to the Ministry. This implies that what used to be done in a time of a decade
 for preparation of Master Plan or what used to be done by aerial photography would be better achieved with the efforts of the
 Department of Space when the IRS-IC and ID go into the orbit. The Secretary of the Ministry, expressed the hope that, the satellite
 data made available through IRS-IC and ID in near future would enable the Ministry of Urban Development to undertake urban
 planning of larger areas, and urban mapping of at least 25 towns quite expeditiously which have been identified for development on
 pilot basis.
 
            51. The Committee wanted to know whether it was not a fact that a distinct pattern imbalances in big cities was emerging and
 whether the increasing pressures of grow population did not render the whole concept of Master Plan for such cities inconsequential
 The Secretary, agreed that the needs of the growing population coupled with other facto put tremendous pressure on the efficacy of
 Master Plans and the result was indeed haphazard and mushroom growth, particularly of slum areas. In this context, he submitted
 that the satellite data being provided to the Ministry at present by the Department of Spa was not of much help in locating the
 haphazard growth of cities and towns, particular slums. At the same time he expressed the hope that with improved satellite imagery
 higher spatial resolution in the near future, and with the power of remote sensing for repetitive mapping the Ministry would be able
 to get relevant data on the basis of which  plans could be worked out which would be dynamic in nature, and would detect imbalance
 so as to make possible corrective measures.
 
            52. The Committee notes that at a time when the population of the country j tremendously increasing and extra pressures are
 building up on the cities and towns, urban planning assumes great importance. This can become a success only through mapping of
 these areas on a regular basis, so as to be able to check unplanned growth particularly in |h, proliferation of slums, encroachments on
 public land and damage to environment. And ix this, the role of the Department of Space is very crucial, Remote sensing techniques
 have t( be upgraded with the needs of time. The proposed launch of IRS-IC and ID by that Department would definitely help in

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 making available necessary data and imageries of highly resolution needed for sound urban planning. The Committee feels that
 however perfect and reliable data may be, it is of little use unless the Department Agencies involved in the efforts show seriousness
 of purpose and make optimum utilisation of such data in an effective manner. The role of local bodies in this context is very
 important and it has to be ensured that necessary data reach them, as also the other grass root level agencies/bodies. The task of
 urban planning is, no doubt, a mammoth one but a coordinated effort between the Central Government and the State Governments
 through effective use of information obtained through remote. :sensing can ensure some amount of success on this vital front. The
 Committee further feels that the Department of Space might consider the feasibility of attaining resolutions of 1kin. not for
 generalized remote sensing but of specific areas such as urban growth centres; and for this panchromatic imagery is not called for.
 This may be looked into.
 
MINISTRY OF TEXTILES
 
            53. The Committee was informed by the Department of Space (DOS) that the Cotton Acreage and Production Estimation
 using remote sensing data was initiated in 1990 at the behest of Ministry of Textiles; and that the Department of Space has carried
 out satellite data analysis for the years 1990, 1991, 1992 and 1993. The cotton acreage and production estimates for 17 selected
 districts were made and sent by the Department of Space to the Cotton Advisory Board, Ministry of Textiles and Department of
 Agriculture and Co­operation (DAC). As per the existing structural mechanism, an Inter-Departmental Working Group, with
 members from the Ministry of Textiles, Directorate of Economies and Statistics of the DAC, the Indian Council of Agricultural
 Research (ICAR) and DOS oversees the whole project in this area. In the meeting held in July 1992 this group had recommended
 extension of the projects to 44 cotton-growing districts.
 
            54. The Secretary of the Department of Space submitted that during the year 1992-93, cotton acreage estimation was
 undertaken in respect of the States of Punjab, Haryana, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Gujarat; and the total
 number of districts covered was 15. In these six States, the Department has been able to get, from remote sensing, the data relating to
 the yield based on the acreage; and for the" last three years the Department has been providing information to the Ministry of
 Textiles only, on Cotton acreage for the area under cotton cultivation. The information is being regularly supplied to the Ministry by
 DOS but no feedback from the Ministry as regards the adequacy or the precision or the timeliness thereof has been received back,
 except that the data was being used by the Ministry for certain types of planning programmes. The Department of Space, however,
 was not in a position to determine the purpose for which the data was being used. The Ministry of Textiles nonetheless accepted the
 data for the year 1992-93 provided by the Department, and conveyed that it was good.
 
            55. The Committee was, however, surprised to find that the Ministry of Textiles took a somewhat unusual stand when it was
 examined on the subject inasmuch as that the Secretary of the Ministry took the view that the subject of Cotton Acreage and
 Production Estimation fell within the purview of the Ministry of Agriculture. When the Committee told him that the project on
 Cotton Acreage and Production Estimation was undertaken by the Department of Space at the instance of the Ministry of Textiles
 which had ever since been receiving remote sensed data from the Department of Space, the Secretary, Ministry of Textiles stated
 that the assessment of area under cotton and its production stands formally allocated in the Ministry of Agriculture and the Ministry
 of Textiles has been involved in tills just on an  informal basis. The establishment of the Cotton Advisory Board is an administrative
 arrangement evolved by his Ministry with which the Ministry of Agriculture is not associated at all.  Even the project on Cotton
 Acreage and Production Estimation should have been handled by the Ministry of Agriculture and it is just because the events so
 developed that the Ministry of Textiles had to deal with this project.
 
            56. In April, 1990 the Cabinet Committee on Export Strategy had emphasised the need (o give better attention to production
 estimates of cotton; pursuant to this, a meeting was convened  by the Ministry of Textiles inviting the representatives of the Ministry
 of Agriculture and Department of Space. In that meeting, the issue as to how better production estimates in respect of cotton could
 be had well in advance for purposes of planning Export Strategy was discussed threadbare. It was in the meeting held in June 1990
 that the Department of Space gave a proposal for remote sensing application to assess the area and productivity, which was to cover
 in the experimental phase 17 districts in 6 States. There are ) Cotton producing States covering 44 districts; but 50% of the
 production of cotton comes from 17 districts in six States which were taken up initially in the experimental phase. Based )n the
 proposal of the Department of Space, a budgetary provision for launching the project vas made for the year 1991-92, but the
 proposal was not admitted in the Budget. Then, in le month of March 1991, the Department of Space was requested to recast the
 proposal.  The Department of Space came out with a much enlarged project of Rs. 4 crores; and since is was too big a sum for the
 Ministry to invest, it was decided to approach the Common und for commodities. Since the funding under this Fund could be only
 on regional basis, involving a number of countries in the region, the proposal remained a non-starter. However, further discussions
 took place, and in August 1992, the Department of Space submitted a third proposal involving an amount of Rs. 79 lakhs which
 would cover all the strict over a period of three years. The investment was supposed to be Rs. 21 lakhs in the first year and Rs. 29
 lakhs each in the second and third years. The Ministry of Textiles, however, did not pursue this proposal with seriousness as a result
 of which nothing came out it. The Department of Space, however, continued to work on the Project. The Department of Space
 decided from a research point of view to invest Rs. 21 lakhs from their Budget, and started the project. Based on the performance of
 IRS-1A and 1B Satellites, the Department of Space offered to make available updated figures at an interval of every 11 days.
 According to the Secretary, Ministry of Textiles, the experience of his Ministry is that the data supplied by the Department of Space
 is more on area whereas the Ministry is more interested in having the data on production of Cotton. The Department of Space, no
 doubt, gives production figures with reference to 4 parameters namely, vegetation index; data on rain supplied by the Meteorological
 Department; soil condition; and extent of moisture in the Soil. What is, however, important is that, in order to have correct
 production figures, knowledge about the area and the .crop condition, variety of cotton grown and yield is very necessary. Yield in

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 any case will have to be worked out on a decentralised basis. The Secretary of the Ministry of Textiles, in the course of his
 submissions, made a point that having regard to these variables, the Conversion of area figures into possible production figures has
 not been very satisfactory and the Department of Space, being conscious of this, asked for a five year time-frame to build up their
 database and to make their models more reliable and acceptable. The Department of Space has three more years to evolve a reliable
 base for conversion of area figures into production figures and one reason for that Department to continue with the project is that
 IRS-1C scheduled to be lunched in near future will have an infra-red band which gives accurate information on moisture stress. The
 Ministry of Textiles, as a user Ministry, believes that the Department of Space could develop capabilities in this area. It has,
 however, been impressed clearly on the Department that the Ministry needs information for all the 44 districts in 9 States and,
 therefore, the entire ground has to be covered. Secondly, the Department should develop its database first, start converting area
 figures into production estimates an0 then approach the Ministry with the production figures; and lastly, the Ministry would take it
 up after IRS-1C becomes operational. Therefore, in view of this, the Ministry of Textiles has practically done little with regard to the
 initiatives of Department of Space, so much so that the Ministry has had no correspondence with them nor for that matter their
 reports have been analysed with any seriousness or continuity of purpose. The reason for the lack of interest on the part of the.
 Ministry on this account, according to the Secretary, is that the Ministry finds it very difficult to invest Rs. 50-60 lakhs just to collect
 area figures. Despite this, the Ministry would be very happy to be the client of the Department of Space if it improves its technology
 and capabilities and would be satisfied only when it has conversion capabilities from area to production.
 
            57. Replying to a query from the Committee, Secretary, Ministry of Textiles, clarified that the Department of Space had made
 available production figures, but the same were not accurate as they were based on vegetation index which varies from place to
 place. Besides, the Department did not give different ~details in terms of per hectare yield, seed-rate, climatic factors and varieties
 grown. To another question, as regards the extent of variation between figures of production estimates given by the Department of
 Space and the ones arrived at by the Ministry, the representative of the Ministry provided a statement giving comparative figures for
 the years 1991-92, 1992-93 and 1993-94 which is appended at Annexure.
 
            58. The Committee expresses its displeasure over the stand taken by the Ministry of Textiles on the Crop Acreage and
 Production Estimation Project undertaken by the Department of Space. The Ministry seems to be dragging its feet, being totally
 oblivious of the fact that it was at its initiative that the Department of Space came into the picture, and that even though it had no
 technique then in its armoury to make 100% accurate forecast about cotton production in the country, it took in hand the project
 clearly impressing upon the Ministry that yield modelling would require some R & D efforts because of the complex relationship
 between green biomass and yield of cotton. The requisite funds also don't seem to have been made available to the Department of
 Space by the Ministry of Textiles; but notwithstanding this, the Department of Space went ahead with the project from its own
 resources, and since 1990 the Department has been making available data as regards crop acreage and production estimation to the
 Ministry of Textiles. The Ministry of Textiles on its part, not only has not been funding the project, has neither been analysing that
 data nor giving any feedback to the Department of Space. The Committee feels that for a national effort of this nature grater patience
 and coordination on the part of the user Departments/ agencies concerned is needed; but unfortunately in this case the cooperation
 extended by the Ministry of Textiles was far from satisfactory. There seems to have been quite extensive correspondence on the
 subject between the Ministry of Textiles and the Department of Space on the subject during the period 1990-92 and the former
 should have been aware of the difficulties inherent in production estimation of cotton which were clearly identified by the latter.
 
            59. The Committee was informed by the Department of Space that the project covered 17 districts for which cotton acreage
 and production estimates based on trend analysis of historical data during 1990 to 1993 were provided to the Ministry of Textiles.
 The Department of Space is making efforts to evaluate remote sensing based estimates with presently available data from Cotton
 Advisory Board. The Department of Space has nevertheless emphasised that cotton production estimation is a complicated exercise,
 as cotton is an indeterminate crop with prolonged phonological events and without distinctive vegetative, and reproductive phases.
 At present, DOS (along with Agricultural Universities) is using the acreage estimates from satellite data to work out the yield
 estimates through trend analysis of historical data. R&D efforts are also underway to integrate temporal profiles of vegetation
 indices derived from satellite data with agrometeorological models to estimate the potential yield and also for identification of
 varieties of cotton crops. In-season crop condition assessment (occurrence of pests, diseases, etc.) is being integrated with the
 empirical models to refine the yield figures.
 
            60. The Committee trusts that in view of the wide field Vegetation Sensor to be provided by IRS-1C and ID there will be
 quite useful crop yield estimation; and the problems now being faced in making accurate production estimation of cotton too will be
 minimised to a considerable extent. The Committee also hopes that the Ministry of Textiles would cooperate with the Department of
 Space in realising the objectives of the project.
 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
 
            61. The Committee wanted to know from the Secretary of the Department of Science and Technology as to what were th8
 areas within its mandate where remote sensing data were being extensively used, and what useful information was given by the
 Department of Space under the Disaster Warning System. The Secretary emphasized at the very outset that it was paramount to have
 the capabilities to interpret the remote sensing data, the effective use of which lay in integrating it with conventional data. He
 explained that the Disaster Warning and Indian Topographic Survey are the two significant areas where the role of the remote
 sensing is very crucial. ,.The life-line of the whole cyclone warning system is INSAT which, with the help of higher power radars,
 provides necessary information on the origin and tracks of cyclones. The essential components of cyclone warning are detecting and
 centering, tracking, structure and intensity and movement. As submitted by the Department of Space, prior to the launch of the

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 INSAT series of satellites, there had been practically no warning system in the country for major disasters like cyclones; and today
 INSAT-based Diaster Warning System for cyclone monitoring is an operational system. It is a system developed jointly b/y the
 Indian Meteorological Department and the Department of Space, which uses the VHRR and communication capability of INSAT
 and is a unique indigenous design not tried elsewhere in the world. The advantages of this system are its high reliability against
 adverse weather, broadcast of warning directly to remote coastal locations and minimum handling delay. The transmission of
 warnings is done in local language and broadcasts are frequent. It was pointed out by the Secretary of the Department of Science and
 Technology that New Delhi has been recognised as regional specialised Meteorological Centre on tropical Cyclones. Under this
 system, the India Meteorological Department has to provide information on cyclones around the Bay of Bengal to neighbouring
 countries including Pakistan. Not only this, there are other 'distinct meteorological applications of INSAT in weather observation
 such as cloudy area location, cloud movement and wind speed, high rainfall zones, turbulence and thunderstrom location. INSAT, in
 any case, is a mode of communication for Disaster Warning and Meteorological Data Dissemination for which very small Aperture
 Terminals have been used.
 
            62. Some of the Committee Members wanted to know whether it was possible to make forecast about other natural calamities
 such as earthquakes, cloud bursts and landslides.,. The Secretary of the Department of Science and Technology clarified that there
 were-many features which could not be detected by Remote Sensing and the INSAT based system was essentially for warning in
 respect of cyclones; this had great importance because of the geo-destruction potential of the cyclones. The' Secretary, however,
 added that his Department had*undertaken National Coordinated Programme on landslides where under some intensive test areas,
 mostly in the Himalayan region, have been selected. Under this Programme, which started only two years ago, 11 R&D Projects are
 going on and a lot of reports and documents have been brought out. Remote sensing is being utilised as an important date input.
 However, because landslide is a very small phenomenon on the ground, high resolution data is needed. Elaborating further on this
 point, he stated that the IRS Satellite is currently providing a resolution of 35 meters, but with the launching of IRS-IC, the
 resolution of 6 meters will be made available. He, however, emphasised that still the IRS-IC data will have to be complemented by
 conventional means.
 
            63. A point was made as to whether the Department had examined the feasibility of having linkages with educational
 institutions such as engineering colleges which could be used to analyse the data so that the interests of the particular region could be
 served. The Secretary concurred with the view saying that' the universities and the laboratories were always treated by the
 Department as its constituencies.
 
            64. The Department also submitted exhaustive data on the extent of remote sensing technology being used by" the Survey of
 India(SOI) which is basically responsible for producing topographical maps on scale 1~:250,000, 1:50,000, and 1:25,000. The
 Survey of India is exploiting different capabilities of remotely sensed data such as repeatability of data, multi-disciplinary use of
 data and easy availability of data for inaccessible areas in map making/map revision; anti satellite imagery could help in adding real
 time information (both geometric and thematic) to the existing topographic map base. The Survey of India has used SPOT, Landsat
 and IRS imageries of different resolutions. The result of all this is that image maps superimposed with text and liner information are
 available in a very short time and are highly useful for proper understanding of the terrain for various planning purposes.
 
            65. On being asked as to what specific improvements the department of Science and Technology would like to be effected in
 remote sensing inputs, the secretary of the Department suggested that water vapour channel which is not available at present may be
 incorporated in the INSAT. This would help IMO to study air wind "movements, in addition to cloud movements. In other words,
 when there is no cloud it would be possible to determine the wind movement pattern on the basis of water vapour channel. Water
 vapour could be a good tracer. Improvement in resolution was another essential requirement which the Department would look
 forward to. Besides, increase in the perodicity of satellite repeat cycle is also needed to cope with certain problems such as in the
 areas of monitoring floods. The Department would also like to see some up gradation in the data processing capabilities at various
 state remote sensing centres so that the data was accessible to the local academic sectors. Another area which demanded attention
 was the pricing structure for the data products; and the paramount need was to fix a different price for data products for academic
 and university people vis-a-vis others. Clarifying a point about detection possibilities from remote sensing of tectonic movements,
 the Secretary referred to a technique currently being used whereby synthetic aperture radar and some kind of interference
 methodology is brought into operation to detect the stress pattern on the ground like the photo-elastic effect. Under this technique,
 microwaves are used to enhance the effect by using synthetic aperture principle and the interference pattern is monitored.
 Amplifying this point the Department of Space submitted that the prediction of earthquake occurrence directly through satellite
 remote sensing is not possible presently. However, scientific studies have been initiated in India and elsewhere for earthquake
 prediction, using advanced technologies such as synthetic aperture radar interferometry and use of sophisticated, sensitive sensors to
 measure micro movements of continental plates, electromagnetic disturbances, etc. that have a bearing on earthquakes occurrences.
 It is feasible to use satellite data for mapping earthquake prone areas with respect to geology, geomorphology and structural features,
 which when integrated appropriately with collateral data such as past seismic activity, gravity anomalies and in situ micro-seismic
 observations will help in better understanding of earthquake prone areas.
 
            66. The Committee has note with satisfaction that remote sensing provides very potent tools in disaster warning management
 system. It has also proved very helpful to the Survey of India. The Committee would like the Department of Space to look into the
 possibility of a dedicated remote sensing satellite for cartography. The use of remote sensing inputs, particularly in areas which are
 very rugged and inaccessible, is all the more necessary. The Department of Science and Technology has made some useful
 suggestions for up gradation of remote sensing technology, particularly in the area of resolution; and the Committee hopes that the
 Department of Space would seriously examine them, though the Committee believes that with the induction of new technology in

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 the planned launch of IRS 1-C and 1-D the requirements of the Department of Science Technology will be considerably met. The
 Committee would also like the Department of Space to seriously examine the feasibility of bringing other natural calamities within
 the ambit of disaster warning system so that large number of people are benefited and the system does not remain confined only to
 the area of cyclones.
 
DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
 
            67. The Committee wanted to know as to how the Department of Ocean Development (DOD) was using Remote Sensing
 Technology in environmental marine survey, collection of oceanographic data and identification of potential fishing zones (PF-Zs).
 The Secretary of the Department, at the very outset, submitted that the IRS Satellites operating at present are merely land satellites
 which provide data only in respect of land; and what the Department needs is an ocean viewing satellite. The Department took up the
 matter with the Planning Commission, and is now working closely with the Department of Space in that direction. The Department
 of Space is currently seized of the matter, and as conveyed, to the Committee by the Space Department itself, studies on Ocean-Sat
 have been completed. Five sensors, viz., Ocean Colour Monitor, Scatter meter, Altimeter, Thermal Infrared Sensor and Passive
 Microwave Radiometer have been prioritised. While DOD is planning to fund the development of these payloads, DOS has initiated
 preparatory actions towards spacecraft development. Ocean-Sat is proposed to be launched in 1998-99. Besides, the Modular
 Optoelectronic Scanner (MOS) onboard the IRS-P3 satellite planned to be launched using PSLV-D3 vehicle, will also be available
 for the Ocean colour studies.
 
            68. Secretary, Department of Ocean Development, informed the Committee that the Department is at present using an
 American Satellite NOAA, with the help of which it is in a position to give information on the sea surface temperatures for locating
 PFZs. In other words, this Satellite is facilitating the task of the Department in delineating zones where there gas a temperature
 gradient. But NOAA also does not have the technology to cater to all the requirements of the Department. Therefore, in the second
 phase, the Department proposes to use another satellite for detecting chlorophyll, and this capability would be forthcoming from Sea
 Star Satellite to be launched by an American Company. The Department is incurring very nominal expenditure on the services
 derived from NOAA; and the basic purpose behind utilising a foreign satellite is to have enough experience in putting to use this
 capability so that when the indigenous ocean satellite is launched no major problems are encountered.
 
            69. On being asked a pointed question as to whether the dissemination of information in respect 0f PFZs, as at present, was
 not favouring big fishermen and the benefits were not actually .percolating down to the community of small fishermen, the Secretary
 of the Department of Ocean Development was candid enough in admitting that there were some gaps here and there, in that the
 feedback which the Department was getting was good from some States and not so good from some other States. The Department
 was fully conscious of this problem, and awareness programmes had been launched. With an increase in the number of awareness
 programmes they would move to utilising the Sea Star Data which would be available in a year. As far as the satellite technology is
 concerned, it is for larger areas, and the Department of Ocean Development has a programme of giving communication sets to
 fishermen to ensure that the information about PFZs is transmitted to them in the quickest possible time. In response to a query from
 the Committee as to whether the data on PFZs was being supplied by the Department free of cost or some charges were levied
 thereon, the Secretary clarified that the data was absolutely free of cost, but a request had been made to the National Remote Sensing
 Agency to start charging for the data. The basic consideration was that the data was being supplied to the outside user agencies and
 the value needed to be realised.
 
            70. As regards the Fisheries Forecasts, it was submitted by the Department of Space that such forecasts which are based on
 Sea surface temperature, derived from NOAA-AVHRR, are applicable m/finely for the areas beyond 10 kilometers from the coast,
 and since the fishing activities of traditional fishermen are confined to within 10 kilometers Zone, ,the satellite derived PFZ maps
 have a limited use for them. Touching upon another aspect as regards the validation of PFZ data, the Department explained that the
 feedback is collected from fishermen for validating the fishery forecasts by various means viz., (i) employing the i~ own scientists in
 selected fishing centres, (ii) through States, fisheries department officials, (iii) through government organisations like Central Marine
 Fisheries Research Institute (CMFRI), Fisheries Survey of India (FSI), Marine Satellite Information Service (MARSI$), etc. (iv)
 through fishermen's organisations/fishermen by conducting awareness programmes. The Department however plans to collect
 feedback from all the fishing centres in due course of time in order to strengthen the validation programme.
 
            71. The Committee has noted that remote sensing techniques have been found to be quite useful, particularly in the area of
 fisheries forecast, and the efforts of both the Department of Ocean Development' which sponsored the project in this area (PFZ) and
 the Department of Space which executed it, have been quite laudatory. The achievements in receiving, processing, disseminating and
 marketing various satellite data products have by no means been less significant. The Committee, however, feels that in the absence
 of an indigenous Ocean-Sat the Department of Ocean Development is not able to pursue quite vigorously its objective to diversify
 the use of remote sensing technology in other marine areas. The Committee has taken note of the fact that both the Department of
 Ocean Development and Department of Space are seized of the problem, and Ocean-Sat is planned to be put into orbit sometime in
 1998-99. This Observation Satellite will cater to the Cartographic and fisheries applications. Besides, the availability and utilisation
 of microwave remote sensing data will provide all weather capability. In combination with IRS data, the microwave data would be
 useful for obtaining information on soil moisture, Kharif crops (as they pose problems for optical data due to cloud cover), snow and
 other oceanographic applications, etc. The Committee hopes that the Ocean-Sat will be launched as per the schedule and funds will
 not be a constraint in this endeavor.
 
MINISTRY OF MINES

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 
            72. The Secretary, Ministry of Mine~ informed the Committee that the Ministry of Mines is having a very close interaction
 with the Department of Space. There is the National Minera4, Resources Management System Standing Committee which is headed
 by the Secretary, Ministry of Mines, and a large number of user agencies are represented on it. The activities of the Geological
 Survey of India (GSI), particularly its teehni6al programmes, are supervised by a Board of Management which includes the
 Secretaries of the Department of Space and the Department of Science and Technology. Geological Survey of India has used space
 data as a supportive tool for supplementing conventional methods. This has helped in the speeding up of geological mapping and
 other investigations. Remote Sensing is one of the largest and extremely supportive tools for quick geological appraisal of large
 areas, and particularly for inaccessible, harsh and rough terrains which otherwise would have been difficult to deal with or taken a
 long time. No direct discovery of mineral deposits is possible through the application of remote sensing data alone, but it can focus
 attention on certain areas so that geologists can zero in on target areas for detailed ground truth verification.
 
            73. The Geological Survey of India uses the space borne data as well as air borne platform data for targetting and exploitation
 of mineral resources, hydrological studies, geothermal hazard management and even for the environmental factors. Earlier, the
 preparation of structural maps on a broad regional scale used to take years which now with the help of space borne data has become
 a matter of few months. The lineaments map and geological map of India on 1:2 scale have already been prepared by using remote
 sensing techniques.
 
            74. In 1985-86, GSI took up 'Project Vasundhara', in collaboration with ISRO, for systematic analysis of remotely sensed data
 on conjunction with collateral geological, geophysical and geo-chemical information.
 
            75. The Committee was also told that the study of earthquakes is a part of the study of earth processes being carried out by
 GSI. In the case of recent earthquakes in Uttarkashi and Latur, the GSI got a lot of help from the satellite data. Efforts are on to map
 the elements to identify the lineaments" which are active.
 
            76. Attempts are being made to study the existing geological and geophysical data critically, to collect new information,
 analyses and conceptualise the probabilities of various theories and to undertake relevant thematic in depth studies. Space imagery
 has been analysed to study the lineament patterns and to establish their significance in relation to crustal  movement with the help of
 available geological and geophysical data. Seismtectonic studies  with geophysical surveys including seismic, gravity, magnetic and
 receptivity are being carried out by various organisations including GSI to re-asssess the seismic stability of Peninsular India.
 
            77. the Committee notes that remote sensing data are of great significance for investigation of mineral resources, and GSI is
 using such data for its various activities. The Committee hopes that with improvements in resolution and scale in the new IRS-1C
 and 1D satellites, scheduled to be launched in the year 1994-95, and 1996-97, better quality space data would be available which
 would help in more accurate investigation of mineral resources.
 
            78. Geophysical studies of the Indian subcontinent is one of the areas which our nation can venture on and succeed; it has
 great value to society in terms of tectonic activities and its consequences. However, in the absence of our own satellite GSI is facing
 difficulties in getting data, particularly for measuring the gravity of water covered area or sea. For such type of data GSI has to
 depend on the foreign satellite. The Committee impresses upon the Department of Space to look into the matter so that tile
 expertise available in the country can be fully utilised.
 
            79.       LANDSAT/IRS Satellite imageries having the resolution of 30 to 40 meters enlargeable upto a acale of 1:50,000 are
 capable of detecting large mining activities with visible survace manifestations.  The more recent panchromatic and colour infrared
 aerial photos/airborne scanner imagery will be quite useful for the purpose.  The Committee recommends that attempts should be
 made to develop the interpretative approaches and determinants of such activities as a test case before its practical utility and
 applications are certified.
            80. Mining of salt, and sand in  data  and river channels, cause problems of trainage congestion. From l:5(I,(100 scale satellite
 imagery such areas can be broadly detected; while in the case of larger domains, airborne scanner/aerial photos will be useful for
 detailed study. The Committee recommends that the study of environmental impact arising out of such activities be taken up
 and likely solutions to such problems be |found out.
 
            81. The Committee feels that the satellite imageries can be helpful in checking the illegal mining of mineral resources. The
 satellite  imageries of mining activities can be sent to the concerned Slates for their information and determination as to which
 mining activity is permitted and which others are not legal. The Committee recommends that the possibility of this sort of use of
 satellite imagery may be examined further.
 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
 
            82. The Committee also took up the issue of application of remote sensing data for forest cover mapping, coral reef mapping
 and environmental impact of mining and discussed the matter with the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
83. The Committee was informed that the Ministry of Environment and Forests is one of the major user agencies of remote sensing
 data generated by the Department of Space through its IRS satellites. The Forest Survey of India (FSI) located at Dehra Dun is
 engaged in the task of analysing the satellite imageries. Giving details to the Committee about the methodology of management of
 forestry before introduction of remote sensing techniques, the representative of the Ministry stated that previously forests in India

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 were being managed by means of working plans, and 80 pet cent of the forest area was being covered by those plans. It] the past,
 preparation of one such working plan used to take nearly two years, because each forest had to be visited and it had to be mapped to
 find the area under forest cover, its density etc. Today FSI is using the remote sensing technology for obtaining the information
 about the forest cover of the country. Now a working plan can be prepared in just about four months instead of two years. The first
 attempt to assess the forest cover of the country by visual interpretation of satellite imageries was made in 1984-85 when satellite
 imageries were made available from the US and French satellites. Since the availability of 1RS satellites, FSI is utilising data from
 these satellites for forest management and forest working.
 
            84. FSI, by using satellite imageries, has been preparing maps of forest vegetation on 1:250,00 scale for the entire country on
 a two 'year cycle to know accurate position in respect of the land under forest cover. Based on the analysis of satellite data, FSI so
 far has brought out four reports in 1987, 1989, 1991 and 1993. The first report which, related to the period 1982-87 revealed that the
 country was losing 47,000 hectares of good forest area per year. Subsequently, under the VII Plan programme, large-scale plantation
 activity was initiated arid with more professional forest management the degradation of forest was checked. The analysis through the
 subsequent reports brought out in 1989 and 1991 indicated that the process of degradation of forest had not only been checked but
 there had been slight gain in forest cover. It ~~vas found that, on account of conservation measures taken up by the Government,
 there has been an increase of 28,000 hectares per year in the forest cover of the country. However, as per the latest report which
 came out in 1993, there has been a fall in the growth of forest cover and the same has gone down to the level of 1100-1200 hectares
 per year. The Committee was further told that the expenses in terms of cost of preparation of maps of forest cover have gone down
 substantially. By using the remote sensing technique, the process of preparation of maps costs just 50-80 paise per hectare.
 Moreover, quick and accurate information is available which helps in drawing the proper strategy for the forest management in the
 country.
 
            85. To a specific query as to whether plantation done in private sector to being take note of, the representative of the Ministry
 submitted that at present, it is not possible to make difference between legal status of plantation through satellite imageries. It is also
 not feasible to measure agro-forestry, plantations and forests along roads and canals. However, this would be possible with the help
 of the data received from the next generation satellites to be launched in near future and the FSI would be able to report on forest
 activities going on in private sector and along roads and canals.
 
            86. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry of Environment and Forests has made good use of the remote
 sensing data in forest cover mapping. The latest report prepared by the FSI using remote sensing data indicates that India has 11.73%
 of good forest cover of total geographical area of the country. However, as per the mandate of the Forest Policy, there should have
 been 33% of good forest cover of the total geographical area. The Committee finds that we are still short of this target. It hopes that
 with the technology of IRS-IC and IRS-1D satellites which will provide better resolution, Ministry of Environment and Forests
 would be able to keep a close watch on the situation and take necessary steps to increase the total area under good forest cover.
 
Coral Reef Mapping
 
            87. Coral reef mopping is another area where remote sensing data is used. The representative of the Ministry submitted that in
 1988, a project called 'Coastal Environment' was sanctioned, and the coral reef mapping was one of the components of that project.
 Maps in the scale 1:250,000 were prepared by the Department of space using the remote sensing technology. With the help of these
 maps, a firm estimation of the extent of coral reefs in the country was made. Based on the analysis of the remote sensing data about
 the extent of coral reefs, a scheme has been evolved for conservation of coral reefs which envisages setting up of Marine National
 Parks and Marine Sanctuaries. The National Committee constituted for the conservation and management of wetlands and
 mangroves also looks into formulation and implementation of programmes of conservation, management and research on coral reefs.
 
            88. The growth pattern which can determine the sustainable use of coral reefs is very clear from the satellite imageries; and it
 is very easy to detect the area being destroyed. In reply to a query, the representative of the Ministry told the Committee that the
 existing IRS-IB satellite can provide imageries of water upto the depth of 50 meters. However, the quality of maps would certainly
 improve with IRS-1C satellite.
 
            89. The Committee finds that coral reef mapping is another area where the remote sensing technique is being applied and the
 destruction of coral reefs has been stopped by way of setting up of National Marine Parks and National Marine Sanctuaries. The
 Committee hopes that with the launching of IRS-1C and ID satellites, better quality of imageries would be available which would
 enable the Ministry of Environment and Forests to chalk out a prope{ strategy for the growth of coral reefs.
 
REMOTE SENSING DATA AND STUDY OF ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF MINING
 
            90. There are a variety of scientific studies which are being carried out to examine the impact of-different developmental
 projects, including mining. The studies are carried out by IITs, Regional Engineering Colleges, University of Roorkee and by
 specialised bodies like the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute of CSIR etc.
 
            91. The representative of the Ministry told the Committee that remote sensing technique is one of the techniques used for
 assessing the environmental impact of the developmental project as well as of the mining projects. Insofar as the Ministry of
 Environment and Forests is concerned, mining has been an area of special interest because mining activities are on the increase and
 sometimes there is a clash between mining activity and forest development. Studies relating to environmental impact are of great

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 importance because these studies help in arriving at a decision about the fate of developmental projects. For this purpose, the
 Ministry has a Standing Committee on Bio-resources and Environment, which is chaired by the Secretary of the Ministry, and
 consists of nine members from user Ministries/Departments. This Committee submits its reports for approval or rejection of a
 project. The recommendations of the Committee form the basis for the Ministry's decision regarding approval/rejection of a project.
 Following the Notification of January 27, 1994 amended on May 4, 1994, Environmental Impact Assessment has been made
 statutory for 29 different activities in' various developmental sectors including that of Mines. The Notification also deals with the
 constitution of an Experts' Committee for environmental assessment of different projects. The environmental viability of a project is
 assessed not only on the basis of reports of the Experts' Committee and views of user agencies but on the basis of the remote sensing
 data also. The remote sensing technique provides scientific and relatively error-free quick procedure because the data are
 scientifically obtained and the element of human error is much less. In this context, the Committee finds that the remote sensing
 technique has not only supplemented and simplified the studies of environmental impact of mining and other developmental
 projects, but also that the procedure of project appraisal from the environmental angle has also become more scientific, accurate and
 faster.
 
APPLICATION OF REMOTE SENSING DATA BY VOLUNTARY ORGANISATIONS
 
            92. In order to have an idea as to how remote sensing data are being used by the voluntary organisations, the Committee
 selected BAIF Development Research Foundation, a non-governmental organisation (NGO) of Pune  which was represented by its
 Executive Vice-President before the Committee. Throwing Light on the utility of remote sensing data in the Development of land
 and water resources, the representative of BAIF Development Research Foundation submitted that the remote sensing data from
 their utility point of view, had two aspects. One is the application for planning of specific measures; and second is the monitoring of
 developmental activities. For example, remote sensing data provides information about the extent of wasteland, which has been
 helpful in planning for the watershed catchment area. The BA1F Development Research Foundation has used the remote sensing
 data for the Development of water resources in Ahmednagar district of Maharashtra.      
                                                       
            93. Another application of remote sensing data in which the BAIF Development Research Foundation is presently engaged is
 monitoring of afforestation. 12 years ago, the BAIF Development Research Foundation started a wasteland development programme
 in Vansada Taluka of Valsad district in Gujarat. Under the programme, about 6000 families developed the wasteland where 2 lakh
 mango trees and 25 lakh forest trees have been planted. Some plantation, work has been done in that area by governmental agencies
 also. In order to have assessment of the growth of the plantations, remote sensing data were used which showed that there had been
 significant increase in vegetation cover both in fare~! and non-forest land. This proves that remote sensing data can be a very good
 monitoring tool.
 
            94. The Committee was further told that the remote sensing data, as available presently could be used for very broad level
 planning and estimates. Therefore, these data were useful either to district development authorities or to individual Departments or
 Ministries for planning and resource allocation at district level or State level or national level. These data could also be used at the
 monitoring stage of the projects undertakes by the district authorities or Department/Ministry. The Representative of BAIF
 Development Research Foundation submitted that when it came to action, it required the application of remote sensing data on a
 small scale and, therefore, suggested that data should be made available at village level or to a group of villages. The representative
 of BAIF also submitted that the data should be according to the needs of the users.
 
            95. The representative of the NGO also suggested creation of geographical information centres where the information linked
 to the end-use of different users be made available, and such centres be created wherever there is demand in order to meet the
 requirements not only of the planners and monitoring agencies but also of the end-users. These centres can provide data for a
 particular small area by compiling and collecting various types of information available from different sources viz. Department of
 Space, Meteorological Centres, revenue offices, etc. Such information can be used by NGOs as well as Government agencies, etc. at
 village level. He further suggested that for the time being some of the NGOs could function as Geographical Information Centres.
           
            96. The representative of BAIF Development Research Foundation, however, admitted that creating new agencies to provide
 inputs for planning and monitoring of developmental activities in rural area might add to the bureaucracy which would not help in
 the long run, and it would be better to identify the existing agency or modify the existing mechanism which would provide the
 necessary information to the planning authorities for development and planning at village level.
 
            97. The Committee notes that the data generated through remote sensing techniques have multitudinous applications in
 various fields and the data can be utilised as an effective and scientific tool for better planning and monitoring of developmental
 activities in the rural areas. The Committee is happy to note that BAIF Development Research Foundation has used the remote
 sensing data for the development of water resources and has applied the remote sensing technique as useful monitoring tool. The
 Committee, however, observes that the full potential of the remote sensing data has not been exploited and its benefits have not
 reached the grassroot level. Presently, the remote sensing data are being utilised for formulating plans for larger areas covering some
 districts. Such data cannot be utilised for village level planning. The Committee was told by the Secretary, Department of Space that
 there was a proposal for launching the IRS-1C and ID satellites and these satellites, with improved capabilities would greatly
 enhance the applications of remote sensing data in the rural areas make as well.
 
            98. The Committee feels that, at present, mechanisms are not fully geared up to optimal use of remote sensing technique, as
 there exist no well equipped agencies which can provide relevant data including remote sensing data necessary for specific purposes.

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 The Committee is not in favour of creating a new agency like Geographical Information Centre as suggested by the representative of
 BAIF. However, it recommends that necessary infrastructure should be developed in one of the existing government agencies which
 can function as Geographical Information Centre and compile, correlate and coordinate remote of sensing data and other data
 received from various sources and transfer the same to the NGOs the NGOs and other Governmental bodies engaged in the
 developmental work. There is a necessity  creating awareness about the application of remot sensing technique among working in
 the rural area to ensure their greater participation in the use of data generated through remote sensing techniques.
 
CONCLUSIONS                                                    
 
            99. The Indian Space Research Organization has, over the past quarter developed the area of wilt disease in Kerala to the first
 two experimental remote sensing experiments on coconut          the current range of highly successful operational IRS build remote
 sensing satellites and satellites Bhaskara-I and II and now the has capabilities to design and build remote sensing satellites and
 associated detector systems, which are contemporary with developments elsewhere in the world.  ISRO also now has the ability to
 launch satellites of the IRS  class on its PSLV system.  In addition to accomplishing successfully these developments relating to
 hardware, including ground stations, facilities for handling and analyzing remote sensing data etc.,  all of which rightfully fall within
 ISRO’s  jurisdiction, ISRO has for more than a decade, concerned itself with the effective use of remote sensed data in vario9us
 areas of national development.  It took the initiative in setting up the National Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS). 
 This enabled linkages to be established with various user Departments and agencies, particularly in the Central Government. 
 Specific, important and relevant areas were selected for application of remote sensed data.  The committee has in its deliberations,
 been given many examples of important and successful applications (ground water targeting, wasteland development, snow melt,
 survey maps, etc.) since this programme started.  In other areas, the Committee was informed that, based on the experience gained,
 specific demands have been placed on ISRO in terms of the imagery need e.g. higher spatial resolution, measurement of various
 ocean parameters etc.  Some of these will be fulfilled through programmes that ISRO is planning for the rest of this decade,
 including IRS-IC and ID, and ocean Sat. Also, new analytical techniques are being developed by ISRO to deal with the specific
 Indian situation of heterogeneous agricultural production where more than one crop is taken out by a farmer in a small area. ISRO
 has also been implementing major activities for training in remote sensing and photo interpretation techniques of large numbers of
 personnel from various user organizations in the Central, State and non-governmental sectors. It has set up National, Regional and
 State Remote Sensing Centres. Overall, the programme relating to remote sensing has been well thought out, and been implemented
 on a steady long term basis, so as to derive optimal advantage for our country from this hitech area. In many ways it is a unique
 programme in the world. The Committee would like to place on record its appreciation for the efforts of the Department of Space in
 this matter.
    
NEW DELHI
December 21, 1994
SYED SIBTEY. RAZI
 Chairman, Committee on Science and
Technology Environment and Forests.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED    PARLIAMENTARY    STANDING   
 COMMITTEE    ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
 
VIII
Eighth Meeting
 
            The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 1.05 p.m. and again from 3.00 p.m. to 4.00 p.m. on Monday, the 11th July, 1994 in
 Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi -- Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.         Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
3.         Prof. M.G.K. Menon
4.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
5.         Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
6.         Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 
LOK SABHA
 
7. Shri P.C. Chacko
8. Shrimati Saroj Dubey
9. Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
10. Shri Harpal Panwar

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
11. Shri Balraj Pasi
12. Shri Vijay Naval Patil
13. Shri Harchand Singh
14. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
15. Kumari Frida Topno
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Assistant Director
Shri D0st Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parl. Interpreter
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SPACE
 
Dr. K. Kasturirangan, Secretary
Shri M.G. Chandrasekhar, Scientific Secretary
Shri A. Sengupta, Joint Secretary
Dr. George Joseph, Director, SAC
Shri K. Radhakrishnan, Director (NNRMS-RRSSC)
Shri S. Krishnamurthy, Director (P&PR)
Shri R.S. Rao, Director (APSRAC)
Shri K. Narayanan, Programme Director (INSAT)
 Dr, D.P. Rao, Deputy Director (NRSA)
 Shri V. Jayaraman, Deputy Director (EOS)
 Dr. R.R. Navalgund, Scientist 'SG'
 Dr. S.V. Kibe, Scientist
 Dr. Y.V.N. Krishnamurthy, Scientist 'SE'
 Shri K.S. Krishnan, Officer on Special Duty
 Shri Rattan Lal, Under Secretary
 Shri T.S. Venkataramani, Administrative Officer
 ShriV.S. Natarajan, Administrative Officer (NRSA)
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE
 
Shri J.C. Pant, Secretary
 
2. The Committee took up for consideration the Remote Sensing Application Projects of the Department of Space under their
 National Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS) particularly in the areas of mapping of forest cover and wastelands,
 groundwater targeting and fisheries forecast, together with their Satellite based Disaster Warning System. The Secretary of the
 Department of Space, at the very outset, through audio visual presentation gave an overview of the activities being pursued by the
 Department under NNRMS and Satellite based Disaster Warning" System and the extent to which the data are being passed on to the
 respective user Ministries /Departments /Agencies. etc. The members then sought necessary clarifications from the Secretary of the
 Department on various points arising out of the papers/documents furnished by the Department and the presentation made by him on
 the subject.
 
3. In the afternoon session, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture on the extent of use of
 Remote Sensing Data by the Ministry in the areas of crop acreage and production estimation, fisheries, drought monitoring, mapping
 of saline/ alkaline soils and satellite based disaster warning system. The Secretary of the Ministry also gave replies to the
 clarifications sought by members on the subject.
 
            The discussion on the subject under consideration of the Committee remained inconclusive. A verbatim record of the
 proceedings was kept.
 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on Tuesday, the 12th July, 1994.
 
IX
Ninth Meeting
 
The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. "to 12.50 p.m. and again from 3.00 p.m. 4.50 p.m. on Tuesday, the 12th July, 1994 in Room No.
 63, First Floor, Parliament House New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1. Syed Sibtey Razi -- Chairman

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Prof.M.G.K. Menon
3. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
4. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
5. Shrimati Saroj Dubey
6. Shri Oscar Fernandes
7. Shri P. Kumarasamy
8. Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
9. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
10. Shri Rama Chandra Rath
11. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
12. Shri Harchand Singh
13. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
14. Shri K.G. Shivappa
15. Kumari Frida Topno
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Assistant Director
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parl. Interpreter
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
 
Shri T.K.A Nair, Additional Secretary
Shri R. lssar, Joint Secretary (NWDB)
Shri S.K. Biswas, Additional Advisor
Dr. P. Basak, National consultant (R&D)
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF WATER RESOURCES
 
Shri M.S. Reddy, Secretary
Dr. R.K. Prasad, Chairman, Central Ground Water Board
Dr. M. Seth, Director NIH
Shri S.K. Sharma, Incharge, Remote Sensing (CGWB)
Dr. V.S. Dinkar, Senior Joint Commissioner (C&D)
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CENTRAL WATER COMMISSION
 
Shri A.B. Joshi, Chairman
Shri' A.D. Mohile, Member
Shri G.R. Keskar, Chief Engineer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
 
Dr. J.P. Singh, Secretary
Shri K.S. Sripathi, Joint Secretary
Dr. D.S. Meshram, Chief Planner, TCPO
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF TEXTILES
 
Shri S. Sathyam, Secretary
Shri Ajay Prasad, Joint Secretary
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SPACE
 

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
Shri M.G. Chandrasekhar, Scientific Secretary
Shri K. Radhakrishnan, Director
Shri R.S. Rao, Director (APSRAC)
Dr. D.P. Rao, Deputy Director
Dr. S.V. Kibe, Scientist 'SF'
2. The Committee took up further consideration of the Remote Sensing Application Projects of the Department of Space, together
 with its satellite based Disaster Warning System and heard The views of the Secretaries and other concerned officials of the
 following user Ministries/Departments etc. of requisite satellite based data in areas as indicated against each:-
 
1. Ministry of Rural Development  National wasteland  mapping and Ground                                          
                                                            water exploration.
 
2. (i) Ministry of Water Resources Command area studies,
 (ii) Central Water Commission--Flood mapping and snow mapping.
 
3. Ministry of Urban Development     Urban landuse/land cover, sprawl and
                                                                growth of major cities.
 4. Ministry of Textiles--          Crop acreage and production
                                                      of cotton.
 
The Members of the Committee sought clarifications from the Secretaries and other concerned officials on various points and
 necessary replies thereto were given by them.
The discussion on the subject under consideration of the Committee remained inconclusive. A verbatim record of the proceedings
 was kept.
            3. The Committee thereafter discussed its agenda and programme of sittings for the month of September, 1994 and decided to
 hold its meetings on the 7th, 8th, 19th, 20th, 29th and 30th September, 1994 to take up environmental pollution and related issues.
 
The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on July 21, 1994.
 
X
Tenth Meeting
 
            The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 1.15 p.m. from 3.00 p.m. to 4.12 p.m. and again from 4.25 p.m. to 5.20 p.m. on
 Thursday, the Ist July, 1994 in Committee Room 'A' Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1. Syed Sibtey Razi--Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
3. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
4. Prof. M.G.K. Menon
5. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
6. Shri Ram Gol~al ¥adav
 
LOK SABHA
 
7. Shri Oscar Fernandes
8. Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
9. Shri Harpal Panwar
10. Shri Balfaj Pasi
11. Shri Vijay Naval Patil
12. Shri Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
13. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
14. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Assistant Director
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri Y.S. Rajan, Advisor
Shrl S. Ghose, Joint Secretary
Shri R.K. Midha, Joint Advisor
Dr. N. Sen Roy, DG, IMD
Shri P.K. Mishra, Addl. DG. IMD
Shri R.C. Bhatia, Director
Maj. General S.P. Mehta, Addl. Surveyor General SOI
Shri Ashok Harnal, Director Dr. P. Nag, Joint Director
Dr. D.K. Sharma, Deputy Secretary
Shri R.P. Singh, Under Secretary
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
 
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri J.V.R. Prasada Rao, Joint Secretary
Shri B.N. Krishnamurthy, Director
Shri S.W. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
 Dr. B.R. Subramanian, Principal Scientific Officer
 Dr. V.N. Sanjeevan, Technical Officer
 Dr. B.R. Subramanian, Principal Scientific Officer
 Dr. P.S. Goel, Scientist, Department of Space', Bangalore
 Dr. A. Narendra Nath, Scientist, NRSA, Hyderabad
 Dr. H. Honne Gowda, Scientist, ISRO, Bangalore
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF MINES
 
Shri I.G. Jhingran, Secretary
Shri M. Gopalakrishna, Addi. Secretary
 Shri D.B. Dimri, Director General, GSI
Shri A.K. Bhandari, Director
Shri A.M Rakshit, Director, GSI
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
 
Shri A.K. Mukherji, Inspector General of Forests
 Shri B.P. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary
Shri N. Bagchi, Adviser
Shri Harjeet Singh, Adviser
Dr. C.L. Trisal, Additional Director
Shri N. Hossabettu, Joint Director
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SPACE
 
Shri M.G. Chandrasekhar, Scientific Secretary
Shri K. Radhakrishnan, Director (NNRMS-RRSSC)
 Shri V.S. Hegde, Scientist/Engineer, 'SF'
 Shri Narendranath, Scientist/Engineer 'SF'
 Dr. D.P. Rao, Deputy Director (NRSA)
Dr. Y.V.N. Krishnamurthy, Scientist/engineer 'SF'
Dr. C.B, Dutt, Scientist Engineer 'SE'
Shri Baldev Sahai, Group Director
Shri H. Gowda, Scientist/Engineer 'SD'
 Dr. S.T. Chari, Scientist/Engineer 'SF'
Dr. S.V. Kibe, Scientist/Engineer 'SF'
 
            2. The Committee took up futher consideration of the Remote Sensing Application Projects of the Department of Space,
 together with its Satellite based Disaster Warning System and Heard the views the Secretaries and other concerned officials of the
 following user Ministries/Departments of Satellite based Data, in areas as indicated against each:
     (1) Department of Science and Technology                  Satellite  based Disaster
                                                                                         Warning System and Surveys

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
                                                                                    conducted by the Survey of
                                                                                         India.
     (2) Department of Ocean Development                         Oceanography
     (3) Ministry of Mines                                                    Geology and Mineral Resources
     (4) Ministry of Environment and Forests                    Forest    Cover    Mapping,
                                                                                            Environmental impact of mining
                                                                                               and coral reef mapping
            The members 9f the Committee sought clarifications from the Secretaries and other concerned officials on various points and
 necessary replies thereto were given by them.
 
            The discussion on  the subject under consideration of the Committee remained inconclusive, A trim record of the proceedings
 was kept.
 
3.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.20 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on July 22, 1994.
 
Xl
Eleventh Meeting
            The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 12.15 p.m. and again from  3.00 p.m. to 4.40 p.m. on Friday, the 22nd July, 1994 in
 Committee Room 'A' Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1. Syed Sibtey Razi--Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
3. Shri N. Giri Prasad
4. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
5. Shri Suresh Pachouri
6. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 
LOK SABHA
 
7. Shri P.C. Chacko
8. Shrimati Saroj Dubey
9. Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
10. Shri Balraj Pasi
11. Shri Rama Chandra Rath
12. Shri Harchand Singh
13. Shri RamPrasad Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Assistant Director
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE VOLUNTARY ORGANISATION
 
Shri Girish G. Sohani, Vice President, BAIF, Dev. Research Foundation, Pune
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SPACE
 
Dr. K. Kasturirangan, Secretary
Shri M.G. Chandrasekhar, Scientific Secretary
Shri H. Gowda, Scientist/Engineer
Shri Y.V.N. Krishnamurthy, Scientist /Engineer 'SE'
Dr. R.R. Navalgund, Scientist Engineer 'SG'
Shri Radhakrishnan, Director (NNRMS-RRSSC)
Shri K.S. Krishnan, Officer-on-Special Duty
Shri U.S. Hegde, Scientist 'SF'
Dr. D.P. Rao, Deputy Director (NRSA)

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
 
            2. In the forenoon session, the Committee, continuing its discussion on the Remote Sensing Application Projects of the
 Department of Space and its Satellite based Disaster Warring System, heard the views of Shri Girish G. Sohani, Executive Vice-
President, BAIF Development Research Foundation, Pune, on the usages of remote sensing data. Necessary clarifications on certain
 points sought by Members were also given by him.
 
            3. In the afternoon session, the Committee took the oral evidence of the Secretary of the Department of Space in the context
 of the feed-back received from certain Ministries/Departments using Remote Sensing Data in different areas. The Secretary also
 replied to the clarifications sought by the Members on various points arising therefrom.
 
            The discussion on the subject was concluded. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
 
            4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.40 p.m.
 
XXII
Twenty Second Meeting*
 
            The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology Environment and Forests
 met at 10.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 21st December, 1994 in Room No. 67, 1
st  Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1. Syed Sibtey Razi--Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Dr. M. Aram
3. Shri K. Rahman Khan
4. Prof. M.G.K. Menon
5. Shri W. Knlabidhu Singh
6. Dr. Ranbir Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
7. Shri P.C. Chacko
8. Smt. Bhavna Chikhalia
9. Shri Sharad Dighe
10. Shri Oscar Fernandes
11.Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
12. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
13. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
14. Shri Harchand Singh
15. Shri Bapusaheb Thite
16. Kumari Frida Topno
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
            2. At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee informed the Members that since the last meeting of the
 Committee, three new Members namely, Dr. M. Aram, Shri Suresh Kalmadi and Shri K. Rahman Khan, all from the
 Rajya Sabha, had been nominated to the Committee and welcomed Dr. M. Aram and Shri K. Rahman Khan who were
 present in the meeting.
 
            3. The Committee, thereafter, took up consideration of its Draft Fifteenth Report on the Annual Report (1993-94)
 of the Department of Space (Remote Sensing Application Projects and the Satellite Based Disaster Warning System) and
 after some discussion, adopted the same unanimously.
 
            4. The Committee decided to present this Report to both the Houses of Parliament on the 22rid December, 1994.
 The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh to present this Report to the Rajya
 Sabha and Shri Sharad Dighe and in his absence, Shri Harchand Singh to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.

15th REPORT OF COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/15threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:56]
           
            5. The Committee placed on record its appreciation for the excellent work done by the Secretariat
of the Committee in preparing the Draft Report and circulating it to the Members in a record time.
 
            6. The Committee then adjourned at 10.30 a.m. to meet again at 10.15 a.m. on the 5th January, 1995.
______________________________________________________________________________
 
*Minutes of Twelfth to Twenty-first Meetings are not related to this Report.
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------