 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
212
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS  
 
TWO HUNDRED TWELFTH REPORT 
ON  
"THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE BILL, 2010" 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18TH AUGUST, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18TH AUGUST, 2010) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI
 
AUGUST, 2010/ SRAVANA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
C O N T E N T S 
 
       PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                     ( i) -(ii) 
2. PREFACE                                       (iii) 
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                     
4. ANNEXURES                                                                       
5.  MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                              
                               
               

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2010) 
---------- 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy  –– Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
      2. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia 
3. Shri Anil H. Lad 
   $ 4.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
 5.   Shri S.S. Ahluwalia 
6. Shri Saman Pathak 
7. Prof. Ram Gopal Yadav 
 **8. Shri Shivanand Tiwari  
9. Shri Jabir Husain 
10. Dr. Barun Mukherji 
 
 LOK SABHA 
11. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg 
12. Shri Udayanraje Bhonsale 
13. Shri Ninong Ering  
14. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
15. Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda 
16. Shrimati Kaisar Jahan 
17. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
18. Shri Jayaram Pangi 
  @19.  Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal 
     @@20. Shri Balakrishna K. Shukla 
21. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi 
22. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
23. Shri Francisco Sardinha 
 # #24. Shri P.C. Chacko 
25. Dr. Rajan Sushant 
26. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
27. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
28. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava 
29. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
30.    Shri Akhilesh Yadav  
   31.    Shri K.C. Singh Baba 
                                                 
*    Nominated w.e.f. 14th June,  2010 
@   Nominated w.e.f. 21st June,  2010 
  @@  Nominated w.e.f. 21st June, 2010 
       $   Nominated w.e.f. 22nd July, 2010 
##   Nominated w.e.f. 4th August, 2010 
**  Nominated w.e.f. 9th August, 2010 
 
 

      SECRETARIAT 
 
 Smt. Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary 
 Shri  Alok Chatterjee, Director 
 Shri  V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri  Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
Preface 
           I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science & Technology, Environment & Fore sts, having been authorized by the 
Committee to present the Report on its behalf, pres ent this Two Hundred and Twelfth  
Report on ‘The Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Bill, 2010’.  
2.  In the meetings of the Committee held on 8 th, 15th, 16th, 23rd & 24 th June, 2010, 
13th,  14th,   21st  and   27th  July,  2nd, 3rd , 5th and        10th August, 2010; the Secretaries of 
the Ministries/Department of Atomic En ergy, Finance (Departments of Financial 
Services and Department of Expenditure), Ho me Affairs; External Affairs; Power; Law 
& Justice (Legislative Department & Legal A ffairs); Food & Public Distribution; Water 
Resources; Environment & Forests; Health & Family Welfare; Labour & Employment; 
Agriculture; Defence beside s various  Trade Unions, experts, organizations,                       
non-governmental organizations; tendered oral evidence on th e various aspects related to 
‘The Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Bill, 2010 ’. 
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to th e Officers of the Ministries/Departments 
of Government of India and experts/repr esentatives for rendering their valuable 
views/clarifications sought by the Members of the Committee. 
4.      In the meeting held on 17
th August, 2010 the Committee considered the draft report 
and adopted the same.  
 
NEW DELHI
;                                                                       Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy   
18, August, 2010                                            Chairman,                                
               Department-related Parliamentary Standing                      
 Committee  on Science & Technology,    Environment & Forests. 
 

REPORT 
 
The Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consulta tion with the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok 
Sabha, referred* ‘The Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Bill, 2010’(Annexure-I) as 
introduced in Lok Sabha on 7 th May, 2010 and pending therein, to the Standing 
Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests for examination and 
report. 
Background and Need for the Bill
: 
The Department of Atomic Energy thr ough a background note on ‘Civil Liability 
for Nuclear Damage Bill, 2010’ submitted to the Committee gave an   
outline for the need of a Liability Bill,  summary of which is as follows:  
(a) The principal objective of the ‘Civil Liability for Nu clear Damage Bill, 2010’ is 
to provide for prompt compensation to the victims of a nuclear incident. While making 
the design, and during constructio n and operation of nuclear power plants every care is 
taken to ensure safety of the plant, public and the environment. However, in the unlikely 
event of a nuclear incident or accident, ther e may be damage to i ndividuals, property and 
environment on a large scale. Further, the geographical scope of damage caused by a 
nuclear accident may not be confined to  national boundaries and it may have trans-
boundary effects.  
(b) At present, nuclear power plants and f acilities in India ar e owned by the Central 
Government or its Public Sector Undertakings. Therefore, any incident  
 
* Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II dated the 13
th May, 2010. 
or accident that happens in these installations , and the liability issues arising therefrom, 
are the responsibility of the Central Government.  
(c) It is also important to bear in mind th at the nuclear industry in India is growing 
and as a result of the steps taken particularly in the recent period, it is expected to form an 
important part of the energy-mix of the c ountry. Recent developments including the 
decision of the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG ) of 8 September 2008 has given India the 
possibility of providing fo r additionality to the indigenous programme by setting up 
nuclear power plants in coope ration with major internationa l vendors.  This would mean 
more opportunities for Indian suppliers includ ing in the private sector and they would 
increasingly be in a position to supply items for nuclear power plants being set up both 
through indigenous efforts and also in coope ration with foreign vendors. A transparent 
and predictable liability re gime would help domestic nuc lear equipment manufacturing 
industry to develop and grow. 
(d) At the international level there are four  instruments for nuclear liability i.e. the 
1960 Paris Convention, 1963 Vienna Conventi on, 1997 Protocol to Amend the Vienna 
Convention, and 1997 Convention on Supplementa ry Compensation for nuclear damage.   
Each of these conventions are based on the  
following basic principles: 
i. Channeling of liability to the installation operator, 
ii. Absolute liability 
iii. Liability limited in amount 
iv. Liability limited in time 

v. Include a single competent court to adjudicate claims 
vi. Compulsory financial security, and 
vii. Non-discrimination based on nationality, domicile or residence 
 (e) India is not a party to any of the nuc lear liability conventions mentioned above. 
Indian nuclear industry has b een developed within the context of a domestic framework 
established by the Atomic Energy Act, 1962. Th ere is no provision in  this Act about the 
nuclear liability or compensation for nuclear da mage due to nuclear accident or incident 
and no other law deals with nucl ear liability for nuclear damage in the event of nuclear 
incident. It was, therefore, considered necessary to enact legislation to provide for prompt 
compensation to the victims of a nuclear in cident. Accordingly, th e Civil Liability for 
Nuclear Damage Bill, 2010 has been drafted.  
Following are the other highlights of the proposed legislation:- 
 The provisions of the Act shall apply to nuclear damage suffered in the 
territory of India or in  or over the maritime area s beyond the territorial sea 
of India or in or over the exclusive economic zone of India or on board or 
by a ship flying the flag of India or on board or by an aircra ft registered in 
the territory of India or on or by an artificial island, installation or structure 
under the jurisdiction of India. 
 The operator of the nuclear installa tion shall be liable for any nuclear 
damage resulting from nuclear incident occurring in his nuclear installation 
and the consignor of a nuclear material shall be deemed to be the operator 
and shall be liable for any nuclear damage during the transport of such 
material;  
 Under special circumstances, the operator  of a nuclear installation shall not 
be held liable for nuclear damage where the accident is due to a grave 
natural disaster, or act of  armed conflict, or hostilities or insurrection or act 
of terrorism. 
 The maximum amount of total liability fo r a nuclear incident shall be up to 
rupee equivalent of 300 million Special Drawing Rights and the liability of 
the operator shall be limited to rupees 500 crore per nuclear incident;  
 The Central Government shall be lia ble for nuclear damage where such 
damage occurs in any nuclear installation owned by the Central 
Government; and where the liability is in excess of the operator’s liability;  
 The right to claim compensation gets extinguished after ten years from the 
date of notification of nuclear incident;  
 Every operator shall take insurance pol icy or financial security for an 
amount not less than the amount of his liability; 
 Every nuclear incident shall be no tified by the Atomic Energy Regulatory 
Board 
 Where the Atomic Energy Regulatory Boar d is satisfied that the gravity of 
threat and risk involved in a nuclear inci dent is insignificant, it shall not be 
required to notify such nuclear incident. 
 Whoever suffers nuclear damage shall have a right to claim compensation 
and the Claims Commissioner appointed  by the Central Government shall 
have exclusive jurisdiction to award compensation.    

 Where the amount of compensation c ould exceed the amount of operator’s 
liability or it is in th e public interest to prov ide special measures for 
compensation, the Central Government may establish a Nuclear Damage 
Claims Commission and all claims cases  would be transferred to such a 
Commission and the Comm ission shall make the awards in all cases 
pertaining to nuclear damage;  
 The Commission shall have a Chai rperson and other members not 
exceeding six;  
 The Chairperson shall have the financ ial and administrative powers of the 
Commission;  
 The Central Government shall have power to dissolve the Commission.   
 So far as the international legislation concerning nuclear liability laws is 
concerned, the Committee was also informed that as far as Convention on Supplementary 
Compensation (CSC) which has been develo ped under the auspices of International 
Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), provides for relations among all countries that accept 
the basic principles of nuclear liability law and an international fund to compensate for 
nuclear damage in the event of nuclear inci dent. CSC envisages a two tier system with 
respect to the amount of compensation e.g. Insta llation State to ensure availability of the 
amount of compensation (at least 300 million Special Drawing Rights), and an 
International Fund for which all contracting parties are obliged to contribute the amount 
based on a formula for calculation of contribution. 
Historical Background of the Bill
 
Prof.  V.B. Coutinho, former Vice-Chance llor, Gulbarga University, and presently 
Director, Legal Studies, Directorate of Legal Education, Bar Council of India who 
deposed before the Committee informed that the project on          “A critical and 
comprehensive study of the nature and extent of state responsibility arising out of nuclear 
incidents/accidents within national boundaries and beyond” was started in 1999 with the 
objective of going into the various aspects of civil liability arising out of the nuclear 
damage.  He further informed that since the number of power plants and facilities in India 
are owned and promoted by the union governme nt  and a government undertaking, any 
accident or incident arising in these installa tions and the legal issue arising therefrom, 
naturally becomes a matter of st ate responsibility or liability.   Hence it was proposed in 
the study to concentrate on determ ining the nature and extent of  this responsibility in the 
background of the development in the field of international law and also prepare a 
domestic legislation.   
Initiatives taken by the Committee for the examination of the Bill 
The Committee held its first meeting with  the Secretary, Department of Atomic 
Energy and the Chairman & Managing Direct or, Nuclear Power Corporation of India 
Limited and other senior offici als of the Department on the 8 th June, 2010, for a 
preliminary discussion on the va rious provisions of the Bill. In all the Committee  held 
thirteen meetings (five of them full day) to hear various expe rts, organizations, non-
governmental organizations and Secretaries of  the concerned Ministries/Departments on 
the  various aspects of the Bill on the 8 th, 15th, 16th, 23rd & 24th June, 2010 and 13th,  14th,   
21st  and   27th  July and 2nd, 3rd ,5th and 10th August, 2010.  

Considering the significance of the Bill, the Committee also issued a Press Release 
in the national dailies and ot her regional newspapers on the 24 th June, 2010, inviting 
memoranda containing suggestions/ views/  comments of experts/ institutions/ 
organizations   interested in  the  subject  matter of the Bill. In all 24 memoranda were 
received by the Committee from various organi zations and individuals, etc. which were 
sent to the Department of Atomic Energy for their comments/observations.  
The Committee also undertook a study visit to Mumbai and Chennai from        5th to 
8th July, 2010 in  the  course of examination  of  this Bill.  The Committee  
visited the Nuclear Power Plants at Tarapu r (Maharashtra) and Kalpakkam (Tamil Nadu) 
to have first-hand experience of the functi oning of various Nucl ear Power Plants, the 
safety parameters/measures whic h are in place to avoid a nucl ear incident and the effect 
of radiation in general on the environm ent, flora-fauna, water in the nearby 
rivers/lakes/ponds and the plant and animal lif e.  After the detailed examination during 
the course of the visit the Committee expres sed its satisfaction at the measures which 
have been initiated by the Nuclear Power Co rporation and the Department of Atomic 
Energy to avoid a nuclear incident and mitigat e the affects of nuclear radiation in the 
areas surrounding the nuclear plants.   
   The Committee heard the views of  a number of experts from various 
Institutes/Organisations/ Non- Governmental Organisations viz. Institute for Defence 
Studies & Analyses; Centre for Policy Re search; The Hindu Group; Green Peace India 
Society; PRS Legislative Research; Delhi Science Forum, and Coalition for Nuclear 
Disarmament & Peace. The Committee also he ld wide ranging discussions with the 
representatives of various Industrial Organisations viz. Federation of Indian Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry (FICCI); Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of  
India(ASSOCHAM); Confederation of Indi an Industry(CII) and the India Atomic 
Industrial Forum (IAIF). The representatives of Insurance companies both in public and 
private sectors namely New India Assuran ce Company Limited; United India Assurance 
Company Limited; General Insurance Compa ny Limited; ICICI Lombard and Tata AIG 
also presented their views on the aspects relating to the Insurance provisions of the Bill.  
Bajaj Alliance was also invited to present their views before the Committee but their 
representatives did not appear.   
 The Committee also interacted with the re presentatives of trade unions such as the 
Centre of Indian Trade Unions (CITU) , Bhartiya Mazdoor Sangh (BMS) and Hind 
Mazdoor Sabha (HMS) to know about the safety measures that are in place and also 
additional safety measures, if any, to be put in place to prot ect the workers in case of a 
nuclear incident and the compensation availabl e to them.  Representatives of All India 
Trade Union Congress (AITUC) however did not attend the meeting.  
  Since the consequences of nuclear a nd radiological incidents may have wider 
impact not only on human beings but also on crops, arable land/soil, bovine animals and 
other live stock, environment including la nd, water and biosphe re, food and food 
products stored in godowns, the Committee al so heard the views of all the concerned 
Secretaries of various Ministries/Departments of  Government of India viz; Ministry of 
Finance, Department of Expenditure; Power;  Environment & Forests; Water Resources; 
Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distri bution;  Labour and Em ployment; Agriculture; 

Health and Family Welfare alongwith Dir ector-General, Indian Council of Medical 
Research, etc to know about their opinion on the Bill pertaining to the component of the 
legislations falling under these respective Mi nistries/ Departments. The Committee also 
heard the views of Secretary, Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance; 
particularly on the insurance aspect of th e liability amount. Apart from the above the 
Committee also heard the views of Secretary, Ministry of   Home Affairs alongwith the 
Director-General, Central Industrial Securi ty Force & Vice-Chair man, National Disaster 
Management Authority to know about the exis ting preparedness of the ministry to deal 
with any eventuality in case of nuclear incide nt and the future preparations that they 
require to make for speedy evacuation, safety measures/security cover to be provided to 
the nuclear installations, etc. Alongwith the above, the clause-w ise opinion of the 
Secretary, Legislative Department, Ministry of Law & Justice, was also heard by the 
Committee.   
  Although, clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill had been on the agenda of 
the meetings of the Committee held on 5
th, 9th, 10th and 11th August, 2010, however, the 
Committee took up clause-by-clause consid eration of the draft report on the 17 th August, 
2010.   Twenty seven Members attended the m eeting on that day and adopted the report 
by broad consensus, except for two Members, namely, Dr. Barun Mukherjee and Shri 
Saman Pathak, who disagreed with some of  the observations/recommendations of the 
Committee.  The Chairman of the Committee tried to explain the position to those 
Members that their concerns have been take n care of in the report.  Still they gave 
minutes of dissent, which have been appended to the report.    
Views/     Suggestions     of     Experts      from      various      Organisations/
 
Non-Governmental Organisations/Trade Unions etc. 
(i) An opinion was expressed by one of the e xperts that the facilities directly owned 
by the Central Government or Government co mpanies are exempt from application of 
this clause regarding insurance, which will leave almost all facilities now operational, 
whether safeguarded or not, out of the Bill. This is dangerous because an accident is 
more likely to happen in an aging facility  built long ago and will  defeat the very 
purpose of the Bill. They were of the view that Insurance should be made mandatory as 
far as practicable for all operators, government or private.  
(ii) Some of the experts took  exception to Clause 16(5) of the Bill which provides that 
every award made by Claims Commissioner shall be final and desired that appeal against 
the award may be permitted.   
(iii) During the deliberations of the Committ ee, the experts expressed a view that the 
Bill permits recourse against suppliers only in cases of willful acts or gross negligence 
and should be redrafted to provi de for recourse to recover  damages levied  on the 
operator, damages to plant and machinery. It should contain prov isions from product 
liability laws that holds the supplier liabl e for product liability, faulty design, faulty 
manufacture, negligence, etc. Further the experts were of th e view that when the Clause 
17 is read with Section 6, it limits the amount that the Operator can claim from suppliers 
to Rs.500 crores only. Some of the experts we re also of the view that the Right of 
Recourse should be a separate clause altogether and should not be mixed with claims and 
awards and the operator of a nuclear installa tion shall be absolutely liable to pay the 
damages caused by the nuclear in cident. It shall be his fore most duty to pay damages to 
those affected first and then only, he may us e his right of recourse . One of the experts 

argued that deficiencies in the technology of a supplier wi ll not be propagated openly 
which could be discovered by the operator only during operation. Even if the supplier 
makes a contract with the operator, it would be in a vague and opaque language to hide 
his own deficiencies and would be a recipe for unending legislation.  
The Committee was, however, also inform ed by an expert organisation that the 
provision granting a right of recourse ag ainst the supplier (Sub-Clause B), does not 
comply with international ag reements of the major intern ational conventions agreement 
on nuclear liability (the Paris Conventi on, the Vienna Convention and the 1997 CSC) 
which provide for recourse only if: (a) there is  a written contract and (b) if the damage 
results from an act or omission of someone with intent to cause damage.  So, a legislation 
providing an additional right of recourse against the supplier for a willful act or 
negligence could not be compliant with CS C which Government proposes to join.  
Moreover, wilful act is difficult to prove in the court of law.   
(iv) The Committee during its deliberations came across an expert’s view that a 
period of ten years from the date of incide nt is an unacceptably short period for a 
nuclear accident, as usually the adverse effects of internal and external radiation 
exposure manifest themselves often quite late and may be even after twenty years
.  
(v) The Committee was suggested that Clau se 9 regarding appointment of Claims 
Commissioner(CC) and Clause 19 regarding the appointment to Nuclear Damage Claims 
Commission(NDCC), which appa rently shows that the appointment of CC and 
establishment of NDCC, will be done by issu ing a notification by the Government only 
after a nuclear incident takes place. It was also argued that Clause19(c) also provides for 
special measures for speedy adjudication of claims for compensation necessary in public 
interest by NDCC. It was further argued that the spirit of this clause is contradicted by 
Clause 21, which provides that the Chairperso n and Members of NDCC shall hold office 
for a term of three years, which is extenda ble by another three years if necessary. The 
Clause 22 provides for payment of salary and Allowances and retirement benefits of the 
Chairperson & Members of the NDCC and Clause 11 provides for the salary and 
allowances of the CC. As per the opinion of the expert, that if speedy adjudication is the 
spirit of Clause 19(c), then what is the jus tification of paying salary and allowances and 
other benefits to the Chairperson & Me mbers of NDCC and CC under Clauses 22 and 11 
respectively. Moreover, the jus tification of keeping Clause 21 in the Bill is apparently a 
contradiction to the spirit of Clause 19 (c) of the Bill as mentioned above. 
These suggestions were considered by the Committee.  
(vi) The Committee was also informed that  the Clause 35 takes away the citizen's 
right to appeal against the award give n by the Claims Commi ssioner or Claims 
Commission in case of a nuclear incident. Since the Commissioners and members of 
the Commission are persons taken mostly fr om administrative and government service 
background and they cannot be viewed on pa r with justices of High Courts or the 
Supreme Court. In 
our democracy, where the ultimate judicial responsibility rests 
with the Supreme Court of India, every citizen must have the right to approach the 
judiciary at the highest level, if need be to seek redressal.  
In the same vein, the experts opined that the Bill must include a clause that 
the victims themselves or their representati ves shall have the ri ght to approach any 
court in India to seek justice if they feel the same has b een denied to them through the 
provisions & procedures contained in the Bill. Such litigation could include cases 

against the operator, his suppliers of equi pment, civil constructors, designers and 
manufacturers of systems & equipment, etc. for compensation, over and above 
what has already been granted under the provisions of this Bill, for damages caused 
by these allied entities. The experts were therefore of the opinion that 
there must be 
provision for appeal to an appellate authority-High Court or Supreme Court, without 
prejudicing the immediate implementation/ enforcement of the award/order by the 
claims commission, otherwise, it would be violation of natural justice.  
These suggestions have been considered by the Committee. 
(vii) The experts observed that this Clause does not specify whether such 
proceedings (instituted under la ws other than the Bill) w ill be adjudicated by the 
Claims Commissioner or by a civi l court. In view of the ex clusion of jurisdiction of 
civil courts vide Sec tion 35, this issue required clarific ation. It also fa ils to specify 
whether suppliers can be proceeded agai nst under other laws i.e. it  restricts the 
operation of other laws only to the operator.  
These Suggestions have been considered by the Committee. 
(viii) Some of the experts opined that CSC stipulates that the compensation arising out 
of nuclear damage made available by ot her CSC members can be spent only to 
compensate damages suffered in the territory of a "Contracting Party", namely, a country 
which itself has acceded to the CSC. Accord ingly, if an Indian nuclear accident causes 
trans-boundary adverse impacts in any of th e neighboring countries , the liability for 
compensation has to be made from the I ndian taxpayers funds if no supplementary 
financial assistance from the CSC is forthcoming.  
Some other experts also opined that CSC does not have support from many 
countries and only thirteen count ries have signed it. The high  densities of nuclear power 
stations in Europe could be one of th e reasons for those countries pushing this 
convention, so that extra resources are available from international contributions.   
(ix) Some experts during their deliberations before the Committee said that this Bill is 
mainly to favour United States of America but this is not true.  Material provided by the 
Department of Atomic Energy and deposit ion of Secretary External Affairs on 
15.06.2010 suggests that there is no internationa l pressure and that the Government of 
India has entered into agreement with several countries such as France, Russia and USA.  
However, the Committee did not agree with their arguments.    
 
Views/Suggestions of Secretaries of the various Ministries/Departments of 
Government of India 
Ministry of Finance 
 The Finance Secretary while giving ev idence before the committee argued that 
conceptually there does not seem to be a symmetrical apportionment of responsibility 
between the operator and the Central Government while fixing the cap of Rs.500 crores 
as the amount of liability under clause 6 (2),  of the bill.  He further mentioned that 
Finance Ministry would be more happy if e ither there is no speci fic cut off of Rs.500 
crores or Rs.600 crores; and if it is possible to have any linkage with the kind of risk from 
the nuclear installation that can be quantifie d, it would be better.  And, in any case, the 
operator should have bul k of the responsibility.  He also argued that government’s 
liability should be quantified in the legislati on so that there is clar ity on who has to bear 
what part of the responsibility in the even t of an accident. The point of burden-sharing 

between the Central Government and the operator in case of liability, it should be based 
on an exact formula.  
The Secretary, Ministry of Fi nance expressed reservations over the fact that the 
Central Government is expected to meet the difference between the maximum amount of 
liability, i.e. rupee equivale nt of 300 Million SDR and the operator’s liability of Rs. 500 
Crores.  He was of the view that limiting the liability of the operator to a fixed amount of 
Rs. 500 Crores appears to be somewhat ar bitrary and exposed the Government to 
substantial liabilities for the operators’ failings. 
 Secretary, Ministry of Finance had acco rdingly suggested that a formula based 
limitation should be considered which matches the regime for the operator to the types of 
accidents that may occur so as to incentivise adherence to the higher safety standards; 
limit negligence and encourage the practice of  highest international standards while 
providing reasonable and scientifically determined cover by the Central Government.  
 While further discussing the issue of insurance, Secretary, Financial services, 
Ministry of Finance pointed out that GIC will do the initial  insurance but there is a 
nuclear pool available outside in other countr ies. CMD, GIC, who appeared before the 
committee argued that there are 28 pools in th e world working all around and these pools 
are connected to mother pool, and they provide cap acity to each pool as and when 
required.  So far as India is concerned, ther e is no concept as such  of providing nuclear 
liability as per legislations as well as the asset insurance for hot zone of nuclear power 
plant.  Insurance is only provided for the cold  zone where there is no nuclear reaction.  
He further stated that within the country capacity will be available of something about 50 
million dollar, around Rs.200 crores of rupees wh ich can be absorbed within GIC as well 
as the other insurance companies joining together and forming a pool.  Beyond this 
Rs.200 crores, when it comes to Rs.500 crores or what is decided, then GIC can work out 
a pool providing a liability due to this nuclear accident and wi th the support of 
international insurers who become  a part of this pool as such.  This is the concept which 
goes and GIC already has pool of same amount  like terrorism pool.  Chairman, GIC in a 
subsequent depositions stated that it would be possible to have a pool of Rs. 500 Crores. 
On the same concept, the Secretary, Financial Services stated that insurance in the form 
of nuclear pool which provide s liability towards nuclear accident as well as the asset 
liability could be provided by this pool.  
 Secretary, Financial Services, further ar gued that if insurance of 300 million SDR 
is done, the premium of insurance will be ex tremely high that is about 1.8 to 2.7 percent.
 He therefore argued that any increase in  premium of insurance will lead to 
increase in the cost of production of electricity for nuclear power.  It is argued that higher 
the liability limit higher will be the insuranc e premium and subsequently higher will be 
the cost of electricity production.   
 He further argued that insurance companie s are not doing insurance of hot areas.  
He also stated that if hot areas are also required to be insured and reinsured, it can be 
done because the nuclear pools in other countri es do the hot and cold areas insurance and 
reinsurance.  Now, regarding the capability of Indian insurance companies, he stated that 
India can build up expertise over  a period of time.  Once we are going to seriously enter 
into this area of insurance and reinsurance of the hot and cold areas, our insurance 
companies will certainly build up the expertise.  On the issue relating to foreign insurance 
companies, the Secretary stated that the rein surance with other nucle ar pools cannot take 

place if outside surveyors from other rein surance companies cannot come and inspect 
nuclear power plants which is mandatory. Without that, no insurance or reinsurance 
company from abroad will be in a position to provide insurance or reinsurance.   
At this stage, the CMD, GI C  emphasised that the permi ssion for inspecting the hot 
zone areas of a nuclear plant   is important in two senses.  First is that the inspectors who  
inspect  all these hot zone plants are well versed  with the intricacies   of this specific line.  
As per his argument, these people are not only internationally acclaimed inspectors and 
they inspect plants on the basis of management studies, they also even work out safety 
features  including the quality of  the plants  and positive features of safety and security 
involved in it.   After the in spection, as he informed the Committee, inspectors submit a 
detailed report carrying effective suggesti ons which the plant ope rator can follow to 
preserve the safety interest of the plant.    
The second point of argument what the CMD, GIC kept was that, on the basis of the 
report so submitted by the inspector, the plant op erator can rectify  any deficiency in the 
operation of the plant and a detailed risk analysis of the plant could be designed 
determining the premium part of the insura nce.   Therefore, ultimately, undertaking 
inspection is beneficial for the plant operato r  as it reduces the risk involved in the 
operation of the plant by taking all the positive measures as suggested in the  report.    
During deposition of Secretary, Financial Services, Chairman, Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Authority and Chairman a nd Managing Director , General Insurance 
Company, the Committee was informed that th ey can arrange insurance for any amount 
by seeking reinsurance from international insurance companies, provided foreign 
surveyors are allowed to inspec t Nuclear Power Plants.  Since Secretary, Department of 
Atomic Energy clarified that for the Nuclear Power Plants proposed to be installed in 
future, equipments would be purchased from foreign countries, foreign surveyors can be 
allowed.   
The Committee is satisfied with the development. 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affair s while commenting on the conditions in 
which the operator of a nuclear power plan t, who could be made  liable for nuclear 
damage, contain such terms as armed conflict, ho stilities, civil war, insurrection or an act 
of terrorism stated that these terms have wide  meanings but have not been defined in the 
present Bill.  Therefore there is a need for inserting meani ngs of these terms from other 
laws, in Section 2 of this Bill. Otherwise,  the vagueness in connotations, besides leading 
to situations of disputes between the ope rator and the Central Government make the 
operators negligent on observing security procedures.    
Ministry of Water resources 
The Secretary, Water resources was of th e opinion that any nuclear incident may 
induce radioactive contaminations in su rface, ground water bodies, and other water 
resources.  However, he stated that the Mi nistry does not have a ny facility for testing 
water quality, from point of view of nuclear  contamination because this work has been 
done by the Department of Atomic Energy.  Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy 
responded by saying that Ministry of Water Resources has not been involved in checking 
and monitoring the quality of water because this job is done by the Environmental Survey 
Laboratories of the Department of Atom ic Energy. The Secretary, Water Resources 

stated that since this expertise is available in the Department of Atomic Energy and not in 
Ministry of Water Resources, this Bill was not  sent to Ministry of Water Resources for 
their comments/views. He also stressed upon the need to study the impact of nuclear 
contaminated water on human beings, animals, plants and crops. 
Ministry of Environment & Forests 
Since, nuclear incident may have potential effect on environment, the Committee 
heard the views of Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests.  The Committee 
wanted to know from the Environment Secretary as to what efforts are being made to 
safeguard the environment system around the nuclear power plants in case of any nuclear 
incident. He suggested that this Bill itself clearly recognizes that nuclear incident could 
cause environmental damage, but the scope of environment has not been defined in the 
Bill.  So, it is necessary to define the scope of environment because if we define the 
scope of environment only then we will be able to make an assessment of the cost of 
measures for any remediation which will be required for the environment impaired due to 
nuclear incident. The Secretary, in this cont ext, suggested that the definition of the 
environment as given in Environment protec tion Act, 1986 which is a tried and tested 
definition should be adopted for this Bill and su itably incorporated in the Bill in Clause 
2(f) (iv).   
Commenting on the Clause 18 of the B ill, the Ministry of Environment & 
Forests, who were consulted in the matter we re of the view that the time limit of 10 
years may extinguish the genuine claim of  victims who have been affected by 
mutagenic and teratogenic changes, which may have a delayed onset and therefore 
suggested that the time limit may be determin ed in consultation w ith the Ministry of 
Health & Family Welfare and  it should be computed from the date on which the cause 
of action for such compensation first arose, ra ther than from the date of notification of 
the  nuclear accident as provided in the Bill.
 
Ministry of Law & Justice(Legislative Department) 
While discussing Clause 4 of the Bill, the Secretary pointed out that the Section 3 
(a) of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 provides that the Central Government shall have 
power to produce, develop, use and dispose of  atomic energy either by itself or through 
any authority or Corporation established by it or a Government company and carry out 
research into any matters connected therewith.  He further stated that in this Bill the 
expression “either by itself or th rough any authority or corpor ation established by it, or a 
Government company” has not been provided.   
While contesting the legal position of  clause 35, Secretary, Legislative 
Department deposed before the Committee by saying that whenever a particular 
specialized body or a tribunal ad judicate, in many of the Acts the appeal is provided to 
the High Court or the Supreme Court.  The difference between the appeal and the writ 
petition is that writ petition can be dismissed in limini , whereas, the right of appeal 
cannot be dismissed and has to be adjudicate d. He further mentioned that whenever any 
legislation is brought and any special mechanism is created because there is a lot of 
pendency in the courts, for the adjudication of  the cases, either tri bunal or a commission 
is created for the purpose of the adjudication of a particular matter  being technical in 
nature.  So, for that purpose, a tribunal or a commission is created, this is the usual clause 
which is found there which debars the jurisdic tion of the civil courts.  So far as the 

jurisdiction of the High Courts and the Supr eme Court under articles  226 or 32 of the 
Constitution is concerned, nobody can debar th at. Anybody can go to the High Court and 
Supreme Court, and this is the usual provision which is found.   
The Secretary, Legislative Department further repeated his argument by saying 
that no separate clause is necessary to amplif y the fact that appellate jurisdiction always 
remains in-vogue vide articles 226 and 32 in the Constitution since it finds a place in a 
large number of statutes and it has been existing for a very long time.  However, he 
agreed to the fact that if the Committee insists, a separate provision invoking the 
application of judicial review could be incorporated in a suitable place in the legislation. 
Ministry of External Affairs 
 The Committee enquired from the Foreign Secretary that whether there are other 
considerations apart from the legal requireme nts that necessitated the Bill. She informed 
that since the Government is operating within the ambit of international agreements and 
on the basis of certain principles the nation should have provisions of the nuclear liability 
Bill. She further informed that the Bill needed to be seen in the background that currently 
there is no regulatory mechanism or legislative provision in India for dealing with claims 
of damages arising out of a nuclear incident. Moreover, domestic civil nuclear liability 
regime in India would help in realising th e potential for nuclear c ooperation with various 
countries.  
Ministry of Power 
 The Secretary, Ministry of Power appr ised the Committee about the implications 
and importance of joint-venture projects to be undertaken between the National Thermal 
Power Corporation Ltd.(a Government PSU) and the NPCIL, as regards nuclear power 
production in India. He was of the view that operator and Government seem to be the 
same entity as per the Bill, however, at the same time there should be a clear distinction. 
In his view there is a bit of blurring betw een these two components and it would have its 
bearing on the liability sharing between them in case of nuclear incident. He also referred 
to the Clause 3 of the Bill, wherein the notif ication regarding the occurrence of a nuclear 
incident is to be issued within 15 days by the AERB, and as  per the opinion of the Power 
Secretary, the nuclear power station incharge/ director will immediately declare nuclear 
emergency, and forthwith the disaster management plan will start, without waiting for the 
publication of the notification and the 15 days time-period also needs to be reduced. 
Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution (Department of Food 
& Public Distribution)  
 The Secretary, Department of Food & Pu blic Distribution, wh ile explaining the 
functioning of her Ministry, emphasized the il l-effects of nuclear radiation on food items 
and its subsequent repercussions on human heal th and safeguards to be taken to prevent 
nuclear contamination of food during radiol ogical accidents. She further mentioned 
although radiological damage to food items ma y fall within the generic definition of the 
property as mentioned in Clause 2f(ii) of the Bill, it would be better if the said Clause 
could provide a separate definition food gr ains alongwith of storage of foodgrains. 
Additionally she also mentioned that safe ty norms, distance, location and operating 
procedure, which should be defined in the Bi ll during the construction of the warehouses 
for foodgrains storage to be followed, near a nuclear facility. She also mentioned about 

the establishment of laborator ies for the standard testing of food articles to ascertain 
radiation levels. 
 Ministry  of Health and Family Welfare 
 The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare while deposing before the 
Committee mentioned that her Ministry is nowhere  to meet  an eventuality that may arise 
out of nuclear and radiological emergencies.   She further me ntioned that while drafting 
the Bill the Dept. of Atomic Energy did not c onsult them.   Since the response system to 
deal with any kind of emergency of such ty pe, the hospitals are no t well-equipped, it is 
natural that mortality and morbidity due to multiple burn, blasts, radiation injuries and 
psycho-social impact could be on very high sc ale and medical tackling  of such a large 
emergency  could have enough repe rcussions in the ne arby areas of radio active fall out.   
She also mentioned that in the entire Bill, th ere is not a single cl ause which speaks about 
taking health care during radiological emergenc ies.  It reflects only about payment of 
compensation due to health impacts of such  radiation.  She suggested while setting up 
nuclear plants  consideration may also be gi ven to the fact that there should be hospital 
having trained doctors near such establishmen ts  and arrangements should also be made 
for free treatment of people who are affected by serious nuclear fall out.      
 
Ministry of Agriculture 
 The Secretary, Agriculture mentioned be fore the Committee that the disaster 
management structure in the country is oriented in such a manner that emergencies  
arising out of floods, earthqua kes and droughts  could be managed  in an efficient 
manner.   However, on the other hand, unfortunately the disaster management structure in 
the country, as per his opini on, is not well tailored  in m eeting radiological fall out and 
more  unfortunate to mention that even edu cated section of the people is not well aware 
about the implications of a serious  nuclear disaster.   He ther efore, felt that more public 
awareness needs to be built in respect of nuclear disaster and its hair-raising impact on 
biological population.    He further pointed out that as a consequence of a nuclear disaster 
of the Chernobyl type, it is quite possible that  agricultural crops    around 30 to 100 kms. 
from the site of the incident could be wiped out total.   This may affect seriously the 
biodiversity of the crops   in the radiation area and the farmer may loose their traditional 
variety of crops.  In this c onnection he mentioned that th e National Bureau of Plant  
Genetic Resources  and  Gene Bank in the country who are keeping a sample of each 
variety of crops  can preserve  these va rieties which could be planted for further 
production if a variety of crops is entirely lost due to ra diological emergency.    He 
however, mentioned that there should be suit able rules, regulati ons and guidelines and 
compensation model for agricultural damage th at could be inserted at an appropriate 
place in the legislation which may work after a radiological eventuality takes place.  
Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy, howev er, stated that the Reactor at Chernobyl 
did not have a containment, while old reactors in India have containments and, therefore, 
Chernobyl type incident can never take place in India.   
 
Ministry of Labour and Employment 
Secretary, Ministry of Labour and Employme nt while referring to Clause 5 (1)(i) 
which provides for non-liability of operator for any nuclear damage arising out of a grave 
natural disaster of an exceptional character  pointed out that grave natural disaster should 

not include earthquakes or floods.   He advi sed the Committee that if nuclear plant is 
placed in a seismic zone,  it should be properly designed to withstand earthquake of 
severe character.  The word natural disaster is too general.    
 He further mentioned that concept of absolu te liability of the operator  in case of a 
nuclear damage whether it is on worker or someone else should be invoked in the Bill.   
The Secretary, while referring to Clause 39 (1) of the Bill, drew the attention of 
the Committee that no specific monetary quan tum has been mentioned in regard to the 
fine to be imposed under the chapter on offenses  and penalties.  He therefore, suggested 
that specific quantum   of fine in monetary  terms should be defined in the Bill.   He 
further mentioned about Factories Act wherein under the chapter for Hazardous 
Processes, the maximum period of imprisonme nt  is 10 years.  Since handling nuclear 
equipments could be equally hazardous  the term of imprisonment in the chapter on 
Offenses and Penalties under Clau se 39(1)  could be increase d to at least 10 years as on 
the line as mentioned in Fact ories Act instead of 5 years, as currently mentioned in the 
legislation.     
Ministry of Defence 
 The Defence Secretary, who also appeared  before the Committee, mentioned that 
in peace time there are different levels of protection cover of various civilian assets in the 
country, which are called ‘vital assets’ and also include  nucl ear assets as per their very 
nature. Under different layers of protection, nuclear assets including nuclear installations 
are being protected through Defence. However he admitted that absolute and fool proof 
protection cannot be guaranteed  for any nuclear or other a ssets in the country during 
peace or war.     
 The Director General, Coast Guard also mentioned that since maritime security is 
a matter of great concern and since some of th e nuclear installations are located along the 
coast, the co-ordination, operational and cap acity building assets have been emphasized 
to improve coastal security and radars have  been put up along the coast, along with the 
introduction of coastal or marine police fo r patrolling vulnerable points. A number of 
joint operational exercises with the navy have taken place in pursuit of coastal security.    
 In the meeting held on 5
th August, 2010, Secretaries of the Ministries of Health 
and Family Welfare, Agriculture, Labour and Employment, Environment and Forests 
appeared before the Committee with formula tions of changes suggested by them in the 
Bill.  These formulations were discussed with  the Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs 
as well as Legislative Department and the Committee considered these formulations and 
agreed to incorporate some of the suggestions.   
Observations and Recommendations of the Committee 
 It has been the unanimous opinion of  the Committee that the Bill being a 
domestic legislation should reflect Indian  interests.  Accordin gly, it has been the 
attempt of the Committee to ensure that the B ill is in line with India’s expectations 
in terms of adequacy and promptness of payment of compensation and also to 
enable Indian nuclear industry to grow by no t subjecting it to excessive burden.  At 
the same time, it has also been the ob jective of the Committee to see that the 
provisions of the present legislation can be made in consonance with the 
International Convention, so that as and wh en needed India can join it for availing 

of benefits flowing from this Internatio nal Convention finalised under the aegis of 
the single universal organisation for nuclear cooperation – IAEA.  
 When the Committee inquired from the Secretaries of 
Ministries/Departments of Government of India who appeared before the 
Committee as to whether the draft nuclear  liability Bill was referred to them for 
their views/comments, some of them viz. Ministries of Health & Family Welfare, 
Agriculture, Labour & Employment, Food & Public Distribution, etc. replied in the 
negative.  The Committee is of the opinion that Government must have sought the 
opinion of Ministries which are even di stantly related to any provision of the 
legislation.  The Committee, therefore,  recommends that in future Government 
should consult all such Mini stries/ Departments which are even remotely concerned 
with the provisions of a proposed legislation.   
 The Committee after taking into account the views/ suggestions of all experts 
and various Secretaries of the Ministries/ Departments of Government of India, who 
appeared before the Committee, observes the following clause-wise views and 
recommendations that could be incorporated in the Bill:   
Clause 1  
 Some of the witnesses who appeared  before the Committee expressed their 
apprehensions that private operators may enter into nuclear energy sector sooner or later.  
It was also stated by them that Government should not give subsidy to the private nuclear 
operators.  The Committee has take n their suggestions into account.  The Committee 
after hearing the views of the Secretary, Legislative Department also, recommends 
that a new Sub-clause 3 (A) should be insert ed into Clause 1 after Sub-clause (3)(e) 
which may read as follows:-  
 “The Bill applies only to nuclear installations owned and controlled by the 
Central Government either by itself or  through any authority or corporation 
established by it or a government compan y, as defined in the Atomic Energy Act, 
1962.” 
 This will make the position clear that  there will be no private operator of 
nuclear installation.  
Clause 2 
 Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare suggested that the meaning of 
nuclear damage needs to be expanded so as to  include loss of or da mage to health of a 
person.   The Committee considered the suggest ion of the Health Secretary and 
recommends that Sub-clause f (i) of Clause 2 of the Bill should be read as follows:- 
 Loss of life or personal injury (incl uding immediate and long term health 
impact to a person). 
 The Committee after hearing the view s of the Secretary, Ministry of 
Environment & Forests feels that the meaning of the word ‘environment’ as 
assigned to it in Clause (a) of Section 2 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
should be suitably incorporated in the Bill.  

 The Committee finds that the definition of the term ‘operator’ as provided in 
Clause 2(l) of the Bill is not clear.  The Committee, therefore,  recommends that this 
clause may be modified as follows:- 
 ‘Operator’, in relation to a nuclear in stallation, means the person designated 
by the Central Government as per Sectio n 3(a) of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 as 
the operator of that installation.   
Clause 6 (1) 
  The Committee thoroughly discussed the i ssue of maximum amount of liability in 
respect of each nucl ear incident as provided in Clause 6(1) of the Bill.  The Committee 
feels that this Clause needs to be modifi ed and recommends that Clause 6(1) may be 
read as follows: 
 
 “The maximum amount of liability in res pect of each nuclear incident shall 
be the rupee equivalent of three hundred m illion Special Drawing Rights or such 
higher amount as may be notified by the Central Government from time to time.   
Clause 6 (2) 
A majority of the experts who deposed before the Committee were of the view that the 
cap on liability of an operator to Rs. 500 crore is on the lower side and it should be 
increased.  The Committee is also of the opinion th at keeping in view the disastrous 
effects of a nuclear incident an d the consequent loss or injury to life, damage to property, 
economic loss, cost of measures for reinstat ement of the damages to the environment, 
keeping the level of liability of the operator to Rupees 500 crores seems to be inadequate. 
The Committee also feels that  a lower amount may result in the operator marginalising 
the issue of safety and security of the nuclear  power plant, which may lead to an incident. 
Since the operator holds a no-fault liability and is being held responsible for a nuclear 
incident, the Committee is of the opinion that it should bear a substantial cost of payment 
of compensation for the nuclear incident. The Committee therefore recommends that 
the liability of the operator needs an upw ard revision from the present level of Rs 
500 crores, specially keeping in view the present level of inflation and the purchase 
value of the Indian currency.  The Committee, after cons idering the issue feels 
that the principle of no faul t/ strict liability of the op erator should be explicitly 
stated in the Bill and the amount of liabili ty of the operator should be rupees 1500 
Crores.    
The Committee feels that the further prov iso to Clause 6 (2) of the Bill which 
gives power to the Central Government to e ither increase or decrease the amount of 
liability of the operato r by notification, having regard to th e extent of risk involved in a 
nuclear installation, is not justified.   
  The Committee is of the opinion that  the decrease in liability cannot be 
accepted.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that while Government may 
increase the amount but in no case it should decrease it.   
  The Department further explained th at the powers to reduce the amount of 
liability was considered as there are many research reactors which are small and there are 
also other facilities such as fuel fabricat ion, reprocessing, transportation etc. which may 
not require high level of  financial security.  The Committee in view of the above feels 

that if required the Governme nt may create a separate ca tegory for such facilities 
based on the extent of risk involved.   
  Some of the experts suggested that nuc lear operators coul d create a nuclear 
liability fund by charging a nominal amount in the unit energy cost in such a way that in 
course of time Government liability is reduced.   
 The Committee agrees with the above views and recommends that Clause 6 
may be appropriately reframed.     
Clause 10 
 After hearing the views of the experts in th is Clause and also keeping in view the 
financial magnitude and the extreme scale of  human tragedy that may occur from the 
possible nuclear holocaust that may emanate from a nuclear incident, the Committee 
recommends that the compensation amount sh ould be determined by an officer not 
less than the rank of Additional Secretary to Government of India or a judicial 
authority of a similar rank, instead of an officer of the rank of Joint Secretary in the 
Bill. 
Clause 17 
The Committee is of the view that the imp lication of the word ‘wilful act or gross 
negligence’ is quite vague in the context of the present Bill. In case an incident takes 
place it would be difficult to prove and establish the fact that it was a wilful act or gross 
negligence on part of the supplier. Hence there should be clear cut liability on the 
supplier of nuclear equipments/m aterial  in case they are found to be defective. Clause 
17(b) gives escape route to the suppliers of nuclear materials, equipments, services of his 
employees as their willful act or gross negligence would be difficult to establish in a civil 
nuclear compensation case. Mens rea, which is only amplifying the intent in clause 17(b), 
as argued by the Secretary (Legislative Depart ment) is generally used in Criminal and 
taxation laws, but in compensation cases the use of this doctrine is grossly inadequate and 
misplaced.  The Committee therefore recommends th at Clause 17 (a) may end with 
word “and” and Clause 17 (b) should be modified as: 
 “the nuclear incident has resulted as a consequence of latent or patent defect, 
supply of sub-standard material, defective equipment or services or from the gross 
negligence on the part of the supplier of the material, equipment or services.” 
 The Committee also recommends that th e operator must secure his interest 
through appropriate provisions in the contract with the supplier.   
 Even though the supplier is liable to the operator as per Clause 17(a), (b) and 
(c) of the Bill, the Committe e recommends that if a written contract between the 
operator and the supplier provides for the right of recourse, the operator, may, after 
compensating the victims, exercise his right of recourse against the supplier in 
accordance with the provisions of the contract.   
  The Committee therefore, recommends that the above observations of the 
Committee should be reflected in Clause 17 of the Bill. 
Clause 18 
The Committee agrees with the contenti on of the experts and the Secretary, 
Ministry of Environment & Forests that a period of ten years from the date of 

incident is a short period for a nuclear acci dent, as usually the adverse effects of 
internal and external radiation exposure ma nifest themselves often quite late. A 
number of experts, NGOs, Trade unions etc. have also suggested to increase it to 
twenty years. Moreover, Di rector, Tata Memorial Hosp ital, Mumbai, categorically 
mentioned that any cancer reported within first five years of radiation exposure is 
almost certainly not related to radiati on exposure. Mutation related changes take 
minimum five to seven years and earlier than that mutation cannot be expressed 
into a grossly killer cancer. He therefore emph asized that to be on a safer side this 
limit may be put to about twenty years. 
The Committee therefore recommends that 
period of extinction of right to claim co mpensation of any nuclear damage in case 
of personal injury is short and may be increased to twenty years.  The Committee 
is further of the view that the claim shou ld be computed from the date on which 
the cause of action for such compensation first arose, rather than from the date of 
notification of the nuclear incident as provided in the Bill. 
Clause 20 
Some experts suggested that it is not desirable that a Committee consisting of 
bureaucrats decides the appointment of Chairperson and Members of the Nuclear 
Damage Claims Commission (NDCC) as provided in Clause 20(2)  of the Bill.   
The Committee agrees with the views put by the experts and recommends 
that the appointment of Chairperson and other Members of the Commission should 
be done by the Central Government by any other credible mechanism.   
Clause 35 and 46 
The Committee observes that both Clau ses 35 and 46 deal separately with 
legal remedies to the victims and feels that all the legal  remedies available to the 
victims should be dealt together. 
It should also be clarified that the Clau se 35 ensures that prom pt remedy is given 
to the victims without protracted litigation. The Committee recommends that victims 
shall have right to appeal to the High Court and Supreme Court if they are not 
satisfied with the award given by the Claims Commissioner or Nuclear Damage 
Claims Commission.                                                                                                                
 
 
 
 
 
NOTE OF DISSENT ON THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE 
BILL 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

Annexure 
THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE BILL, 2010 
————— 
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES 
————— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
CLAUSES 
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE 
3. Atomic Energy Regulatory Board to notify nuclear incident. 
4. Liability of operator. 
5. Operator not liable in certain circumstances. 
6. Limits of liability. 
7. Liability of Central Government. 
8. Operator to maintain insurance or financial securities. 
CHAPTER III 
C
LAIMS COMMISSIONER 
9. Compensation for nuclear damage and its adjudication. 
10. Qualifications for appointment as Claims Commissioner. 
11. Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Claims 
Commissioner. 
12. Adjudication procedure and powers of Claims Commissioner. 
CHAPTER IV 
CLAIMS AND AWARDS 
13. Inviting application for claims by Claims Commissioner. 
14. Persons entitled to make application for nuclear damage. 
15. Procedure for making application before Claims Commissioner. 
16. Award by Claims Commissioner. 
17. Operator's right of recourse. 
18. Extinction of right to claim. 
CHAPTER V 
N
UCLEAR DAMAGE CLAIMS COMMISSION 
19. Establishment of Nuclear Damage Claims Commission. 
20. Composition of Commission. 
21. Term of office. 
22. Salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and 
Members. 
23. Filling up of vacancies. 
24. Resignation and removal. 
25. Chairperson or Member deemed to retire from service. 
26. Suspension of pension. 
27. Prohibition of acting as Arbitrator. 
28. Prohibition of practice. 
T
O BE INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
Bill No. 19 of 2010 
29. Powers of Chairperson. 
30. Officers and other employees of Commission. 
31. Application for compensation before Commission. 
32. Adjudication procedure and powers of Commission. 
33. Transfer of pending cases to Commission. 
34. Proceedings before Claims Commissioner or Commission to be judicial proceedings. 
35. Exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts. 

36. Enforcement of awards. 
37. Annual report. 
38. Dissolution of Commission in certain circumstances. 
CHAPTER VI 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
39. Offences and penalties. 
40. Offences by companies. 
41. Offences by Government Departments. 
42. Cognizance of offences. 
CHAPTER VII 
M
ISCELLANEOUS 
43. Power to give directions. 
44. Power to call for information. 
45. Exemption from application of this Act. 
46. Act to be in addition to any other law. 
47. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
48. Power to make rules. 
49. Power to remove difficulties. 
(ii) 
C
LAUSES 
THE CIVIL LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE BILL, 2010 
A 
BILL 
to provide for civil liability for nuclear damage, appointment of Claims Commissioner, 
establishment of Nuclear Damage Claims Commission and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-first Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
1. (1) This Act may be called the Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage Act, 2010. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
Short title, 
extent, 
application 
and 
commencement. 
Bill No. 19 of 2010 
2 
(3) It also applies to nuclear damage suffered— 
(a) in or over the maritime areas beyond the territorial waters of India; 
(b) in or over the exclusive economic zone of India as referred to in section 7 of 
the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and Other Maritime 
Zones Act, 1976; 
(c) on board or by a ship registered in India under section 22 of the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958 or under any other law for the time being in force; 
(d) on board or by an aircraft registered in India under clause (d) of sub-section 
(2) of section 5 of the Aircraft Act, 1934 or under any other law for the time being in 
force; 
(e) on or by an artificial island, installation or structure under the jurisdiction of 
India. 
(4) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification, 
appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any 
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a 
reference to the coming into force of that provision. 
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) "Chairperson" means the Chairperson of the Commission appointed under 
sub-section (1) of section 20; 

(b) "Claims Commissioner" means the Claims Commissioner appointed under 
sub-section (2) of section 9; 
(c) "Commission" means the Nuclear Damage Claims Commission established 
under section 19; 
(d) "Member" means a Member of the Commission appointed under sub-section 
(1) of section 20; 
(e) "notification" means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the 
term "notify" shall be construed accordingly; 
(f) "nuclear damage'' means— 
(i) loss of life or personal injury to a person; or 
(ii) loss of, or damage to, property, 
caused by or arising out of a nuclear incident, and includes each of the following to the 
extent notified by the Central Government; 
(iii) any economic loss, arising from the loss or damage referred to in 
clauses (i) or (ii) and not included in the claims made under those clauses, if 
incurred by a person entitled to claim such loss or damage; 
(iv) costs of measures of reinstatement of impaired environment caused 
by a nuclear incident, unless such impairment is insignificant, if such measures 
are actually taken or to be taken and not included in the claims made under 
clause (ii); 
(v) loss of income deriving from an economic interest in any use or 
enjoyment of the environment, incurred as a result of a significant impairment of 
that environment caused by a nuclear incident, and not included in the claims 
under clause (ii); 
(vi) the costs of preventive measures, and further loss or damage caused 
by such measures; 
80 of 1976. 
44 of 1958. 
22 of 1934. 
Definitions. 
3 
(vii) any other economic loss, other than the one caused by impairment of 
the environment referred to in clauses (iv) and (v), in so far as it is permitted by the 
general law on civil liability in force in India and not claimed under any such law, 
in the case of sub-clauses (i) to (v) and (vii) above, to the extent the loss or damage 
arises out of, or results from, ionizing radiation emitted by any source of radiation 
inside a nuclear installation, or emitted from nuclear fuel or radioactive products or 
waste in, or of, nuclear material coming from, originating in, or sent to, a nuclear 
installation, whether so arising from the radioactive properties of such matter, or 
from a combination of radioactive properties with toxic, explosive or other hazardous 
properties of such matter; 
(g) "nuclear fuel" means any material which is capable of producing energy 
by a self-sustaining chain process of nuclear fission; 
(h) "nuclear incident" means any occurrence or series of occurrences having 
the same origin which causes nuclear damage or, but only with respect to preventive 
measures, creates a grave and imminent threat of causing such damage; 
(i) "nuclear installation" means— 
(A) any nuclear reactor other than one with which a means of transport 
is equipped for use as a source of power, whether for propulsion thereof or for 
any other purpose; 
(B) any facility using nuclear fuel for the production of nuclear material, 
or any facility for the processing of nuclear material, including re-processing 
of irradiated nuclear fuel; and 
(C) any facility where nuclear material is stored (other than storage 
incidental to the carriage of such material). 
Explanation.— For the purpose of this clause, several nuclear installations 
of one operator which are located at the same site shall be considered as a single 

nuclear installation; 
(j) "nuclear material" means and includes— 
(i) nuclear fuel (other than natural uranium or depleted uranium) capable 
of producing energy by a self-sustaining chain process of nuclear fission 
outside a nuclear reactor, either by itself or in combination with some other 
material; and 
(ii) radioactive products or waste; 
(k) "nuclear reactor" means any structure containing nuclear fuel in such an 
arrangement that a self-sustaining chain process of nuclear fission can occur therein 
without an additional source of neutrons; 
(l) "operator", in relation to a nuclear installation, means the person designated 
by the Central Government as the operator of that installation; 
(m) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(n) "preventive measures" means any reasonable measures taken by a person 
after a nuclear incident has occurred to prevent or minimise damage referred to in 
sub-clauses (i) to (v) and (vii) of clause (f), subject to the approval of the Central 
Government; 
(o) "radioactive products or waste" means any radioactive material produced 
in, or any material made radioactive by exposure to, the radiation incidental to the 
production or utilisation of nuclear fuel, but does not include radioisotopes which 
have reached the final stage of fabrication so as to be usable for any scientific, 
medical, agricultural, commercial or industrial purpose; 
4 
(p) "Special Drawing Rights" means Special Drawing Rights as determined by 
the International Monetary Fund. 
CHAPTER II 
LIABILITY FOR NUCLEAR DAMAGE 
3. (1) The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board constituted under the Atomic Energy 
Act, 1962 shall, within a period of fifteen days from the date of occurrence of a nuclear 
incident, notify such nuclear incident: 
Provided that where the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board is satisfied that the gravity 
of threat and risk involved in a nuclear incident is insignificant, it shall not be required to 
notify such nuclear incident. 
(2) The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board shall, immediately after the notification 
under sub-section (1) is issued, cause wide publicity to be given to the occurrence of such 
nuclear incident, in such manner as it may deem fit. 
4. (1) The operator of the nuclear installation shall be liable for nuclear damage caused 
by a nuclear incident — 
(a) in that nuclear installation; or 
(b) involving nuclear material coming from, or originating in, that nuclear 
installation and occurring before — 
(i) the liability for nuclear incident involving such nuclear material has 
been assumed, pursuant to a written agreement, by another operator; or 
(ii) another operator has taken charge of such nuclear material; or 
(iii) the person duly authorised to operate a nuclear reactor has taken 
charge of the nuclear material intended to be used in that reactor with which 
means of transport is equipped for use as a source of power, whether for 
propulsion thereof or for any other purpose; or 
(iv) such nuclear material has been unloaded from the means of transport 
by which it was sent to a person within the territory of a foreign State; or 
(c) involving nuclear material sent to that nuclear installation and occurring 
after— 
(i) the liability for nuclear incident involving such nuclear material has 
been transferred to that operator, pursuant to a written agreement, by the operator 
of another nuclear installation; or 
(ii) that operator has taken charge of such nuclear material; or 

(iii) that operator has taken charge of such nuclear material from a person 
operating a nuclear reactor with which a means of transport is equipped for use 
as a source of power, whether for propulsion thereof or for any other purpose; or 
(iv) such nuclear material has been loaded, with the written consent of 
that operator, on the means of transport by which it is to be carried from the 
territory of a foreign State. 
(2) Where more than one operator is liable for nuclear damage, the liability of the 
operators so involved shall, in so far as the damage attributable to each operator is not 
separable, be joint and several: 
Provided that the total liability of such operators shall not exceed the extent of liability 
specified under sub-section (2) of section 6. 
33 of 1962. 
Atomic Energy 
Regulatory 
Board to notify 
nuclear 
incident. 
Liability of 
operator. 
5 
(3) Where several nuclear installations of one and the same operator are involved in a 
nuclear incident, such operator shall, in respect of each such nuclear installation, be liable to 
the extent of liability specified under sub-section (2) of section 6. 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) where nuclear damage is caused by a nuclear incident occurring in a nuclear 
installation on account of temporary storage of material-in-transit in such installation, 
the person responsible for transit of such material shall be deemed to be the operator; 
(b) where a nuclear damage is caused as a result of nuclear incident during the 
transportation of nuclear material, the consignor shall be deemed to be the operator; 
(c) where any written agreement has been entered into between the consignor 
and the consignee or, as the case may be, the consignor and the carrier of nuclear 
material, the person liable for any nuclear damage under such agreement shall be 
deemed to be the operator; 
(d) where both nuclear damage and damage other than nuclear damage have 
been caused by a nuclear incident or, jointly by a nuclear incident and one or more 
other occurrences, such other damage shall, to the extent it is not separable from the 
nuclear damage, be deemed to be a nuclear damage caused by such nuclear incident. 
5. (1) An operator shall not be liable for any nuclear damage where such damage is 
caused by a nuclear incident directly due to— 
(i) a grave natural disaster of an exceptional character; or 
(ii) an act of armed conflict, hostility, civil war, insurrection or terrorism. 
(2) An operator shall not be liable for any nuclear damage caused to— 
(i) the nuclear installation itself and any other nuclear installation including a 
nuclear installation under construction, on the site where such installation is located; 
and 
(ii) to any property on the same site which is used or to be used in connection 
with any such installation; or 
(iii) to the means of transport upon which the nuclear material involved was 
carried at the time of nuclear incident: 
Provided that any compensation liable to be paid by an operator for a nuclear 
damage shall not have the effect of reducing the amount of his liability in respect of 
any other claim for damage under any other law for the time being in force. 
(3) Where any nuclear damage is suffered by a person on account of his own negligence 
or from his own acts of commission or omission, the operator shall not be liable to such 
person. 
6. (1) The maximum amount of liability in respect of each nuclear incident shall be 
the rupee equivalent of three hundred million Special Drawing Rights. 

(2) The liability of an operator for each nuclear incident shall be rupees five hundred 
crores: 
Provided that the Central Government may, having regard to the extent of risk involved 
in a nuclear installation, by notification, either increase or decrease the amount of liability 
of the operator: 
Provided further that where the amount of liability is decreased, it shall not be less 
than rupees one hundred crore: 
Provided also that the amount of liability shall not include any interest or cost of 
proceedings. 
Operator not 
liable in 
certain 
circumstances. 
Limits of 
liability. 
6 
7. The Central Government shall be liable for nuclear damage in respect of a nuclear incident, — 
(a) where the liability exceeds the amount of liability of an operator specified 
under sub-section (2) of section 6, to the extent such liability exceeds such liability of 
the operator; 
(b) occurring in a nuclear installation owned by it; and 
(c) occurring on account of causes specified in clauses (i) and (ii) of subsection 
(1) of section 5. 
8. (1) The operator shall, before he begins operation of his nuclear installation, take 
out insurance policy or such other financial security, covering his liability under sub-section 
(2) of section 6, in such manner as may be prescribed. 
(2) The operator shall from time to time renew the insurance policy or other financial 
security referred to in sub-section (1), before the expiry of the period of validity thereof. 
(3) The provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall not apply to a nuclear installation 
owned by the Central Government. 
CHAPTER III 
CLAIMS COMMISSIONER 
9. (1) Whoever suffers nuclear damage shall be entitled to claim compensation in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
(2) For the purposes of adjudicating upon claims for compensation in respect of 
nuclear damage, the Central Government shall, by notification, appoint one or more Claims 
Commissioners for such area, as may be specified in that notification. 
10. A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Claims Commissioner unless 
he— 
(a) is or has been or qualified to be a District Judge; or 
(b) is or has been in the service of the Central Government and has held the post 
of the Joint Secretary to the Government of India or any other equivalent post in the 
Central Government for a period of not less than five years and possesses special 
knowledge in law relating to nuclear liability arising out of nuclear incident. 
11. The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of 
Claims Commissioner shall be such as may be prescribed. 
12. (1) For the purposes of adjudication of claims under this Act, the Claims 
Commissioner shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed. 
(2) For the purpose of holding inquiry, the Claims Commissioner may associate with 
him such persons having expertise in the nuclear field or such other persons and in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) Where any person is associated under sub-section (2), he shall be paid such 
remuneration, fee or allowance, as may be prescribed. 
(4) The Claims Commissioner shall, for the purposes of discharging his functions 
under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:— 
Liability of 

Central 
Government. 
Operator to 
maintain 
insurance or 
financial 
securities. 
Compensation 
for nuclear 
damage and 
its 
adjudication. 
Qualifications 
for 
appointment 
as Claims 
Commissioner. 
Salary, 
allowances 
and other 
terms and 
conditions of 
service of 
Claims 
Commissioner. 
Adjudication, 
procedure and 
powers of 
Claims 
Commissioner. 
5 of 1908. 
7 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him 
on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or office; 
(e) issuing of commission for the examination of any witness; 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(5) The Claims Commissioner shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of 
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. 
CHAPTER IV 
CLAIMS AND AWARDS 
13. After the notification of nuclear incident under sub-section (1) of section 3, the 
Claims Commissioner, having jurisdiction over the area, shall cause wide publicity to be 
given, in such manner as he deems fit, for inviting applications for claiming compensation for 
nuclear damage. 
14. An application for compensation before the Claims Commissioner or the 
Commission, as the case may be, in respect of nuclear damage may be made by— 
(a) a person who has sustained injury; or 
(b) the owner of the property to which damage has been caused; or 
(c) the legal representatives of the deceased; or 
(d) any agent duly authorised by such person or owner or legal representatives. 
15. (1) Every application for compensation before the Claims Commissioner for nuclear 
damage shall be made in such form, containing such particulars and accompanied by such 
documents, as may be prescribed. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 18, every application under sub-section (1) 
shall be made within a period of three years from the date of knowledge of nuclear damage by 
the person suffering such damage. 
16. (1) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1) of section 15, the Claims 
Commissioner shall, after giving notice of such application to the operator and affording an 
opportunity of being heard to the parties, dispose of the application within a period of three 

months from the date of such receipt and make an award accordingly. 
(2) While making an award under this section, the Claims Commissioner shall not take 
into consideration any benefit, reimbursement or amount received by the applicant in 
pursuance of contract of insurance taken by him or for members of his family or otherwise. 
(3) Where an operator is likely to remove or dispose of his property with the object of 
evading payment by him of the amount of the award, the Claims Commissioner may, in 
accordance with the provisions of rules 1 to 4 of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule to the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, grant a temporary injunction to restrain such act. 
(4) The Claims Commissioner shall arrange to deliver copies of the award to the parties 
within a period of fifteen days from the date of the award. 
(5) Every award made under sub-section (1) shall be final. 
17. The operator of a nuclear installation shall have a right of recourse where — 
(a) such right is expressly provided for in a contract in writing; 
Inviting 
application 
for claims by 
Claims 
Commissioner. 
Person 
entitled to 
make 
application 
for nuclear 
damage. 
Procedure for 
making 
application 
before Claims 
Commissioner. 
Award by 
Claims 
Commissioner. 
Operator's 
right of 
recourse. 
5 of 1908. 
2 of 1974. 
8 
(b) the nuclear incident has resulted from the wilful act or gross negligence on 
the part of the supplier of the material, equipment or services, or of his employee; 
(c) the nuclear incident has resulted from the act of commission or omission of 
a person done with the intent to cause nuclear damage. 
18. The right to claim compensation for any nuclear damage caused by a nuclear 
incident shall extinguish if such claim is not made within a period of ten years from the date 
of incident notified under sub-section (1) of section 3: 
Provided that where a nuclear damage is caused by a nuclear incident involving 
nuclear material which, prior to such nuclear incident, had been stolen, lost, jettisoned or 
abandoned, the said period of ten years shall be computed from the date of such nuclear 
incident, but, in no case, it shall exceed a period of twenty years from the date of such theft, 
loss, jettison or abandonment. 
CHAPTER V 
NUCLEAR DAMAGE CLAIMS COMMISSION 
19. Where the Central Government, having regard to the injury or damage caused by 
a nuclear incident, is of the opinion that— 
(a) the amount of compensation may exceed the limit specified under sub-section 
(2) of section 6; or 
(b) it is expedient and necessary that claims for such damage be adjudicated by 
the Commission instead of Claims Commissioner; or 
(c) it is necessary in the public interest to provide special measures for speedy 
adjudication of claims for compensation, 
the Central Government may, by notification, establish a Nuclear Damage Claims 

Commission, for the purposes of this Act. 
20. (1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and such other Members, not 
exceeding six, as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint. 
(2) The Chairperson and other Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the 
Central Government on the recommendations of a Committee consisting of — 
(a) Cabinet Secretary — Chairman; 
(b) Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy — Member; 
(c) Secretary, Ministry of Law and Justice — Member. 
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson of the 
Commission unless he has attained the age of fifty-five years and is or has been or qualified 
to be a Judge of a High Court: 
Provided that no appointment of a sitting judge shall be made except after consultation 
with the Chief Justice of India. 
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Member unless he has attained 
the age of fifty-five years and— 
(a) has held or is holding or qualified to hold, the post of Additional Secretary to 
the Government of India or any other equivalent post in the Central Government and 
possesses special knowledge in law relating to nuclear liability arising out of nuclear 
incident; or 
(b) has been a Claims Commissioner for five years. 
Extinction of 
right to claim. 
Establishment 
of Nuclear 
Damage 
Claims 
Commission. 
Composition 
of 
Commission. 
9 
21. The Chairperson or a Member, as the case may be, shall hold office as such for a 
term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for 
re-appointment for another term of three years: 
Provided that no person shall hold office as such Chairperson or Member after he has 
attained the age of sixty-seven years. 
22. The salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service, 
including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits, of the Chairperson and other 
Members shall be such as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson or other Members shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. 
23. If, for reasons other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the office of 
the Chairperson or Member, as the case may be, the Central Government shall appoint 
another person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy and the 
proceedings may be continued before the Commission from the stage at which it was, before 
the vacancy is filled. 
24. (1) The Chairperson or a Member may, by a notice in writing under his hand 
addressed to the Central Government, resign his office: 
Provided that the Chairperson or the Member shall, unless he is permitted by the 
Central Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of 
three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his 
successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is earlier. 
(2) The Central Government shall remove from office the Chairperson or a Member 
who— 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, involves moral turpitude; or 
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; or 

(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially 
his functions as a Member; or 
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office detrimental 
to the public interest: 
Provided that no Member shall be removed under clause (d) or clause (e) unless he has 
been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter. 
25. A person who, immediately before the date of assuming office as a Chairperson or 
a Member, was in service of the Government, shall be deemed to have retired from service on 
the date on which he enters upon office as such, but his subsequent service as the Chairperson 
or a Member shall be reckoned as continuing approved service counting for pension in 
service to which he belonged. 
26. If a person who, immediately before the date of assuming office as the Chairperson 
or a Member was in receipt of or being eligible so to do, has opted to draw, a pension, other 
than a disability or wound pension, in respect of any previous service under the Central 
Government, his salary in respect of service as the Chairperson or a Member shall be reduced— 
(a) by the amount of that pension; and 
Term of 
office. 
Salary, 
allowances 
and other 
terms and 
conditions of 
service of 
Chairperson 
and Members. 
Filling up of 
vacancies. 
Resignation 
and removal. 
Chairperson 
or Member 
deemed to 
retire from 
service. 
Suspension of 
pension. 
10 
(b) if he had, before assuming office, received, in lieu of a portion of the pension 
due to him in respect of such previous service, the commuted value thereof, by the 
amount of that portion of the pension. 
27. No person shall, while holding office as a Chairperson or a Member, act as an 
arbitrator in any matter. 
28. On ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson or a Member shall not appear, act or 
plead before the Commission. 
29. The Chairperson shall have the power of superintendence in the general 
administration of the Commission and exercise such powers as may be prescribed. 
30. (1) The Central Government shall provide the Commission with such officers and 
other employees as it may deem fit. 
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and the terms and other conditions of service 
of officers and other employees of the Commission shall be such as may be prescribed. 
31. (1) Every application for compensation before the Commission for nuclear damage 
shall be made in such form, containing such particulars and accompanied by such documents, 
as may be prescribed. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 18, every application under sub-section (1) 
shall be made within a period of three years from the date of knowledge of nuclear damage by 
the person suffering such damage. 
32. (1) The Commission shall have original jurisdiction to adjudicate upon every 
application for compensation filed before it under sub-section (1) of section 31 or transferred 
to it under section 33, as the case may be. 

(2) Upon transfer of cases to the Commission under section 33, the Commission shall 
hear such applications from the stage at which it was before such transfer. 
(3) The Chairperson may constitute benches comprising of not more than three 
Members of the Commission for the purpose of hearing of claims and any decision thereon 
shall be rendered by a majority of the Members hearing such claims. 
(4) The Commission shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and subject to the 
other provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder, the Commission shall have the 
power to regulate its own procedure including the places and the times at which it shall have 
its sittings. 
(5) The Commission shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under 
this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 
1908, while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him 
on oath; 
(b) the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or office; 
(e) issuing of commission for the examination of any witness; 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(6) The Commission shall, after giving notice of application to the operator and after 
affording an opportunity of being heard to the parties, dispose of such application within a 
period of three months from the date of such receipt and make an award accordingly. 
Prohibition of 
acting as 
arbitrator. 
Prohibition of 
practice. 
Powers of 
Chairperson. 
Officers and 
other 
employees of 
Commission. 
Application 
for 
compensation 
before 
Commission. 
Adjudication 
procedure and 
powers of 
Commission. 
5 of 1908. 
5 of 1908. 
11 
(7) While making an award under this section, the Commission shall not take into 
consideration any benefit, reimbursement or amount received by the applicant in pursuance 
of any contract of insurance or otherwise. 
(8) Where an operator is likely to remove or dispose of his property with the object of 
evading payment by him of the amount of the award, the Commission may, in accordance 
with the provisions of rules 1 to 4 of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, grant a temporary injunction to restrain such act. 
(9) The Commission shall arrange to deliver copies of the award to the parties concerned 
within a period of fifteen days from the date of such award. 
(10) Every award made under sub-section (6) shall be final. 
33. Every application for compensation pending before the Claims Commissioner 
immediately before the date of establishment of the Commission under section 19 shall stand 
transferred on that date to the Commission. 
34. Every proceeding before the Claims Commissioner or the Commission under this 

Act shall be deemed to be judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 
228 of, and for the purposes of section 196 of, the Indian Penal Code. 
35. No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceedings in respect 
of any matter which the Claims Commissioner or the Commission, as the case may be, is 
empowered to adjudicate under this Act and no injunction shall be granted by any court or 
other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power 
conferred by or under this Act. 
36. (1) When an award is made under sub-section (1) of section 16 or under subsection 
(6) of section 32, — 
(a) the insurer or any person, as the case may be, who under the contract of 
insurance or financial security under section 8 is required to pay any amount in terms 
of such award and to the extent of his liability under such contract, shall deposit that 
amount within such time and in such manner as the Claims Commissioner or the 
Commission, as the case may be, may direct; and 
(b) the operator shall, subject to the maximum liability specified under subsection 
(2) of section 6, deposit the remaining amount by which such award exceeds 
the amount deposited under clause (a). 
(2) Where any person referred to in sub-section (1) fails to deposit the amount of 
award within the period specified in the award, such amount shall be recoverable from such 
person as arrears of land revenue. 
(3) The amount deposited under sub-section (1) shall be disbursed to such person as 
may be specified in the award within a period of fifteen days from the date of such deposit. 
37. The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year, 
as may be prescribed, an annual report giving full account of its activities during that financial 
year and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government which shall cause the same to be 
laid before each House of Parliament. 
38. (1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that the purpose for which the 
Commission established under section 19 has served its purpose, or where the number of 
cases pending before such Commission is so less that it would not justify the cost of its 
continued function, or where it considers necessary or expedient so to do, the Central 
Government may, by notification, dissolve the Commission. 
Transfer of 
pending cases 
t o 
Commission. 
Proceedings 
before Claims 
Commissioner 
or 
Commission 
to be judicial 
proceedings. 
Exclusion of 
jurisdiction of 
civil courts. 
Enforcement 
of awards. 
Annual 
report. 
Dissolution of 
Commission 
in certain 
circumstances. 
5 of 1908. 
45 of 1860. 
12 
(2) With effect from the date of notification of dissolution of Commission under subsection 
(1), — 
(a) the proceeding, if any, pending before the Commission as on the date of such 
notification shall be transferred to the Claims Commissioner to be appointed by the 
Central Government under sub-section (2) of section 9; 

(b) the Chairperson and all Members of the Commission shall be deemed to have 
vacated their offices as such and they shall not be entitled to any compensation for 
premature termination of their office; 
(c) officers and other employees of the Commission shall be transferred to such 
other authority or offices of the Central Government, in such manner, as may be 
prescribed: 
Provided that the officers and other employees so transferred, shall be entitled 
to the same terms and conditions of service as would have been held by them in the 
Commission: 
Provided further that where an officer or an employee of the Commission refuses 
to join the services in such other authority or office, he shall be deemed to have 
resigned and shall not be entitled to any compensation for premature termination of 
contract of service; 
(d) all assets and liabilities of the Commission shall vest in the Central 
Government. 
(3) Notwithstanding the dissolution of the Commission under sub-section (1), anything 
done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken including any order made 
or notice issued or any appointment, confirmation or declaration made or any document or 
instrument executed or any direction given by the Commission before such dissolution, shall 
be deemed to have been validly done or taken. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the Central Government to 
establish the Commission subsequent to the dissolution of the Commission in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act. 
CHAPTER VI 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
39. (1) Whoever— 
(a) contravenes any rule made or any direction issued under this Act; or 
(b) fails to comply with the provisions of section 8; or 
(c) fails to deposit the amount under section 36, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or with fine 
or with both. 
(2) Whoever fails to comply with any direction issued under section 43 or obstructs 
any authority or person in the exercise of his powers under this Act shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine or with both. 
40. (1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, every 
person who at the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the 
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded 
against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person 
liable to any punishment under this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without 
his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such 
offence. 
Offences and 
penalties. 
Offences by 
companies. 
13 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under 
this Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, 
any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, 
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation. — For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association 
of individuals; 

(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
41. Where an offence under this Act has been committed by any Department of the 
Government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and 
shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head of the 
Department liable to any punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his 
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
42. No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of 
the first class shall try any offence under this Act: 
Provided that cognizance of such offence shall not be taken except on a complaint 
made by the Central Government or any authority or officer authorised in this behalf by that 
Government. 
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
43. The Central Government may, in exercise of its powers and performance of its 
functions under this Act, issue such directions, as it may deem fit, for the purposes of this 
Act, to any operator, person, officer, authority or body and such operator, person, officer, 
authority or body shall be bound to comply with such directions. 
44. The Central Government may call for such information from an operator as it may 
deem necessary. 
45. The Central Government may, by notification, exempt any nuclear installation from 
the application of this Act where, having regard to small quantity of nuclear material, it is of 
the opinion that the risk involved is insignificant. 
46. The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any 
other law for the time being in force, and nothing contained herein shall exempt the operator 
from any proceeding which might, apart from this Act, be instituted against such operator. 
47. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central 
Government or the person, officer or authority in respect of anything done by it or him in 
good faith in pursuance of this Act or of any rule or order made, or direction issued, thereunder. 
48. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the 
purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers such 
rules may provide for — 
(a) the other financial security and the manner thereof under sub-section (1) of 
section 8; 
(b) the salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of 
service of Claims Commissioner under section 11; 
Offences by 
Government 
Departments. 
Cognizance 
of offences. 
Power to give 
directions. 
Power to call 
for 
information. 
Exemption 
from 
application of 
this Act. 
Act to be in 
addition to 
any other law. 
Protection of 
action taken 
in good faith. 
Power to 
make rules. 
14 

(c) the procedure to be followed by Claims Commissioner under sub-section (1) 
of section 12; 
(d) the person to be associated by Claims Commissioner and the manner thereof, 
under sub-section (2) of section 12; 
(e) the remuneration, fee or allowances of associated person under sub-section 
(3) of section 12; 
(f) any other matter under clause (f) of sub-section (4) of section 12; 
(g) the form of application, the particulars it shall contain and the documents it 
shall accompany, under sub-section (1) of section 15; 
(h) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of 
service of Chairperson and other Members, under section 22; 
(i) the powers of Chairperson under section 29; 
(j) the salary and allowances payable to and the terms and other conditions of 
service of officers and other employees of the Commission, under sub-section (2) of 
section 30; 
(k) the form of application, the particulars it shall contain and the documents it 
shall accompany, under sub-section (1) of section 31; 
(l) any other matter under clause (f) of sub-section (5) of section 32; 
(m) the form and the time for preparing annual report by Commission under 
section 37; 
(n) the manner of transfer of officers and other employees of the Commission 
under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 38. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously 
done under that rule. 
49. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty: 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years 
from the commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid 
before each House of Parliament. 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS 
The nuclear industry in India is growing and as a result of the steps taken particularly 
in the recent period, it is expected to form an important part of the energy-mix of the country. 
While making the design, and during construction and operation of nuclear power plants 
every care is taken to ensure safety of the plant, public and the environment. However, in the 
unlikely event of a nuclear incident or accident, there may be damage to individuals, property 
and environment on a large scale. The geographical scope of damage caused by a nuclear 
accident may not be confined to national boundaries and it may have trans-boundary effects. 
In such an event, it is desirable that protection is accorded to victims of such incident or 
accident by a third party liability regime. It is necessary to give compensation to persons if 
they suffer nuclear damage as a result of a nuclear incident and therefore it is important to 
make provision to ensure clarity of liability and the requirement to pay compensation. 
2. At present, the nuclear power plants and facilities in India are owned by the Central 
Government or its Public Sector Undertakings. Therefore, any incident or accident that 

happens in these installations, and the liability issues arising therefrom, are the responsibility 
of the Central Government. This, however, leaves any trans-boundary liability to uncertainty. 
There is also a need to address the issue of nuclear liability during transport of nuclear 
material. 
3. At the international level there are four instruments for nuclear liability, i.e., the 1960 
Paris Convention, 1963 Vienna Convention, 1997 Protocol to Amend Vienna Convention and 
1997 Convention on Supplementary Compensation for nuclear damage. Convention on 
Supplementary Compensation was developed under the auspices of International Atomic 
Energy Agency and which deal with nuclear liability. It provides for treaty relations among 
all countries that accept the basic principles of nuclear liability law and an international fund 
to compensate nuclear damage in the event of nuclear incident. The said Convention on 
Supplementary Compensation envisages a two tier system with respect to the amount of 
compensation, e.g., Installation State to ensure availability of the amount of compensation 
(at least 300 million Special Drawing Rights), and International Fund for which all contracting 
parties are obliged to contribute the amount based on a formula for calculation of contribution. 
4. Convention on Supplementary Compensation is a free standing instrument open to 
all countries. It offers a country the means to become part of the global regime without 
having to become a member of the Paris Convention or the Vienna Convention. However, all 
countries party to the Convention on Supplementary Compensation are expected to abide 
by the basic principles of the nuclear liability law. For this reason, the Convention on 
Supplementary Compensation sets out a number of rules, which are consistent with the 
general principles of both the Paris Convention and the Vienna Convention. Any State 
willing to join the Convention on Supplementary Compensation will have to ensure that its 
national legislation is consistent with the provisions laid down in the Annex to Convention 
on Supplementary Compensation. 
5. Many countries which are engaged in nuclear power generation are having their 
own legislations and some of them are parties to one or other international regimes. 
6. India is not a party to any of the nuclear liability conventions mentioned above. 
Indian nuclear industry has been developed within the context of a domestic framework 
established by the Atomic Energy Act, 1962. There is no provision in the said Act about the 
nuclear liability or compensation for nuclear damage due to nuclear accident or incident and 
no other law deals with nuclear liability for nuclear damage in the event of nuclear incident. 
15 
16 
7. It is, therefore, considered necessary to enact a legislation which provides for 
nuclear liability that might arise due to a nuclear incident and also on the necessity of joining 
an appropriate international liability regime. 
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
NEW DELHI; 
The 11th February, 2010. PRITHVIRAJ CHAVAN 
Notes on clauses 
Clause 2.— This Clause defines certain words and expressions used in the Bill 
including 'nuclear damage', 'nuclear incident', 'nuclear installation', 'nuclear material', 'nuclear 
reactor ', operator, etc. 
Clause 3.— This clause contains provisions for notification of nuclear incident. it 
requires the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board to notify nuclear incident within a period 
of fifteen days from the date of its occurrence and give wide publicity to the occurrence 
of such nuclear incident. However, the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board would not be 
required to notify nuclear incident where it is satisfied that the gravity of threat and risk 
involved in such nuclear incident is insignificant. 
Clause 4.—This clause contains provisions relating to liability of operator. It, inter 
alia, provides that the operator shall be liable for nuclear damage caused by a nuclear 
incident occurring in that nuclear installation. 
The sub-clause (1) contains provisions for liability of the operator in respect of a 
nuclear damage caused by a nuclear incident involving nuclear material coming from or 
originating in that nuclear installation before and after the operator has assumed the liability. 

It also provides that where more than one operator is liable for nuclear damage, the 
liability of the operators so involved shall be joint and several if the damage attributable 
to each operator is not separable. However, the total liability of such operators shall not 
exceed the extent of liability specified in sub-clause (2) of clause 6 of the Bill. It also 
provides that where several nuclear installations of one and the same operator are involved 
in a nuclear incident, such operator shall, in respect of each such nuclear installation, be 
liable to the extent of liability specified in sub-clause (2) of clause 6 of the Bill. 
Explanation to sub-clause (3) of this clause specifies the circumstances under 
which a person shall be deemed to be an operator. 
Clause 5.—This clause provides for circumstances under which an operator shall 
not be liable for the nuclear damage. It provides that where a nuclear damage is caused by 
nuclear incident directly due to a grave natural disaster of an exceptional character or by 
acts of armed conflict, hostility, civil war, insurrection or terrorism, the operator shall not be 
liable. It further provides that the operator shall not be liable for any nuclear damage 
caused to (a) the nuclear installation itself or any other nuclear installation including a 
nuclear installation under construction, on the site where such installation is located; 
(b) any property on the same site which is used or to be used in connection with any such 
installation; (c) the means of transport upon which the nuclear material involved was 
carried at the time of nuclear incident. However, any compensation liable to be paid by the 
operator for a nuclear damage shall not have the effect of reducing the amount of his 
liability in respect of any other claim for damage under any other law for the time being in 
force. However, the operator shall not be liable (a) where a nuclear damage is suffered by 
a person on account of his own negligence; or (b) where a nuclear damage occurs from the 
acts of commission or omission of a person, to each person suffering such damage. 
Clause 6.—This clause contains provisions relating to limits of liability. This clause 
provides that the maximum amount of liability in respect of each nuclear incident shall be 
the rupee equivalent of three hundred million Special Drawing Rights and the liability of an 
operator for each nuclear incident shall be rupees five hundred crores. However, it empowers 
the Central Government to increase or decrease, by notification, the amount of liability of 
the operator, having regard to the extent of risk involved in a nuclear installation but, such 
liability shall not be decreased less than rupees one hundred crore. It also provides that the 
amount of liability of the operator shall not include any interest or cost of proceedings. 
17 
18 
Clause 7.—This clause contains provisions for the liability of the Central Government. 
It seeks to fix the liability on the Central Government in certain circumstances and provides 
that the Central Government shall be liable for nuclear damage in respect of a nuclear 
incident (a) to the extent such liability exceeds the amount of liability of the operator 
specified in sub-clause (2) of clause 6; or (b) where such nuclear damage occurs in a 
nuclear installation owned by it; or (c) occurring directly due to a grave natural disaster of 
an exceptional character or by acts of armed conflict, hostility, civil war, insurrection or 
terrorism. 
Clause 8.—This clause imposes an obligation upon the operator to take out, before 
beginning the operation of a nuclear installation, insurance policy or such other financial 
security covering his liability as specified under sub-clause (2) of clause 6 and to renew 
the same. However, the Central Government shall not be required to take out such insurance 
or financial securities. 
Clause 9.—This clause confers a right upon a person who suffers nuclear damage to 
claim compensation in accordance with the provisions of the this Act and claims for such 
compensation shall be adjudicated by one or more Claims Commissioners to be appointed 
by the Central Government. 
Clause 10.—This clause contains provisions for qualifications for appointment as 
Claims Commissioner. It provides that a person shall not be qualified for appointment as a 
Claims Commissioner unless he is, has been or qualified to be a District Judge or is or has 
been in the service of the Central Government and has held the post of the Joint Secretary 
to the Government of India or any other equivalent post in the Central Government for a 

period of not less than five years and possesses special knowledge in law relating to 
nuclear liability arising out of nuclear incident. 
Clause 11.—This clause contains provisions relating to the salary and allowances 
payable to and other terms and conditions of service of Claims Commissioner which shall 
be specified by rules to be made by the Central Government. 
Clause 12.—This clause contains provisions for procedure to be followed by the 
Claims Commissioner and powers to be exercised by the Claims Commissioner for 
adjudicating such claims. The Claims Commissioner shall have certain powers which are 
vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure , 1908, for discharging functions 
under the proposed legislation. It, inter alia, provides that Claims Commissioner shall 
follow the procedure for adjudication of claims under the proposed legislation in the 
manner povided by rules to be made by the Central Government. The Claims Commissioner 
can associate experts in the nuclear field in the manner provided by rules for the said 
purpose. 
Clause 13.—This clause contains provisions for inviting applications for claims by 
the Claims Commissioner. It provides that the Claims Commissioner shall, after the 
notification of a nuclear incident, cause wide publicity to be given for inviting applications 
for claiming compensation for nuclear damage. 
Clause 14.—This clause specifies the category of persons who would be entitled to 
make application for nuclear damage. It provides that an application to the Claims 
Commissioner for compensation in respect of nuclear damage may be made by a person 
who has sustained injury or by the owner of the property to which damage has been 
caused or by the legal representatives of the deceased or by an authorised agent. 
Clause 15.—This clause contains procedure for making applications before the Claims 
Commissioner. It provides that the application for compensation before the Claims 
Commissioner for nuclear damage shall be in the form and manner provided by rules to be 
made by the Central Government and such applications shall be made within a period of 
three years from the date of knowledge of nuclear damage by the person suffering such 
damage. 
19 
Clause 16.—This clause contains provisions for making of awards by the Claims 
Commissioner. It contains provisions relating to procedure to be followed by the Claims 
Commissioner on receipt of application for compensation and the manner for making an 
award. This clause requires that the Claims Commissioner shall dispose of the application 
within a period of three months from the date of such receipt and make an award accordingly. 
However, while making the award, the Claims Commissioner shall not take into consideration 
any benefit, reimbursement or amount received by the applicant in pursuance of contract of 
insurance taken by him or for members of his family or otherwise. It also empowers the 
Claims Commissioner to grant temporary injunction to restrain the operator where he is 
likely to remove or dispose of his property with the object of evading payment by him of 
the amount of the award, from doing so. It also provides that every award, so made, shall 
be final. 
Clause 17.—This clause contains provisions relating to right of recourse. It provides 
that the operator of a nuclear installation shall have a right of recourse where such right is 
expressly provided for in a contract in writing or where the nuclear incident has resulted 
from the wilful act or gross negligence on the part of the supplier of the material, equipment 
or services, or of his employee or where the nuclear incident has resulted from the act of 
commission or omission of a person done with the intent to cause nuclear damage. 
Clause 18.—This clause contains provisions relating to extinction of right to claim. It 
provides that the right to claim compensation for any nuclear damage caused by a nuclear 
incident shall extinguish if such claim is not made within a period of ten years from the date 
of incident notified under sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill. However, where a nuclear 
damage is caused by a nuclear incident involving nuclear material which, prior to such 
nuclear incident, had been stolen, lost, jettisoned or abandoned, the said period of ten 
years shall be computed from the date of such nuclear incident, but, in no case, it shall 
exceed a period of twenty years from the date of such theft, loss, jettison or abandonment. 

Clause 19.—It empowers the Central Government to establish a Nuclear Damage 
Claims Commission in certain cases. It provides that the Central Government may, if it is of 
the opinion that the amount of compensation may exceed the limit specified under subclause 
(2) of clause 6 of the Bill or it is expedient and necessary that claims for such damage 
should be adjudicated by the Commission instead of the Claims Commissioner or it is 
necessary in the public interest to provide special measures for speedy adjudication of 
claims for compensation, establish a Nuclear Damage Claims Commission. 
Clause 20.—It provides for the composition of the Nuclear Damage Claims Commission 
which would consist of a Chairperson and Members, not exceeding six, to be appointed by 
the Central Government on the recommendations of a Committee consisting of Cabinet 
Secretary as Chairman, Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy and Secretary, Ministry of 
Law and Justice as Members. This clause further provides that a person shall not be 
qualified for appointment as the Chairperson of the Commission unless he has attained the 
age of fifty-five years and is or has been or qualified to be a Judge of a Hight Court. The 
appointment of a sitting judge of a High Court shall be made after consultation with the 
Chief Justice of India. It further provides that a person shall not be qualified for appointment 
as a Member unless he has attained the age of fifty-five years and has held or is holding or 
qualified to hold, the post of Additional Secretary to the Government of India or any other 
equivalent post in the Central Government and possesses special knowledge in law relating 
to nuclear liability arising out of nuclear incident or has been a Claims Commissioner for five 
years. 
Clause 21.—This clause contains provisions for the term of office of the Chairperson 
and Members of the Nuclear Damage Claims Commission. It provides that the Chairperson 
and a Member shall hold office as such for a term of three years from the date on which he 
enters upon his office and shall be eligible for re-appointment for another term of three 
years. However, no person shall hold office as such Chairperson or Member after he has 
attained the age of sixty-seven years. 
20 
Clause 22.—This clause contains provisions relating to the salaries and allowances 
payable to and other terms and conditions of service, including pension, gratuity and other 
retirement benefits, of the Chairperson and other Members of the Nuclear Damage Claims 
Commission and provides that they shall be specified by rules to be made by the Central 
Government. However, the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson or other Members shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment. 
Clause 23.—This clause contains provisions for filling up of vacancies in the office of 
Chairperson or Members of the Nuclear Damage Claims Commission. It provides that if, for 
reasons other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson or 
Member of the Commission, the Central Government shall appoint another person in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy and the proceedings may be continued 
before the Commission from the stage at which it was, before the vacancy is filled. 
Clause 24.—This clause contains provisions for resignation and removal of the 
Chairperson or Member of the Nuclear Damage Claims Commission. It provides that the 
Chairperson or a Member may, by a notice in writing under his hand addressed to the 
Central Government, resign his office. It further provides that the Central Government shall 
remove the Chairperson or Member from his office under the circumstances specified in this 
clause and in certain cases, such person shall be given an opportunity of being heard in the 
matter before his removal. 
Clause 25.—This clause contains provisions to provide that a Chairperson or a Member 
shall be deemed to have retired from service. It provides that a person in the service of the 
Government immediately before the date of assuming office as a Chairperson or a Member 
shall be deemed to have retired from service on the date on which he enters upon his office. 
However, his subsequent service as the Chairperson or a Member shall be reckoned as 
continuing approved service counting for pension in service to which he belonged. 
Clause 26.—This clause contains provisions relating to deduction of pension in 
certain cases. It provides that if a person, immediately before the date of assuming office as 
the Chairperson or a Member, was in receipt of, or has opted to draw, a pension, other than 

a disability or wound pension, in respect of any previous service under the Central 
Government, his salary in respect of service as the Chairperson or a Member shall be 
reduced by the amount of that pension and where he has received the commuted value in 
lieu of a portion of the pension due to him in respect of such previous service, his present 
salary shall be reduced by the amount of that portion of the pension as well. 
Clause 27.—This clause contains provisions for prohibition of acting as an Arbitrator. 
It provides that no person shall, while holding office as a Chairperson or a Member of the 
Nuclear Damage Claims Commission, act as an Arbitrator in any matter. 
Clause 28.—This clause contains provisions for prohibition of practice. It provides 
that on ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson or a Member of the Nuclear Damage Claims 
Commission shall not appear, act or plead before the Commission. 
Clause 29.—This clause contains provisions relating to powers of the Chairperson of 
the Nuclear Damage Claims Commission. It provides that the Chairperson shall have the 
power of superintendence in the general administration of the Commission and exercise 
such powers as may be specified by rules to be made by the Central Government. 
Clause 30.—This clause contains provisions for appointment of officers and other 
employees of the Nuclear Damage Claims Commission. It provides that the Central 
Government shall provide the Commission with such officers and other employees as it may 
deem fit. It further provides that the salaries and allowances payable to and the terms and 
other conditions of service of officers and other employees of the Commission shall be 
specified by rules to be made by the Central Government. 
Clause 31.—This clause contains procedure for making application for claiming 
compensation before the Nuclear Damage Claims Commission. It provides that an application 
21 
to the Commission in respect of a nuclear damage shall be made in the form and manner 
provided by rules to be made by the Central Government and such application shall, subject 
to the provisions of clause 18, be made within a period of three years from the date of 
knowledge of nuclear damage by the person suffering such damage. 
Clause 32.—This clause contains provisions for procedure and powers of Nuclear 
Damage Claims Commission. It provides that the Commission shall have original jurisdiction 
while adjudicating upon application for compensation filed before it under sub-clause (1) of 
clause 31 or transferred to it under clause 33 of the Bill, and upon such transfer, the Commission 
shall hear the applications from the stage at which it was before such transfer. Further, it 
empowers the Chairperson to constitute benches comprising of not more than three Members 
of the Commission for the purpose of hearing of claims and that any decision thereon shall be 
rendered by a majority of the Memebrs hearing such claims. The Commission shall not be 
bound by the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 but shall be guided by 
the principles of natural justice and shall have the power to regulate its own procedure. The 
Commission shall have certain powers which are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908, for discharging functions under the proposed legislation. It provides that 
the Commission shall dispose of the application within a period of three months from the date 
of its receipt and make an award accordingly. However, while making an award under this 
section, the Commission shall not take into consideration any benefit, reimbursement or 
amount received by the applicant in pursuance of any contract of insurance or otherwise. It 
empowers the Commission to grant temporary injunction to restrain the operator where he is 
likely to remove or dispose of his property with the object of evading payment by him of the 
amount of the award. It also provides that every award so made shall be final. 
Clause 33.—This clause contains provisions for transfer of pending cases to the 
Nuclear Damage Claims Commission. It provides that every application for compensation 
pending before the Claims Commissioner immediately before the date of establishment of 
the Commission under clause 19 shall, after the establishment of the Commission, stand 
transferred on that date to the Commission. 
Clause 34.—This clause provides for the nature of proceedings before the Claims 
Commissioner or the Nuclear Damage Claims Commission. It provides that every proceedings 
before the Claims Commissioner or the Commission under the proposed legislation shall be 
deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 of, and 

for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code. 
Clause 35.—This clause contains provisions for exclusion of jurisdiction of civil 
courts. It provides that no civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or procedings 
in respect of which the Claims Commissioner or the Nuclear Damage Claims Commission is 
empowered to adjudicate under the proposed legislation and no injunction shall be granted 
by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of 
any power conferred by or under the proposed legislation. 
Clause 36.— This clause contains provisions for enforcement of awards. It provides 
that when an award is made by the Claims Commissioner under sub-clause (1) of clause 16 
or by the Nuclear Damage Claims Commission under sub-clause (6) of clause 32 of the Bill, 
the insurer or the person responsible under the contract of insurance or financial security to 
pay the amount of such award to the extent of his liability, shall be required to deposit such 
amount within such time and in such manner as directed by the Claims Commissioner or the 
Commission and the remaining amount by which such award exceeds the amount so 
deposited shall be deposited by the operator, subject to the maximum extent of his liability 
under sub-section (2) of section 6 of the Bill. It further provides that on the failure of any 
person to deposit the amount of award within the period specified in the award, such 
amount shall be recoverable from such person as arrears of land revenue and the amount so 
deposited shall be disbursed to the awardees within a period of fifteen days from the date 
of such deposit. 
22 
Clause 37.—This clause contains provisions for preparation of annual report. It 
provides that the Nuclear Damage Claims Commission shall prepare in each financial year 
an annual report giving full account of its activities during that financial year in the manner 
provided by rules to be made by the Central Government and submit a copy to the Central 
Government to enable it to lay the same before each House of Parliament. 
Clause 38.—This clause contains provisions for dissolution of Nuclear Damage Claims 
Commission in certain circumstances. It provides that where the Central Government is 
satisfied that the purpose for which the Commission established under clause 19 has served 
its purpose, or where the number of cases pending before such Commission is so less that 
it would not justify the cost of its continued function, or where it considers necessary or 
expedient so to do, it may, by notification, dissolve the Commission. It also provides for 
consequences of such dissolution and provides that with effect from the date of notification 
of dissolution of Commission, (a) the proceeding, if any, pending before the Commission as 
on the date of such notification shall be transferred to the Claims Commissioner to be 
appointed by the Central Government under sub-clause (2) of clause 9; (b) the Chairperson 
and all Members of the Commission shall be deemed to have vacated their offices as such 
and they shall not be entitled to any compensation for premature termination of their office; 
(c) officers and other employees of the Commission shall be transferred to such other 
Authority or offices of the Central Government in the manner provided by rules to be made 
by the Central Government. However, officers and other employees so transferred shall be 
entitled to the same terms and conditions of service as would have been held by them in the 
Commission and in the case of an officer or employee of the Commission refusing to join the 
services in such other Authority or office, he shall be deemed to have resigned and shall not 
be entitled to any compensation for premature termination of contract of service. It also 
provides that upon the dissolution of the Commission, all assets and liabilities of the 
Commission shall vest in the Central Government and that anything done or any action 
taken or purported to have been done or taken including any order made or notice issued or 
any appointment, confirmation or declaration made or any document or instrument executed 
or any direction given by the Commission before such dissolution, shall be deemed to have 
been validly done or taken. The Central Government shall have power to re-establish the 
Nuclear Damage Claims Commission subsequent to its dissolution in accordance with the 
provisions of the proposed legislation. 
Clause 39.—This clause contains provisions for offences and penalties. It provides 
punishment for contravention of any rule to be made or any direction to be issued under the 
proposed legislation or for failure to take out and renew insurance policy or other financial 

security under clause 8 or for failure to deposit the award amount under clause 36 of the Bill, 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or with fine or with both. It also 
provides punishment for failure to comply with any direction to be issued under clause 43 
of the Bill or for causing obstruction to any authority or person in the exercise of his powers 
under the proposed legislation, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year 
or with fine or with both. 
Clause 40.—This clause contains provisions for offences by companies. It provides 
that where an offence under the proposed legislation has been committed by a company, 
every person directly in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its 
business at the time of commission of offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly unless he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to 
prevent the commission of such offence. It also provides that where any offence under the 
proposed legislation has been committed with the consent or connivance of, or attributable 
to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accodingly. 
The Explanation to the clause seeks to define the terms "company" and "director". 
23 
Clause 41.—This clause contains provisions for offences by Government Departments. 
It provides that where an offence under the proposed legislation has been committed by 
any Department of the Government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accodingly, 
in accordance with the provisions of the said clause. 
Clause 42.—This clause contains provisions for cognizance of offences and provides 
that no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first 
class shall try any offence under the proposed legislation and that cognizance of such 
offence shall be taken only on a complaint made by the Central Government or any authority 
or officer authorised by it. 
Clause 43.—This clause confers powers upon the Central Government to give 
directions to any operator, person, officer, authority or body for carrying out the purposes 
of the proposed legislation and such person shall be bound to comply with such direction. 
Clause 44.—This clause confers power upon the Central Government to call for such 
information from an operator as it may deem necessary for the purposes of the proposed 
legislation. 
Clause 45.—This clause confers power upon the Central Government to exempt, by 
notification, any nuclear installation from the application of the proposed legislation where 
it is of the opinion, having regard to small quantity of nuclear material, that the risk involved 
from such installation is insignificant. 
Clause 46.—This clause provides that the provisions of the proposed legislation 
shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, any other law for the time being in force and 
it shall not exempt the operator from proceeding against him under the provisions of any 
other law for the time being in force. 
Clause 47.—This clause contains provisions for protection of action taken in good 
faith under the proposed legislation. It provides that no suit, prosecution or other legal 
proceedings shall lie against the Central Government or person or officer or authority in 
respect of anything done in good faith in pursuance of such proposed legislation or of any 
rule or order made, or direction issued, thereunder. 
Clause 48.—This clause empowers the Central Government to make rules in respect 
of the matters specified in the said clause. The rules made by the Central Government shall 
be laid before each House of Parliament. 
Clause 49.—This clause contains provision for power to remove difficulties. It provides 
that if any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for 
removing the difficulty. However, no such order can be made under this section after the 

expiry of three years from the commencement of the proposed legislation. Further, every 
order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM 
Person who suffers nuclear damage shall be entitled to receive compensation under 
this Act for any nuclear damage resulting from nuclear incident. For this purpose, clause 6 of 
the Bill proposes to fix the maximum amount of liability for a nuclear incident at rupee 
equivalent of three hundred million Special Drawing Rights and the liability of the operator at 
rupees five hundred crores per nuclear incident at present and empowers the Central 
Government to increase or decrease the amount of liability of the operator depending on the 
extent of risk involved. 
2. Clause 7 of the Bill proposes to fix liability of the Central Government for nuclear 
damage resulting from a nuclear incident in the following cases— 
(a) where the liability exceeds the amount of liability of an operator, to the extent 
such liability exceeds such liability of the operator; 
(b) where the nuclear incident occurs in a nuclear installation owned by it; and 
(c) where the nuclear incident occurs on account of grave natural disaster of an 
exceptional character or on account of act of armed conflict, hostility, civil war, 
insurrection or terrorism. 
However, since the possibilities of such eventualities are very rare and the actual 
liability of the government in the event of a nuclear incident would very well depend on the 
magnitude of the incident, it would be very difficult to estimate the cost of liability at this 
stage. 
3. Sub-clause (2) of clause 9 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to appoint 
Claims Commissioner for the purpose of adjudicating upon the claims for compensation in 
respect of nuclear damage and clause 11 thereof provides for the salary and allowances 
payable to and other terms and conditions of service of Claims Commissioner. 
4. Clause 19 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to establish a Nuclear 
Damage Claims Commission under the circumstances specified thereunder and clause 22 
thereof, provides for Salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions 
of service including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits of the Chairperson and 
other Members of the Commission. 
5. Sub-clause (1) of clause 30 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to provide 
the Nuclear Damage Claims Commissioner with officers and other employees and sub-clause 
(2) thereof provides for the salary and allowances payable to and other conditions of service 
of such officers and employees. 
6. It would be difficult to work out the exact expenditure, both recurring and nonrecurring 
towards the establishment of Claims Commissioner and Nuclear Damage Claims 
Commission, as it can be determined only after their appointment in case of any nuclear 
incident. 
24 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION 
Clause 48 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules for carrying out 
purpose of the Act. Such power to make rules, inter alia, includes (a) the other financial 
security which an operator of a nuclear installation may take for covering his liability under 
the Bill and the manner thereof; (b) the salary and allowances payable to and the other terms 
and conditions of service of Claims Commissioner; (c) the procedure to be followed by Claims 
Commissioner; (d) the person to be associated by Claims Commissioner and the manner 
thereof; (e) the remunerations, fee or allowances of associated person; (f) any other matter 
with respect to which the Claims Commissioner shall have the power of a Civil Court; (g) the 
form of application, the particulars it shall contain and the documents it shall accompany; (h) 
the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson 
and other Members; (i) the powers of Chairperson; (j) the salary and allowances payable to 
and the terms and other conditions or service of officers and other employees of the Commission; 
(k) the form of application, the particulars it shall contain and the documents it shall accompany; 
(l) any other matter with respect of which the Commission shall have the power of a Civil 

Court; (m) the form and the time for preparing annual report by the Commission; and (n) the 
manner of transfer of officers and other employees of the Commission. 
2. The matters in respect of which the said rules may be made or notification issued 
are matters of procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practicable to 
provide for them in the proposed Bill. 
3. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
25 
LOK SABHA 
———— 
A 
BILL 
to provide for civil liability for nuclear damage, appointment of Claims Commissioner, 
establishment of Nuclear Damage Claims Commission and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
————— 
(Shri Prithviraj Chavan, Minister of State for Science and Technology and 
Earth Sciences) 
GMGIPMRND—810LS(S5)—02-03-2010. 
 
 
 