PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 226
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)MAY, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY , 
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-2013) 
OF THE MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES
(DEMAND NO. 29)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18  MAY, 2012)TH

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY SIXTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2012-2013)
OF THE MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES
(DEMAND NO. 29)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 18 TH MAY , 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 18 TH MAY , 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY , 2012/V AISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—15
4. S UMMARY OF THE R ECOMMENDATIONS .................................................................................. 16—20
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................ 21—27

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2011-12)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
**2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Anil H. Lad
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Dr. Chandan Mitra
@6. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
7. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
@8. Shri A.V . Swamy
9. Dr. Barun Mukherji
10. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
12. Shri Ninong Ering
#13. Vacant
14. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
15. Shri Abdul Rahman
16. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
17. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
18. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
19. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
20. Shri Cosme Francisco Caitano Sardinha
21. Shri Shibu Soren
22. Dr. Rajan Sushant
23. Shri Pradeep Tamta
24. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava
***25. V acant
26. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
*27. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
** Shri Janardan Dwivedi re-nominated w.e.f. 2 nd February, 2012.
@ Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra and Shri A.V. Swamy nominated w.e.f. 15th May, 2012.
# Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 3 rd January, 2012 on his resignation
from the Membership of the Committee.
***Shri Akhilesh Yadav ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  2 nd May, 2012 on his resignation from the
Membership of the Lok Sabha.
* Nominated w.e.f.  25 th November, 2011.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present
the Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Twenty Sixth Report of the Committee. This
Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2012- 2013) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Demand No. 29).
2. In its meeting of the Committee held on the 13
th April, 2012 the Secretary and other
Officers of the Ministry of Earth Sciences gave an overview of the various activities of the
Ministry and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the
Ministry to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the
clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 16
th May, 2012.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
May 16, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

1
REPORT
Since the time immemorial, Oceans have always fascinated man and influenced his life and
history in several ways. Even today, man obtains mineral, food and energy resources from the
oceans. Due to its vastness and interplay of ecological processes, oceans control the atmosphere
and global climate besides being a vast storehouse of resources necessary for sustenance of life
on earth. The magnitude of India’s vast ocean resources can be considered from the fact that the
coastline of the mainland and islands measures about 7,500 kms. and the area of Exclusive
Economic Zone (EEZ) of the country is 2.02 million sq. km. The coastal and offshore environment
support a wide variety of marine ecosystem, rich in species and diversity, besides supporting
multifarious economic development activities. The sea has tremendous influence on the physical and
meteorological conditions of the country.
2. In view of great importance and significance of the subject, Government of India
established the Department of Ocean Development in 1981 (later renamed as Ministry of Earth
Sciences) with an aim to create a deeper understanding of the oceanic regime of the northern and
central Indian Ocean and also to develop technology and technological aids for harnessing of
marine resources in a sustainable way and for holistic understanding of the earth processes in order
to achieve greater accuracy in the forecast of weather, climate and hazards.
3. The Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) has created an executive arm for its policies and
programmes, namely ‘The Earth System Science Organisation (ESSO)’, in the year October, 2007,
subsequent to the setting up of the MoES, which was formed in 2006 by bringing all the agencies
of meteorological and ocean development activities under one umbrella, recognizing the importance
of strong coupling among various components of the earth, viz. atmosphere, oceans, cryosphere
and geosphere. The Ministry inter alia  is primarily responsible for development of technology
towards the exploration and exploitation of marine resources in a sustainable way for the socio-
economic benefit of the society by taking into account the global developments in the field of
marine environment and to provide a wide range of meteorological services to the Indian public in
general and to the various sectors specifically. The area of competence of the Ministry, covers a
gamut of policies and programmes that relate to the areas of Weather viz. Weather advisories
specific to agriculture, aviation, shipping, sports, monsoon, disasters (cyclone, earthquake, tsunami,
sea level rise), living (fishery advisory) and non-living resources (poly-metallic nodules, gas
hydrates, freshwater); Coastal and Marine Ecosystems and Climate Change.
4. OBJECTIVES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE MINISTRY
The Ministry of Earth Sciences has the following objectives and functions:
• Improving weather forecast and provide advisory to agriculture, aviation, shipping,
sports including the Extended Long Range Seasonal Monsoon forecast;
• Providing a wide range of ocean information advisories including fishery information;
• Improving the understanding of Polar Science and its implications for climate change;
• Developing technology for harnessing marine resources;
• Conducting survey for assessing non-living resources;
• Assesing coastal marine productivity and Marine Ecosystems;
• Improving understanding of Climate Change Science;

2
•  Providing early warning of natural hazards viz. cyclone, tsunami, sea level rise; and
•  Promoting basic research including capacity building in the Earth System Science.
5. ORGANISATIONAL SET UP
5.1 The Ministry of Earth Sciences functions through the Earth Commission. The executive arm
of the Ministry i.e.  ‘The Earth System Science Organisation (ESSO)’ is responsible for
implementing its policies and programmes. It has four major branches of earth sciences viz.,
(i) Ocean Science and Technology Services; (ii) Atmospheric and Climate Science Services;
(iii) Geoscience and Technology; and (iv) Polar Science and Cryosphere. The policies/programmes
of the ESSO are being pursued through its autonomous bodies and subordinate offices. The
institutions, under the ESSO includes, India Meteorological Department (IMD), National Centre for
Medium Range Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF) and Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology
(IITM), National Centre for Antarctica and Ocean Research (NCAOR), National Institute of Ocean
Technology (NIOT), Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS), Centre for
Marine Living Resources (CMLRE) and Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM).
5.2 Operationalisation of Earth Commission:
The Committee was also informed that the Earth Commission was constituted by Hon’ble
Prime Minister after Cabinet approval, on the pattern of Space Commission and Atomic Energy
Commission. The Earth System Science Organisation with a Council to formulate policies has also
been constituted under the Earth Commission by the Minister of Earth Sciences. However, the
Earth Commission presently does not have any financial and administrative powers.
5.3 The Committee feels that without any financial and administrative powers, the Earth
Commission will hardly be effective in performing its role and functions and the very
purpose of setting up of Earth Commission would be defeated. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that immediate steps be taken to provide necessary financial and
administrative powers to the Earth Commission so that it may carry out it assigned role
effectively.
5.4 The detailed budget allocation of the Ministry of Earth Sciences, for the year 2012-2013
was considered by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests in a meeting held on 13th April, 2012.
6. MONITORING AND REVIEWING ONGOING SCHEMES
6.1 The Ministry informed the Committee that a 3-tier mechanism has been adopted by the
Ministry to monitor and review various schemes. While at the programme level, the schemes are
monitored by Steering Committee constituted by the Ministry with experts drawn from relevant
fields, at institute level, particularly for the autonomous bodies, the programmes are monitored
periodically by the, Governing Council, Financial Committee and Research Advisory Committee of
the Centres. At the Ministry level, the programmes are monitored on half yearly basis by the ESSO
council, in the beginning of the financial year (in April) and middle of the year (in September).
Besides, the programmes are being monitored and evaluated by Planning Commission and Cabinet
Secretariat as regards the Result Framework Document (RFD) on annual and half yearly basis,
respectively.
6.2 The Committee was further informed that the Ministry is making every effort to monitor
and evaluate the progress of the programmes. All the centres of the Ministry have been connected
to Tele-presence system for periodic monitoring on both scientific and financial aspects of

3
programmes by the Secretary, MoES. The financial progress of the autonomous bodies of the
centres is also being monitored on quarterly basis by the Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor
(AS&FA) of the Mini stry using tele-presence on quarterly basis.
6.3 The Committee notes with satisfaction that Result Framework Document (RFD), has
been adopted by the Ministry to review and monitor physical and financial progress/
achievements of major activities with respect to agreed targets fixed for each programme,
in addition to its internal monitoring mechanisms. The Committee is of the opinion that an
effective monitoring mechanism is imperative for ensuring that the various projects are
completed as per the projected schedule and timely action taken to overcome problems that
may arise in the implementation of the projects. The Committee hopes that with potent
monitoring mechanisms, the Ministry would be able to complete its projects in time.
7. ELEVENTH PLAN ACHIEVEMENTS AND TWELFTH PLAN PROPOSALS
7.1 Citing the achievements during the XIth Plan period (2007-2012), the Ministry informed the
Committee that the major focus during this Plan period was on the observation systems for
improving services related to oceanic, geological and atmospheric hazards and improving short-term
forecasts. Some of the major achievements during this period, inter-alia  include setting up of the
state-of-the-art tsunami warning system, two desalination plants in the Lakshadweep Islands, Centre
for Climate Change Research, advanced training school for earth system science and climate
change, third polar station at the Larsemann Hills in Antarctica, Establishment of Arctic Station,
high performance computing facility, etc. Besides various services were augmented/improved such
as agro-meteorology for farmers, forecasting for fog, weather, air quality, monsoon and cyclone,
etc. On being enquired from the Ministry, it was also informed that all the projects launched during
XIth Plan have been successfully achieved baring two projects viz., Multi-channel Seismic System
on board Sagar Kanya and NIOT extension centre in West Bengal.
7.2 As regards the XIIth Plan, the Committee was informed that the outlay proposed for by
the Ministry was Rs.18,824 crores. The Working Group and Steering Committee, have proposed
a total of 76 projects (both new and ongoing) for implementation during the XIIth Plan. In order
to focus the activities for accomplishing the targets and meet objectives, the Ministry had
reoriented and recast the 76 projects of XIIth Plan into 15 major programmes. The focus during
the XIIth Plan would be on discovering new phenomena, exploring sea bed and Polar Regions,
understanding of various earth processes and their interaction, developing earth system science
model and application of knowledge for improving/developing services for societal benefits. Another
major task, would be to develop climate services in view of climate change and variability, besides
continuing the operational programmes related to observations of atmosphere, ocean, snow, ice and
land surface and services related to weather and hazards. The major missions planned are related
to monsoon, earthquake, mountain meteorology, cloud physics, ocean mineral exploration
particularly Hydrothermal Sulfides, acquisition of observing platforms, such as aircrafts and ships,
and augmenting observing systems and earth enterprise, monsoon mission.
7.3 In this connection the Committee would like to invite the attention of the Ministry
to its 204th Report (page 3, para 5.1) on the Demands for Grants (2010-11), wherein it has
been stated that as per information furnished by the Ministry, the total initial Budgetary
allocation of Rs. 7004.00 crores for the XIth Five Year Plan was revised to Rs. 6637.00
crores at the mid term appraisal stage. In comparison to this, the Committee has observed
from the foregoing para, that the projected amount has been increased by almost three
times during XIIth Plan with outlay proposed by the Ministry at Rs 18,824.00 crores. The
Committee also notes that for focused attention and securing effective implementation,
Ministry has reoriented its 76 projects into 15 major programmes for XIIth Plan. The

4
Committee hopes that with increased allocations and more focused attention, the Ministry
would be able to achieve capacity for reliable weather forecasts at par with the highest
international standards and would be able to develop technologies needed for effective
exploitation of marine resources for the socio-economic development of our people during
the XIIth Plan period.
7.4 The Committee also notes that two projects viz. Multi-channel Seismic System on
board Sagar Kanya and National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) extension centre in
West Bengal, could not be completed during the XIth Plan period. The Committee would
like Ministry to make all possible efforts to complete these programmes as soon as possible
and well before the expiry of the first year of the XIIth Plan.
8. BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
8.1 The Committee was informed that an allocation of Rs.1668.00 crores at the B.E. stage, has
been made for the year 2012-2013, with a Plan allocation of Rs.1281.00 crores and a Non-Plan
allocation of Rs. 387.00 crores. The Ministry also informed that an allocation of Rs.1650.00 crores
(Plan) was projected by the Ministry during the year 2012-13. In reply to a query, the Ministry
stated that the allocation of Rs.1668.00 crores, for the year 2012-13 would be reasonably sufficient
to carry out all planned on-going activities of the Ministry, though some of the planned new
initiatives may have to be deferred for the time being as XIIth Plan is yet to be approved.
8.2 The Committee observes that the Ministry has received a plan outlay of Rs.1281.00
crores, which is Rs. 369.00 crores less than the amount of Rs 1650.00 crores, projected by
the Ministry. The Committee, however, notes with surprise and concern that XIIth Five
Year Plan of the Ministry is yet to be finalised and the Ministry is not certain about some
of the new initiatives that it had proposed during the Plan period. The Committee
recommends that all possible efforts may be made to finalise the XII Five Year Plan of the
Ministry at the earliest so that future roadmap of the Ministry’s action Plan becomes
certain and it can vigorously pursue the Plan targets and achieve them.
9. OCEANOGRAPHIC RESEARCH
9.1 The Committee noted that the head of ‘Oceanographic Research’ which comprises of 24
programmes/institutes/centres etc. including more important ones such as the Polar Science,
Polymetallic Nodules, Gas Hydrates programmes, Tsunami and Storm Surge Warning System etc.
and centres of National importance such as National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT),
National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR), Indian National Centre for Ocean
Information Services (INCOIS) have not been granted any budgetary allocation at B.E. stage for
the year 2012-13, while the same programmes were allocated Rs.531.00 crores at B.E. stage during
the year 2011-12.
9.2 On being asked about the reasons for the ‘Nil’ allocation, the Ministry clarified that the
funding pattern for various centres of the Ministry has been changed from institute-mode to
programme-mode during XIIth Plan period. Therefore, the activities of the Ministry have been the
re-oriented, reformatted and restructured to meet the requirement of activities of the different
disciplines of Earth Sciences and the allocations for NIOT, NCAOR, INCOIS and other
programmes such as Tsunami Warning System have been provided in respect of 15 major schemes
of the Ministry for the year 2012-13. For example, in the year 2012-13 the expenditure relating
to NIOT has been included under ‘Ocean Technology Programme’ where an allocation of Rs. 89.00
crores has been made, similarly the allocation for NCAOR activities has been included under ‘Polar
Science and Cryosphere’ where Rs. 290.00 crores has been made and other schemes of INCOIS

5
and Tsunami and Storm Surge have been included in the programme ‘Ocean Science and Services’
for which an allocation of Rs. 91.00 crores has been made.
9.3 The Committee notes that various ongoing projects/activities and proposed new
initiatives have been integrated into 15 broad major restructured programmes to carry out
the research activities in a more focused way. The Committee hopes that the new initiatives
does not lead to less focused monitoring or neglect of some of the programmes vis-a-vis the
position existing so far when these programmes were assigned individual budgetary
allocations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should carry out a
review, after a suitable interval, to see if the new system has helped achieve improved
meeting of physical and financial targets and appraise the Committee of the finding of such
a review. The Committee would, however, like Ministry to ensure that despite amalgamation
of a large number of projects/schemes in a programmes, individual focus and attention
continues to be provided to each schemes and project of the Ministry.
10. AUTONOMOUS BODIES
I. NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF  OCEAN TECHNOLOGY  (NIOT), CHENNAI
10.1 The National Institute of Ocean Technology was started in 1993 as the technical arm with
a view to develop reliable indigenous technology to solve the various engineering problems
associated with harnessing of non-living and living resources in the Indian Exclusive Economic
Zone (EEZ), which is about two-thirds of the land area of India. Its major functions are
development of technology related to the country’s needs in the field of deep sea mining,
desalination, ocean energy, marine instrumentation, materials development, oceanic data collecting
devices and observation systems etc. in consonance with ocean policy and national priorities,
Research and development of ocean related technology projects sponsored by the industry and
development of required technologies for the management of coastal zone and islands of the country.
10.2 The Committee was also informed that due to the re-orientation of the activities of the
Ministry, the allocation for NIOT, has been provided for under the ‘Ocean Technology Programme’
where a total allocation of Rs. 89.00 crores has been made.
10.3 The Ministry also informed that it has adopted the ‘Low Temperature Thermal Desalination
(LTTD)’ to solve the drinking water problem and two LTTD plants were commissioned in the
islands of Lakshadweep, one each at Minicoy and Agatti during March, 2011 and August, 2011
respectively. These plants, with a capacity of one lakh litre per day have been contributing
significantly to the drinking water needs of the local population of these islands. The Ministry
proposes to set up six more plants in other islands of Lakshadweep one each at Amini, Chetlet,
Kadamath, Kalpeni, Kiltan and Andrott, through public-private partnership mode.
10.4 The Committee has always stressed upon the need for greater application of
technologies for socio-economic development of common masses. The Committee, therefore,
commends the initiative of the NIOT in using technology i.e. ‘Low Temperature Thermal
Desalination (LTTD)’ to solve the drinking water problem in two islands of Lakshadweep,
by setting up two LTTD plants. The Committee is also happy to know that NIOT, also
proposes to set up six more plants in other islands of Lakshadweep, through public-private
partnership mode.  The Committee is of the opinion that such technologies needs to be
popularized and such plants should also be established in Andaman and Nicobar Islands as
well and other coastal regions of the country, which face a scarcity of fresh drinking water.
It also feels that the adoption of the public-private partnership model would make the
establishment of such plants more  cost effective, and enable the Ministry to commission a
larger number of plants in the coastal regions of the country in a short time.

6
II. INDIAN NATIONAL CENTRE FOR OCEAN INFORMATION SERVICES (INCOIS),
HYDERABAD
10.5 The mission of INCOIS is to provide ocean information and advisory services to the
society, industry, government and scientific community through sustained ocean observations and
constant improvements through systematic and focused research. The objective is to provide
coastal and ocean advisory services, potential fishing zone advisory service (PFZ), ocean state
forecast, national tsunami early warning etc. The Tsunami and Storm Surge Early Warning System
started in October, 2007 at INCOIS provides information on ocean waves swell etc. which are
quite valuable for Navy, Coast Guards, Merchant Ships. Similarly Fishing Zone Advisories are
utilized by large number of fishermen.
10.6 The Committee was also informed that during the current fiscal, the INCOIS and Tsunami
and Storm Surge have been included in the programme ‘Ocean Science and Services’ for which
an allocation of Rs. 91.00 crores has been made.
10.7 The Ministry informed that performance related to cyclone warnings has been significantly
improved due to implementation of high-resolution models and augmentation of capability to acquire
atmospheric and ocean data and as a part of disaster warning services, the Coastal Vulnerability
Mapping Index (CVI) for both Andaman and Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands have been
completed. The centre has been recognized as a Regional Tsunami Service Provider (RTSP) for the
Indian Ocean Region and started its operation for the Indian Ocean Rim countries. A Pan–India
mock drill exercise was successfully conducted on October 12, 2011, as part of Tsunami Warning
System in coordination with 29 countries of Indian Ocean under the overall framework of Inter-
governmental Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO programme and with this exercise, the
Indian Tsunami Warning System established by the Ministry at INCOIS, Hyderabad has been
entrusted responsibility for operation of Indian Tsunami Warning System as Regional Tsunami
Service Provider by UNESCO.
10.8 The Committee commends the efforts of the Ministry in augmenting the scientific
and technological capabilities of the INCOIS, in respect of predicting cyclones and tsunami,
since accurate and advance warnings about these natural hazards give sufficient time to
disaster management agencies to gear themselves better to minimise the loss of property
and lives. The Committee is also happy to note that the Indian Tsunami Warning System,
has been entrusted the responsibility to function as Regional Tsunami Service Provider by
UNESCO and have started its operation for the Indian Ocean Rim countries. The
Committee commends the Ministry for making accurate predictions on recent earthquake
that hit certain parts of India and saving the country from unnecessary anxiety and fear.
The Committee appreciates the fact that the technological capabilities of the INCOIS have
been recognized internationally and hopes that, in future, the Centre would forge
collaborations with similar scientific organizations of the advanced countries, to provide
ocean information and advisory services to society, industry, Government agencies and
scientific community through sustained ocean observations, information management, and
focused research.
III. NA TIONAL CENTRE FOR ANTARCTIC AND OCEAN RESEARCH (NCAOR), GOA
10.9 The mission of NCAOR is to plan, promote, co-ordinate and execute the entire gamut of
polar science and logistic activities of the country in order to ensure a perceptible presence of India
in Antarctica and Arctic and to uphold our strategic interests in the global framework of nations
in the southern continent and the surrounding oceans. The Indian Antarctic and Arctic Scientific
Expeditions are launched through and under the guidance of this organization. The centre is also
responsible for conducting and coordinating marine scientific surveys in the Indian Ocean for

7
assessment of non-living resources, besides the management of ORV Sagar Kanya for various
oceanographic researches in the country.
10.10  The Committee was informed that the allocation for NCAOR activities for the current
fiscal has been included under ‘Polar Science and Cryosphere’ where a total allocation of
Rs. 290.00 crores has been made.
10.11 The Committee is aware of NCAOR’s good performance in conducting scientific
expeditions to polar regions. The Committee hopes results of scientific studies being done
in polar regions would find useful application in glaciers of Himalayas, forecasts and control
relating to monsoons and in other areas and a better understanding of climate change would
emerge from these studies.
IV. INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TROPICAL METEOROLOGY(IITM), PUNE
10.12 IITM is a premiere research Institute and functions as a national centre for basic and
applied research in Atmosphere Climate System and climate change science required for
improvement of Weather and Climate Forecasts of the tropics in general with special reference to
monsoon meteorology over India and its neighborhood. The objectives of IITM is to generate,
scientific knowledge and to promote, and guide research in the field of meteorology and
atmospheric sciences that has potential application in various fields such as agriculture, economics,
health, water resources, transportation, communications, etc. The IITM is also responsible for
overall coordination of activities relating to ‘Centre for Climate Change Research (CCCR)’ being
established at Pune. Further, IITM is also involved in running, operation and maintenance of
Advanced Training School in Atmospheric Science to the development of human resources in the
field of earth sciences.
10.13 The Committee observed that the allocation for the IITM in the year 2011-12 was Rs.58.40
crores in B.E., which was increased to Rs.68.40 crores at the R.E. stage. However, the allocation
for B.E. 2012-13 has been drastically reduced to Rs.23.54 crores. When the Committee desired to
know the reason for the drastic reduction, the Ministry explained that the rest of the expenditure
relating to IITM will be met from one of the 15 umbrella schemes under Climate Change Research
and thus there is no reduction in the allocation for the IITM, Pune and the progress of the institute
will not be hampered. The Committee also observes that the allocation under the head of Climate
Change Research for the year 2012-13 at B.E. stage is Rs. 66.00 crores.
10.14 The Committee notes the importance of the useful research being done by the IITM
and hopes that the Institute would successfully provide research backup needed for raising
the accuracy levels of our weather and climate forecasts to the highest international
standards well before the end of XIIth Five Y ear Plan and the Committee recommends
adequate budgetary support during the period be provided to the Institute to achieve this
task.
11. CLOUD SEEDING PROGRAMME
11.1 During its deliberations with the Ministry on the 13
th April, 2012, a query was raised by the
Committee regarding differences of opinion among scientists on the cloud seeding programme in
different States. Citing a particular case, it was pointed that the programme under Andhra Pradesh
Government had resulted in improved rainfall, while in case of Karnataka Government no such
improvement in rainfall was observed. The Ministry apprised the Committee that doing cloud
seeding randomly on any cloud will not yeild rain and understanding the nature of the cloud is a
must before seeding. The Ministry further informed the Committee that selecting a right type of
cloud before seeding can enhance the precipitation ratio. The Ministry further pointed out that lack

8
of availability of correct data leads to the difficulty in seeding the right type of cloud for yielding
precipitation. An aircraft was hired two years back to measure cloud behaviour, but as the study
was sporadic the complete understanding of cloud physics is still to be achieved. The Ministry
further apprised that a special laboratory to study clouds has been established at Mahabaleshwar.
11.2 The Committee is of the opinion that research in the field of cloud physics should
be accorded high priority as it would not only help in right selection of clouds for seeding
but would help master its other aspects as well including development of cost effective
techniques for successful cloud seeding, which may go a long way in helping the country
solve the problems of drought and water scarcity in certain parts of the country. Such
research may also provide greater insights in understanding the dynamics of global
warming. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that Ministry should make all
out efforts to strengthen the special laboratory which has been set up at Mahabaleshwar to
study all kinds of clouds from precipitation point of view so that cost effective techniques
for artificial precipitation could be developed and for that, if needed, adequate funds should
be made available.
12. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMES
12.1 The Research and Development activities of the Ministry cover experimental work and
research on basic and applied meteorology and seismology including design and development of the
instruments for it. The Ministry also informed that one of the significant achievements under the
programme has been the improvement in the long range forecast of Indian summer monsoon. The
Ministry also informed the Committee of the following achievements, in the Research and
Development, made by it.
(i) Improvement in weather forecasting:  Research and Development efforts are driven by
operational requirements to improve the multi-scale weather forecasts and need based R & D
efforts have been developed to translate research to operation. Specific efforts have been made
towards the assimilation of Doppler Weather Observations for forecasting and meso-scale modeling,
application of multi-model ensemble (MME) technique for weather forecasting the district level
rainfall, cyclones etc. and about 12 papers in national as well as international journals have
published in this regard.
(ii) Improvement in application of weather forecast in agriculture : In order to improve the
operational Agromet Services, research work is being carried out in different areas like development
of forewarning models for pest and disease incidences, delineation of agroclimatic zones under the
present scenario of rainfall and irrigation, resilience of climate change and its impact on agromet
services including field experiments on rate of photosynthesis at different environmental conditions
and other different areas of agrometeorology. The salient findings emerging from these studies are
being experimentally used in Operational Agromet Services.
(iii) Improvement in Meteorological Instruments:  A new hall effect Wind direction sensor has
been developed by the IMD, which is capable of showing wind direction even at very low wind
speed. A PC based Current Weather instrument system, with very high resolution has been designed
and installed at IGI airport. A Lightning protection system has been designed for protection against
lightning and surges and installed at Cochin, Calicut, Thiruvananthapuram Airports. A new technique
has been developed, which has helped IMD to get real time radiation data from network stations
on IMD website, at ten minutes interval which can be accessed at any location.
(iv) Rainfall Analysis for drought monitoring :  To monitor droughts, research have been
made towards studying the trend in extreme rainfall and district-wise droughts and results were
brought out in a peer reviewed research journal.

9
(v) Climatic Monitoring:  Reports on Climate Monitoring are regularly brought out in national
and international journals for the benefit of the scientific community.
12.2 The Committee noted that for the year 2011-12 ‘Research and Development Programme’
was allocated Rs.22.41 crores at B.E. as well as at R.E. stages and the B.E. for the year 2012-13
was increased to Rs.24.91 crores under Non-Plan head. When the Committee enquired, whether
the budgetary support was sufficient to meet the increasing importance of indigenous R&D, the
Ministry stated that the amount of Rs.24.91crores in B.E. 2011-12, under the non-plan head,
reflects the marginal increase pertaining to in-house R&D activities of India Meteorological
Department (IMD). However, sufficient budget provision amounting to Rs. 60.00 crores has been
earmarked separately for Plan programme entitled ‘Research, Training, Education and Outreach’.
The fund provision under Plan is primarily intended to support the extra-mural R&D projects, being
executed by the academic institutions and research organization other than MoES centres in the
country. The Ministry therefore stated that the available funds under both non-Plan and Plan heads,
would be adequate to meet the requirements of R&D Programme. Besides, R&D activities are also
envisaged under other major schemes of the Ministry being carried out by the centres of the
Ministry, for which separate allocations have been made.
12.3 The Committee is happy to note that allocations made for R&D activities of IMD and
for the programmes ‘Research, Training, Education and Outreach’ taken together are
sufficient and hopes that a strong research backup would be available for the Ministry to
complete its various programmes and achieve its objectives during the year 2011-12.
13. NATIONAL CENTRE OF SEISMOLOGY (NCS)
13.1 The Committee during its deliberations with the Ministry, on the 13th April, 2012, enquired
about the existence of a separate research institute to study the science behind earthquakes. The
Ministry in response to the said query mentioned that it has already proposed to set up a separate
body in this regard, under the nomenclature ‘National Centre of Seismology’.
13.2 The Ministry further mentioned that the issue of setting up a separate Institute/Centre for
Seismology has been under consideration since 1969. Various committees viz., Bhagwantam
Committee have recommended viz., Narasimha Committee (2007) and Das Committee (2007), have
recommended separate Centre for Seismology. Presently, it is proposed to have a separate
Seismology Division for IMD. The newly set up Earthquake Risk Evaluation Centre (EREC) will
be consolidated into a separate ‘National Centre for Seismology’ (NCS), to enable rapid scientific
developments in this field.
13.3 The Ministry further informed that, at present, various aspects of seismology related
research are being carried out in a fragmented way by several research, academic and State and
Central Government institutions in the country. India Meteorological Department, under the Ministry
of Earth Sciences (MoES), has been the nodal agency of Government of India dealing with matters
related to Seismology in the country. The Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) is currently
supporting several multi-institutional R&D projects in Seismology. The Ministry therefore stated
that, there is an urgent need to bring synergy that would effectively integrate in a holistic manner
all the efforts put in by various Earth Science related organizations in the country, by way of
creating a centre of excellence in Seismology, called the NCS, that would address all earthquake
related matters.
13.4 The Ministry further mentioned that the ultimate aim of the NCS would be to enhance our
understanding of earthquake processes, especially those relevant to India, and provide S&T inputs
on the earthquake hazard for populated areas, thereby reducing the risk due to earthquakes. In
terms of economic implications, the benefits that would be accrued in terms of reducing the loss

10
of life and damage to property in future from earthquakes, would be much more than the
investments made.
13.5 The Committee fully understands that though it may not humanly possible to
completely control the forces of nature like earthquake, yet through technological
interventions the massive destruction and financial losses it causes can certainly be
minimized. The Committee, therefore, feels that, intensive efforts towards scientific
research are needed to fully understand the various aspects of earthquakes. It is therefore,
imperative to establish a separate institutional mechanism to effectively deal with
earthquake related issues in the country, so as to minimize the damage in future due to
earthquakes.
13.6 The Committee also notes that  p resently, various aspects of seismology related
research are being carried out in a fragmented way by several research, academic and State
and Central Government institutions in the country.  In view of the extreme killer and
destructive potential of earthquake as a natural phenomenon, the Committee fully endorses
the proposal of the Ministry to set up a separate research institute of the nature of
‘National Centre of Seismology’ which is exclusively devoted to study of the mechanics of
earthquakes, geo-tectonic movements and all other aspects of earthquake so as to avoid/
minimise the loses of life and property, a field which is yet to by mastered by the human
mind.
14. ATMOSPHERIC OBSERV ATION SYSTEMS NETWORK AND ATMOSPHERIC
PROCESSES AND MODELLING ANDs SERVICES
14.1 The Ministry informed that the ‘Atmospheric Observation Systems Network’ is a
modernization plan, that aims at commissioning state-of-the-art observing systems throughout the
country. An Atmospheric Technology Institute is also planned to coordinate development of
instruments, calibrate instruments including satellite-based and provide overall technology support to
atmospheric sciences, besides validation of satellite data. Besides, a dedicated forecasting system
for the entire Himalayan region with a much focused objective of integrating and improving the
weather related services, is also proposed.
14.2 The Committee was also informed that ‘Atmospheric Processes and Modelling and Service’
aims at developing a wide range of atmospheric models for providing weather and climate
forecasting services to various sectors by integrating all the process studies and models. The major
sectors that would be benefited are: Agriculture, Aviation, Metro-cities, Mountain regions, defence,
sports and disaster forecasting. Through this programme, District-level agromet advisory is also
being provided to about 560 districts of the country to deliver crop and location specific
information to farmers. The upgradation of advisory facilities at about 100 airports in the country
is proposed to be undertaken.
14.3 As regards the Budgetary allocation, the Committee observed that the ‘Atmospheric
Observation System Network’ and ‘Atmospheric Processes and Modelling and Services’ were not
given any budgetary support in the year 2011-12; however in B.E. for the year 2012-13 these
programme/services have been allocated Rs.206.00 crores and Rs.79.00 crores respectively. On
being enquired about the reasons for the allocation and the details thereof, the Ministry clarified that
the ‘Atmospheric Observation System Network’ and ‘Atmospheric Processes and Modelling and
Services’ were a part of the ongoing schemes implemented in 2011-12 for which adequate budget
provision had been made under the respective heads and therefore no separate allocations were
made. Presently, these two heads have been separated and are existing as new schemes in the
current fiscal i.e. 2012-13, which explains the separate allocation under these heads.

11
14.4 The Ministry also stated that there is no allocation under the head ‘Indian Meteorology
Department’ for the B.E. in the year 2012-13, while for the same head an allocation of Rs.352.00
crores was made in B.E. for the year 2011-12. Explaining the reason for this, the Ministry stated
that the head ‘India Meteorological Department (IMD)’ has been merged with ‘Atmospheric
Observation System Network’ and hence there is no separate allocation during 2012-13 for IMD.
14.5 The Committee further took note that the Presidential address delivered in Parliament on the
12th March, 2012, mentioned that the ‘Monsoon Mission Programme’ launched by Government will
enable the country to significantly improve monsoon prediction for the benefit of our farmers. The
coverage of farmers under the agro-meteorological services is also proposed to be raised from the
current level of 10 per cent to around 40 per cent in the XIIth Plan period.
14.6 The Ministry, also informed that to provide advance information to the farmers, about the
weather conditions, Agro-met Advisory Service (AAS) bulletins at district, state and national levels
are jointly prepared with Agricultural Universities, Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR)
and the Ministry of Agriculture and disseminated to different stakeholders. The district-level
bulletins are issued to 560 districts of the country. Various audio-visual media are used for the
dissemination of agromet advisories to the farming community in sixteen States viz. TV, radio,
newspapers, SMS and Interactive V oice Response Technology (IVR) are used. Mobile phone
services have been used to a great extent for the providing Agro Advisory services to the farmers
and presently it has been extended to 30,00,000 users during the current year. It is proposed to
increase the mobile user base from the existing 10% to 40%. The Committee was also informed
that, AAS bulletins provides an outlook of weather in 560 districts of the country 5 days in
advance, particularly the parameters like, wind, temperature, rainfall, humidity and soil moisture.
Apart from farmers, these bulletins are useful for fertilizer and pesticide industries, irrigation
department, seed corporations and also for horticultural crops and livestock, etc.
14.7 The Committee is of the opinion that the agricultural economy of the country is
immensely affected by the vagaries of nature. However, this effect can only be minimized
with the through scientific inputs, through the installation of state-of-the-art weather
observation systems throughout the country and utilizing them for providing accurate and
advance information to the farmers pertaining to the weather and climatic conditions. In
this connection the Committee appreciates the Ministry for initiating the ‘Agro-
meterological services’ to provide advance information to the farmers pertaining to wind,
temperature, rainfall, humidity and soil moisture and helps them to plan the cultivation and
harvesting of various crops  and in issuing district-level bulletins to 560 districts across the
country. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Government intends to increase the
coverage of farmers under the agro-meteorological services from the current level of 10%
to around 40%.
14.8 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should develop Atmospheric
Observations Systems Network and Atmospheric Processes and Modelling and Services
throughout the country in a time bound manner so as to improve weather and climate
forecasting services. The Committee further recommends that agro-meteorological advisory
services should be extended to cover all districts of the country. The Committee further
recommends that crop and location specific information to farmers be disseminated in a
more farmer friendly manner and its reach extended to cover all farmers in a time-bound
manner, so that even small and marginal farmers could take full benefit of these services.
15. INTEGRATED OCEAN INFORMATION ADVISORY SERVICES
15.1 The Committee noted that Presidential address delivered in the Parliament on 12
th March,
2012 also mentioned that Integrated Ocean Information Advisory Services will be extended to

12
90 per cent of coastal fisherman in our country. The Committee understands that at present the
services cover only 65 per cent of the coastal fishermen in the country. In this context, the
Committee desired to know from the Ministry, the details of the initiative taken in this regard and
how fishermen would be benefited from this programme.
15.2 The Ministry informed that multi-lingual Potential Fishing Zone (PFZ) advisories are being
generated and disseminated to about 65 per cent of coastal fishermen on every Monday, Wednesday
and Friday in various coastal States of India viz., Gujarat, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Goa, Kerala,
Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Orissa, West Bengal, Andaman and Nicobar Islands and Lakshadweep
Islands. However, on cloudy days the PFZ advisories, generated using satellite data, is hindered by
clouds and hence the forecast is generated based on a new scientific method. The Committee was
also informed that due to implementation of this new method, the number of advisories issued the
year 2010-11 increased by 36%. These advisories have benefited the fishermen by reducing the
search time and increasing the catch per unit effort and have also resulted in savings upto 30%
of the fuel cost The validation experiments carried out indicated that the net profit increased from
1.5 to 2.5 times.
15.3 The Committee appreciates the good initiative of the Ministry in providing the
fishermen advance advisories, which have led to reduction of search time and increase in
the catch per unit effort, resulting in an increased net profit from 1.5 to 2.5 times and fuel
savings upto 30%. The Committee also notes the proposal to increase the user base of
these advisories from the existing 65% to 90% of the fishermen across the country, by the
end of the Plan period. The Committee desires the Ministry to make concerted efforts to
achieve this target.
16. ACCURACY IN WEATHER FORECASTING
16.1 The Committee notes that during discussions on the application of Numerical weather
modelling for the purpose of weather forecast, with the Ministry on the 13
th April, 2012, it was
informed by the Ministry that USA is more advanced as regards meteorological predications than
India, because it uses high speed computing system than India to frame weather models and they
also have sufficiently trained a large number of people to run and understand those models which
India lacks. Therefore the Ministry proposes to enhance India’s computing power in the field of
meteorology by establishing schools to train people so that the country can attain the US level
efficiency in the next five years. While explaining the efficiency of Numerical Weather Modelling,
the Ministry stated that it represents atmospheric conditions, through a set of equations solved
through high performance computers, through which the prediction period in advance could be
reduced from five days at present to two days. He further apprised the Committee that Numerical
Modelling is very important to generate initial weather conditions based upon which future
predictions are made.
16.2 In response to another query regarding level of accuracy in forecasting raised by the
Committee, the Ministry replied that Numerical Weather prediction will bring India at par with US
Centres in terms of accuracy in prediction, in the next five years and forecast improvement will
take place in terms of accuracy upto five days.
16.3 The Committee feels that the above discussion itself shows the urgent need for
making concerted efforts to improve the accuracy of our weather and climate services. In
a country like India, where a large section of population is dependent on agriculture for its
living, correct and reliable weather prediction well in advance, will prove a boon for the
farmers. The Committee, therefore, feels that instead of putting a distant plan of achieving
the US level of accuracy, in climate and weather forecasting in the next five years, the
Ministry should make all out efforts to improve our weather and climate prediction services

13
and bring them at par with the highest international standards of accuracy within the next
three years.
17. POLAR SCIENCE AND CYROSPHERE
17.1 The Committee was informed that ‘Polar Science and Cryosphere programme’ entails the
study of the Antarctic, Arctic and Glaciers of Himalayas that are important to understand the
climate change and climate variability in the Indian region. The Arctic and Antarctic regions, and
the ocean surrounding it, are the most important areas that not only govern the earth’s climate but
are also the storehouse which archive its past climatic history. The north Atlantic and Southern
Ocean are well recognized as the major points for deep water formation that drive the large scale
thermohaline circulation in world’s oceans, thereby controlling the global climate, therefore a study
of these regions becomes important.
17.2 Explaining, the benefits of studies of Polar Regions, the Ministry explained that for a
tropical country like India, such polar processes assume greater significance as these affect the
monsoon which is the backbone of the agriculture dominated Indian economy. Recent research
have shown that natural climatic variability in polar regions such as the North Atlantic Oscillation,
Southern Hemisphere Annular Mode etc., togetherwith the Southern Ocean sea-surface-temperatures
can impart control over Indian monsoon via coupled ocean-atmosphere pathways or tele-
connections. The North Atlantic Sea Surface Temperature is strongly linked with the Indian
monsoon on inter-decadal and longer time scales. Therefore, understanding the physical
mechanisms behind these tele-connections will help India improve our predictive capability of
weather systems in northern India including the Indian monsoon. Besides, the glaciological studies
undertaken in Antarctica including monitoring of ice sheet margin, Dakshin Gangotri glacier, snow
accumulation and ablation studies, Ice core drilling and isotopic analyses of ice etc., have direct
relevance to the global warming and mass balance calculations of the ice sheet.
17.3 As regards the Budgetary allocations, the fund allocation to Arctic and Ice-Class vessel has
been provided under the programme “Polar Science and Cryosphere”, as all the activities relating
to Arctic and Antarctic including southern Ocean studies in XIIth Plan have been integrated into
this major programme. The required allocations for Arctic and and Polar Research vessel are Rs.
7.0 crores and Rs. 180.00 crores, respectively, for the year 2012-13. The Himadri station in Arctic
and Maitri and Bharati, which is in an advanced stage of commission in the Antarctic, has since
been converted in to a supply base and are the nerve centres of Indian Polar Programme from
where Indian scientists conduct front ranking research in the domains of not only atmosphere
science but also polar microbiology, upper ionosphere, solid earth geophysics, crustal evolution,
Gondwana connection of India and Antarctica etc.
17.4 The Ministry during its deliberations on the 13th April, 2012, informed the Committee that
increased number of research stations in the Polar regions would increase the base of data
collection regarding polar processes which affect the monsoon and would also facilitate climate
change studies. Moreover, as most of the glaciers in the polar regions occur at the sea level, one
can go directly to the glacier and observe them and do scientific studies, which yield meaningful
results; while at the Himalayas the Glaciers are at the height of 10,000ft and above, where studies
are difficult and any results obtained from glacial studies at polar regions could also be applied in
Himalayan regions of the country.
17.5 The Committee acknowledges the significance of the Indian polar missions as the
climatic conditions in these regions have a direct bearing on the monsoons, which is the
lifeline of the agriculture in our country. The Committee commends the setting of the
Indian polar stations which would increase the base of data collection regarding polar
processes. The Committee hopes that Bharati station would be commissioned as per

14
schedule and start its operations during the 2012-13, which will give significant boost to
India’s polar research programme. The Committee recommends that the  continuing long
term approved scientific projects which are the proposed activity under the “Polar Science
and Cryosphere”, should be pursued diligently and in a well-planned and strategic manner
and the data collected from its scientific expeditions must be analyzed and a serious
endeavor made to use the results to predict the Indian monsoons more accurately.
18. POLYMETALLIC NODULES PROGRAMME
18.1 India is a pioneer investor in the Polymetallic Nodules Programme and has 75,000sq. km.
in the Central Indian Ocean Basin (CIOB), allotted by International Sea Bed Authority of United
Nations for exploiting Polymetallic Nodules lying on the sea bed at 4000 to 6000 metre water
depth. These potato-shaped nodules contain Copper, Nickel and Cobalt which are useful elements.
The programme consists of four components - Survey and Exploration of Polymetallic Nodules in
the Central Indian Ocean Basin (CIOB), Environmental Impact Assessment studies at CIOB,
Technology Development for mining of nodules and Technology Development for extraction of
metals from nodules.
18.2 The Comm ittee observed that the allocation for the programme ‘Polymetallic Nodules
Programme’ for the year 201 1-12, was Rs.18.00 crores at B.E. and drastically reduced to Rs.2.00
crores at R.E. stage, while for the year 2012-13, there is no allocation under this head. When the
Committee desired to know the reasons for the same, the Ministry clarified that the allocation for
‘Polymetallic Nodules Programme’ for the year 2012-13 has been provided under the programme
‘Ocean Survey and Minerals Resources’ which has been allocated Rs.68.00 crores.
18.3 The Committee was also informed of the trend of budgetary support approved and actually
utilised during the last three years. The Committee observes for the year 2009-10, there was a B.E.
allocation of Rs. 13.00 crores and the Actual expenditure was Rs.11.76 crores; while for the year
2010-11, the B.E. allocation was 15.00 crores and Actual expenditure was Rs. 12.46 crores. For
the year 2011-12 the B.E. and R.E. allocation was Rs. 18.00 crores and Rs. 2.00 crores,
respectively. The Actual expenditure for the year 2010-12 are awaited.
18.4 The Committee, notes with concern that there was a shortfall in utilisation of
allocated funds by the Ministry, to the tune of Rs. 1.24 crores in the year 2009-10 and
Rs. 2.54 crores in the year 2010-11; which is evident from the difference in B.E. and Actual
allocations for the said years. The shortfall in utilization, is even more apparent for the
year 2012, where the B.E. allocation stood reduced from Rs. 18.00 crores to Rs. 2.00 crores
only, i.e. a drastic reduction of about 90 per cent of allocated budget. The Committee takes
a serious view of the under utilisation of funds in last few years by the Ministry, which
shows that the Ministry is not seriously persuing this important programme. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry must actively pursue this
programme and the programme must be carried forward with full vigour, for exploitation of
the mineral resources in our vast Exclusive Economic Zone to enhance availability of
sufficient mineral resources required for our industrial growth.
19. GAS HYDRATES PROGRAMME
19.1 In response to a query raised by the Committee for eliciting details of initiatives taken by
the Ministry for the evaluation and quantification of gas-hydrates, in view of their potential as a
clean fuel resource, in the Indian Exclusive Economic Zone, the Ministry intimated the Committee
that under this programme, several approaches were developed for the detection, characterization,
delineation and quantification of gas-hydrates in the Krishna-Godavari (KG) and Mahanadi (Mn)
basins using the available seismic data. However, major portions of the deep-water regions have not

15
been fully explored and as most of the data which have been examined so far were acquired for
the exploration of conventional hydrocarbons, the available data were inadequate for the delineation
and assessment of gas hydrates.
19.2 The Ministry has also stated that the preliminary analysis of seismic data shows wide-spread
signatures of gas-hydrates in both the basins. By employing the indigenously developed methods for
the qualification and quantification of gas-hydrates, the Ministry is in the process of (i) ascertaining
whether the identified regions are related to gas-hydrates; (ii) understanding the petroleum system
of gas-hydrates; (iii) delineating the gas hydrate-bearing sediments; and (iv) assessing the gas-
hydrate resource potential in these regions. Ground truth verification will be carried out at the
potential locations identified through the analysis.
19.3 The Committee observes for the year 2011-12, there was a B.E. allocation of Rs.ss18.00
crores, which was reduced to Rs.11.00 crores, i.e. a reduction of Rs.7.00 crores at R.E. 2011-12.
For the year 2012-13 no separate allocation has been made under this head, however, the allocation
for ‘Gas Hydrates Programme’ for the year 2012-13 has been provided under the programme
‘Ocean Survey and Minerals Resources’ which has been allocated a total of Rs.68.00 crores.
19.4 The Committee observes that as regards the detection and quantification of gas–
hydrates, major portions of the deep-water regions have remained unexplored and available
data is inadequate for the assessment of gas-hydrates. The Committee therefore
recommends that evaluation and quantification of gas-hydrates must be intensified in the
EEZ region of the country to fully explore this resource specially in view of its potential as
clean fuel resource. The Committee is of the opinion that to meet the ever increasing
demand of energy in the country, it is imperative to explore alternate sources of energy as
soon as possible and therefore such programmes should be actively pursued and adequately
funded.
19.5 The Committee after examining the various aspects of the Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences, the Committee is of the view that the Ministry
through its various schemes/programmes is providing a wide range of meteorological
services to people, besides carrying out high end research in meterological and polar
sciences. The Committee is therefore of the opinion that the programmes of the Ministry
of Earth Sciences should be properly and adequately funded, to provide the necessary
impetus to the core and critical programmes, Ministry has envisaged for the year 2012-13.

16
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Committee feels that without any financial and administrative powers, the Earth
Commission will hardly be effective in performing its role and functions and the very
purpose of setting up of Earth Commission would be defeated. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that immediate steps be taken to provide necessary financial and
administrative powers to the Earth Commission so that it may carry out it assigned role
effectively. (Para 5.3)
2. The Committee notes with satisfaction that Result Framework Document (RFD), has
been adopted by the Ministry to review and monitor physical and financial progress/
achievements of major activities with respect to agreed targets fixed for each programme,
in addition to its internal monitoring mechanisms. The Committee is of the opinion that an
effective monitoring mechanism is imperative for ensuring that the various projects are
completed as per the projected schedule and timely action taken to overcome problems that
may arise in the implementation of the projects. The Committee hopes that with potent
monitoring mechanisms, the Ministry would be able to complete its projects in time.
(Para 6.3)
3. In this connection the Committee would like to invite the attention of the Ministry
to its 204th Report (page 3, para 5.1) on the Demands for Grants (2010-11), wherein it has
been stated that as per information furnished by the Ministry, the total initial Budgetary
allocation of Rs. 7004.00 crores for the XIth Five Year Plan was revised to Rs. 6637.00
crores at the mid term appraisal stage. In comparison to this, the Committee has observed
from the foregoing para, that the projected amount has been increased by almost three
times during XIIth Plan with outlay proposed by the Ministry at Rs. 18,824.00 crores. The
Committee also notes that for focused attention and securing effective implementation,
Ministry has reoriented its 76 projects into 15 major programmes for XIIth Plan. The
Committee hopes that with increased allocations and more focused attention, the Ministry
would be able to achieve capacity for reliable weather forecasts at par with the highest
international standards and would be able to develop technologies needed for effective
exploitation of marine resources for the socio-economic development of our people during
the XIIth Plan period. (Para 7.3)
4. The Committee also notes that two projects viz. Multi-channel Seismic System on
board Sagar Kanya and National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) extension centre in
West Bengal, could not be completed during the XIth Plan period. The Committee would
like Ministry to make all possible efforts to complete these programmes as soon as possible
and well before the expiry of the first year of the XIIth Plan. (Para 7.4)
5. The Committee observes that the Ministry has received a plan outlay of Rs.1281.00
crores, which is Rs. 369.00 crores less than the amount of Rs 1650.00 crores, projected by
the Ministry. The Committee, however, notes with surprise and concern that XIIth Five
Year Plan of the Ministry is yet to be finalised and the Ministry is not certain about some
of the new initiatives that it had proposed during the Plan period. The Committee
recommends that all possible efforts may be made to finalise the XII Five Year Plan of the
Ministry at the earliest so that future roadmap of the Ministry’s action Plan becomes
certain and it can vigorously pursue the Plan targets and achieve them. (Para 8.2)
16

17
6. The Committee notes that various ongoing projects/activities and proposed new
initiatives have been integrated into 15 broad major restructured programmes to carry out
the research activities in a more focused way. The Committee hopes that the new initiatives
does not lead to less focused monitoring or neglect of some of the programmes vis-a-vis the
position existing so far when these programmes were assigned individual budgetary
allocations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should carry out a
review, after a suitable interval, to see if the new system has helped achieve improved
meeting of physical and financial targets and appraise the Committee of the finding of such
a review. The Committee would, however, like Ministry to ensure that despite amalgamation
of a large number of projects/schemes in a programmes, individual focus and attention
continues to be provided to each schemes and project of the Ministry. (Para 9.3)
7. The Committee has always stressed upon the need for greater application of
technologies for socio-economic development of common masses. The Committee, therefore,
commends the initiative of the NIOT in using technology i.e. ‘Low Temperature Thermal
Desalination (LTTD)’ to solve the drinking water problem in two islands of Lakshadweep,
by setting up two LTTD plants. The Committee is also happy to know that NIOT, also
proposes to set up six more plants in other islands of Lakshadweep, through public-private
partnership mode. The Committee is of the opinion that such technologies needs to be
popularized and such plants should also be established in Andaman and Nicobar Islands as
well and other coastal regions of the country, which face a scarcity of fresh drinking water.
It also feels that the adoption of the public-private partnership model would make the
establishment of such plants more cost effective, and enable the Ministry to commission a
larger number of plants in the coastal regions of the country in a short time. (Para 10.4)
8. The Committee commends the efforts of the Ministry in augmenting the scientific
and technological capabilities of the INCOIS, in respect of predicting cyclones and tsunami,
since accurate and advance warnings about these natural hazards give sufficient time to
disaster management agencies to gear themselves better to minimise the loss of property
and lives. The Committee is also happy to note that the Indian Tsunami Warning System,
has been entrusted the responsibility to function as Regional Tsunami Service Provider by
UNESCO and have started its operation for the Indian Ocean Rim countries. The
Committee commends the Ministry for making accurate predictions on recent earthquake
that hit certain parts of India and saving the country from unnecessary anxiety and fear.
The Committee appreciates the fact that the technological capabilities of the INCOIS have
been recognized internationally and hopes that, in future, the Centre would forge
collaborations with similar scientific organizations of the advanced countries, to provide
ocean information and advisory services to society, industry, Government agencies and
scientific community through sustained ocean observations, information management, and
focused research. (Para 10.8)
9. The Committee is aware of NCAOR’s good performance in conducting scientific
expeditions to polar regions. The Committee hopes results of scientific studies being done
in polar regions would find useful application in glaciers of Himalayas, forecasts and control
relating to monsoons and in other areas and a better understanding of climate change would
emerge from these studies. (Para 10.11)
10. The Committee notes the importance of the useful research being done by the IITM
and hopes that the Institute would successfully provide research backup needed for raising
the accuracy levels of our weather and climate forecasts to the highest international
standards well before the end of XIIth Five Y ear Plan and the Committee recommends
adequate budgetary support during the period be provided to the Institute to achieve this
task. (Para 10.14)

18
11. The Committee is of the opinion that research in the field of cloud physics should
be accorded high priority as it would not only help in right selection of clouds for seeding
but would help master its other aspects as well including development of cost effective
techniques for successful cloud seeding, which may go a long way in helping the country
solve the problems of drought and water scarcity in certain parts of the country. Such
research may also provide greater insights in understanding the dynamics of global
warming. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that Ministry should make all
out efforts to strengthen the special laboratory which has been set up at Mahabaleshwar to
study all kinds of clouds from precipitation point of view so that cost effective techniques
for artificial precipitation could be developed and for that, if needed, adequate funds should
be made available. (Para 11.2)
12. The Committee is happy to note that allocations made for R&D activities of IMD and
for the programmes ‘Research, Training, Education and Outreach’ taken together are
sufficient and hopes that a strong research backup would be available for the Ministry to
complete its various programmes and achieve its objectives during the year 2011-12.
(Para 12.3)
13. The Committee fully understands that though it may not humanly possible to
completely control the forces of nature like earthquake, yet through technological
interventions the massive destruction and financial losses it causes can certainly be
minimized. The Committee, therefore, feels that, intensive efforts towards scientific
research are needed to fully understand the various aspects of earthquakes. It is therefore,
imperative to establish a separate institutional mechanism to effectively deal with
earthquake related issues in the country, so as to minimize the damage in future due to
earthquakes. (Para 13.5)
14. The Committee also notes that presently, various aspects of seismology related
research are being carried out in a fragmented way by several research, academic and State
and Central Government institutions in the country. In view of the extreme killer and
destructive potential of earthquake as a natural phenomenon, the Committee fully endorses
the proposal of the Ministry to set up a separate research institute of the nature of
‘National Centre of Seismology’ which is exclusively devoted to study of the mechanics of
earthquakes, geo-tectonic movements and all other aspects of earthquake so as to avoid/
minimise the loses of life and property, a field which is yet to by mastered by the human
mind. (Para 13.6)
15. The Committee is of the opinion that the agricultural economy of the country is
immensely affected by the vagaries of nature. However, this effect can only be minimized
with the through scientific inputs, through the installation of state-of-the-art weather
observation systems throughout the country and utilizing them for providing accurate and
advance information to the farmers pertaining to the weather and climatic conditions. In
this connection the Committee appreciates the Ministry for initiating the ‘Agro-
meterological services’ to provide advance information to the farmers pertaining to wind,
temperature, rainfall, humidity and soil moisture and helps them to plan the cultivation and
harvesting of various crops and in issuing district-level bulletins to 560 districts across the
country. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Government intends to increase the
coverage of farmers under the agro-meteorological services from the current level of 10%
to around 40%. (Para 14.7)
16. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should develop Atmospheric
Observations Systems Network and Atmospheric Processes and Modelling and Services
throughout the country in a time bound manner so as to improve weather and climate

19
forecasting services. The Committee further recommends that agro-meteorological advisory
services should be extended to cover all districts of the country. The Committee further
recommends that crop and location specific information to farmers be disseminated in a
more farmer friendly manner and its reach extended to cover all farmers in a time-bound
manner, so that even small and marginal farmers could take full benefit of these services.
(Para 14.8)
17. The Committee appreciates the good initiative of the Ministry in providing the
fishermen advance advisories, which have led to reduction of search time and increase in
the catch per unit effort, resulting in an increased net profit from 1.5 to 2.5 times and fuel
savings upto 30%. The Committee also notes the proposal to increase the user base of
these advisories from the existing 65% to 90% of the fishermen across the country, by the
end of the Plan period. The Committee desires the Ministry to make concerted efforts to
achieve this target. (Para 15.3)
18. The Committee feels that the above discussion itself shows the urgent need for
making concerted efforts to improve the accuracy of our weather and climate services. In
a country like India, where a large section of population is dependent on agriculture for its
living, correct and reliable weather prediction well in advance, will prove a boon for the
farmers. The Committee, therefore, feels that instead of putting a distant plan of achieving
the US level of accuracy, in climate and weather forecasting in the next five years, the
Ministry should make all out efforts to improve our weather and climate prediction services
and bring them at par with the highest international standards of accuracy within the next
three years. (Para 16.3)
19. The Committee acknowledges the significance of the Indian polar missions as the
climatic conditions in these regions have a direct bearing on the monsoons, which is the
lifeline of the agriculture in our country. The Committee commends the setting of the
Indian polar stations which would increase the base of data collection regarding polar
processes. The Committee hopes that Bharati station would be commissioned as per
schedule and start its operations during the 2012-13, which will give significant boost to
India’s polar research programme. The Committee’ recommends that the continuing long
term approved scientific projects which are the proposed activity under the “Polar Science
and Cryosphere”, should be pursued diligently and in a well-planned and strategic manner
and the data collected from its scientific expeditions must be analyzed and a serious
endeavor made to use the results to predict the Indian monsoons more accurately.
(Para 17.5)
20. The Committee, notes with concern that there was a shortfall in utilisation of
allocated funds by the Ministry, to the tune of Rs. 1.24 crores in the year 2009-10 and
Rs. 2.54 crores in the year 2010-11; which is evident from the difference in B.E. and Actual
allocations for the said years. The shortfall in utilization, is even more apparent for the
year 2012, where the B.E. allocation stood reduced from Rs. 18.00 crores to Rs. 2.00 crores
only, i.e. a drastic reduction of about 90 per cent of allocated budget. The Committee takes
a serious view of the under utilisation of funds in last few years by the Ministry, which
shows that the Ministry is not seriously persuing this important programme. The
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry must actively pursue this
programme and the programme must be carried forward with full vigour, for exploitation of
the mineral resources in our vast Exclusive Economic Zone to enhance availability of
sufficient mineral resources required for our industrial growth. (Para 18.4)
21. The Committee observes that as regards the detection and quantification of gas-
hydrates, major portions of the deep-water regions have remained unexplored and available

20
data is inadequate for the assessment of gas-hydrates. The Committee therefore
recommends that evaluation and quantification of gas-hydrates must be intensified in the
EEZ region of the country to fully explore this resource specially in view of its potential as
clean fuel resource. The Committee is of the opinion that to meet the ever increasing
demand of energy in the country, it is imperative to explore alternate sources of energy as
soon as possible and therefore such programmes should be actively pursued and adequately
funded. (Para 19.4)
22. The Committee after examining the various aspects of the Demands for Grants
(2012-13) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences, the Committee is of the view that the Ministry
through its various schemes/programmes is providing a wide range of meteorological
services to people, besides carrying out high end research in meteorological and polar
sciences. The Committee is therefore of the opinion that the programmes of the Ministry
of Earth Sciences should be properly and adequately funded, to provide the necessary
impetus to the core and critical programmes, Ministry has envisaged for the year 2012-13.
(Para 19.5)

21
MINUTES

22

23
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 13 th April, 2012 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Anil H. Lad
4. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
LOK SABHA
6. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
7. Shri Pradeep Tamta
8. Prof (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
9. Shri Kristapa Nimmala
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Ministry of Earth Sciences
1. Dr. Shailesh Nayak, Secretary
2. Shri Rajshri Bhattacharya, AS & FA
3. Shri L.S. Rathore, DO, IMD
4. Dr S.K. Das, Scientist ‘G’
5. Dr. B.R. Subramanian, Scientist ‘G’
6. Shri Rasik Ravindra, Director, NCAOR, Goa
7. Dr. S.S.C. Shenoi, Director, INCOIS, Hyderabad
8. Dr. M.A. Athmanand, Director, NIOT, Channai
9. Prof. B.N. Goswami, Director, IITM, Pune
10. Dr. V .N. Sanjeevan, Director, CMLRE, Kochi
11. Dr. B.K. Bansal, Scientist ‘G’
12. Dr. K.L. Ramesh, Scientist ‘G’
23

24
13. Dr. M.P. Wakdikar, Scientist ‘G’
14. Dr.M. Sudhakar, Scientist ‘G’
15. Shri R.K. Sharma, Scientist ‘G’
16. Dr. Swati Basu, Scientist ‘G’
17. Dr. Vasudha Gupta, Director (Admn.)
18. Shri Taranjit Singh, Director (Parl.)
19. Shri R.S. Kaim, Director (Fin.)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, Secretary, Ministry
of Earth Sciences and his team of officials. He informed that the Committee proposed to discuss
the functioning and Demands for Grants for the year 2012-13 of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
The Committee while noting that polar studies have been thrust area of the Ministry of Earth
Sciences since 2008, desired to know the societal bebefits received so far from Indian Scientific
Expeditions to Antarctica. Besides the Committee desired to know about the progress made in some
important programmes of the Department such as Poly metallic Nodules Programmege, Gas
Hydrates Exploration, Development of Drugs from Oceans etc. The Committee also asked the
Secretary to brief the Committee about the budgetary allocations, initiatives for the year 2012-13
and whether the allocations were sufficient to implement the programmes of the Ministry.
Thereafter, the Chairman asked the Secretary to start his presentation.
3. In reply to a query regarding the activities of the Ministry, the Secretary stated that
preliminary studies had been carried out on a sample basis to detect the presence of rare-earths
on the sea bed. Besides the Ministry had prepared a wind potential atlas to locate coastal areas,
where wind energy can be generated and on the basis of the atlas specific areas in Tamil Nadu
and Gujarat-Maharashtra coast had been located with potential for off-shore wind farming.
4. The Chairman of the Committee desired to know whether there was any collaboration
among the Department of Space and the Ministry as regards weather forecasting. The Secretary
clarified that while the responsibility of weather forecasting lies with the Ministry, the Department
of Space, which launches the satellites, provides data, which is wholly used by the organisations
under the Ministry such as IMD, NCMRWF and INCOIS for various purposes.
5. The Committee also enquired about the existence of a separate research institute to study
the science behind earthquakes. The Ministry, in response, mentioned that it had already proposed
to set up a separate body in this regard, under the nomenclature ‘National Centre of Seismology’.
The Committee welcomed the initiative of the Ministry and directed them to provide a detailed note
in this regard so as to recommend the setting up of such an institute to the Government.
6. During its deliberations, the Committee took up the issue of the application of Numerical
weather modeling for the purpose of weather forecast. The Ministry informed that USA is more
advanced as regards meteorological predications than India, as it not only uses a more advanced high
speed computing system than India to frame weather models but also have sufficient trained people
to run and understand those models which India, at present lacks. Therefore the Ministry proposes
To establish schools to train people in the field of meterology so that the country can attain the US
level efficiency in the next five years. While explaining the efficiency of Numerical Weather Modeling,
the Ministry stated that it represents atmospheric conditions, through a set of equations solved
through high speed computers, through which the prediction period in advance could be increased
from two to five days. He further apprised the Committee that Numerical Modeling is very important
to generate initial weather conditions based upon which future predictions are made.
7. In response to another query regarding level of accuracy in forecasting raised by the
Committee, the Ministry replied that Numerical Weather prediction, will bring India at par with US

25
in terms of accuracy in prediction, in the next five years and forecast improvement will take place
in terms of accuracy upto five days. The Ministry also stated that there is an acute shortage of
scientists in this field and the Ministry is making efforts to attract the best talent, especially those
scientists who have worked in USA and Japan, to work in the country.
8. A query was thereafter raised by the Committee regarding differences of opinion among
scientists on the cloud seeding programme in different States. Citing a particular case, it was
pointed that the programme under Andhra Pradesh Government had resulted in improved rainfall,
while in case of Karnataka Government no such improvement in rainfall was observed. The
Ministry apprised the Committee that doing cloud seeding randomly on any cloud will not yeild rain
and understanding the nature of the cloud is a must before seeding. The Ministry further informed
the Committee that selecting a right type of cloud before seeding helps to enhance the precipitation
ratio. The Ministry further pointed out that lack of availability of correct data leads to the difficulty
in seeding the right type of cloud for yielding precipitation. An aircraft was hired two years back
to measure cloud behaviour, but as the study was sporadic the complete understanding of cloud
physics is still to be achieved. The Ministry further apprised that a special laboratory to study
clouds has been established at Mahabaleshwar.
9. In reply to a query regarding the studies being done by the stations in Antarctic and Arctic
regions and the justification for increasing the number of such stations, the Ministry informed the
Committee that an increased number of research stations in the Polar regions would increase the
base of data collection regarding polar processes which affect the monsoon and would also
facilitate climate change studies. Moreover, as most of the glaciers in the polar regions occur at
the sea level, one can go directly to the glacier and observe them and do scientific studies, which
yield meaningful results; while at the Himalayas the Glaciers are at the height of 10,000ft and
above, where studies are difficult and any results obtained from glacial studies at polar regions
could also be applied in Himalayan regions of the country.
The officials then withdrew.
A verbatim record of  the proceedings was kept.
10. The Committee then adjourned at 1.01 
P.M.
** *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. * * *
16. * * *
17. * * *
18. * * *
*** Relate to other matters.

26
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday 16 th May, 2012 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Shri Francisco Sardinha — In Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil H. Lad
3. Dr. Chandan Mitra
4. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Shri Abdul Rahman
9. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
10. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
11. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
12. Dr. Rajan Sushant
13. Shri Pradeep Tamta
14. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
15. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed them
that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft reports on Demands for Grants
(2012-13) pertaining to Ministries/Departments of ***; ***; ***; *** Earth Sciences. He also
informed that the draft reports, approved by the Chairman of the Committee had already been
circulated to Members and that they must have gone through the reports. ***, ***, ***.
26
*** Relates to other matter.

27
3. The Committee then took-up for consideration, its draft ***, 226 th, *** Reports, one by
one.
4. * * *
5. The Committee, then took-up for consideration, one by one, its draft ***, 226 th and ***
Reports, pertaining to the Ministry/Departments of ***, Earth Sciences and *** respectively and
adopted them without any amendments.
6. * * *
7. The Committee, thereafter, decided to present/lay the Report Nos. 222
nd to 228 th on both
the Houses of Parliament on the 18 th May, 2012. The Committee authorised Shri Francisco
Saradinha and in his absence Shri Pradeep Tamta to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha
and in Rajya Sabha Shri Janardan Dwivedi and in his absence Dr. Barun Mukherji to present the
reports.
8. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
9. The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matter.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.