PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY FOURTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the
Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Demand No. 26 )
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th May, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th May, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2016/Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka)
284
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY FOURTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the
Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Demand No. 26 )
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th May, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th May, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2016/Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(iv)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (vi)-(vii)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-18
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE.................................................... 19-22
6. M INUTES  ............................................................................................................. 23-28

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2015-16)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2015)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
9. Shri Bhupinder Singh
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakraborty
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nana Patole
(i)

(ii)
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
30. Shri Vikram Usendi
31. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2015-16)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2015)
1. *Smt. Renuka Chowdhury — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
9. Shri Bhupinder Singh
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakraborty
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nana Patole
* Nominated w.e.f.  21th April, 2016
(iii)

24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
30. Shri Vikram Usendi
31. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Two Hundred Eighty-fourth Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the
detailed Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences (Demand No.26).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on 29th March, 2016, the Secretary and other Officers of
the Ministry of Earth Sciences gave an overview of the various activities of the Ministry and the
Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Ministry to enable it to
scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministry for replying to the clarifications
sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise
the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft report at its meeting held on the 5th May, 2016.
   N EW D ELHI; RENUKA CHOWDHURY
 5 May, 2016 Chairman,
Vaisakha 15, 1938 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
ACROSS : Atmosphere & Climate Research- Modelling Observing System
& Services
APORV : Airborne Platform and Ocean Research Vessels
AWOS : Automated Weather Observing System
BBS : Bulletin Board System
CPCB : Central Pollution Control Board
ESSO : Earth System Science Organisation
GPS : Global Positioning System
GSI : Geological Survey of India
HPC : High Performance Computing
ICAR : Indian Council of Agriculture Research
IITM : Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology
IMD : India Meteorological Department
INCOIS : Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services
INSA T : Indian National Satellite System
ITCOocean : International Training Centre for Operational Oceanography
LIDAR : Light Detection and Ranging
LTTD : Low Temperature Thermal Desalination
MoDWS : Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation
NCESS : National Centre for Earth Science Studies
NCMRWF : National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting
NCS : National Centre for Seismology
NCT : National Capital Territory
NIOT : National Institute of Ocean Technology
STORMS : Ocean Services, Technology, Observations, Resources Modelling
and Science
PACER : Polar and Cryosphere Research
(vi)

(vii)
REACHOUT : Research, Education and Training Outreach
SAFAR : System of Air Quality and Weather Forecasting and Research
SAGE : Seismological and Geoscience
UT : Union Territory
VSA T : Very Small Aperture Terminal

REPORT
INTRODUCTION
Understanding and study of the Earth System and its Components and processes is important for
the mankind. The Earth, being a single, interlinked and self-regulating system, together with its components
i.e. atmosphere, oceans, cryosphere, geosphere and biosphere exhibit complex interactions. The scientific
understanding of the Earth system becomes necessary for the improvement of the services for socio-
environment benefits of the country. The exploration of polar regions, sea bed and optimum use of
resources and greater accuracy in the forecast of weather, climate is significant for the sustenance of
life on earth.
1.2 The Ministry of Earth Sciences was established in 2006 by the Government of India for better
understanding of the complex processes of the Earth system namely ocean, atmosphere, cryosphere and
solid work. To monitor and give an overall policy direction of the Ministry, the Earth System Science
Organisation (ESSO) was also established in the year 2007.
1.3 The Ministry is mandated to provide weather and climate services in varied sectors of agriculture,
aviation, shipping, natural disasters (cyclones, earthquakes, tsunamis), marine resources, coastal and
marine ecosystem, climate change and under water technology. The Ministry also deals with Antarctica/
Arctic and Seismological research in an integrated manner.
OBJECTIVES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE MINISTRY
2.1 The Ministry of Earth Sciences has the following objectives and functions:
• Improving weather forecast and provide advisory to agriculture, aviation, shipping, sports
including the Extended Long Range Seasonal Monsoon forecast;
• Providing a wide range of ocean information advisories including fishery information;
• Improving the understanding of Polar Science and its implications for climate change;
• Developing technology for harnessing marine resources;
• Conducting survey for assessing non-living resources;
• Assessing coastal marine productivity and Marine Ecosystems;
• Improving understanding of Climate Change Science;
• Providing early warning of natural hazards viz. cyclone, tsunami, sea level rise; and
• Promoting basic research including capacity building in the Earth Systems Science.
ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF THE MINISTRY
3.1 The Ministry of Earth Sciences functions through the Earth Commission. The executive arm of the
Ministry i.e. 'The Earth System Science Organisation (ESSO)' is responsible for implementing its policies

2
and programmes. It has four major branches of earth sciences viz., (i) Ocean Science and Technology
Services; (ii) Atmospheric and Climate Science Services; (iii) Geoscience and Technology; and (iv) Polar
Science and Cryosphere. The policies/programmes of the ESSO are being pursued through its autonomous
bodies and subordinate offices. The institutions under the ESSO include India Meteorological Department
(IMD), National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF) and Indian Institute of
Tropical Meteorology (IITM), National Centre for Antarctica and Ocean Research (NCAOR), National
Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT), Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS),
Centre for Marine Living Resources & Ecology (CMLRE) and Integrated Coastal and Marine Area
Management (ICMAM).
3.2 The detailed budget allocation of the Ministry of Earth sciences, for the year 2016-17 was considered
by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
Forests in its meeting held on the 29th March, 2016.
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE MINISTRY AND BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR
2016-17
4.1 A comparison of the B.E., R.E. allocation made and actual Planned expenditure incurred by the
Ministry for the years 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 is given below:-
(
` in Crore)
Head 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
Budget Estimates ` 1281.00 ` 1179.00 ` 1200.00
Revised Estimates ` 925.00 ` 1013.00 ---
Actual Expenditure ` 900.28 ` 900.00 ---
% Budget Utilization 97.32% 88.84% ---
with respect to R.E.
4.2 The Committee notes that although there has been a reduction in the budgetary allocation
at RE stage in 2015-16, the Ministry has not been able to utilize the allocated amount optimally
and much amount had remained unspent. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such
underutilization by the Ministry should be avoided and whatever amount is allocated should be
utilized to the fullest extent.
4.3 The Committee was informed that the budgetary allocations for the Ministry in B.E. 2016-17 is
` 1672.45 crore comprising of ` 1200.00 crore as the 'Plan' and ` 472.45 crore as the 'Non-Plan' outlay.
The Ministry informed the Committee that it had requested the Ministry of Finance for 'Plan' allocation
of ` 1350 crores, however the Ministry of Finance had allocated ` 1200 crores (Plan component) for
the year 2016-17.
4.4 Also, in its meeting held on 29th March, 2016, the Ministry apprised the Committee that it is facing
severe financial constraints and at the R.E. Stage in 2015-16 it suffered lack of allocations and cut in
budgetary support to the tune of 30%. The Ministry further informed that due to reduction, critical

3
programmes of the Ministry have been adversely affected like National Monsoon Mission, Replacement
of Coastal Research Vessels, Deep Borehole Programme for Earthquake Precursory Studies, Augmentation
of High Performance Computing Systems, Critical Programmes at NCESS, Thiruvananthapuram; Severe
Weather Forecasting. The Ministry also informed that due to the cuts and financial constraints, approved
new programmes like Integrated Himalayan Meteorology; National Facility for Airborne Research;
Paleoclimate have been deferred. The Ministry also informed the Committee that a set of infrastructure
related programmes such as replacement of Coastal Research Vessels, Acquisition of Polar Research
Vessel, Manned Submersible, Sea Front Facilities, Numerical Offshore Tank are not being implemented
due to paucity of funds. The Ministry had therefore requested to seek additional ` 650.00 crores so that
the functioning of the Ministry is not hampered.
4.5 The Committee in the meeting had suggested that since the total budgetary allocation to the Ministry
is less than ` 2000 crores which is a lesser amount as compared to the budgetary allocation to the other
Ministries, the budgetary allocation should not face any cuts or reduction at the R.E. stage in 2016-17
which would adversely affect the functioning of the Ministry and would cause unnecessary delays in
activities and programmes.
4.6 The Committee notes that the Ministry still requires additional funds in the 'Plan' component
in order to pursue important programmes and activities in 2016-17 which had been deferred
previously due to paucity of funds. The Committee also notes that the 'Plan' component in any
budgetary allocation is important to carry out programmes and activities. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the additional funds for the flagship programmes of the Ministry should be
allocated to the Ministry. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should be provided
adequate additional amount, as requested by the Ministry, so that the critical programmes are
not adversely affected.
MAJOR SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES OF THE MINISTRY
5.1 The Committee was informed by the Ministry that during the year 2016-17, as a part of rationalization,
the programmes Airborne Platform and Ocean Research Vessels (APORVS) has been merged with O-
STORM Programme and the programme of High performance Computing has been merged with ACROSS
Programme. The major schemes of the Ministry are as follow:-
(i) Atmosphere & Climate Research - Modelling Observing Systems & Services (ACROSS)
(ii) Ocean Services, Technology, Observations, Resources Modelling and Science (O-STORMS)
(iii) Polar and Cryosphere Research (PACER)
(iv) Seismological and Geoscience (SAGE)
(v) Airborne Platforms for in-situ observations - Ocean Research Vessels (APOORV)
(vi) High Performance Computing (HPC)
(vii) Research, Education and Training Outreach (REACHOUT)

4
5.2 The Budget Estimates of the Schemes in 2015-16 and 2016-17 are given below:-
(` in Crore)
Sl. No. Rationalised Schemes Budget Estimates B.E. 2016-17
2015-16
(i) Atmospheric Climate Change Research Observations `250 ` 360.00
Services (ACROSS)
(ii) High Performance Computing (HPC) ` 10
(iii) Ocean ServicesTechnologyObservations,Resources `300 ` 350.00
Modellingand Science (O-STORM)
(iv) Polar and Cryosphere Research (PACER) `294 ` 156.00
(v) Seismological and Geoscience (SAGE) `175 ` 150.00
(vi) Airborne Platflorm and Ocean Research Vessels (APORVS) `75 -
(vii) Research Eduction, and Outreach (REACHOUT) `75 ` 49.90
TOTAL ` 1179 ` 1070.9
POLAR SCIENCES AND CRYOSPHERE
6.1 The programme of Polar Sciences and Cryosphere entails the study of Antarctica, Arctic and
glaciers of Himalayas and the impact of climate change in these polar regions and variability in polar
environment has a large global impact. The Ministry had informed that the main objective of Polar and
Cryosphere studies is to carry out an integrated study on glaciology, biogeochemical processes and ice-
core records to understand the role and response of cryosphere in polar/glacial regions and their global
linkages. The Committee desired to know the details and studies/activities about the programme. The
Ministry informed that in Antarctica, scientific studies focuses on Atmospheric and Ocean Sciences,
Earth Sciences and Glaciology, Biological and Environmental-Sciences, Engineering and Communication
and Human Physiology & Medicine. In Arctic, the thrust areas of the research have been atomospheric
sciences with special emphasis on the study of aerosols and precipitation; cryosphere studies on the mass
balance of glaciers and chemical characterization of snow; and biogeochemical studies in Kongsfjorden
(with respect to long-term monitoring of climate change studies). Under the Himalayan Cryosphere
Studies, six major glaciers (Samudra Tapu, Bara Shigri, Sutri Dhaka, Batal, Gepang Gath, and Kunzum)
of Chandra Basin in Lahaul-Spiti region with different characteristics and dynamics are being studied for
their long-term mass balance, energy balance and hydrological balance characteristics. A field Station
with facilities for accommodation and labs is under establishment.
6.2 The Ministry further informed that India attained 'Observer' status within the Arctic council for
conducting scientific research. The Third Antarctic Station "Bharati" was successfully commissioned in
March, 2012 for operations towards conducting front line research and a satellite ground receiving
station has been set up at the Bharati Station in the Antarctica for acquiring data from all passing polar
orbiting satellites. Also, Arctic mooring Observation system has been established. Towards augmentation

5
of ocean observations networks, the retrieval of Arctic Observatory and deployment of Polar Remotely
Operable Vehicle (PROVe) in the Antarctic were carried in July, 2015 and February, 2015, respectively.
6.3 The Committee observed that the budgetary allocation to the programme of Polar Sciences and
Cryosphere in 2015-16 was ` 294.00 crore at B.E. stage which was reduced to ` 123.50 crore at
R.E. stage. The Committee desired to know the reasons for the reduction in funds. In response, the
Ministry, informed that the primary reason for reduction of ` 123.50 crore at RE stage is due to technical
reasons relating to finalization of tender for exhibition of Polar Research Vessel. The L-1 bidder identified
through the tendering process had sought change in terms and conditions of the contract which were
not acceptable resulting into re-tendering and reduction in the expenditure.
6.4 The Committee desired to know why no amount has been allocated to this programme in the
budgetary allocation in 2016-17. The Ministry apprised the Committee that the expenditure for this
programme would be met from the rationalization scheme of PACER for which an amount of ` 156.00
crore has been earmarked during 2016-17.
6.5 The Committee feels that the programme is extremely significant from the environmental,
aspect as it is through this programme that India's presence in Arctic and Antarctica region will
be felt. Further, the study of climate of Polar regions will help in its research of understanding
the climate of cold and fragile region of Himalayas in the wake of climate change. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should undertake more studies and activities in the
Polar regions and should take up this programme sincerely.
6.6 The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should undertake a realistic
assessment of all the formalities involved in the programme and take action accordingly so that
underutilization of funds is avoided. The Committee notes that the budgetary allocation to the
new rationalized programme, 'PACER' has been reduced in 2016-17 and hopes that the reduction
would not affect the targets of the programme.
SEISOMOLGICAL AND GEOSCIENCE (SAGE) PROGRAMME
7.1 This programme mainly deals with sustaining and strengthening of seismological observation systems,
related studies on seismology and earthquakes; research related to solid-earth and geosciences related
drilling programmes in Koyna Warna region (Maharashtra), crustal processes and other related studies/
research activities.
7.2 The Committee desired to know from the Ministry about the main activities proposed to be taken
up in the coming years. The Ministry informed that following programmes are to be undertaken:-
(i) Drilling and instrumentation of pilot bore hole (s) in Koyna towards finalization of main
borehole.
(ii) Construction of Borehole Geophysical Research Laboratory at Karad (Maharashtra) as an
operational centre for carrying out the research activities related to the scientific deep drilling,
borehole investigations, core analysis and research, and associated fields/ research studies
(iii) augmentation of seismological network (iv) initiate construction activities related to National
Centre for Seismology (NCS) (v) provide VSAT connectivity to stand alone BBS & GPS
systems (vi) set up facility for Geochronology.

6
7.3 The details of Budget allocation and utilization under Seismological and Geoscience programme
during 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 are as under:-
(` in Crore)
Head Name of 2014-15 Rationalised 2015-16 2016-17
Scheme scheme
Budget Seismological ` 100.00 SAGE ` 175.00 ` 150.00
Estimates Research
Geoscience ` 54.00
Revised Seismological ` 74.35 SAGE ` 131.50 --
Estimates Research
Geoscience ` 53.51
Actual Seismological ` 74.56 SAGE --- --
Expenditure Research
Geoscience ` 53.50
7.4 The Committee enquired as to why the budgetary allocation to the Seismological and Geoscience
(SAGE) programme have been reduced from ` 175.00 crore at B.E. 2015-16 to ` 131.50 crore at R.E.
stage. The Ministry informed that reduction is due to reduction in overall budget of the Ministry at R.E.
stage and also due to postponement of construction of building for National Centre for Seismology. The
reasons for the postponement was not furnished by the Ministry.
7.5 The Ministry also informed the Committee that the budgetary allocation for the programme was
reduced from ` 175.00 crore in B.E. 2015-16 to ` 150.00 crore in B.E. 2016-17 because of the
completion of planned activity of integrated Ocean Drilling Programme in the Arabian Sea and making
separate allocations for operation and maintenance of National Centre For Earth Science Studies (NCESS).
7.6 The Committee notes that the funds were underutilized in 2015-16 primarily due to
postponement of construction of building of National Centre for Seismology. The Committee
feels that the Ministry should not have postponed the construction of National Centre for
Seismology causing underutilization of funds which could have been avoided and the progress of
projects would not have been affected.
7.7 The Ministry informed that the scientific deep drilling programme in Koyna -Warna region of
Maharashtra is being implemented by Ministry in close association with National Geophysical Research
Institute (NGRI) as per the Cabinet approval.
7.8 As part of the 'Preparatory Phase', various studies/investigations were taken up which included
Broadband Seismology, Magneto-Tellurics (MT), Land-based Gravity-Magnetics, Airborne Gravity and
LIDAR surveys, etc. These studies were supplemented by the exploratory boreholes at a depth of 1.5
km surrounding the seismic zone. Out of the 10 planned boreholes, 9 have been completed to depths
of 1522.5m (Rasati), 1196m (Udgiri), 1134m (Kundi), 1211.6m (Nayari), 906.0M (Phansavle), 1500m
(Panchgani), 1503m (Ukhalu), 1500m (Paneri), 1103m (Khadi) with logging and heat flow measurements.
7.9 The Committee desired to know the status of the main phase of the SAGE programme. In response,
the Ministry informed the Committee that in the main phase, it planned to drill and instrument the pilot

7
borehole (s) (~3 km deep) at identified locations in the Koyna-Warna region in the next one and half years
to be followed by detailed design and drilling of the deep borehole(s) of 5-7 km each. The Ministry
informed that in addition, core samples are being analysed to take various studies, including petrological,
mineralogical, geochemical, paleomagnetic, rock magnetic, anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility etc. and
have been shared for multi-disciplinary investigations (national participation).
7.10 The Committee desired to know whether the Ministry is planning to undertake scientific deep
drilling programme in other parts/regions of India facing regular occurrence of earthquakes apart from
Koyna-Warna region of Maharashtra. The Ministry informed that no such proposal exists currently for
undertaking a scientific deep drilling programme in other parts of India.
7.11 The Committee notes that the activities in the main phase have been initiated by the
Ministry and hopes that the drilling process would be started. The Committee recommends that
the Ministry should complete the drilling process within the scheduled time period to enrich its
prediction of the regular occurrence of the earthquake in the region. The Committee also
recommends to undertake scientific drilling programme in other parts of India facing regular
occurrence of earthquakes.
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR SEISMOLOGY
8.1 The Committee desired to know about the status of National Centre for Seismology and the
progress achieved with regard to creation of manpower, posts, infrastructure etc. The Ministry informed
that National Centre for Seismology (NCS) has been set up as an Attached Office of the Ministry of Earth
Sciences vide Administrative Order No. MoES/25/15/2012-Estt. dated 20.8.2014. A committee was set
up to work out details of separation of manpower, posts, infrastructure, equipment, etc. from the India
Meteorological Department (IMD) to NCS. The proposal for creation of manpower is under process. The
necessary land for construction of NCS building has been identified in IMD campus at Ayanagar in New
Delhi.
8.2 In its previous reports (Report Nos. 243 and 260), the Committee had recommended for
early creation of manpower, posts, infrastructure etc. for National Centre for Seismology. The
Committee, however, notes that even after a period of more than four years, the Ministry is still
in process of creation of manpower. Although the land for the construction of building has been
identified, the construction of the building is yet to be taken up. The Committee finds that the
approach of the Ministry in the matter is extremely lethargic. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry should initiate the process of construction of the building of
National Centre for Seismology without any further delay.
Microzonation of Cities
9.1 During the year 2015, the Ministry had informed the Committee that apart from microzonation of
cities of Delhi and Bengaluru, it was making efforts for including the cities of Kolkata and other selected
cities. On the further progress of the Seismic Hazard Microzonation of metro cities of India, the Ministry
informed the Committee that the Seismic Microzonation work for NCT Delhi and Kolkata had been
completed on 1:10000 scale and published the report. The Committee desired to know the plans initiated
by the Ministry to undertake Microzonation of cities particularly those falling in Seismic Zone V , IV and

8
III categories and efforts made by Ministry in working in tandem with Geological Survey of India (GSI)
for acquiring essential data needed for Microzonation of studies. In response, the Ministry informed that
the work has been initiated to undertake Microzonation of 30 cities falling in Seismic Zone V, IV and
III and an MoU have been signed with Geological Survey of India (GSI) for acquiring aforesaid data
and geological and geomorphologic maps on available scale have been procured from GSI.
9.2 The Committee observes that the Microzonation of cities falling in seismic zone of V , IV and
III has been taken up by the Ministry and is working in coordination with GSI. The Committee
recommends that Microzonation of these cities should be carried out expeditiously in view of the
vulnerability of India to severe earthquakes.
OCEAN SERVICES, TECHNOLOGY OBSERV ATIONS, RESOURCES MODELLING AND SCIENCE
(OSTORMS)
10.1 O-STORMS encompasses four programmes relating to the ocean sector viz., Ocean Observations,
Ocean Science Services, Ocean Survey and Mineral Resources and Ocean Technology. O-STORMS
programme mainly deals with understanding coastal and oceanic processes to provide ocean advisory
services, for conducting coastal research, development of technology for harnessing marine resources
and also of indigenous oceanic technology and conducting marine scientific surveys for exploration and
exploitation.
10.2 The details of Budget allocation and utilization under Ocean Services, Technology, Observations,
Resources Modelling and Science (O-STORMS) programme during 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 are
as under:-
(` in Crores)
Name of 2014-15 Rationalised 2015-16 2016-17
Scheme Scheme
1      2 3 4 5 6
Budget Ocean ` 45.00 O-STORMS ` 300.00 ` 355.00
Estimates observations
Ocean Science ` 90.00
Services
Ocean Survey ` 80.00
and Mineral
Resources
Ocean ` 100.00
Technology
Revised Ocean ` 45.00 O-STORMS ` 295.50 ---
Estimates observations
Ocean Science ` 71.08
Services

9
1      2 3 4 5 6
Ocean Survey ` 60.43
and Mineral
Resources
Ocean ` 51.00
Technology
Actual Ocean ` 44.49 O-STORMS ` 274.00 ---
Expenditure observations (as on
23.03.2016)
Ocean Science ` 68.50
Services
Ocean Survey ` 60.42
and Mineral
Resources
Ocean ` 51.00
Technology
10.3 On being asked by the Committee  the reasons for increase in the budgetary allocation to the
programme O-STORMS from ` 300.00 crore in B.E. 2015-16 to ` 355.00 crores in the financial year
2016-17, the Ministry informed that the increase is mainly due to merging of a major scheme of Ocean
Research Vessels which envisages acquiring of 2 coastal research vessels and replacement of Sagar
Kanya and Sagar Sampada which are 2 oceanographic research vessels. Besides, the increased allocation
will be used by the Ministry for a number of initiatives planned as a part of ocean technology launched
during 2016-17 for which the additional budgetary provision projected under the Programme O-STORM
would be utilized. The expenditure as on 23.03.2016 is ` 274 crores including authorization issued. These
funds were utilized for activities relating to Ocean Observations, Services, Technology development and
Survey of Mineral Resources, and the projects will be continued in the year 2016-17.
10.4 The Committee notes the initiatives planned to be taken by the Ministry in 2016-17 and the
amount of expenditure incurred in 2015-16. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would
diligently and prudently work towards these initiatives. The Committee also notes that the
Ministry has failed to acquire Ocean Research Vesssels in last four years which is significant for
conducting oceanic research despite the Committee's repeated recommendations in its previous
reports (Report Nos. 243 and Report No. 260). The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry should make all out efforts to ensure that such vessels are acquired at the earliest.
POLYMETALLIC NODULES AND GAS HYDRATES
11.1 Polymetallic Nodules found at the sea bottom at a depth of 4km to 5km in the Central Indian Ocean
Basin are of essential elements like copper, nickel, cobalt and manganese which are important for future
resources and also the strategic economic reasons.

10
11.2 On being asked about the progress achieved on polymetallic nodule programme, the Ministry
informed the Committee that the survey exploration and environmental impact assessment studies have
been carried out. The data pertaining to various environmental parameters including biological, chemical
and physical oceanographic aspects have been collected. Feasibility of the studies has been carried out
for phase-wise development of the deep sea mining system. Further, the data collected during the earlier
cruises pertaining to survey and exploration were processed for refinement of identification of test mine
site and in addition various research and development endeavour have been carried out pertaining to the
extractive metallurgy of polymetallic nodules and the data collected during the earlier cruises were
processed and analysed. The Ministry further informed that the Cabinet Note for signing the 15 years
contract with the International Seabed Authority for Exploration of Polymetallic Sulphides in the South
West Indian Ridge has been prepared and is being circulated to the various Ministries.
11.3 The Committee desired to know the activities/laboratory experiments conducted by the Ministry for
exploring gas-hydrates and the results of these activities and experiments. The Ministry informed that
under the science component of the Gas Hydrate Programmes various locations have been identified in
Krishna, Godavari and Mahanadi Basins based on the seismic survey and under the technology component,
the autonomous coring system has been developed which can operate upto a depth of 3000 mtrs with
a coring capability of upto 100 mtrs. Further the Remotely Operated Submersible (ROSUB) has been
developed as an exploring tool for the gas hydrates.
11.4 The Ministry also informed that presently no technology is available to the Ministry for exploration
of gas from gas hydrates. However, in this regard pilot lab experiment is being carried out by National
Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT).
11.5 The Committee takes note of the progress made in harnessing polymetallic nodules and the
explorations being carried out by the Ministry which is significant for economic and strategic
purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should continue with the
exploration and also to develop the deep sea mining system. The Committee also notes the
experiment being carried out for feasibility of extracting gas from gas hydrates and recommends
that the Ministry should continue with experiments in this field.
11.6 On acquiring of dedicated research vessels for exploration of poly metallic sulphides, the Committee
asked the Ministry about the progress made in this regard. The Ministry informed that a detailed project
report for acquisition of new vessels will be prepared by consultant appointed following the tender
process. Further, Ministry has tied up with GSI through a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) for
carrying out topographic survey of the Exclusive Economic Zone through deployment of the research
vessel, Samudra Ratnakar.
11.7 The Committee observes that not much progress has been made by the Ministry in acquiring
new dedicated research vessels for the exploration. The Committee also notes that only one
research vessel i.e. Samudra Ratnakar has been deployed. The Committee therefore, recommends
that the Ministry should prudently undertake the acquiring of new vessel and these vessel(s)
should be deployed, without which the exploration of poly metallic sulphides is not feasible.

11
ATMOSPHERE & CLIMATE RESEARCH - MODELLING OBSERVING SYSTEMS & SERVICES
(ACROSS)
12.1 The details of the Budget Allocation and Utilization under the programme Atmosphere & Climate
Research - Modelling Observing systems & Services (ACROSS) during 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17
are as under:-
(` in Crore)
Head Name of the 2014-15 Rationalised 2015-16 2016-17
Scheme Scheme
1     2 3 4 5 6
Budget Atmospheric ` 190.00 ACROSS ` 250.00 ` 360.00
Estimates Observation Systems
Network
Atmospheric ` 100.00
Processes and
Modelling and
Services
Climate ` 47.00
Change
Research
High ` 90.00 High ` 10.00
Performance Performance
Computing Computing
Revised Atmospheric ` 87.00 ACROSS ` 312.00
Estimates Observation Systems
Network
Atmospheric ` 64.63
Processes and
Modelling and
Services
Climate ` 32.59
Change
Research
High ` 68.54 High ` 0.50
Performance Performance
Computing Computing
Actual Atmospheric ` 103.92 ACROSS
Expenditure Observation Systems
Network

12
1     2 3 4 5 6
Atmospheric ` 64.39
Processes and
Modelling and
Services
Climate Change ` 32.56
Research
High Performance ` 68.53 High ---
Computing Performance
Computing
12.2 The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the proposed plans and activities under the
programme Atmosphere & Climate Research - Modelling Observing systems & Services (ACROSS). The
Ministry informed the Committee that ACROSS is an integrated programme of four major sub-programmes:-
(i) Atmospheric Observation Systems Network
(ii) Atmospheric Processes and Modelling and Services
(iii) Climate Change Research
(iv) High Performance Computing
12.3 The expenses for the above four merged sub-programmes shall be met from the Budget Estimate
allocation of ` 360.00 crore for the financial year 2016-17. The Committee enquired the Ministry the
reasons for the increase in the budgetary allocation of ACROSS PROGRAMME from ` 250.00 crore in
2015-16 to ` 312.00 at the R.E. stage. The Ministry stated that the additional requirement was to sustain
the enhanced activities under different programmes including Monsoon Mission, Metro Air Quality,
Tropical Clouds, Climate Change Research and Agromet Programmes. The Ministry further informed the
Committee that increase in allocation is towards augmentation and maintenance of existing Atmospheric
Observation Systems Network including launch of Integrated Himalayan Meteorology Programmes,
Installation of radar systems in the Himalayan Region and upgradation of the High Performance Computing
System, which has been merged as a part rationalization of exercise.
12.4 The Committee desired to know the programmes/schemes of the Ministry to be undertaken during
the 2016-17. The Ministry informed that under the ACROSS programme, instalment of Doppler Weather
Radars (DWRs) over the Himalayan states and at four major airports of India is to be done. A set of
9 fully automatic Heliport AWOS systems in Himalayan region to support Helicopter operations,
Establishment of DAMUs (District Agromet Advisory Units) at 100 district level, Krishi Vigyan Kendra's
(KVKs) of ICAR for strengthening district level agro advisories will be undertaken. Seasonal forecasting
of the Indian monsoon rainfall for 2016 using the IITM-CFS coupled model, Sub-seasonal forecasting
(2-3 weeks in advance) of the active and break monsoon cycles during 2016, Sub-seasonal forecasting
experiments during non-monsoon season ( i.e, April-June temperatures heat wave conditions and post-
monsoon weather phenomena) are also to be taken up and conduct climate change simulation experiments

13
using the IITM Earth System Model (IITM ESM), Regional Data Assimilation with radar observations
at 4-km resolution will be undertaken under Climate Change Research.
12.5 The Committee notes the increase in allocation at R.E. stage in 2015-16 and in B.E.
2016-17 and exhorts the Ministry to achieves its targets and undertake the schemes/programmes
essential for studying monsoon and climate change and for forecasting experiments.
HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING (HPC)
13.1 The Development of High Performance Computing is significant for improving the quality of
atmospheric, oceanic, polar and geosciences services and enhancing accuracy in monsoon forecasts,
studies related to observation simulation experiments (OSE) and targeted observation experiments, ensemble
predictions for weather, ocean state, cyclone track, short and medium range weather forecast, satellite
and in-situ data assimilation, understanding of the science of climate change and climate variability, etc.
13.2 The Ministry informed the Committee that in order to process and assimilate huge volume of global
scale, weather and climate data for a suite of forecast models, computation facilities have been substantially
augmented to the Petaflop scale.
13.3 The Committee enquired about the reasons for drastic reduction in the amount in the financial year
2015-16 from ` 10.00 crore at B.E. to ` 0.50 crore at the R.E. stage. The Ministry stated that the
allocation of ` 10.00 for the year 2015-16 was for operation and maintenance which was maintained
from the available resources at respective centres of the Ministry. The Ministry also informed that no
separate budgetary allocation has been made during 2016-17 as the necessary budget required to meet
HPC programme has been projected under the ACROSS scheme as a part of rationalization exercise.
13.4 The Committee desired to know about the progress made in High Performance Computing. The
Ministry informed that the HPC has been augmented to ½ peta flop capacity which is fully utilized and
the ultimate goal of acquiring the 10 peta flop capability is being implemented in phased manner and the
purpose is to completely utilize it and cater to the needs of various programmes of the Ministry.
13.5 The Ministry also informed the Committee that its target in the XIIth Five year Plan is to upscale
the High Performance Computing to 4-5 petaflops during the current year 2016-17 for implementing
advanced suite of forecast models for improved forecast quality. However the Ministry is not able to
proceed due to non-availability of funds.
13.6 The Committee in its meeting on 29th March, 2016 stressed upon the need of High Powered
Computers and for high level of computing without which a country stands nowhere. The Committee
also observed that it had underlined the importance of high powered computers since the year 2014.
13.7 The Committee notes that on the one hand, the available BE of ````` 10 crore for the programme
in 2015-16 was reduced to ````` 0.50 crore at RE stage and on the other hand the Ministry is not
able to upscale the High Performance Computing due to non-availability of funds. The Committee
is of the view that replies given by the Ministry are contradictory and recommends that the
Ministry should first utilise the funds available at its disposal and then complain about the lack
of funds. The Committee also recommends that sincere efforts be made for achieving augmentation
of High Performance Computing to the level of 10 Peta flop in time bound manner.

14
ACCURACY IN WEATHER FORECASTING
14.1 The Ministry is responsible for making weather forecasting for the country as a whole and region-
wise also. The Ministry informed the Committee that the weather forecasting capacities have been
enhanced after the implementation of improved forecast suits of models on commissioning of High
Performance computing (HPC) systems. Assimilation of all global radiance data (including INSAT 3D
data) has enhanced the weather forecasting capacities for the production of forecast products at 22 km
grid globally and 9kms/3kms grid over India/regional/mega city domains.
14.2 The Ministry informed that efforts are continuously made to optimize the level of efficiency of the
forecasting systems, with accurate prediction of Very Severe Cyclonic Storms "Phailin", "Hudhud" and
the heavy rainfall events during monsoon seasons of the years 2013 and 2014. However, to improve it
further, the Ministry has been continuously striving for upgradation of (i) observation systems,
(ii) advanced data assimilation tools, (iii) advanced communication and IT infrastructure (iv) high
performance computing systems and (v) intensive/sophisticated training of the personnel to facilitate the
implementation of advanced global/regional/ meso-scale prediction models for improving the accuracy of
weather forecasts in all temporal and spatial scales and for quick dissemination of weather forecast
assessments/warnings to the users.
14.3 The Ministry further informed that success has been achieved in improving the heavy rainfall
warnings. During the XII th Plan, under the National Monsoon Mission initiative, other institutions of
ESSO, the Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (ESSO-IITM), Pune, Indian National Centre for
Ocean Information Services (ESSO-INCOIS), Hyderabad and National Centre for Medium Range Weather
Forecasting (ESSO/NCMRWF), NOIDA have embarked upon to build a state-of-the-art coupled ocean-
atmospheric weather & climate model for: (a) improved prediction of monsoon rainfall on extended range
to seasonal time scale (16 days to one season); and (b) improved prediction of temperature, rainfall and
extreme weather events on short to medium range time scale (up to 15 days) so that forecast skill gets
quantitatively improved further for operational services of ESSO-IMD.
14.4 The Committee desired to know about steps taken by the Ministry to bring the accuracy of weather
forecasts at par with the international standards. The Ministry informed that ESSO-IMD is a member
of the World Meteorological Organisation (WMO) which is a specialised agency of United Nations
wherein collaborative mechanism with international organisations like U K Meteorological Office (UKMO),
National Centre for Environmental prediction (NCEP), USA etc. exists for exchange of operational
forecasts. Through Indo-US collaboration, a "Monsoon Desk" has been set up jointly for improving
seasonal forecast of the Indian monsoon rainfall through exchanging their ideas and sharing their expertise.
This effort has led to appreciable improvements in the efficiency of models in making better forecasts.
14.5 The Committee takes note of the efforts being made by the Ministry to improve its efficiency
in weather forecasting which is essential in the wake of climate change and unpredictable
weather phenomena. The Committee, however, feels that much more still needs to be done to
improve the accuracy and to bring it at par with international standards. The Committee therefore
recommends that the Ministry should improve its weather forecasting capacities and the upscaling
of High Performance Computing and should also go for collaboration with other nations having
well equipped and advanced weather forecasting systems.

15
WATER DESALINATION PLANTS
15.1 The Committee had visited the water desalination plant established by National Institute of Ocean
Technology (NIOT), Chennai, Ministry of Earth Sciences at Agatti, Lakshadweep in November, 2015 and
January, 2016. The Committee was informed that MoES-NIOT established the first LTTD plant in
Kavaratti during July, 2005 and after the initial maintenance and training for about one year, handed over
the plant to UT administration in 2006. Based on the functioning of the plant, Administration approached
MoES-NIOT to put up plants in other islands of the region. Desalination plants at Minicoy (April, 2011)
and Agatti (July 2011) have been completed in phase 1 and were handed over to the UT Administration
during August and October, 2012. All the three plants are being maintained by the Public Works Department
of UT Administration using the local manpower, to fulfill the needs of the 10,000 strong local community
in each of these plants. The salinity of the fresh water produced at the plants was reduced from 35000
ppm for the seawater to about 180 ppm whereas the permissible limit for drinking water is 2000 ppm.
It was also informed that subsequent to the commencement of the plant water supply for drinking water
needs, have been significantly drop in the incidence of water borne diseases amongst the local people.
The Committee desired to know whether similar water desalination plants were also being established in
other islands of Lakshadweep to cater to the drinking water needs of the people residing there and if
so, what was the status of the projects.
15.2 The Ministry of Earth Sciences intimated that recognizing the Ministry's capability on development,
demonstration and establishment of desalination plants, the Lakshadweep Administration had requested
for setting up of water desalination plants in six more islands viz., Amini, Chetlet, Kadamat, Kalpeni,
Kiltan and Androth. ESSO-NIOT had submitted a detailed project report (DPR) to the Ministry of
Drinking Water and Sanitation (MoDWS) during June, 2013, through Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA)
and Union Territory of Lakshadweep Administration (UTL). The proposal was reviewed by the Ministry
of Drinking Water and Sanitation through a standing committee under the chairmanship of JS (Water),
MoDWS. A Central Committee constituted by the Standing Committee reviewed the Techno-commercial
feasibility of the project and recommended the project at a cost of ` 280.01 Crore. The Union Territory
of Lakshadweep submitted documents to MoDWS. The SFC memo as sought by MoDWS was submitted
by NIOT on 30th December, 2015 to Union Territory of Lakshadweep / Ministry of Home Affairs. The
Union Territory of Lakshadweep has also submitted the documents to MoDWS. The Ministry also
informed the Committee that the project is likely to be completed in 48 months from the date of
administrative approval.
15.3 The Committee commends the establishment of water desalination plants by MoES-NIOT in
Kavaratti, Minicoy and Agatti islands of UT of Lakshadweep, constructed with indigenous
components by using limited infrastructure available in these remote islands. These plants are
greatly catering to the need of fresh quality drinking water in these remote islands and are
extremely cost effective. However, the projects for similar plants at other six islands i.e. Amini,
Chetlet, Kadamat, Kalpeni, Kiltan and Androth, which were conceptualised in the year 2013, are
still hanging fire and mired in administrative procedures. Keeping in view the need for fresh
water in these remote islands for human consumption, the Committee recommends that the
Ministry should coordinate with all the concerned Ministries so that all procedural formalities for
the establishment of the water desalination plants at the six islands are completed at the earliest
and the work on the projects begins without any further delay.

16
AGRO-METEOROLOGICAL SERVICES
16.1 The Committee desired to know the measures being taken by the Ministry to enhance the dissemination
of agro-advisories to farmers and in increasing the agro-met services. The Ministry informed that at
present, 11.5 million farmers are directly receiving the messages under Gramin Krishi Mausam Seva
(GKMS) in vernacular languages. Block level forecast for 37 districts (342 blocks) has been initiated on
pilot mode. The Ministry in association with Agro Met Field Units (AMFUs) is disseminating agro-
meteorological advisories to the farmers through different multichannel system television and visual media
communication through Newspaper and Internet, SMS and IVRS In addition, agro-meteorological advisories
are also disseminated through Kisan Portal launched by the Ministry of Agriculture.
16.2 ESSO-IMD is taking continuous efforts to expand popularization of the service among the farming
community and for this Farmers Awareness Programmes are being conducted in various parts of the
country. Besides these, details of more number of farmers are collected through Kisan Portal and along
with the experts from Agromet Field Units (AMFUs) located at State Agricultural Universities, institutes
of Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR) and Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) participate
in Kisan Melas, Farmers' Day etc. to create awareness about the services so that more farmers get
benefitted.
16.3 The Ministry in the meeting held on 29th March, 2016 informed the Committee that at present 30%
of farmers are being benefitted from the agromet advisories issued twice in a week and the Ministry
wanted to improve it to 80% or 90%. On this, the Committee had advised the Ministry to undertake
measures to ensure awareness and publicity among farmers for such advisories.
16.4 The Committee observes that the number of farmers receiving agro-meteorological advisories
is still small as compared to the total number of farmers in the country. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that efforts should be made in increasing the number of farmers benefiting
from meteorological advisories and enhancing dissemination through various media channels.
The Committee feels that awareness about the agro-met services is necessary and recommends
to continue creating awareness so that more and more farmers get benefited.
RESEARCH, EDUCATION AND TRAINING OUTREACH
17.1 Specialized Manpower in the field of earth system science is significant for achieving the objectives
of the programme of the Ministry. The Ministry informed that at present, there are 3 training schools
established at ESSO-IITM, Pune, ESSO-INCOIS, Hyderabad and ESSO-IMD, New delhi for the
development of manpower. Also, focused Research and Development is being conducted. The Ministry
informed that with respect to Earth Systems Sciences and Climate, three batches of trainees have already
been imparted the 18 month induction programme. The Ministry also informed that the International
Student Hostel to be jointly shared by MoES-IMD and MoES-IITM for the activities of two training
schools is under construction which will be completed by the end of this financial year i.e. 2016-17.
17.2 The details of the Budget Allocation and Utilization of the programme Research Education, Training
and outreach are as follow:-

17
(` in Crore)
Head 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17
Budget Estimates ` 105.00 ` 75.00 ` 49.90
Revised Estimates ` 70.83 ` 70.00 ---
Actual Expenditure ` 70.35 --- ---
17.3 The Committee desired to know reasons for reduction in budgetary allocation for the programme
from ` 75.00 crore in B.E. 2015-16 to ` 49.90 crore in 2016-17. The Ministry informed that this is due
to completion of establishment facilities under major infrastructural programme viz., establishment of
International Training Centre for Operational Oceanography (ITCOocean) and Centre for Advance Training
(CAT).
17.4  ITCO ocean started functioning formally in 2013 by conducting short term training courses for
the trainees from Africa and Indian Ocean Rim (IOR) countries. Ocean State Forecasting (OSF), Ocean
Color Data, Processing and Applications, Ocean Climate Modeling, and Standard Operating Procedure for
Tsunami Warning and Emergency Response are some of the broad themes addressed through these
training programs. In addition, ITCOocean has also conducted training programs on Ensemble Kalman
Filtering, Ocean Information services for cyclone forecasters, advanced statistical concepts in Atmospheric
and now it is imparting training to participants coming from across the globe. A state of the art E-class
room has been made operational with the facility to link different centers, organizations and participants
across the globe and inviting world class faculties and trainees from around the world. This global
character is further enhanced by the facility for distance learning / teaching conveniences achieved
through the availability of e-class room at the centre. This facility provides seamless access of ITCOocean
training programs, to all interested, participants across the globe. Till date, the Centre has conducted 6
International and 7 National training programs and trained more than 360 researchers, university students,
State and Central Govt. officials, including 59 foreign nationals from 22 countries. This demonstrates
the global outreach of ITCOocean, that was achieved in a short span of two years.
17.5 The Committee notes the significance of creating specialized manpower in the field of Earth
System Science and conducting training programmes with participants from across the globe. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should create world class infrastructure
including training schools and hostels and complete the construction of International student
Hostel which Scheduled time frame. The Committee further recommends to enhance extramural
activities and fulfilling the objectives of the programme.
ENVIRONMENT MONITORING AND RESEARCH
18.1 The SAF AR-Air was launched on 17th February 2015 to provide site specific information on Air
Quality in near real time and its forecast for the next 24 hours for Delhi, Pune and Mumbai. The SAFAR-
Air monitoring and prediction is being done with the network of monitoring stations in and around
national capital Delhi and Pune on environmental degradation on weather and vice-versa. The Ministry
stated that the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change monitors various pollutants in major towns and cities in the country in association with
State Pollution Control Boards. On the other hand, Ministry of Earth sciences had embarked upon

18
providing air quality forecasts of selected pollutants at selected locations of Delhi (24 hours in advance)
based on measurement network established in close vicinity of the various venues of Commonwealth
Games events that was organised by India in 2010.
18.2 The Committee enquired about what is being done in order to bridge the substantial research gaps
existing in environment related matters by coordinated interaction of scientists of SAFAR and Central
Pollution Control Board. The Ministry informed that the data quality is controlled and the project SAFAR
is ISO 9001-2008 accredited and recognized by World Meteorological Organisation (GURME Programme)
that establishes the credibility and the veracity of data. The frequency of status update is hourly. SAFAR
system involves 4 major components (i) Establishing Air Quality and Weather Monitoring Network
(2) Customizing air quality and weather forecasting model (3) Emission inventory development for the
city (4) Disseminating air quality and weather information products in terms of Air Quality Index (AQI),
through Digital Display boards, SAFAR web portal (safar.tropmet.res.in) and IVRS.
18.3 The Committee observes that not much has been done by the Ministry to bridge the
substantial research gaps between SAFAR and CPCB. The Committee feels that the coordination
between different Ministries is important and therefore recommends to ensure coordination
among concerned Institutions and Ministries which would boost studies and research specially in
environment-related research and development. The Committee also feels that inter-Ministry
coordination is essential without which the benefits of any research activity will not be able to
reach the citizens and to contribute to socio-economic development of the country.

19
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE MINISTRY AND BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR
2016-17
The Committee notes that although there has been a reduction in the budgetary allocation
at RE stage in 2015-16, the Ministry has not been able to utilize the allocated amount optimally
and much amount had remained unspent. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such
underutilization by the Ministry should be avoided and whatever amount is allocated should be
utilized to the fullest extent. (Para 4.2)
The Committee notes that the Ministry still requires additional funds in the 'Plan' component
in order to pursue important programmes and activities in 2016-17 which had been deferred
previously due to paucity of funds. The Committee also notes that the 'Plan' component in any
budgetary allocation is important to carry out programmes and activities. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the additional funds for the flagship programmes of the Ministry should be
allocated to the Ministry. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry should be provided
adequate additional amount, as requested by the Ministry, so that the critical programmes are
not adversely affected. (Para 4.6)
POLAR SCIENCES AND CRYOSPHERE
The Committee feels that the programme is extremely significant from the environmental,
aspect as it is through this programme that India's presence in Arctic and Antarctica region will
be felt. Further, the study of climate of Polar regions will help in its research of understanding
the climate of cold and fragile region of Himalayas in the wake of climate change. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should undertake more studies and activities in the
Polar regions and should take up this programme sincerely. (Para 6.5)
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should undertake a realistic
assessment of all the formalities involved in the programme and take action accordingly so that
underutilization of funds is avoided. The Committee notes that the budgetary allocation to the
new rationalized programme, 'PACER' has been reduced in 2016-17 and hopes that the reduction
would not affect the targets of the programme. (Para 6.6)
SEISMOLOGICAL AND GEOSCIENCE (SAGE) PROGRAMME
The Committee notes that the funds were underutilized in 2015-16 primarily due to
postponement of construction of building of National Centre for Seismology. The Committee
feels that the Ministry should not have postponed the construction of National Centre for
Seismology causing underutilization of funds which could have been avoided and the progress of
projects would not have been affected. (Para 7.6)
The Committee notes that the activities in the main phase have been initiated by the
Ministry and hopes that the drilling process would be started. The Committee recommends that
the Ministry should complete the drilling process within the scheduled time period to enrich its
prediction of the regular occurrence of the earthquake in the region. The Committee also
19

20
recommends to undertake scientific drilling programme in other parts of India facing regular
occurrence of earthquakes. (Para 7.11)
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR SEISMOLOGY
In its previous reports (Report Nos. 243 and 260), the Committee had recommended for
early creation of manpower, posts, infrastructure etc. for National Centre for Seismology. The
Committee, however, notes that even after a period of more than four years, the Ministry is still
in process of creation of manpower. Although the land for the construction of building has been
identified, the construction of the building is yet to be taken up. The Committee finds that the
approach of the Ministry in the matter is extremely lethargic. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Ministry should initiate the process of construction of the building of
National Centre for Seismology without any further delay. (Para 8.2)
MICROZONATION OF CITIES
The Committee observes that the Microzonation of cities falling in seismic zone of V , IV and
III has been taken up by the Ministry and is working in coordination with GSI. The Committee
recommends that Microzonation of these cities should be carried out expeditiously in view of the
vulnerability of India to severe earthquakes. (Para 9.2)
OCEAN SERVICES, TECHNOLOGY OBSERV ATIONS, RESOURCES MODELLING AND SCIENCE
(OSTORMS)
The Committee notes the initiatives planned to be taken by the Ministry in 2016-17 and the
amount of expenditure incurred in 2015-16. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would
diligently and prudently work towards these initiatives. The Committee also notes that the
Ministry has failed to acquire Ocean Research Vesssels in last four years which is significant for
conducting oceanic research despite the Committee's repeated recommendations in its previous
reports (Report Nos. 243 and Report No. 260). The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Ministry should make all out efforts to ensure that such vessels are acquired at the earliest.
(Para 10.4)
POLYMETALLIC NODULES AND GAS HYDRATES
The Committee takes note of the progress made in harnessing polymetallic nodules and the
explorations being carried out by the Ministry which is significant for economic and strategic
purpose. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should continue with the
exploration and also to develop the deep sea mining system. The Committee also notes the
experiment being carried out for feasibility of extracting gas from gas hydrates and recommends
that the Ministry should continue with experiments in this field. (Para 11.5)
The Committee observes that not much progress has been made by the Ministry in acquiring
new dedicated research vessels for the exploration. The Committee also notes that only one
research vessel i.e. Samudra Ratnakar has been deployed. The Committee therefore, recommends
that the Ministry should prudently undertake the acquiring of new vessel and these vessel(s)
should be deployed, without which the exploration of poly metallic sulphides is not feasible.
(Para 11.7)

21
ATMOSPHERE & CLIMATE RESEARCH - MODELLING OBSERVING SYSTEMS & SERVICES
(ACROSS)
The Committee notes the increase in allocation at R.E. stage in 2015-16 and in B.E.
2016-17 and exhorts the Ministry to achieves its targets and undertake the schemes/programmes
essential for studying monsoon and climate change and for forecasting experiments.
(Para 12.5)
HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING (HPC)
The Committee notes that on the one hand, the available BE of ````` 10 crore for the programme
in 2015-16 was reduced to ````` 0.50 crore at RE stage and on the other hand the Ministry is not
able to upscale the High Performance Computing due to non-availability of funds. The Committee
is of the view that replies given by the Ministry are contradictory and recommends that the
Ministry should first utilise the funds available at its disposal and then complain about the lack
of funds. The Committee also recommends that sincere efforts be made for achieving augmentation
of High Performance Computing to the level of 10 Peta flop in time bound manner.
(Para 13.7)
ACCURACY IN WEATHER FORECASTING
The Committee takes note of the efforts being made by the Ministry to improve its efficiency
in weather forecasting which is essential in the wake of climate change and unpredictable
weather phenomena. The Committee, however, feels that much more still needs to be done to
improve the accuracy and to bring it at par with international standards. The Committee therefore
recommends that the Ministry should improve its weather forecasting capacities and the upscaling
of High Performance Computing and should also go for collaboration with other nations having
well equipped and advanced weather forecasting systems. (Para 14.5)
WATER DESALINATION PLANTS
The Committee commends the establishment of water desalination plants by MoES-NIOT in
Kavaratti, Minicoy and Agatti islands of UT of Lakshadweep, constructed with indigenous
components by using limited infrastructure available in these remote islands. These plants are
greatly catering to the need of fresh quality drinking water in these remote islands and are
extremely cost effective. However, the projects for similar plants at other six islands i.e. Amini,
Chetlet, Kadamat, Kalpeni, Kiltan and Androth, which were conceptualised in the year 2013, are
still hanging fire and mired in administrative procedures. Keeping in view the need for fresh
water in these remote islands for human consumption, the Committee recommends that the
Ministry should coordinate with all the concerned Ministries so that all procedural formalities for
the establishment of the water desalination plants at the six islands are completed at the earliest
and the work on the projects begins without any further delay. (Para 15.3)
AGRO-METEOROLOGICAL SERVICES
The Committee observes that the number of farmers receiving agro-meteorological advisories
is still small as compared to the total number of farmers in the country. The Committee,

22
therefore, recommends that efforts should be made in increasing the number of farmers benefiting
from meteorological advisories and enhancing dissemination through various media channels.
The Committee feels that awareness about the agro-met services is necessary and recommends
to continue creating awareness so that more and more farmers get benefited. (Para 16.4)
RESEARCH, EDUCATION AND TRAINING OUTREACH
The Committee notes the significance of creating specialized manpower in the field of Earth
System Science and conducting training programmes with participants from across the globe. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should create world class infrastructure
including training schools and hostels and complete the construction of International student
Hostel which Scheduled time frame. The Committee further recommends to enhance extramural
activities and fulfilling the objectives of the programme. (Para 17.5)
ENVIRONMENT MONITORING AND RESEARCH
The Committee observes that not much has been done by the Ministry to bridge the
substantial research gaps between SAFAR and CPCB. The Committee feels that the coordination
between different Ministries is important and therefore recommends to ensure coordination
among concerned Institutions and Ministries which would boost studies and research specially in
environment-related research and development. The Committee also feels that inter-Ministry
coordination is essential without which the benefits of any research activity will not be able to
reach the citizens and to contribute to socio-economic development of the country.
(Para 18.3)

23
MINUTES

X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 29th March, 2016 in Room No. 139, First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
3. Shri C.P. Narayanan
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
5. Shri Bhupinder Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
7. Shri Ninog Ering
8. Dr. K. Gopal
9. Shri Daddan Mishra
10. Shri Nana Patole
11. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
12. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
13. Shri Nagendra Singh
14. Shri Vikram Usendi
15. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
** *
2. * * *
25
***Relate to other Matters.

26
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. * * *
16. * * *
17. The Committee reassembled at 3.40 
P.M. and the following representatives of Ministry of Earth
Sciences appeared before the Committee:
1. Dr. M. Rajeevan, Secretary
2. Smt. Anuradha Mitra, JS&FA
3. Dr. S.S.C. Shenoi, Director, National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) & Indian National
Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS)
4. Dr. R. Krishnan, Director, Indian Institute of Tropical meteorology (IITM)
5. Dr. M. Ravichandran, Director, National Centre for Antarctica and Ocean Research (NCAOR)
6. Dr. M. Sudhakar, Director, Centre for Marine Living Resources (CMLRE)
7. Dr. E.N. Rajagopal, Director, National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting
(NCMRWF), Noida
8. Dr. V .M. Tiwari, Director, National Centre for Earth Sciences and Studies (NCESS),
Thiruvananthapuram
9. Dr. L.S. Rathore, DG , India Meteorological Department (IMD)
10. Dr. B.K. Bansal, Adviser
11. Dr. Vineet Kumar Gahalaut, Adviser
12. Shri Manish Kumar Bansal, Director (Finance)
***Relate to other Matters.

27
18. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences and his team of officers and
informed that the meeting has been convened to have a presentation on the Demands for Grants (2016-
17) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences. Initiating the discussion, the Chairman asked the Secretary to
inform the Committee about the budgetary allocations and physical targets for 2016-17 for important
programmes. The Chairman also desired to know about achievements and success of the major programmes
of the Ministry such as Polar and Cryosphere Research (PACER), International Ocean Drilling Programme,
Seismological Research, Weather Forecast Accuracy and High Performance Computing etc.
19. Thereafter, the Secretary made a Power Point Presentation apprising the Committee of the
achievements of the Ministry in 2015-16 and the budgetary details and plans for 2016-17. He explained
that they had been allocated `1200 crores for Plan Expenditure in 2016-17 against their demand for
`1350 crore. He informed that many critical programs get affected due to lack of adequate funds and
requested the Committee to recommend an additional `650 crores for the Ministry during the year.
20. The Chairman then observed that the entire work of the Ministry was Research & Development.
He further stated that allocations made in 2015-16 were not spent fully by the Ministry. The Committee
observed that IMD had made some accurate predictions about some major cyclones unlike some other
countries who had failed. He also stressed on improving the system so that early warning could be given
within 60 to 80 seconds before occurrence of an earthquake.
21. The Committee desired to know about the work done by the Ministry in the agricultural sector. The
Committee was informed that the Ministry was issuing agriculture forecasting and agromet advisories on
weather, rainfall etc. Further, advice was being given by the scientists to the farmers on sowing, use
of fertilizers etc. The Committee advised the Ministry to have a mobile application for farmers and to
increase the number of farmers receiving agromet advisories. The Committee also emphasized the need
for increasing publicity with regard to the services provided by the Ministry.
22. Thereafter, the Members of the Committee raised queries on various subjects such as offshore
numerical tanks; modernisation of systems for early warning of natural hazards like cyclones, floods,
tsunamis, etc. in the wake of increased frequency of natural disasters in the country; steps taken to
tackle the problems of fog, cyclones, tornadoes etc.; establishment of water desalination plants in the
country, including solar desalination units; deep sea technology; marine pollution caused by drilling deep
in the ocean; research undertaken regarding fish being instrumental in propagating cancer; coordination
with other concerned Ministries/Departments etc.
23. The representatives of the Ministry replied to some of the queries raised by the Chairman and
Members. The Chairman asked the Secretary to submit written replies to all the queries raised during
the meeting to the Secretariat at the earliest.
24. The witnesses then withdrew.
25. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
26. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.48 
P.M.

28
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 5th May, 2016 in Room No.' 139', First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhupinder Singh Lok Sabha
3. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
4. Kum. Sushmita Dev
5. Shri Ninong Ering
6. Shri Laxman Giluwa
7. Shri Daddan Mishra
8. Shri Chirag Paswan
9. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
10. Shri Nagendra Singh
11. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. She
informed the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 281st, 282nd,
283rd and 284th reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Ministries/Departments
of Science & Technology, Atomic Energy, Environment, Forest & Climate Change and Earth Sciences
respectively.
3. The Committee, after considering the recommendations made in the draft reports, adopted the draft
281st, 282nd, 283rd and 284th reports with slight modifications. The Committee also decided to meet
next on 6 May 2016 to consider and adopt some other draft reports.
4. The meeting of the Committee, then, adjourned at 4.15 
P.M.
28