7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 (1993-94)
SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ANNUAL REPORT (1992-93) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN
 DEVELOPMENT
(Presented on the 17th March, 1994))
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March 1994/Phalguna, 1916
CONTENTS
 
1. Composition of the Committee
2. Introduction                
3. Report of the Committee         
4. Appendix
5. Minutes of the Meetings of the Committee
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND
 FORESTS
1.         Syed Sibtey Razi-Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.         Shri N. Giri Prasad
Shri Ajit P.K Jogi
Prof. M.G.K Menon
Shri Suresh Pachouri
  Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
@7.  Vacant
*8.  Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
  Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
 Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
LOK SABHA
Shri M.G. Reddy
  Shri Oscar Fernandes
 Shri KG. Shivappa
£14. Vacant
Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel
Shri Sharad Dighe
18. Shri Ram Chandra Rath
**19. Shri Ram Kirpal Y<tdav
Shri Harchand Singh
Shri Yashwantrao Patil
Shri Vijay Naval Patil
Shri P.C. Chacko
Kumari Frida Topno

7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
Shri Chandresh Patel
Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
Shri Balraj Pasi
Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
Shri Ram Prasad Singh
Shrimati Saroj Dubey
Shri Harpal Panwar
Shri Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
  Shri Jitendra Nath Das
  Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
+38.  Vacant
  Shri Bhim Singh Patel
  Shri E. Ahmed
SECRET ARIA T
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri N.K. Singh, Assistant Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
@Vacancy caused due to retirement of Dr. R.K. Poddar from membership of Rajya Sabha with effect from July 9, 1993.
"Nominated w.e.f. May 13, 1993 "ice Dr. Naunihal Singh resigned.
£Vacancy caused due to resignation by Shri Digvijaya Singh from membership of Lok Sabha w.e.f. January 26, 1994.
 **Nominated w.e.f. August 26; 1993 "ice Shri Bhagey Gobardhan died.
+ Vacancy caused due to the demise of Shri Nuni Bhattacharya on October 11, 1993.
(iii)
(iv)
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri J. V.R. Prasada Rao, Joint Secretary
Shri S. W. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Dr. S.A.H. Abidi, Director
Shri H.P. Rajan, Director
Shri S.K. Das, Director
Shri B.N. Krishnamurthy, Director Shri Bhim Sen Rao, Director
Shri B.P. Gupta, Director (Engg.), DRDO, New Delhi
Shri M.R. Joshi, Director, RDE, Pune
Shri M.K. Kaul, Director, Antarctic Division, GSI, Faridabad
Dr. V.P. Kambhoj, Director, CDRI, Lucknow
Dr. G. Santhana Krishnan, Joint Director, MPEDA, Cochin
Dr. B.M. Reddy, Deputy Director, NPL, New Delhi
Dr. B.V. Nayak, Deputy Director, NIO, Goa
Prof. V.S. Raju, Dean (IC&R), OEC, lIT, Madras
Dr. S.T. Chari, Head, Water Resources Division, NRSA, Hyderabad
Shri B.R. Subramanian, Principal Scientific Officer
Shri V.S. Rao Chinthal, Principal Scientific Officer
Dr. M.D. Zingde, Scientist In-Charge, Regional Centre, NIO, Bombay
Shri P .K. Sen, Assistant -General Manager, ElL, New Delhi
Kumari Rakesh Sharma, Assistant Director (OL)
Dr. P.C. Pandey, R.C. Bombay
Prof. Ravindran, OEC, liT, Madras
Dr. M. Saklhival, MPEDA, Cochin
 

7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Committee~ on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by
 the Committee to present the report on its behalf, present this Seventh Report of the Committee. This Report deals with
 issues contained in the Annual Report of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1992-93.
2. The Committee held in all four meetings on the 10th, 11th, 28th January and 15th March, 1994 (Appendix). In the
 meeting held on the 10th January, 1994, the representatives of the Department of Ocean Development gave an
 overview of various programmes and activities being undertaken by the Department. On 11th and 28th January, 1994
 the Committee discussed in detail the activities of the Department and Members sought clarifications thereon from the
 representatives of the Department.
3. The Committee expresses its appreciation for. the officials of the Department for their cooperation and making
 available the material whenever required by the Committee.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the report at its meeting held on the 15th March, 1994.
 
 
NEW DELHI;
March 15, 1994
SYED SIBTEY RAZI
 Chairman,
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
 and Forests
 
REPORT
General Background
The Oceans, the world over, provide not only a chief means of trade transportation and Naval activity, but also have vast
 resources within and underneath them which provide considerable scope for tapping· their potential for wealth of
 nations and of human society. In India, however, until the 1960s, the Ocean was not the focus of attention in a major
 way; and Oceanographic research was confined to just a few programmes of the institutions and universities. There was
 the national institute of Oceanography in Goa of CSIR and India metrological Department through the Inte Indian
 Ocean Expedition apart from the interests of the Indian Navy and the regular activities of the Ministry of Shipping and
 Transport. It was only with the adoption of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (1982) following the Third
 United Nations conference on the Law of the Sea that many developing countries including India got the necessary
 impetus to create new infrastructure and institutions for harnessing the resources of the Oceans. The convention also
 provided a comprehensive framework for the regulation of Ocean spaces. A new dimension to the ocean related
 activities was added by the enactment of the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone and other
 Part time Zones Act by Parliament in, 1976 and establishment of a 200 mile Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) in
 January, 1977. An Ocean Science and Technology Agency was set up under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister
 which was serviced by the Department of Science and Technology. The creation of the Department of Ocean
 Development’s in January, 1981 first as part of the Cabinet Secretariat directly under the charge of the Prime Minister
 and later in March, 1982 as a separate Department with a Minister of State was in recognition of the need to give
 necessary fillip to the development of oceans within the territorial jurisdiction of the country and to tap their vast
 mineral wealth. Therefore, as a natural corollary an Ocean Policy was enunciated in November, 1982 by the
 Government and duly approved by both the Houses of Parliament. The highlights of this policy are as follows:-
- Need to map living resources, prepare an inventory of commercially exploitable faune and to map and assess the
 availability of mineral resources from the deep sea.
- Optimum utilisation of living resources and seaweeds, exploitation of non-living resources such as hydrocarban and
 heavy placer deposits, harnessing of renewable resources of ocean energy from waves, temperature difference in water
 column.
- Technological advances geared to the utilisation and preservation of the marine environment.
- Research and development in basic ocean sciences.
, - Development of indigenous technology and setting up of infrastructure facilities and services to operate large sized
 fishing vessels.
- Development of technologies relating to instrumentation diving systems, position fixing, materials development,
 oceanic data collecting devices, submersibles etc.

7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
- Broadening and strengthening of available infrastructure facilities.
- Establishment of a centralised data system with appropriate mechanism for collection,
collation and dissemination of ocean related information both from indigenous and foreign sources.
- Training of skilled manpower and creation of self-reliant technological base.
- Establishment of an integrated legal framework and commitment for its enforcement.
- Cooperation with both developed and developing countries.
Programme of the Department
2. The major programmes of the Department include Scientific research in Antarctica, Deep seabed exploration,
 development of technology for extraction of metals from nodules and development of seabed mining system, surveys
 for assessment of living and non-living resources, coastal zone and islands, marine instrumentation and systems;
 promotion of basic research; development of specialised manpower, infrastructure support; operation of research
 vessels; National Ocean information System; policy and law relating to ocean and Antarctica. For this a budget estimate
 of Rs. 56.4 crores (Rs. 43 crores under plan and 13.4 under non-plan) as against Rs. 48.17 crores (Rs. 39 crores under
 plan and 9.17 under non-plan) for 1992-93 has been approved for the Department for the year 1993-94.
3. The important objective of the Department is to function as a nodal department for organising, co-ordinating and
 promoting ocean developmental activities in the country and to promote institutional capabilities in areas where
 significant work is lacking. The department has been given specific responsibilities in relation to (i) Antarctic Research
 Programme to demonstrate India's scientific potential and capabilities and (ii) development of deep seabed mining for
 polymetallic nodules. Going by the budgetary allocation for the Department, it would appear that the Department is
 very small, with just a complement of 209 out of which the component of technical and scientific personnel is just 50
 but the activities and programmes undertaken by it in conjunction with other concerned agencies belief that
 supposition.
4. India has been allotted a mine site of 1,50,000 sq. kms. in the Central Indian Ocean under the new Ocean regime and
 has been accorded a pioneer status in deep seabed exploration. Development of technologies for generation of
 electricity from sea waves, application of remote sensing for identification of potential fishery zones, monitoring of
 marine pollution are some of the activities taken up by the Department recently.
5. The Department of Ocean Development in association with twelve national institutions has designed a National
 Ocean Information System (NOIS). Under this programme data on various ocean related parameters generated by the
 national institutions, universities and other R&D institutions is centralised, stored and disseminated to various users.
 The data centres established at India Meteorological Department, Pune; National Institute of Oceanography, Goa;
 Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow; and Geological Survey of India, Calcutta have become operational.
6. A marine pollution Information System within the Department for maintaining information on pollution levels at 70
 locations along the coastline of the country is being developed. The past data on oil spills along the Indian Coast will be
 integrated with this system.
7. A National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) has been set up in Madras as an autonomous body under the
 Department of Ocean Development. The objective of the institution will be to develop indigenous technologies in the
 ocean sector.
8. In order to assess whether the Department of Ocean Development is fulfilling its mandate effectively, the Committee
 decided to study various aspects of the working of the Department on the basis of its Annual Report for the year 1992-
93, particularly with reference to some of the programmes undertaken by it.
9. The Committee was apprised for the various activities of the Department, its thrust areas etc., by the Secretary and
 other officials of the Department as also those of other agencies/ bodies/institutes in conjunction with whom the
 Department co-ordinates its activities.
Antarctic Research Programme
10. Ever since the creation of the Department of Ocean Development in the year 1981 the Antarctic Research
 programme. has been a focus of attention and annual scientific research expeditions to Antarctica are being launched by
 India, 13 expeditions have uptil now been undertaken and scientists have carried out experiments and research in areas
 as diverse as Geology, Geophysics, Meteorology, Atmospheric Sciences, Geomagnetism, Biology oceanogra ­phy,
 Glaciology and Physiology. The permanent year round station at Maitri and supply base at Dakshin Gangotri constitute
 the requisite infrastructure for carrying out the scientific research in Antarctica which provides a pristine laboratory of
 world-wide significance for researchers to detect and monitor global environmental phenomena such as the depletion of
 atmospheric ozone, global warming and sea level changes. The region offers unique opportunities to study the
 specialised adaptations of organisms with their environment and biological researches provide date essential for
 decision making about marine living resources. Work on Human biology and medicine provides information on the

7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
 physiological adaptation of man to extremec1imates and isolation.
11. The Committee was informed that India is one of signatories to the protocol on Environment Protection and has
 agreed to phase out the use of CFC gases which are aggravating the ozone depletion problem. The scientists have
 conducted some experiments· called laser heteredyne which are first of their kind in the whole world. This technique
 provides the profile of ozone depletion every five minutes and helps to find out where the depletion is maximum or
 minimum. It also reveals as to how the ozone is being sucked from lower altitudes into the Antarctic region. The
 Committee was informed that the scientists were able to find out that the ozone depletion problem is not very serious in
 the case of India. In response to a query from the Committee as to whether it was possible for the CFCs emitted by the
 advanced countries to produce ozone holes over the Third world countries, it was explained that the ability of the CFCs
 to deplete ozone is enhanced only in the presence of Polar Stratospheric clouds (PSCs) when the temperature goes
 below -85°C and with the present knowledge available with the Department, there is little probability that CFC will be
 able to deplete the ozone zone over our country. However, the slight doubt that exists is that if the ozone is being
 destroyed over Antarctica year after year, then slowly the ozone from other latitudes could be sucked into the hole. The
 present knowledge in any case is not enough to forecast the consequences. Further elaborating on the submission that
 the ozone depletion problem is not very serious in India, it was explained that the laboratory experiments have shown
 that the necessary condition for this ozone destruction by CFCs is a temperature approximately minus 90°C which is
 not produced in the stratosphere at any place except Antarctica and not over Arctic. That is our safety factor. On being
 pointedly asked by the Committee about the extent to which the country stood to gain from the Oceanographic 'research
 in Antarctica, the Secretary of the Department explained that the foremost thing that necessitated India's sending
 expeditions to Antarctica on a continuing basis was India's consultative status and that can be retained only because of
 India's continuous endeavour in that direction. Coming to the net gains of Antarctic research, he said that the effect of
 environment on physiology is part of the information that the scientists gained and the responses of individuals are
 monitored by the expert group of doctors sent every time on the expeditions as part of the team. The Committee was
 further apprised that through the expeditions scientists have gained experience in atmospheric research, though the
 economic gain from the research is very difficult to estimate because of the fact that mining in Antarctica has been
 banned for 50 years under the Antarctica Treaty System. He further added that in the event this ban is lifted, the
 scientists of the country should be able to exploit the resources as Antarctica which is supposed to be a repository of
 minerals such .as gas and oil. This would, according to him, be a long term gain. The other aspect touched upon by the
 Secretary related to the exploitation of seabed in Antarctica which still remained to be attempted. In this context, be
 explained that krill - a kind of fish - available in Antarctica had great potential, keeping in' view its high protein
 content, three countries namely Japan, Russia and Poland' had exploited in some measure this potential. As Krill has to
 be immediately processed on being taken out of the Antarctica sea, it calls for not only the vessels to go there, but also
 onboard processing equipment which entails substantial investment and this is one of the initiatives· that the
 Department now wishes to embark upon. To undertake this ambitious programme a multi-purpose vessel would be
 required which should be able to carry out oceanographic research during the time it is anchored in the country's port
 and not required in Antarctica. In this context, the Committee was apprised that an export Committee to draw the
 specifications of 'the proposed vessel and to go through the tendering had been set up and the estimated cost of the
 'Vessel was between Rs: 70 to Rs. 80 crores) On being asked as to how' the Department proposed to arrange necessary
 funds for making the purchase of the multi-purpose vessel, the Secretary replied that the Department was fully
 concerned that the investment should yield adequate results; and with that in view that Department would make a
 strong case for purchasing the multi-purpose vessel. He conceded that funding would, of course, be a problem. Further
 elaborating upon the benefits derived in consequence of the on-going Antarctic research, the Secretary stated that
 another area which bears some technical connection is the polar structure built by the Defence R&D engineers, Pune
 which is in fact a defence laboratory and also a communication system. The Department in co-ordination with other
 agencies/departments, could also use the expeditions for various projects. The engineers from the defence side had gone
 to Antarctica to do cold research work and are finally able to develop a cold research system which could otherwise not
 be developed in the Siachen where the armed forces of the country are face to face with the enemy and have to fight
 them.
12. A point was raised about the latest information gathered by the scientists in the course of their expeditions to
 Antarctica about global warming as a result of the greenhouse effect and whether there was any threat to the human
 population on this planet. It was explained that Antarctica was the most suitable region for studying the greenhouse
 effect and almost all the existing models show that even 0: 1 degree rise in temperature at the equator will be reflected
 as almost 0.5 degree rise in temperature in Antarctica. In other words, the increase in temperature gets amplified as one
 goes to higher latitudes. What the scientists are doing is to monitor the greenhouse gases such as CO , CH  and N 0

7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
2 4 2
 etc. in addition to CFSs. The density of these gases has risen during the last few years. The change in the ice cover is
 being continuously monitored by the satellite and it is from this that information about the warming in the polar region
 is obtained. If the temperature rises by 1.0 degree centigrade the area of ice cover is decreased to that extent. There is an
 alarm sounded by a large number of people that there could not be a positive feed-back because when the ice-cover
 melts there will be more water around and the reflection of the solar energy gets reduced and more energy is absorbed.
 As a result there could be a runaway condition and the green house effect could not be stopped. This is some thing
 which could be very serious for humanity. But the indication so far is that this will be compensated by the increased
 clouds which will cut off the sun's ray. Thus, there are enough safeguards but nobody has a right answer to these
 questions.
13. The Committee has noted that the annual scientific expeditions to the Antarctica are being conducted by the
 Department on an on-going basis, more due to treaty compulsions, but the flow of information as a result of
 experiments and research has been of value. The Committee, however, is not able to reach any definite conclusion as to
 whether the results achieved from these experiments Jand research in Antarctica have actually manifested in their
 application to various programmes/activities on the ground. The Committee would nevertheless like to emphasise that
 along with the emphasis on research in Antarctica, special stress be laid on programmes such as exploiting the Krill
 potential, which may in the long run prove to be commercially viable. With that end in view the policies and schemes
 formulated by the Department should be accorded top priority and funds should not be a constraint in achieving that
 objective if evaluation establishes their viability.
Deep Seabed Polymetallic Nodules Programme Exploration and Extraction of metals
14. India as a registered pioneer investor has been allotted an area of 1,50,000 sq. kms. (mine site) in the Central India
 Ocean basin for exclusive exploration and development. An action plan has been drawn up by the Department for the
 implementation of deep seabed polymetallic nodules programme which covers three main thrust areas, Le., survey and
 exploration, development of mining and extractive metallurgy.
15. The Committee was apprised that the allocation of the mine site of 1,50,000 sq. kms. is on the condition that,50% of
 this site will have to be surrendered. The allocation of 1,50,000 sq. kms. site has been made so that the Department is
 able to conduct a survey of the seabed and find out as to which part is most suitable for exploration activities. The
 survey is a highly technical activity by which it has to be found out as to which regions are most inaccessible on
 account of topography and in this process it may be discovered that nodules are either not available or if they are
 available they may be of a low quality. The survey has nevertheless been conducted by the National Institute of
 Oceanography (NIO) and in the first phase the Department will be surrendering 20% of the mine site having regard to
 the fact that 50% of the mine site has to be surrendered over a period of time.
16. The nodules from deep seabed are potentially rich sources of metals like copper, nickel, cobalt and manganese. The
 potential of these metals as conveyed to the Committee is of the order of 73 million tonnes in respect of manganese, 3
 million tonnes each in respect of nickel· and copper and 0.5 million tonnes in respect of cobalt. In other words it is of
 enormous proportions. Both nickel and cobalt are useful in high technology applications for aero-engines. 70,000
 tonnes of copper is imported every year in the country. Therefore, realising the intrinsic value of these metals and their
 commercial viability, it is very important to have the technology for extraction of these metals from nodules. But the
 country, however, has not yet developed the technology for taking the nodules out from the seabed as a result of which
 exploiting the potential of these metals appears to be a distant dream for the present.
17. The Committee was, however, apprised that the Department has taken some initiative in this respect in that with a
 view to focus on potentially successful process routes, it has made an analysis of something like 15 routes out of which
 three were ,chosen and two of them have been \ pursued vigorously. Two laboratories, namely, National Metallurgical
 Laboratory, Jam­shedpur and the Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubaneshwar are assessing the potential of these
 two routes. The Department has conceded that taking the nodules out of the seabed involves deep sea mining
 technology which is a rather difficult technology and while making efforts to achieve and perfect that technology, its
 commercial viability has also to be kept in view.
18. The Committee was also informed that the Department has decided in Phase-II of the mining technology programme
 to reorient the programme so as to deal with placer deposits which are at a depth of 200 to 300 metres. The Department
 is concentrating on developing under water technologies, with greater emphasis on remotely operated vehicle system to
 handle different situations. The Department as at present is involved in ocean mining technologies, but it is still far
 from the ocean bed. A Committee to evaluate the proven resources of placer deposits in the near shore and EEZ area
 was appointed which has submitted its report, and the Department is in the process of examining the recommendations
 contained therein. The Committee was told that it is very difficult to enter into joint programmes/ventures with other

7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
 countries for 0cean bed technologies as the area was totally considered to be a classified one.
19. The Committee feels that the Polymetallic Nodules programme of the Department lacks direction and perspective as
 no concrete results seem to have been achieved and the acquisition of deep sea bed mining technology still appears to
 be a non starter. The Committee would like the Department to seriously examine the feasibility of involving private
 sector in this programme so that not only the private sector people but also the country as a whole gains from the
 exploitation ,of the vast sea resources. The potential for extraction of metals  from the nodules dug out of the seabed
 could be very great and if the deep seabed mining technology is developed on a commercially viable scale, the gains for
 the country will be enormous. The Committee hopes that the Department would attach due importance to the
 recommendations of the Gopalakrishna and B.K. Rao Committees and take expeditious action towards reorientation of
 the mining prog­rammes.
Exploration and Assessment of living and non-living resources
20. India has abundant natural resources in its oceans with an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of .02 million sq. kms.
 The potential of living as well as non-living resources in the vast coastline of the country an be exploited suitably if
 there is systematic exploration and fair assessment on the basis of correct data.
21. The Committee was apprised that the brackish water area is something like 9,00,000 hectares out of which only
 about 60,000 hectares is under culture. Among the living resources, we have fish potential to the tune of 2.2 million
 tonnes, but that has been only exploited marginally, the reason being that the bulk of our exploitation is just in zero to
 50 meter depth. Among the non­living resources are petroleum, potable water, polymetallic nodules and energy
 generation, the Department through two ocean going research vessels namely ORV Sagar Kanya and FORV Sagar
 Sampada has been engaged in scientific exploration since 1983-84; up till now 82 research cruises of Sagar Kanya and
 106 of Sagar Sampada have been devoted to extensive exploration. Both these research vessels have, however, become
 quite aged and the Department needs their replacement with state of the art multi-purpose vessels to pursue more
 vigorously its exploration objectives so that the vast ocean wealth is exploited to the fullest extent\ and tangible benefits
 accrue to the nation at large.
22. About 18% of our population i.e. 150 million people is living along the coast line. The Department has undertaken
 certain programmes to benefit this segment of the population. One of these programmes is to make available to the
 fishermen accurate satellite information for fish catch and this has proved to be quite successful. Co-related with this is
 another programme of the Department for development of technology for communication by the fishermen from the
 shore to the fishing vessels. Similarly, the Department is also focussing attention on Island develop­ment.
23. The Committee was told that, under the Marine Satellite Information Service Programme (MARSIS), the
 Department is trying to generate data relating to sea surface temperatures and other necessary information relating to
 potential fishing zones and coral reef maps using remote sensing satellite. When the programme was started the
 emphasis was on direct contact with the users of this information, namely fisher community and providing them
 requisite information relating to potential fishing zones, the reason being that the fishermen could not usefully use the
 information in terms of temperature gradient and sea surface temperatures. Now, there have been established 60
 centres, and information is communicated to the fishermen by Fax-first the information is given to the fishermen's
 cooperatives and then to the fishermen. To facilitate grasping of the information by the fishermen and putting that to
 optimum use, the information is given in terms of distance, depth and direction. Now, the fishermen are quite
 convinced that the satellite data is a valuable supplement to their already existing traditional knowledge in this sector,
 and the two way communication from the fishing vessels to the shore and vice-versa has made their task easier. The
 Committee was informed that the programme aims at providing 1000 walkie talkie sets in four States namely Andhra
 Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Karnataka in Phase-I; and after it is found that the programme has achieved its
 objectives and been quite successful, this will be extended to other States also. It will be up to -the State Governments
 to purchase and supply these sets to the fishermen. To a pointed question from the Committee as to what the
 Department is doing for imparting intensive training to the fishermen directly to exploit fish potential in still greater
 measure on the basis of the information made available by it to them, the reply of the Department was that its role was
 only limited to technology demonstration and much would depend upon the State Governments themselves. The
 Department on its part has been quite successful in developing technology for locating potential fishing zones on the
 basis of sea surface temperatures and this has to be perfected by adding the chlorophyll data. Once this package is
 ready, it can be given to the fishermen for effective use.
24. The Committee was informed that the third programme of the Department was related mainly to Andaman and
 Nicobar Islands and there was a break through in the field of aquaculture there because of acidic nature of the soil. The
 production level under this exercise has touched 2 tonnes per hectare, per crop. On being asked as to whether the
 Department was satisfied with the yield when some of the private companies in India had achieved 8 metric tonnes per

7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
 hectare per year per crop, the reply was that it was just the beginning and the achievement was fairly good. It was
 explained to the Committee that in order to .achieve good results in aquaculture, PH value has to be between 7 and 8
 but in Andaman and Nicobar Islands PH value is low and the basic challenge is to raise the PH value. Nonetheless two
 commercially known species have been selected and the islanders can immediately adopt the technology and market
 their produce.
25. The Committee acknowledges the useful· work being done by the Department of Ocean Development in tapping the
 huge wealth lying within the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)· of the country, particularly in the area of living
 resources. The technology for identification of potential fishing zones and the network of information and
 communication developed by it has definitely benefited the fisher community. But the Committee feels that the scope
 for exploiting the huge fish potential is still great and the Department must concentrate on developing under-water
 technologies so that the fish catch is extended beyond 50 meter depth. There is no denying the fact that India has a
 tremendously long coastline; and the fish potential, if exploited to the fullest extent, can yield valuable food as also
 foreign exchange. The Department would also be well advised to lay greater emphasis on the training of fishermen with
 a view to motivating them to use the latest technology and derive maximum benefits there from. The Committee is
 happy to note that the Department has through its sustained efforts made a break through in aquaculture in the
 Andaman and Nicobar Islands but there is still greater need to identify more areas for application of this technique and
 to evolve techniques/methods to maximise yield. Export potential should be given greater attention.
Ocean Energy Programme
26. Energy from the sea waves is one of the promising sources of renewable energy. The estimated potential for India is
 about 40,000 MW for the 6000 kms coastline. However, this energy is thinly distributed and as the system has to be
 designed for extreme waves, it is expensive. The Department of Ocean Development has, therefore, thought of a multi-
functional system which is likely to be more viable. It would be a barrier type wave energy system built at some
 distance from the coast which could generate renewable power, create a harbour between barrier and shore, and protect
 the coast against sea erosion. The Wave Energy Project· group at the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras started a
 research programme on wave energy in 1982. Based on the design data developed in the laboratories, a demonstration
 plant of 150 KW capacity for conversion of wave energy into electrical energy has been built at Vizhinjam near
 Trivandrum. It was commissioned in October 1991. This is the first off shore power plant of its kind in the world. It is
 functioning well and has been declared as a national facility for Wave Energy and other Wave Application studies.
27. On the basis of experience gained from wave power plant at Vizhinjam, two new projects relating to construction of
 breakwater integrated Wave Energy system at Thangerssery in Kerala and Mus point in Car Nicobar have been taken
 up by the Department. At Thangerssery the breakwater is under construction. Part of the breakwater is built; and by the
 time the system is installed, it will be an improved version of the system on the basis of the experience gained at
 Vizhinjam and it can also demonstrate its utility as part of the integrated breakwater. At Mus Point in Car Nicobar
 Islands there is a proposal to build a harbour and the project is in advanced stage of acceptance by the Government.
 There also the Department is going to demonstrate Wave Energy Programme, as no other source of power is available
 there. An expert group to work out the technical and financial aspect at Mus Point has been constituted by the Planning
 Commission.
28. The Committee was apprised that there are basically three ways of getting energy from the seas, namely, from the
 waves, from the tides and from the use of temperature gradients. The Secretary of the Department provided to the
 Committee a comprehensive statement of all these three technologies and their perspective potential in the country. As
 regards wave energy the anticipated potential is about 5 KW to 15 KW per metre of coastline; the south west coast and
 Andaman and Nicobar Islands are potential areas. Total estimated theoretical potential is 40,000 MW. As pointed out
 earlier, an experimental plant has been set up at Vizhinjam near Trivandrum in Kerala where technology for generation
 of electricity from sea waves is demonstrated. Further work to achieve stabilised output of power and integration of the
 system with the breakwaters of fishery or commercial harbours is in progress. Britain, Norway, Portugal and Japan are
 also carrying on research but no commercial plant has been established so far. In so far as Ocean Thermal Energy
 Conversion (OTEC) prospects are concerned, theoretically estimated OTEC potential in India is about 40,000 MW.
 Preliminary studies have shown that real sites for establishment of shore based OTEC plants are available at Kavaratti
 and Minicoy islands in Lakshadweep, Nicobar group of islands and for off-shore based plant of Tamilnadu. The
 Government of Tamilnadu in consultation with Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources has in January 1994
 signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Sea Solar Power, USA for designing, construction and operation of a
 100 MW OTEC plant at about 40-50 Kms. off Kulasekarapatnam, if the site is proved to be feasible. As per the MOU,
 the US company will construct the plant in the form of a vessel or floating platform and transmit the power to the shore
 through sub-marine cable at its own cost. The project will cost about US dollars 250 Million (approx. Rs. 800 crores) to

7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
 the US company. It will sell the power to Government of TamilNadu at an agreed cost of US dollars 0.069 per Kilo
 Volt Ampere (Approx. Rs. 2.20) and the" payment has to be made in US dollars. The plant is expected to be operational
 for 20 years.
29. As regards tidal energy, Gulf of Kutch and Gulf of Cambay on the West Coast are considered of high potential; and
 the estimated tidal power potential in the Gulf of Cambay is stated to be about 7300 MW and Kutch about 1000 MW. A
 proposal to establish a 900 MW plant at Gulf of Kutch prepared by Central Electricity Authority through the Ministry
 of Non Conventional Energy Sources is under revision by MNES through National Hydro Electric Power Corporation.
 Canada, France, China, Russia, U.K. etc. have set up tidal experimental plants.
30. The Department of Ocean Development has, however, made modest beginning only in the wave energy sector and
 plant at Vizhinjam has been conceived as a project to' demonstrate the potential of generation of electricity from sea
 waves. It is a totally indigenous effort and several institutions have been involved in this project. The power, module,
 that is, the turbine generator system of the wave plant is proposed to be modified so that it can run continuously for a
 long period of time. The project engineers will make one more turbine generator system on the basis of the data
 generated and will test it thoroughly and completely before going in for a bigger system of 1.5 MW. It was admitted by
 a representative of the Department that power from the waves is not constant as from wave to wave there is a change in
 power. But there are many other spin offs of this project, an important off shoot of which is to build big caissons for
 storing iron ore and exploring the iron ore off the Goa Coast. In other words, wave energy is not going to contribute
 much for the energy scene of India though a potential of 40,000 MW is quoted; and if power in megawatts is to be
 derived from the ocean, it has to be technologically made feasible. The Department has admitted that what they have
 attempted at Trivandrum coast is a maximum power of 150 KW and this has merely to be looked upon as an energy
 resource for local area management. The Department has obviously great constraints as waves do not provide enough
 scope for going in for generation of electricity in a big way. The Department's efforts in examining the prospects of
 generating it with the combination of wind and wave energy in far off places like Nicobar Islands where there are no
 other sources of energy, are quite laudatory. As submitted by the Department, the potential for OTEC is great - as much
 as upto 40,000 MW but this is an area where the responsibility of the Department is somewhat restricted; as it is the
 Ministry of Non Conventional Energy Sources which would be looking after this aspect as well as the area of tidal
 wave energy. The Committee was told that even though OTEC area falls within the purview of the Ministry of Non-
Conventional Energy sources, it is the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras which carried out a survey in regard to
 the potential places where the OTEC plants could be located and the information provided by the Institute as a result of
 this survey has been utilised for the proposed setting up of a power plant in Tamil Nadu based on Ocean Thermal
 Power Technology.
31. The Committee has noted that the effort of the Department of Ocean Development in the field of wave energy is 11
 modest one and is still at an experimental stage. The economic viability of the project seems to be in doubt though
 multi-functional aspects of the projects which the Department has in view would definitely make the going very useful.
 As the potential from OTEC and tidal energy appears to be much more vis-a-vis wave or wind energy, the Department
 should in co-ordination with the Ministry of Non Conventional Energy Sources and other concerned agencies carry out
 detailed surveys and focus on dependable data so that energy requirements of the country could be substantially· met
 from these two vital sources.
32. The Committee is conscious of the fact that OTEC system has yet not been set up on a commercial basis anywhere
 in the world and similarly some of the countries are still busy setting up tidal energy plants, but the very fact that
 Government of Tamil Nadu as entered into an agreement with an American Company for setting up an OTEC Plant in
 the State should alert the Department about the viability of setting up OTEC Plants indigenously.
Coastal Ocean Monitoring & Prediction System (COMAPS)
33. Protection of Marine environment and preservation of the health of the waters is one of the important components of
 the activities of the Department of Ocean Development. Therefore, the Department has sponsored a nation-wide
 programme of marine pollution monitoring with a view to monitoring various marine pollutants in the seas around
 India. Under this programme, data on 25 pollution parameters, including the dissolved oxygen, concentration of heavy
 metals and pesticides like DDT, are being collected at 70 locations, along the coastline of the country through eleven
 centres. Forty hot spots have been identified in consultation with the concerned State Pollution Control Boards. The hot
 spots are areas having an alarming level of pollution parameters. The results obtained from various parameters
 collected reveal that the pollution problems are localised and mostly occur in the sea off metropolitan cities and thickly
 populated coastline areas. However, because of being diluted by sea water the pollutant level has not reached any
 alarming on a general basis stage. The areas found to be polluted have been identified in consultation with the State
 Pollution Control Boards. The Department does not monitor the areas which are beil1g monitored by the State Pollution

7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
 Control Boards, and in respect of the areas which are monitored by it necessary data is passed on to the State Boards.
 There is a Steering Committee of the representatives from the various institutions headed by the Director, NEERI,
 Nagpur to continuously monitor and discuss pollution levels. The data collected under the COMAPS programme has
 been found to be useful in monitoring the level of pollutants along the coastal waters.
34. The Committee was apprised that the Department has paid particular attention to the accuracy and validity of the
 data as also the measurements and taken the initiative to set up a group at Trivandrum to do some monitoring to see
 how these measurements are to be made out. The Department is to ensure that people are trained, technology is
 upgraded which is reliable, and validated, so that the information that is passed on to the Pollution Boards acts as a
 reliable feed. The Department basically complements the work of the States; and once the information is provided to
 the State Pollution Control Boards, it become their responsibility to control the pollution. The Department on its part is
 trying to identify a Member in the Pollution Control Board with whom it can constantly interact. Besides, the
 Department is also very closely maintaining liaison, and constantly interacting with the Ministry of Environment and
 Forests for the reason that the implementation of various laws relating to environmental issues falls within the purview
 of that Ministry.
35. The Committee has come to the conclusion that the Department of Ocean Development's role is limited to just
 identifying pollution prone coastal areas and the level of existing pollutants.
The data and measurements which are prepared by the scientists. of the Department are just passed on to the State
 Pollution Control Boards and it appears that the matter ends with the issue being left to be tackled by the State Pollution
 Control Boards, who in fact are independent of each other. The Committee feels that though there is a Steering
 Committee to monitor pollution levels, but still the measures are not very effective particularly in respect of the steps
 taken by these Boards, to review and remove the causes of the pollution. What is, therefore, necessary is that the
 activities of these Boards in pollution control should be co-ordinated in an effective manner through a centralised
 system, where by the Department itself or the Central Pollution Control Board can play a pivotal role. There is greater
 need for coordinated action on this front to save the marine environment from increasing pollution. The Department has
 no doubt its constraints, particularly of availability of funds, and it appears to be handicapped in dealing with this issue
 as it does not even have requisite number of vessels for carrying out pollution monitoring surveys. The Committee was
 told that for this specific; purpose the Department would require about 4 vessels. Initially investment is proposed to be
 made in 2 vessels, the design work of which has been completed by the National Ship Design Research Centre,
 Visakhapatnam. The Committee would like to emphasise that protection of marine environment and health of sea
 waters is of paramount importance, and accordingly recommends to the Government that Department's endeavours on
 this account should not suffer for want of funds.
Bio-active Substances from Marine organisms
36. Drugs from the sea is a potentially important area for the country, and the Department of Ocean Development has
 embarked upon this multi-institutional programme involving as many as 10 universities. The nodal institute for this
 programme is, the Central Drug Research Institute (CDRI) Lucknow. 134 Marine organisms have up till been screened
 for biological activities, but no major breakthrough has been achieved, and a drug in the real sense is yet to be
 developed. In response to a query from the Committee as to whether ,there was some substance in newspaper reports
 that drugs for cancer could be obtained from the living organisms in the ocean bed, the Secretary of the Department
 informed the Committee that the components which had been identified are for controlling the viral fevers from AIDS.
 Amolifying this point the Director, CDRI, Lucknow stated that what has been observed is that there are four organisms
 which show anti-viral activities but have not tested against AIDS. They are, however, being tested against AIDS not in
 our country, but in a centre in USA with which the Institute is linked. The property would, however, remain with this
 country. What the scientists in this institute are doing is to collect the substances in large quantities and synthesise and
 test them for application for viral infections including AIDS. The other area is to develop compounds from animals or
 plants and test their efficacy in other area. The scientists have identified 4 or 5 organisms in the ocean with necessary
 activity and they are in the actual process of testing their efficacy. He explained that so far no marine organism has
 been identified for production of drugs on commercial basis; and it would take 10 or 12 years for a drug to develop, the
 reason being that out of 20 compounds which are clinically tested only one may become a drug. Touching upon the cost
 factor, it was explained that in the developed countries the expenditure for development of a drug was to the tune of
 200 million dollars (about Rs. 700 crores). On the contrary the picture in the developing countries was that
 development of just one drug cost
            between Rs. 18 to 20 crores.    I
37. The Committee feels that having drugs from the sea has immense potential and more sustained efforts should be
 made in tapping this potential by involving more universities and institutes. The Committee is happy to note that this

7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
 area is seriously engaging the attention of the Department, and quite a substantial number of bio-active
 substances/marine organisms have been screened. The Department has agood track record of identification of such
 substances and with that expertise already available, it is hoped that development of drugs in near future on a
 commercial scale from the medicinal substances obtained from the sea will not be in the realm of impossibility.
Infrastructure, Research Development and Specialised Manpower etc.
38. Infrastructural support forms an essential pre-requisite for ocean development activities and for providing a
 comprehensive and reliable information system through a network of data centres on marine resources and their
 environment. As pointed out earlier, the two vessels namely ORV Sagar Kanya and FORV Sagar Sampada form the
 core of this infrastructural support for carrying out research and exploration in the country's vast coastline; they have
 done quite useful work. But they seem to have outlived their live and need immediate replacement by multi-purpose
 state-of-the-art vessels. The Department of Ocean Development is seized of the matter. Though it is handicapped by
 funds, it proposes to go in for such type of vessels in a phased manner. There is no doubt that the vast potential of ocean
 wealth within EEZ of our country still remains untapped, and there is need for concerted action on this front which
 cannot materialise unless the infrastructural support is fully geared up to meet this challenge. There are certain institutes
 set up by the Department which are doing pioneering work in the field of ocean research and manpower development.
 In this context, mention may be made of the National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) Goa and the National Institute
 of Ocean Technology (NIOT) Madras. The National Institute of Oceanography is a CSIR laboratory intended for
 surveys, development of technologies and basic sciences in marine science area particularly marine biology.
39. The National Institute of Ocean Technology has been registered as an autonomous body and it is intended to
 function as a nodal agency for the ocean development programme. The specific tasks assigned to NIOT are in the fields
 of wave energy, mining technology, development of marine instruments and evolving mathematical models to solve
 user oriented coastal engineering problems like coastal erosion, accretion etc. A point was raised about the approximate
 annual expenditure of NIOT, to which the Secretary replied that though the amount of Rs. 15 crores was for the entire
 plan for this institute, it had means to generate its own resources. A suggestion was made by the Committee as to
 whether it would not be appropriate for the Department to have public funding of its various projects so that a lot of
 benefit could be derived by a large number of industrial houses and secondly would it not be advisable to give some
 representation to the Private Sector on the government body of the National Institute of Ocean Technology. The
 Secretary assured to look at this suggestion of the Committee constructively.
40. This apart, the Department is  working very closely with Indian Institute of Technology, Madras. This Institute has
 set up facilities which are unique in Asia like multi-directional wave basin which have cost between Rs. 30 to 40 crores.
 The Ocean Engineering Centre and Ocean Energy Centre are the other two premier bodies set up by lIT, Madras to
 cater to the requirements of research in Oceanographic fields and substantial amount of money has been invested in the
 Ocean Centre alone for the reason that the Department has got a collaborative programme with Germany.
41. The Committee has noted the existence of a number of Institutes in the country engaged in high quality R&D in
 ocean science and technology. The Department informed the Committee that it is making use of that 'expertise to the
 maximum possible extent.
42. In the course of detailed examination of the working of the Department of Ocean Development, a valid point was
 made by a Member of the Committee to the effect that since India has a vast coastal area, oceans have special
 importance for the country, but an area of this nature cannot be dealt with just by one Department. The exploitation of
 living and non-living resources, promotion of shipping, pollution free environment on the coast reduction of coastal
 erosion are just a few of many· issues which call for greater coordination among Departments engaged in one way or
 the other with ocean related activities. The Department of Ocean Development has a very small budget, a substantial
 part of which goes into areas which do not relate to production sectors~ The Secretary while conceding in his reply that
 with its present size and budget, the Department of Ocean Development is not in a position to co-ordinate ocean related
 activities with all the departments to the desired extent, pointed out that it certainly has information about what the
 other departments are doing. In this context, he pointed out that they have Ocean Science and Technology Board on
 which representatives are drawn from various Ministries. The Committee feels that in view of the special importance
 which the oceans have for us, the Department of Ocean Development in its present form is not geared up to meet the
 challenges of our times. nor for that matter, it is in a position to co-ordinate ocean related activities with other
 Ministries/Departments, some of which like the Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Surface Transport are even
 bigger than the Department of Ocean Development itself. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends to the
 Government to set up an Ocean Agency, under the chairmanship of the Prime Minister for effective co-ordination,
 monitoring and implementation of the ocean related activities.
43. Besides, having regard to the mandate of the Department as outlined in the opening part of the Report, the

7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
 Committee desires that the Department should submit a detailed picture of all the activities, particularly of a Scientific
 and Technological nature relating to the field of Oceanography and utilization of these resources for national benefit;
 this should include the financial component.
 
NEW DELHI;
March 15, 1994    
SYED SIBTEY RAZI
 Chairman
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
 and Forests
                                                                         
APPENDIX
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
 COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
XXVII
Twenty-Seventh Meeting
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests met
 at 3.00 P.M on Monday, the 10th January, 1994 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
 New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi-Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
Prof. M.G.K. Menon
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
   Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
  Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
LOK SABHA
Shri Oscar Fernandes
Shri K. G. Shivappa
Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
Shri Praful Manoharbhai Patel
Shri Sharad Dighe
Shri Vijay Naval Patil
Kumari Frida Topno
Shri Ram Prasad Singh
Shri Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
   Shri Jitendra Nath Das
. Shri E. Ahamed
SECRETARIAT
Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretaty
Shri G. C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVEOPMENT
 Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri J.V.R. Prasada Rao, Joint Secretry
Shri S.W. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Dr. S.A.H. Abidi, Director
Shri H.P. Rajan, Director
ShriS.K. Das, Director
Shri B.N. Krishnamurti, Director
Shri B.R. Subramanian, Principal Scientific Officer
Shri V.S. Rao Chintal, Principal Scientific Officer
Shri B.K. Mukhopadhyay, Under Secretary
Shri M.R. Joshi, Director, RDE, Pune
Shri M.K. Kaul, Director, GSI, Faridabad

7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
Dr. P.V. Kambhoj, Director, CRDI, Lucknow
Prof. V.S. Raju, Dean, (IC&R) OEC, lIT, Madras
Dr. S.T. Chari, Head, Water Resources Division, NRSA, Hyderabad
Dr. A. Narendra Nath, Head, Ocean Development, NRSA, Hyderabad
Dr. M.D. Zingde, Scientist In-charge, Regional Centre, NIO, Bombay
Dr. B.M. Reddy, Scientist, NPL, New Delhi
Shri P.K. Sen, Assistant General Manager, ElL, New Delhi
Prof. Revindran, OEC, liT, Madras
Dr. G. Santhana Krishnan, Joint Director, MPEDA, Cochin
Dr. B.V. Nayak, Deputy Director, NIO, Goa
2. The Committee took up for consideration the Annual Report of the Department of Ocean Development for the year
 1992-93. The Secretary of the Department assisted by the respective Department Heads/Officials gave an overview of
 the activities of the Department and the Members sought necessary clarifications from him. The discussion on the
 Annual Report remained inconclusive.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee, thereafter, after some discussion, decided to visit the Space Centres/units under the control of the
 Department of Space located at Bangalore, Hassan and Thiruvanan ­thapuram as also the Wave Power Plant of the
 Department of Ocean Development at Vizhinjam near Thiruvananthapuram from 31st January to 5th February, 1994 to
 make an in-depth study of their working and authorised its Chairman to constitute a group of 15 members of the
 Committee to undertake the proposed visit. The Committee also authorised its Chairman to seek permission of the
 Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, for its visit to the said places.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 5.05 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 11th January, 1994.
xxvm
Twenty-Eight Meeting
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests met
 at 11.00 a.m.on Tuesday, the 11th January, 1994 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
 New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi--Chairman
RAJYA SABRA
Shri N. Giri Prasad
Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
  Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
 Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
LOK SABHA
Shri Oscar Fernandes
Shri K.G. Shivappa
Shori Shankarrao D. Kale
Shri Sharad Dighe
Shri P.C. Chacko
Kumari Frida Topno
Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
Shri Ram Prasad Singh
Shri Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
 Shri Jitendra Nath Das
 Shri E. Ahamed
SECRET ARIA T
Shri Nand Lal, Deputy Secretary
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary Shri N .K.Singh, Assistant Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
Dr. P.Rama Rao, Secretary

7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
Shri J.V.R. Prasada Rao, Joint Secretary
Shri S.W. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Dr. S.A.H. Abidi, Director
Shri H.P. Rajan, Director
Shri S.K. Das, Director
Shri B.N. Krishnamurthi, Director Shri Bhim Sen Rao, Director
Shri B.R. Subramanian, Principal Scientific Officer
Shri V.S. Rao Chintal, Principal Scientific Officer
Shri B.K. Mukhopadhayay, Under Secretary
Shri M.R. Joshi, Director, ROE, Pune
Shri M.K. Kaul, Director, GSI, Faridabad
        Dr. P.Y. Kambhoj, .Qirector, CRDl, Lucknow
Dr. S.T. Chari, Head, Water Resources Division, NRSA, Hyderabad
Dr. A. Narendra Nath, head, Ocean Development, NRSA, Hyderabad
Dr. M.D. Zingde,Scientist in-charge, Regional Centre, NIO, Bombay
Dr. P.C. Pandey, R.C. Bombay
Dr. B.M. Reddy, Scientist, NPL, New Delhi
Shri P.K. Sen, Assistant General Manager, ElL, New Delhi
Prof. Revindran, OEC, IlT, Madras
Dr. S. Santhana Krishnan, Joint Director, MPEDA, Cochin
Dr. B.Y. Nayak, Deputy Director, NIO, Goa
       Dr. M. Saklhival, MPEDA, Cochin
2. The Committee took up further consideration of the Annual report of the Department of Ocean Development for the
 year 1992-93. The Secretary of the Department assisted by the respective Department heads/officials continued his
 presentation of the overview of the activities of the Department and Members sought clarifications on the points made
 by him. The discussion on the Annual report was not concluded.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 12.35 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 28th January, 1994.
XXIX
Twenty-Ninth Meeting
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests met
 at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 28th January, 1994 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi-Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
  Shri Ajit P.K . .Jogi
  Prof.M. G.K. Menon
  Dr.Suresh Pachollri
  Shri Vithalbhai M. Patel
  Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
LOK SABHA
  Shri Oscar Fernandes
  Shri K. G. Shivappa
  Shri Sharad Dighe
Shri Ram Prasad Singh
Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
Shri Jitendra Nath Das
Shri E. Ahamed
Shri Harchand Singh
Shri P.C Chacko
Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
 Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia

7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
 Shri M. G. Reddy
SECRET ARIA T
Shri G.c. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary,
Shri J.V.R. Prasada Rao, Joint Secretary
Dr. S.A.H. Abidi, Director-
Shri Bhimsen Rao, Director
Shri H.P. Rajan, Director
Shri S.K. Das, Director
Shri B.N. Krishnamurthy, Director
Shri B.P. Gupta, Director (Engg.), DRDO, New Delhi;
Shri B.R. Subramanian, Principal Scientific Officer
Shri V.S. Rao Chintala, Principal Scientific Officer
Shri B.K. Mukhopadhyay, Under Secretary
Kumari Rakesh Sharma, Assistant Director (OL)
Dr. M.K. Kalil, Director, Antarctic Division, GSI, Faridabad
Prof. V.S. Raju, Dean (IC&R) DEC, IIT, Madras
Dr. S.T. Chari, Head, Water Resources Division, NRSA, Hyderabad
Dr. B.M. Reddy, Deputy Director, NPL, New Delhi.
Shri P.K. Sen, Assistant General Manager, ElL, New Delhi.
Dr. B.Y. Nayak, Deputy Director, NIO, Goa.
2. The Committee took up for further consideration the Annual Report (1992-93) of the Department of Ocean
 Development. The Secretary of the Department assisted by the respective Department Heads/officials further gave an
 overview of the activities of the department in the context of Annual Report and replied to the clarifications sought by
 the Members on certain points arising therefrom. The discussion on the Report was concludeQ.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Chairman then read out to the Committee the contents of a communication date December 28, 1993 received
 from the Department of Biotechnology informing about the action taken by the department on the recommendations
 contained in the Fifth Report of the Committee.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.45 P.M.
xxx
Thirtieth Meeting
The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests met
 at 9.30 A.M. on Tuesday, .the 15th March, 1994 in Room No. 63. First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi-Chairman
RAJYA SABRA
Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
Sbri Vithalbhai M. Patel
Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
LOK SABRA
Shri Oscar Fernandes
Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
Shri Harchand Singh
Kumari Frida Topno
Shri Ram Prasad Singh
Shri Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
Shri Jitendra Nath Das
Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
SECRET ARIA T
Shri G.C. Miglani. Under Secretary

7th Report Of Committee On Science And Technology, Environment And forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/7threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:52]
Shri N.K. Singh, Assistant Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered and adopted its draft Seventh Report on the subjects dealt with   in the Annual Report of
 the Department of Ocean development for the year 1992-93.
3. The Committee decided to present the Report to both the Houses of Parliament on the 17th March, 1994. The
 Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh to present the Report to the Rajya
 S~lbha and Shri Radhika Ranjan Pramanik and in his absence, Shri Jitendra Nath Das to lay the Report on the Table of
 the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee, thereafter, finalised programme of its sittings for taking up consideration of the Detailed Demands
 for Grants (1994-95) of the related Ministries/Departments and decided accordingly to meet initially on the 21st, 22nd,
 23rd. 24th, 28th, 29th, 30th and 31st March, 1994 for the purpose.