PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/101streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:40]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED - FIRST REPORT
 
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2002-2003)OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT(DEMAND NO. 91)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 7TH MAY, 2002)
(LAID IN THE LOK SABHA ON THE 7TH MAY, 2002)
 RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2002/VAISAKHA, 1924  (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
 
                                     
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
      
2.           INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                     
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE   
4.       SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS           
5.         ANNEXURES 
6.     MINUTES  OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE       
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2002)
 
1.Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
           
RAJYA SABHA
 
#
2. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Smt. S. Gokula Indira
Shri C. Apok Jamir
Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
Smt. Savita Sharda
Shri B.P. Singhal
&
10.Shri M. V. Rajashekaran
J11.Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
*12Vacant
  f13. Vacant
b14. Vacant
  ¥15. Vacant
        
LOK  SABHA
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/101streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:40]
Smt. Margaret Alva
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                   
Smt. Bhavna Devrajbhai Chikhalia                   
Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
Adv. Suresh Ramrao Jadhav                            
Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
Shri Babubhai K. Katara
%
23. Kunwar Akhilesh Singh            
Dr. Charan Das Mahant
Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
Shri Kailash Meghwal
Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
Shri Rupchand Murmu
Shri S. Murugesan                               
Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                            
Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                       
Shri B.K. Parthasarathi
Shri Ajit Kumar Panja  
Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
Shri Prahlad Patel        
Prof. R.R. Pramanik                            
Shri Naresh Puglia                               
Shri Ganta Srinivasa Rao         
Prof. I.G. Sanadi
Shri Ram Prasad Singh
Shri Vishvendra Singh  
Shri V. Vetriselvan
Shri Balram Singh Yadav
Shri Akhilesh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary   
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
 Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred-First Report of the
 Committee.  This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the Department of Ocean Development
 (Demand No.91).
 
2.         In the meeting of the Committee held on the 9
th April, 2002 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of Ocean
 Development gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects
 of the performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
 
3.         The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the Members
 and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean
 Development.
 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on  2
nd May, 2002.
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                   C.RAMACHANDRAIAH,
May 2, 2002                                                                                                                               Chairman,
                                                                            CommitteeonScience&Technology,Environment & Forests.
       
R E P O R T
           
            India has a long maritime history.  The peninsula is surrounded by the Arabian Sea, Bay of Bengal and Indian Ocean.  The

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/101streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:40]
 vast coastline of the mainland and islands is about 7,500 kms.  It’s territory includes, 1,256 islands.  The area of Exclusive Economic
 Zone (EEZ) of the country is 2.02 million sq. km. the vast coastal and offshore environment support a wide variety of marine
 ecosystem rich in species diversity and multifarious economic development activities.  The sea has tremendous influence on the
 physical and meteorological conditions of the country.  Appreciating the importance of the subject, Government of India established
 Department of Ocean Development in 1981 with an aim to create a deeper understanding of the oceanic regime of the northern and
 central Indian Ocean and also to develop technology and technological aids for harnessing of resources and understanding of various
 physical, chemical and biological processes.  The Ocean policy statement was also enunciated in 1982.
2.The Department of Ocean Development is the nodal Department for organising, coordinating and promoting development activities
 relating to ocean development in the country.  The national level R&D laboratories, educational institutions and industries assist the
 Department in carrying out its multi-disciplinary plans and programmes of national importance.  Further, marine research and
 capacity building is one of the key areas of the Department to promote basic research in marine science for self-reliance. Hence, the
 activities of the Department are targeted towards scientific research and technology development with orientation towards its
 applications and harnessing ocean resources. The Department has also mandate towards international programmes arising out of
 international obligations and bilateral and multilateral cooperative ventures to create a technological capacity building and human
 resource development for self-reliance.
3.The programmes of the Department are directed towards:
Technology Development for future applications with strategic, industrial and economic significance.
Society with direct/indirect benefit for the community by technology applications and pilot project demonstration with the
 participation of the community for their socio-economic prosperity, and for coastal area development.
Marine Resource for exploration of marine living and non-living resources, techno-economic studies to evolve strategies for
 sustainable exploration and utilization, and resource enhancement.
Multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary Polar Science Programmes and Antarctic Expeditions with scientific and geo-political
 significance.
Capacity Building towards self-reliance through basic scientific research in ocean sector, human resource development and
 establishing Centres of Excellence in academic institutions.
Creation of pubic awareness of ocean development, its immense potential and diverse uses.
 
 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
4.         A sum of Rs.142 crores was allocated as B.E. to the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2001-02.  This was
 reduced to Rs.120 crores at RE stage which forced the Department to scale down most of its activities last year except in the case of
 National Institute of
Ocean Technology (NIOT) where more funds were required to carry out the task of operationalising 1 MW Ocean Thermal Energy
 Conversion (OTEC) plant. However, for the year 2002-03, total budget allocation for the programmes and activities of the
 Department has been placed at Rs.199.28 crores which includes Rs.175.00 crores (Plan) and Rs.24.28 crores (Non-plan). The plan
 outlay is Rs.33 crores more than the plan outlay of the last year. The following areas have been identified to be focussed in the year
 2002-03:-
The approved outlay for the Antarctic Research is placed at Rs.26.50 crores, which  would be given as Grants-in-aid to National
 Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research (NCAOR) for launching the 22
nd Scientific Expedition to Antarctica, carrying out scientific
 experiments, maintenance of the permanent research station “Maitri” at Antarctica and operation and manning of the NCAOR, Goa.
In the case of Poly Metallic Nodules (PMN) programme, an outlay of Rs.20 crores has been provided.
For the mission mode programmes of National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) including Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion
 (OTEC), an outlay of Rs.7.80 crores has been provided. The Expenditure Finance Committee has approved an outlay of Rs.35.25
 crore for OTEC programmes which was revised to Rs.61.13 crores. The pilot plant which was scheduled for commissioning in
 March, 2001, could not be done due to an operational mishap in the sea and will now be implemented by December, 2002. The
 activities of OTEC and other programmes on Technology for sea bed mining, coastal engineering and marine instrumentation will be
 continued in this year.
An outlay of Rs.7.10 crores has proposed for Marine Living Resources Programme.  Besides, an amount of Rs.2 crores is proposed to
 be allocated for the ongoing Drugs from Sea programme. During the year 2002-03, a provision of Rs.1.15 crore has been made for
 Marine Non-Living Resources. An outlay of Rs.25.00 crores has been provided for the Ocean Observation & Information Services.
 Out of this, the provision for the Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) at Hyderabad is Rs.11 crores and
 for the National Data Buoy programme and the other Ocean Observing System programmes, a sum of Rs.10 crores has been
 provided.
An outlay of Rs.2 crores and Rs.5 crores has been made for Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction Systems (COMAPS) and
 Coastal Research Vessel (CRV) respectively during the Annual Plan 2002-03. For the Integrated Coastal and Marine Area
 Management (ICMAM) Programme, an outlay of       Rs.5 crores has been provided for 2002-2003. 
In line with the guidelines provided by the Island Development Authority the Department has made a provision of Rs.0.75 crores for
 Island Development.  This is a coastal community programme implemented through National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT)
 by which viable technologies for enhancement of marine living resources would be developed and disseminated to the island
 community for their benefit.
An allocation of Rs.8.5 crores has been made during 2002-03 for identification of Gas  Hydrates  areas  in  the seas around India.  A
 programme of ComprehensiveSwath Bathymetric Survey with an allocation of Rs.14 crores would be initiated for conducting survey
 in the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) for supporting the activities relating to exploration of non-living resources in this area.
 The          geo-physical study of Laxmi Basin would also be initiated with an allocation of Rs.7 crores in order to understand the
 geology specially the crystal characteristics of the Laxmi Basin in the Arabian Sea. In order to replace the age-old existing ocean
 going research vessels of the Department, an activity for designing a new research vessel would be initiated with an allocation of

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/101streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:40]
 Rs.2 crores.
During his presentation on Demands for Grants, Secretary, Department of Ocean Development informed the Committee that an outlay
 of Rs.18.00 crores has been provided for the Delineation of Continental Shelf in 2002-03. Since India ratified the UN convention on
 the Law of the Sea in 1995, the claim for extending the outer limits of our continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles Exclusive
 Economic Zone (EEZ) has to be made before 2005. The time frame for carrying out the bathymetric and seismic surveys and
 preparing necessary documents to submit to the Commission on the Limits of Continental Shelf is 5 years. This activity will have to
 be extended to the 10
th plan period (2002-07). 
5.         The Secretary, Department of Ocean Development, informed the Committee about the details of major disproportionate
 variations during the year 1999-2000 and 2000-2001 as follows:
i)          Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM)
            2000-2001:      B.E. – Rs. 6.7 crores               Actual – Rs. 3.59 crores
            ICMAM programme envisages development of integrated management solutions to solve a variety of coastal problems. 
 ICMAM reflects a new approach and in order to provide training on the subject, institutes abroad were contacted.  It was found that
 the foreign institutes provided only basic training and they were not meeting our specialised requirements.  Therefore, no foreign
 training was undertaken.  This led to non-utilisation of funds.
            Regarding the time taken to finalise the contract to engage the consultants, the World Bank that funded the consultancy had
 made recommendations regarding the award of the contract which was not acceptable to Government of India as these were against
 GOI rules.  It was therefore decided not to avail the loan for this work and instead fund the programme from internal resources.  This
 took considerable time to finalise and the amount earmarked could not be utilised during the year.
            2001-2002:      B.E. – Rs. 6.5crores                Actual – Rs. 5 crores
            As the task relating to collection of data for ICMAM plan in respect of Goa and Gulf of Kuchch could be initiated only at the
 end of the financial year, the entire funds earmarked could not be utilised in the  year. Further, the savings were also on account of
 reduction in the scope of work in the foreign consultancies.
ii)         Polymetallic Nodules Programme
            The variation in the BE & actual expenditure in respect of PMN Programme was mainly on account of inability to initiate the
 project on ‘Unmanned Submersibles’.  The provisions made for the years for 2000-01 (Rs.4.09 crore) and for 2001-02 (Rs.5.00
 crore) could not be utilised for want of necessary approvals from the competent authority.
 
iii)         Delineation of outer limits of Continental Shelf (CLCS)
            There have been variations between the Actuals and the budgetary provision in both 2000-01 and 2001-02.  The Continental
 Shelf Delineation programme was one of geo-political importance. The interpretations of UN Convention of Law of Sea (UNCLOS)
 for the delineation have implications for the claims of other countries in the region.  Due to certain special provisions only for India
 and Sri Lanka with major implications in the quantum of claim, various legal issues came up which involved extensive inter-
ministerial consultations including with the Solicitor General of India.  Further, baselines were to be promulgated by Ministry of
 External Affairs which was also delayed.  It was therefore decided to reduce the allocations at the RE stage itself by Rs.43.00 crores
 in 2000-2001 and hence the reduction.
            Once the legal issues were resolved, the action would be taken to finalize the contract for the marine geo-physical surveys. 
 Before the award of the contract the required security clearances were also to be taken.  These have taken some time.  Further, due to
 budgetary constrains it was decided to restrict expenditure to Rs.25.00 crores as against Rs.43.00 crores in 2001-02.
iv)        National Institute of Oceanography (NIO)
            There was substantial additional requirement of funds for the successful implementation of the OTEC project by NIOT. The
 original estimates of Rs.35.25 crores for the OTEC project were revised to Rs.61.13 crores.  Accordingly, there was an increase of
 Rs.17.00 crores in the allocation to NIOT at the RE stage during 2001-02 and this expenditure has been actually incurred by the
 Department.
6.         The Details of budgetary projections for the programmes of the Department of Ocean Development during the year 2002-03
 are given at Annexure-I and comparative figures in terms of provision actually made/ approved and actually utilised during 1999-
2000, 2000-2001 and 2001-2002 are also set out in the     Annexure-II.
7.         The Committee observes that there were major variations in the budgetary allocations and their utilization.  The non-utilisation
 of the allocation meant less or reduced activities of the Department.  The Committee is not happy with the reasons advanced by the
 Department for the non- utilisation of funds which includes delay in transfer of foreign consultation, change of priorities, delay in
 initiating discussion with the neighbouring countries, non approval and uncertainty of elements.  The Committee feels that the
 Department should have foreseen these difficulties before asking for budgetary allocation and should have evolved suitable
 mechanism to monitor the budgetary proposal and its allocations.
COASTAL RESEARCH VESSELS
8.         Two research ships ORV Sagar Kanya and FORV Sagar Sampada have been carrying out oceanographic surveys and surveys
 for the exploration of non-living and living resources in the Exclusive Economic zone (EEZ) and beyond that around Indian Ocean
 region since 1984.  These vessels were being utilised for multi-disciplinary research on the physical, chemical, geological and
 biological aspects of the Indian Ocean.  The vessels were also engaged in campaigns for validating satellite oceanographic data,
 assessment of marine living resources and for various technology demonstration activities. The vessels facilitate systematic collection
 of samples and immediate analysis of the mandatory parameters like nitrate, phosphate etc. for the Coastal Ocean Monitoring & 
 Prediction  System  (COMAPS)  programme.  Both the vessels are  equipped  with sophisticated scientific facilities for onboard
 analysis and navigational equipments alongwith communication facilities. In order to strengthen the programme on monitoring of
 marine pollution along the coastal waters of the country and to promote research on near shore phenomena, the two vessels are being
 used for sampling at desired locations of the transects identified for potential hot spots. These vessels are being maintained by the
 National Institute of Ocean Technology through its Vessel Management Cell.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/101streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:40]
9.         The amount of Rs.28.76 crores allocated towards the two vessels ORV Sagar Kanya & FORV Sagar Sampada and the Marine
 Living Resources (MLR) programme for 2002-03 includes both Plan & Non-Plan allocations. Due to increased requirement for
 operation and maintenance of the two vessels, which were being managed by Shipping Corporation of India, the department had
 requested for more non-plan allocation in 2001-02 and part of this was approved as supplementary grants.       In view  of its vast
 network of vessels, infrastructure facilities, repair and maintenance facilities, fuelling arrangements etc.  Shipping Corporation of
 India was able to by and large manage the vessels in a satisfactory manner.  As a result even after  nearing 20 years of operation the
 ships were in reasonably good shape.
10.       The Committee commends the efforts being made by the Department in utilising the services of two vessels. However, in view
 of decommissioning of existing vessels after another 10 years, it is time to plan for acquiring new vessels  which can cater to shallow
 water survey, data buoy maintenance and provide a platform for various coastal and deep ocean activities and other requirements
 which could reasonably be foreseen in the years ahead . The new vessels would not only serve as a platform for the programmes
 envisaged in the Tenth plan but also serve as a utility vessel which might augment the capacity requirements for programmes on the
 marine living and non-living resources.
POLAR SCIENCE (ANTARCTIC RESEARCH) PROGRAMME
11.       The objectives of Antarctic research programme is to identify and initiate programmes of scientific and economic significance
 besides establishing infrastructure. The Programme, which was initiated in 1981, has culminated into a major national programme
 that has a distinct multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary approach.  The objective of the Antarctic mission is to plan, promote, co-
ordinate and execute the entire gamut of polar science and logistic activities of the country, in order to ensure a perceptible and
 influential presence of India in Antarctica. So far 22 scientific expeditions have been launched on a regular basis including two
 expeditions to the Southern Ocean one to Weddel Sea and another one for assessment of Antarctic Krill, which have carried out
 research work in the thrust areas of polar science.  Till date, more than 55 national institutions have participated in the scientific and
 logistic components of the expedition thereby putting about 1425 Indians to the icy continent. With this year’s allocation of Rs.26.50
 crores, the Department proposes to augment the research facilities at Indian Antarctic Station and also to actively undertake research
 in the Southern Ocean Oceanography area.
12.The Committee was informed that a modern and indigenously build station ‘Maitri’ established in Schirmacher Oasis in 1988 has
 replaced the first Indian station, Dakshin Gangotri that was established on the ice-shelf in 1984.  Maitri is equipped to provide
 comfortable living facilites for 25 persons on a year round basis and has eight permanent observations and several laboratories to
 carry out research in the frontier areas of Antarctic Science.  Since ‘Maitri’ has already withstood 12 years of Antarctic weather and
 gradually a number of shortcomings were being noticed with the station, the Department was planning to establish a new station
 during the Tenth plan, replacing the ‘Maitri’,  with an estimated cost of  Rs.75 crores. 
13.The success of the Antarctic Programme and sustained capabilities in Antarctic science and logistics promoted the Department to
 establish the first polar research lab of the country at Goa namely the National Centre for Antarctic Ocean Research (NCAOR) since
 1998 which is responsible for carrying out all the activities relating to Antarctic expeditions. The research on polar science and
 expeditions to Antarctica was being planned, executed and launched annually on behalf of DOD by the Centre.  The Centre has a
 specific R&D mandate in the realms of polar science and to coordinate and launch Indian Antarctic expeditions.  The Centre has a
 unique laboratory for low-temperature research on ice cores retrieved from Antarctica and the Himalayas.  It would also have the
 facility for the application of remote sensing techniques aimed to understand the sea-ice-atmosphere interaction in the Polar Regions. 
 It would also have an Antarctic museum and a database repository on polar sciences. During 2002-03, the Centre would co-ordinate
 all the activities related to launching of the XXII Indian Antarctic Expedition.
14.During the year 2002-03, NCAOR plans to coordinate and launch the XXII Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica through a
 multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary approach. Moreover, efforts would be made to induct state-of-the-art experiments in
 accordance with the long-term science strategy for the Antarctic expeditions.
15.The Secretary, DOD informed the Committee that Scientific research in Antarctica was of  National and global importance. 
 Besides, important research work had been done in the areas of Earth Sciences, Atmospheric Sciences etc.  which were of
 significance to the country,  for example the research in meteorology and atmospheric sciences helped in understanding the
 relationship between Polar weather and the Indian monsoon.  Biotechnology research helped in identification of low temperature
 genes available in Antarctic microorganisms that would be coned to mesophilic bacteria.  The Antarctic programme had also helped
 the Indian Army in acquiring skills and knowledge relating to operations of vehicles and machineries under extreme cold conditions.
16.The Committee is of the view that in addition to on-going programmes in various domains of polar sciences, National Centre for
 Antarctic Ocean Research (NCAOR) should also initiate cutting-edge experiments in such frontier areas as assessment of
 biotechnological potential of Antarctic microbes, biodegradation of organic wastes using microbial consortium and productivity and
 ecosystem dynamics in the Antarctic lakes. It should also envisage initiating meaningful logistics operation with other countries
 which could lead to operational and financial cooperation.
17.The Committee is further of the view that the National Centre for Antarctic Ocean Research (NCAOR), being the nodal
 Department to execute the Antarctic Programmes should strive to further expand its infrastructure facilities for carrying out research
 in the realms of Polar Sciences and Southern Ocean Oceanography. Besides, the Centre should also initiate its activities related to
 establishing the  Country’s first ice-core repository and analytical facilities with focus on high-resolution histories of fact changes in
 climate, atmospheric composition and ice-cover in Antarctica.
18.The Department should pass on the data collected about the impact of cold climate on human body to defence establishments to
 facilitate treatment of soldiers stationed in cold regions or for such other uses as might be required in the national interest.
 
POLYMETALLIC NODULES PROGRAMME
19.The Polymetallic Nodules Programme (PMN Programme) is a national programme with international commitments which
 envisages eventual exploitation of the nodules from the allotted 1,50,000 sq. km. mine site in the Central Indian Ocean Basin. The
 programme consists of four components-Survey & Exploration of Polymetallic Nodules in the Central Indian Ocean Basin (CIOB);
 Environmental Impact Assessment studies at CIOB; Technology Development for mining of nodules; and Technology Development

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/101streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:40]
 for extraction of metals from nodules. The work related to Survey and Exploration was mainly directed towards assessing relative
 concentration and quality characteristics of nodules as well as seabed topography.  Demarcating of grade of nodules deposits in the
 Central India Ocean Basin was one of the main objectives.  Design and development of mining system has been re-oriented so that
 the intermediate applications of the technology could be achieved before developing the ultimate system for a depth of 6,000 m. 
 Towards this design, development and testing of mining module complex has been undertaken.  A shallow bed mining system
 developed was tested at a depth of 420 m off Tuticorin in March, 2000.  The system successfully pumped slurry from the depth of
 420 m.  The system was subsequently tested at about 32 m. for maneuverability.  This was done under a joint collaborative
 programme between NIO, Goa and University of Seigen, Germany.  An upgraded version of Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV),
 capable of operating up to 250 m water depth has been developed at Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute (CMERI),
 Durgapur.  The system earlier has been tested off Chennai coast at 40 meters depth successfully.  The system would soon be tested at
 250 m depth.
20.A joint collaborative programme between NIOT and EDBOE, Russia for design and development of unmanned submersibles
 capable of operation up to 6,000 m was likely to be taken up soon in pursuance of a MoU between DOD and Russian Academy of
 Sciences. Besides, a continuous demonstration pilot plant of 500 kg/day capacity for extraction of Copper, Nickel and Cobalt from
 nodules was being set up at Hindustan Zinc Limited (HZL), Udaipur. 
21.As regards the potential of the PMN  the Department informed the Committee that the resource potential is now known to be of
 quite a high degree of confidence and the percentage of marine deposits of important metals in the global resources are Copper –
 31%, Nickel – 84%, Cobalt – 95% and Manganese – 56%.   The PMN programme thus has to an asset value of Rs.29.12 billion for
 the Copper, Nickel and Cobalt metals in the nodules in the retained area.  The work relating to development of technology
 particularly the mining of nodules from the deep seabed was progressing in phases and was an important component of the cost to
 arrive at the estimate for mining these resources.  More developments were to take place in that area.  The technology development
 for the extraction of metals from nodules has also to be refined to achieve optimum recovery efficiencies and optimization of
 operation cost.  It was thus considered premature to make cost benefit analysis at this stage.  The focus of investigations was towards
 establishing technical capability. At this stage the mining of nodules from the sea bed was not considered commercially viable
 anywhere in the world.
22.In pursuance of the earlier recommendations of the Committee for review of the programme, the Department constituted a Group
 of Experts to critically review and analyse the achievements so far made under various components of the Polymetallic Nodules
 Programme and to access, whether in view of fast changing technology, the Polymetallic Nodules Programme would really be viable
 in view of long gestation period, cost of production and economics of production etc. besides recommending future course of action
 in respect of all the components of PMN programme.  The Committee submitted its report on 31
st March, 2002 to the Department. In
 the course of critical review of the work so far carried out, the Group identified gaps in technological and scientific knowledge in the
 different components of the PMN Programme.  The Group took special note of the fact that unless additional information was
 generated by way of implementation of its recommendations in respect of all components of PMN Programme, the overall picture
 would remain incomplete and inconclusive.  In this background, it has been recommended that the department would upgrade its
 knowledge base to such a threshold level as would enable the launching of the chain of activities from mining to recovery of metals,
 as and when decisions were taken to implement such a programme. The Committee is of the view that activities recommended by it
 are expected to be completed in about three years and a further review could then be taken for future PMN programme.
23.The Committee observes that a group of expert Committee on Polymetalic Modules Programme have identified gaps in
 technologic and scientific knowledge in the different components of the programme.  The expert Committee has taken a special note
 of the fact that unless additional information is generated by way of implementation of its recommendation in respect of survey,
 mining, extraction of metals and environmental impact assessment, the over all picture would remain incomplete and inconclusive. 
 Thus a knowledge based upgradation would be necessary with the launching of chain of activities from mining to recovery of metals,
 as and when, decisions are taken to implement such an integrated programme.  The Committee is of the view, that activities
 recommended by the expert Committee are expected to be completed in  about next three years and further review would take place
 thereafter.
24.The Committee however, notes the potential benefit from the programme spelt out by the Secretary in his presentation on the
 Demands for Grants before the Committee. Accordingly it recommends the Department to go ahead with the programme.     
COASTAL OCEAN MONITORING AND PREDICTION SYSTEM(COMAPS)
25.       Under the Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS) Programme, the Department of Ocean Development
 had taken up scientific monitoring of pollution at different locations. The programme aimed to assess the status and likely trends in
 coastal marine environment quality and contribute directly to the development of strategies for maximising the economic benefits
 derived from the intelligent and sustainable use of marine environment and resources. The programme had been continuing since
 1991 for monitoring the level of various marine pollutants and its impacts on marine fauna and flora of the country. The data
 collected under the programme was made available to the Pollution Control Boards and periodically discussed with them. Any
 significant increase in pollutants at a particular location was brought to the notice of the Central Pollution Control Board for control
 as well as remedial actions.  The main objective of the Programme was to constantly assess the health of India’s  marine environment
 and indicate areas that needed immediate and long term remedial action.  Data on 25 environmental parameters were being collected
 at 82 locations last year with the help of nine R&D institutions.  The Programme along with the modeling component would be
 continued during 2002-03.
26.The data collected under the COMPAS programme undergo quality check through an inter calibration exercise.  The data indicates
 the levels of pollutants in our coastal waters. The data is used by the State Pollution Boards for taking steps to minimize pollution.  It
 has been stated that the recent data has indicated that there was marginal improvement in water quality in Versova and  other Creeks
 of  Mumbai which was due to  treatment of sewage as well as disposal of sewage in the deep sea through out falls.  Similarly, in Puri,
 due to treatment of sewage the bacterial contamination of coastal water has decreased. 
27.Asked about the reduction in the budgetary allocation for the year 2002-03 to the tune of Rs.2 crores, the Committee was informed

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/101streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:40]
 that under the programme, number of stations has been reduced omitting those stations at which pollution levels have been found low
 and have not shown variations over the past few years.  This led to the need for less amount at the RE stage.  The activities to be
 undertaken under the programme during the first year of the 10th Plan would have to be accordingly maintained at the level of the
 previous year and were not expected to hamper the progress of pollution monitoring work under the programme.
28.The Committee observes that the efforts of the Department to monitor pollution in the coastal areas need to be continued
 vigorously. The Department should identify locations for periodical monitoring alongwith stipulated parameters for diffusion and
 dispersion characteristics. Besides, the stations for collection of near-shore samples must be planned with a view to reflect the
 pollution load that was occurring there and the data collected should be processed and forwarded to State Pollution Control Boards
 for taking remedial measures.
DRUG FROM SEA
29.The major objectives of the programme include:–
Systematic exploration of the entire coastline and collections made from deep sea as well for identification of more flora and fauna
 having potential for extraction of drugs and chemicals.
Collection, extraction and biological evaluation of 150 species, and evaluation of biologically potential organisms, leading to possible
 development of new drug(s).
Isolation of bioactive constituents and development as possible drugs.
Development of suitable models for biological activity in certain priority areas.
Undertaking regulatory pharmacology and toxicology of 2-3 extracts.
Initiation and completion of clinical trials for at least two drugs.
Development of at least 2 herbal drugs from the samples and marketing.
Industrial participation in drug development and marketing.
30.The Committee was informed that drug development takes nearly 8-10 years as there were several phases in drug discovery and
 development that costs about 600 million USD for each drug developed.  The ‘Drugs from Sea’ programme was initiated in 1990,
 while the  developed countries initiated this programme in the early ‘60s.  Even then, so far not even a single drug has been put in the
 market by any country.  6 to 7 products were currently in Phase II clinical trials of drug development but none of these have yet
 entered the Phase III clinical trials i.e., the final development stage. 
31.  Under the programme one lead was taken up for product development in 1996-97, but after two years of intensive research
 activities; it was found that the preparation had an unanticipated toxic effect leading to faecolith formation in the monkeys during
 chronic toxicity studies.  Therefore, efforts were made to detoxify the preparation, which took considerable time.  Finally a
 preparation  was  isolated  which  demonstrated  antidiabetic  activity  and  was  also  found  to be largely safe.  This new preparation
 is free from any side effect and has wide margin of safety.  This antidiabetic preparation was now entering clinical safety-cum-
efficacy in humans.  If found safe and effective in humans, we should be ready with this drug for marketing in next 2-3 years.   CDRI
 might also succeed in coming out with one more drug with cholesterol-lowering properties. Under the programme, so far no antiviral
 preparations have been developed.  Instead, it was only antifungal lead that has been taken up.
32.       The Committee feels there is need to concentrate efforts on the project with a view to develop the drugs as expeditiously as
 possible.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OCEAN TECHNOLOGY (NIOT)
33.       The National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) was established in November, 1993 as a registered society under the
 administrative control of the Department of Ocean Development with a view to developing technology in ocean sector. The main aim
 of NIOT is to develop and promote technology in mission mode for specific purposes in ocean related areas. In addition to the four
 core mission activities of Ocean Energy, Deep Sea Mining, Coastal and Environmental engineering and Marine Instrumentation,
 NIOT is also entrusted to undertake Hi-tech consultancy service in ocean related activities.  The major activities, ongoing as well as
 new, include testing of 1MW Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) Plant, design of mining system for depth upto 6000 m,
 preparation of Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) guidelines for Coastal Ocean management, development of Under Water
 Marine Instruments and calibration of the same and continuing the project on enhancement of Marine Living Resources.
34.       The increase in budgetary allocation from Rs.13.30 crores at BE stage in the year 2001-02 to Rs.30.30 crores at the RE stage
 for the year 2002-03 was only on account of the requirement for additional funds for 1 MW floating Ocean Thermal Energy
 Conversion (OTEC) plant project which was under implementation by NIOT.  The OTEC project was originally approved at a cost
 of Rs.35.25 crores.  Subsequently, the proposals had to be revised due to a mishap during deployment at sea and other reasons and
 now the Revised Cost Estimates of Rs.61.13 crores have been approved and the project was to be completed by 31
st December,
 2002.  Accordingly, the additional amount of Rs.17.00 crores was allocated at the RE stage for NIOT.  The project was in an
 advanced stage of implementation and the final deployment at sea was slated in the month of May, 2002.
35.       The National Institute of Ocean Technology which was involved in various technology development activities in the ocean
 sector, have been getting consultancy projects related to surveys, coastal and offshore structures etc.  The details of its earnings
 during the last five years are as under–
 
Year Consultancy charges (Rs. in Lakhs)
1997-98 9.85
1998-99 98.02
1999-00 330.72
2000-01 374.14
2001-02 302.41
TOTAL 1115.14
 
36.       The Committee observes that Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) has a rich potential to provide pollution free

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/101streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:40]
 renewable energy to meet the power needs of coastal region as well as island groups. Therefore, it recommends the Department to
 build energy plants of higher capacity as this might lessen the demand on fossil fuel for power generation.  Besides, the higher
 capacity plants may cost comparatively cheaper in view of the economies of scale.
37.       The Committee would like the National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) to ensure that its activities especially in the
 area of Deep Sea Mining did not pollute the ocean floor and depletion of fish stocks from their habitats which could affect the fishing
 communities.
ISLAND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
38.       This programme had been merged with the activities of NIOT from 1998 onwards with the main objective of development and
 dissemination of viable technologies for enhancement of marine living resources, ocean energy and coastal processes for pollution
 monitoring in the Andaman & Nicobar Islands and other island groups for the benefit of the island community. The programme had
 been renamed as Ocean Science & Technology for Islands.  NIOT, which had been identified as the nodal institute for
 implementation of this multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary programme, has already made a headway in enhancement of marine
 living resources in the island groups by taking up technology for fattening of lobsters, biochemical analysis of lobsters and live feeds,
 breeding larval rearing and sea ranching of lobsters. The facilities both at the island groups and at the mainland have been augmented
 for this purpose.  It was proposed to expand the activities under the programme to other marine organisms on selective basis and also
 to coordinate the implementation of all the programmes of the Department in the island groups for the benefits of the island
 community.
39.       During its deliberations on Demands for Grants (2002-03) the Committee was informed by the Secretary, Department of
 Ocean Development that NIOT had taken up new initiatives in helping island communities in their needs relating to Ocean Science
 and Technology as well as marine resource enhancement. The first activity taken up by NIOT was a programme on lobster resource
 enhancement for islands under the DOD project on Living Marine Resources Enhancement (LMRE). This project was expected to
 benefit about 500 island families and produce about 100 tonnes of live lobsters for export. The programme on lobster resource
 enhancement was already underway by utilising the hatchery facility of Tamil Nadu Fisheries Development Corporation (TNFDC)
 available at Neelankarai, Chennai.
40.       As regards the mechanism for transfer of technology for fattening of lobsters and mud crab at grass root level, the Secretary,
 DOD informed the Committee that in order to   transfer of lobster/mud crab fattening technology developed by NIOT to the coastal
 community at the grass root level, the Department NIOT proposed to conduct a training programme for a minimum of 20 potential
 beneficiaries in the first phase, selected from the coastal states. As regards technology development for mud crab in A&N islands, the
 confirmatory field level experiments were under way for understanding the optimal water quality, feed and other culture management
 practices required for disseminating the technology to the coastal community at the grass root level.At the conclusion of these
 experiments, the technology would be disseminated to the coastal community in these states through the concerned State/Union
 Territory Administratioin.
41.       Under the Island Development Programme for Islands, under implementation from 1998-99 onwards, following
 research/experiments have been carried out:
(i)         Fattening of spiny lobster Panulirus homarus, P. versicolor and mudcrab (Scylla serriata using different pelletised and live
 feeds (mussels, calms, squids, trash fish and chicken waste) both in the main land and A&N islands.
(ii)        Spawning and larval rearing of lobsters.
Water quality, disease diagnostics and preventive measures.     
Biochemical analysis of lobsters and live feeds.
            (v)        Survey of lobster resources in Gulf of Manner and Andaman & Nicobar Islands.
42.       The Committee is of the view that the Department should undertake research on formulation of appropriate feeds for
 maximum growth of lobsters and also develop the larval rearing technology in Indian spiny lobster. Efforts should also be made to
 implement projects on development of technology for sustainable shrimp farming, lobster and seaweed culture and polyculture of
 marine organisms.
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
43.       The objectives of the Department through this programme is:
to contribute and participate effectively in all the international/bilateral organizations, meetings, conferences, committees etc. with a
 view to projecting India’ role in ocean development activities
to have exchange of information and expertise in different aspects of ocean science & technology between Department and its
 organizations and other countries, for upgrading knowledge and for fostering technical cooperation.
44.       The Secretary informed the Committee that the Department would continue to represent India in various International &
 intergovernmental organizations/bodies such as Antarctic Treaty System, Scientific committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR),
 Council of Mangers of National Antarctic Programme (COMNP), Standing Committee on Antarctic Logistic Operation(SCALOP),
 Commission for Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR), Intergovernmental Oceanography Commission
 (IOC), Regional Seas Programme, International Sea Bed Authority and International Tribunal on Law of the Sea.  The programme
 has been shifted to Non-Plan in accordance with the Zero based budgeting carried out by the Planning Commission. India was co-
operating with a number of foreign institutions and countries in this regard.  Many of our facilities were open to scientists of other
 countries.  There were requests for co-operation from countries like Myanmar, Vietnam, Mauritius, Seychelles etc.
INTEGRATED COASTAL AND MARINE AREA MANAGEMENT (ICMAM)
45.       The Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM) programme focuses on development of expertise in ICMAM
 oriented activities and dissemination of knowledge gained by the users like coastal states through organized training programmes;
 developing capabilities in the coastal states and UTs for adoption of ICMAM through training; creating a base for human resource
 development in the fields of ICMAM and ensuring sustainable development and management of the ocean resources and
 enforcement of rules and regulations for regulation of ocean related activities in the ocean zone and make Indian oceans clean and
 productive.
46.       The programme has two components, namely (i) Capacity building and (ii) Development of Infrastructure for R&D, Survey

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/101streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:40]
 and Training for ICMAM.  The capacity building component is being funded by the International Development Association
 containing the activities, namely (i) Development of Geographic Information System (GIS) based information system for 11 critical
 habitats in the coastal and marine Areas in India (II) Determination of Waste Assimilation Capacity at selected estuaries along
 coastal areas of India, (iii) Development of Guidelines for Environmental Impact Assessment (iv) Preparation of Model Integrated
 Coastal and Marine Area Management Plans.  The project activities would be completed in the year 2002-03.  Under the component
 on infrastructure, training, laboratories and other facilities have been established in the NIOT Campus, Chennai, Determination of
 Use Classification for Coastal/Waters and No Impact zone for selected habitats like coastal lakes and mangroves were in progress.
47.       During the year 2002-2003, more activities like shore line management and ecosystem modeling would be initiated apart from
 the continuation of the ongoing activities.  An allocation of Rs.5 crores has been made for this purpose.
48.       The Committee observes the need to focus on programmes aimed at imparting training to coastal states on use of geographic
 information system (GIS) for management of critical habitats.
GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM (GIS) FOR CRITICAL HABITATS
49.       The Department seeks to develop an information system using GIS for 11 critical habitats namely, Gulf of Kachchh, Gulf of
 Khambat, Malvan, Kadamat, Karwar Islands, Cochin Islands, Gulf of Mannar, Pitchavaram, Coringa, Gahirmatha and Sunderbans. 
 The tasks involved in the development of such an information system include, review of data on the habitats available; preparation of
 methodology manual; field data collection; creation of GIS database; and designing of a GIS module and integration of database.
50.       The Committee was informed that after collection of field data and development of database, a GIS based information system
 for Pitchavaram mangrove, namely Critical Habitat Information System (CHIS) has been completed and a compact disc has been
 produced and released. Use of GIS in the CHIS helped detection of the areas of degradation of mangrove and areas of recovery. The
 CHIS for Kadmat Island of Lakshadweep, 7 islands off Karwar and 21 islands of Gulf of Mannar were nearing completion.
 Development of GIS for the other 7 habitats was in advanced stages and would be completed by the end of the year.
OCEAN OBSERVATIONS AND INFORMATION SERVICES (OOIS) 
51.       During the examination of Demands for Grants (2002-03) the Committee was informed that in order to generate user-oriented
 data products and provide services to cater the needs of the coastal and ocean sectors, an integrated programme called “Ocean
 Observations and Information Services (OOIS)” was being implemented by the Department. The OOIS envisages generation and
 dissemination of reliable coastal and ocean data products such as waves, winds, temperature, current, salinity, upwelling, potential
 fishing zone information, coastal maps, etc. to support coastal and off-shore development activities and for furthering quality
 oceanographic research. Besides, it seeks to provide ocean information services for various applications in the ocean section. 
52.       The programme consists of four major components viz. Ocean Observing Systems, Ocean Information Services, Satellite
 Coastal and Oceanographic Research (SATCORE) and Indian Ocean Dynamics & Modeling (INDOMOD).
53.       The Ocean Observing Systems envisage collection of sea truth data using moored data buoys, drifting buoys, expandable
 bathythermographs (XBT), current meter arrays and tide gauges, and designed particularly for acquisition of real-time sea surfaces,
 meteorological land upper oceanographic parameters from the coastal and deep waters.  Validation of the satellite sensors has also
 been undertaken using the sea truth data generated under this programme.  The Data Buoy Programme was initiated in 1996 with
 partial financial assistance from Norwegian Agency for Development (NORAD) and National Institute of Ocean Technology
 (NIOT).  It has been entrusted with the responsibilities for deployment, operation and maintenance of the data buoys.  A set of 12
 buoys were procured from M/s OCEANOR, Norway out of which, seven were moored in the coastal waters and five in the off-shore
 waters.  The buoys were equipped with state-of-the-art sensors for accurate measurement of winds, waves, currents, atmospheric
 pressure, atmospheric temperature, sea surface temperature, dissolved oxygen, chlorophyll, radioactivity, hydrocarbon and turbidity.
 The data Buoy will continue as Govt. of India (GOI) programme.
54.       The Ocean Information Service envisages generation and dissemination of ocean data/data products on an operational basis. 
 Data products in the form of Sea Surface Temperature maps, Potential Fishing Zone maps, wind vector maps, mixed layer depth-
maps, at least on heat-budget are proposed to be made available.  It is also planned to develop ocean state forecasting system; initially
 on an experimental basis.  Services will be offered in the form of coastal wetland maps, shoreline change maps, and close contour
 coastal area maps etc.  which were needed for coastal zone management activities.  The Indian National Centre for Ocean
 Information and Services (INCOIS) at Hyderabad is working as an autonomous society for efficient development and dissemination
 of Data products.
The Satellite Coastal and Oceanographic Research (SATCORE) component envisages development of regional algorithms, data
 assimilation techniques and operational models which would be transferred to the Ocean Information and Service Centre for
 operational use.  The Ocean Modeling and Dynamics (INDMOD) project addresses basic issues on the ocean dynamic, climate
 variability, ocean state forecast, sea level variations, ocean flux studies etc.  These R&D projects are expected to provide basic
 models that could explain the dynamics of the Indian ocean and form an essential input in designing system for ocean state forecast.
56.       The budgetary allocation of Rs.25 for the year 2002-2003 crores would be utilized for procurement of new buoys,
 maintenance of existing buoys, modeling of oceanic phenomena and setting up of infrastructure at the Indian National Centre for
 Ocean Information Services, Hyderabad.
57.       The Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS), being the nodal agency for providing coastal and ocean
 data and value added products to the users, the Department should monitor the performance and work-mechanism of the INCOIS to
 process and disseminate ocean data and data products to user communities like fisheries, weather, climate, ports, shipping etc. on a
 regular basis so that ocean weather forecasting is precise.
MARINE RESEARCH AND CAPACITY BUILDING
58.       The objectives of the programme are to foster the concept of stewardship through education, training and human resource
 development and increasing awareness at all levels. The activities proposed in the programme include promotion of research under
 the basic categories of marine  ecology,  marine biology,  marine  microbiology,  marine benthos,  coastal marine culture systems,
 marine geology/geophysics and ocean engineering & underwater robotics. Besides the ongoing programme of award of fellowships
 to students for pursuing higher studies in academic/educational institutions in various disciplines of ocean science and technology,
 and organizing exhibitions and fairs to create awareness among the public on ocean would continue.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/101streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:40]
59.       The Committee feels that the Department should focus its efforts in assisting Universities to create infrastructure facilities and
 building up a skilled human resource base in Marine Sciences. Moreover, the Department should also participate and showcase its
 activities in national and international level exposition, exhibition, fairs etc. from time to time. Inter-active computer generated
 information on Ocean Science & Technology could perhaps help educate the public on the ocean and its resources.
ARRAY FOR REAL-TIME GEOTROPIC OCEANOGRAPHY (ARGO) PROGRAMME
60.       The array for Real-time Geotropic Oceanography (ARGO) is an internationally coordinated programme for deployment of an
 array  of 3000 profiling floats at a spatial resolution of 3” X 3” (300km X 300 km) to measure temperature and salinity profiles of the
 upper ocean (up to a depth of 2000 m), periodically.  These temperature and salinity profiles are expected to improve the
 understanding of the oceanic processes and contribute to improved prediction of climate variability.
61.       The ARGO floats, equipped with pressure, temperature and salinity sensors, would drift up to a depth of about 2000 m and
 popup to the surface every 10 days for a short period to transmit the data in near real-time via Satellite to ground stations.  The
 expected life of an ARGO float is four years.
62.       Data from the global array of profiling floats would be put on GTS immediately to enable it use in operational forecasting. 
 Delayed mode data, after detailed quality control checks by the ARGO Data Centres, would be available within a few months via
 internet.  The expected life of each float is about 4 years.
63.       India is participating in the ARGO Programme and plans to deploy 150 floats in the North Indian Ocean (north of 10 S). 
 INCOIS was assigned the overall responsibility for implementation of India ARGO Programme.  A Canadian ARGO float deployed
 successfully by INCOIS onboard FORV Sagar Sampada Vessel in December 2001 is providing good quality data.  Data from 20
 ARGO floats currently deployed in the Indian Ocean by different countries are being archived at INCOIS.  This data would be made
 available to the scientific community through INCOIS ocean portal.  INCOIS participated in the International ARGO Science Team
 meeting.  Study on “Analysis and Synthesis for Indian Ocean ARGO Programme” was initiated jointly by Indian Institute of Science
 and INCOIS.  A Project Report for the Indian ARGO Programme (150 Floats) by INCOIS.
64.       The International Argo programme, endorsed by World meteorological Organisation (WMO) and intergovernmental
 Oceanographic Commission (IOC) is directed by an International Argo Science Team.  The international ocean community plans to
 deploy 3000 ARGO Floats in a phased manner by the year 2002 to give a global coverage at a spacing of 300 km.
65.       The Indian Ocean would be covered by about 450 Argo floats.  Of this, India plans to contribute 150 Floats, Australia,
 Canada, China, France, Germany, Japan, UK and USA have committed to deploy Argo Floats in the Indian Ocean Region.
66.       The Implementation planning meeting for Argo in the Indian Ocean was held in Hyderabad, India in July, 2001 where
 representatives from 17 countries and 6 International Organisations participated.  India was identified as (i) the Regional Coordinator
 and (ii) the Regional Data Centre for the Indian Ocean.
67.       The Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS), an autonomous body under the Department of Ocean
 Development (DOD) is the implementing agency for the programme.
68.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development and assessing the progress of various
 important programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 199.28
 crores, as sought by the Department for the year 2002-2003, under Demand No. 91, may be approved.
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS AT GLANCE
 
1.         The Committee observes that there were major variations in the budgetary allocations and their utilization.  The non-utilisation
 of the allocation meant less or reduced activities of the Department.  The Committee is not happy with the reasons advanced by the
 Department for the non- utilization of funds which includes delay in transfer of foreign consultation, change of priorities, delay in
 initiating discussion with the neighbouring countries, non approval and uncertainty of elements.  The Committee feels that the
 Department should have foreseen these difficulties before asking for budgetary allocation and should have evolved suitable
 mechanism to monitor the budgetary proposal and its allocations.
(Para 7)
2.         The Committee commends the efforts being made by the Department in utilising the services of two vessels. However, in view
 of decommissioning of existing vessels after another 10 years, it is time to plan for acquiring new vessels  which can cater to shallow
 water survey, data buoy maintenance and provide a platform for various coastal and deep ocean activities and other requirements
 which could reasonably be foreseen in the years ahead . The new vessels would not only serve as a platform for the programmes
 envisaged in the Tenth plan but also serve as a utility vessel which might augment the capacity requirements for programmes on the
 marine living and non-living resources.
(Para 10)
3.         The Committee is further of the view that in addition to on-going programmes in various domains of polar sciences, National
 Centre for Antarctic Ocean Research (NCAOR) should also initiate cutting-edge experiments in such frontier areas as assessment of
 biotechnological potential of Antarctic microbes, biodegradation of organic wastes using microbial consortium and productivity and
 ecosystem dynamics in the Antarctic lakes. It should also envisage initiating meaningful logistics operation with other countries
 which could lead to operational and financial cooperation.
(Para 16)
4.         The Committee is of the view that the National Centre for Antarctic Ocean Research (NCAOR), being the nodal Department
 to execute the Antarctic Programmes should strive to further expand its infrastructure facilities for carrying out research in the realms
 of Polar Sciences and Southern Ocean Oceanography. Besides, the Centre should also initiate its activities related to establishing the 
 Country’s first ice-core repository and analytical facilities with focus on high-resolution histories of fact changes in climate,
 atmospheric composition and ice-cover in Antarctica.
(Para 17)
5.         The Department should pass on the data collected about the impact of cold climate on human body to defence establishments
 to facilitate treatment of soldiers stationed in cold regions or for such other uses as might be required in the national interest.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/101streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:40]
(Para 18)
6.         The Committee observes that a group of expert Committee on Polymetalic Modules Programme have identified gaps in
 technologically and scientific knowledge in the different components of the programme.  The expert Committee has taken a special
 note of the fact that   unless   additional   information   is    generated    by   way   of   implementation   of its recommendation in
 respect of survey, mining, extraction of metals and environmental impact assessment, the over all picture would remain incomplete
 and inconclusive.  Thus a knowledge based upgradation would be necessary with the launching of chain of activities from mining to
 recovery of metals, as and when, decisions are taken to implement such an integrated programme.  The Committee is of the view,
 that activities recommended by the expert Committee are expected to be completed in  about next three years and further review
 would take place thereafter.     
(Para 23)
7.         The Committee however, notes the potential benefit from the programme spelt out by the Secretary in his presentation on the
 Demands for Grants before the Committee. Accordingly it recommends the Department to go ahead with the programme.
(Para 24)
8.         The Committee observes that the efforts of the Department to monitor pollution in the coastal areas need to be continued
 vigorously. The Department should identify locations for periodical monitoring alongwith stipulated parameters for diffusion and
 dispersion characteristics. Besides, the stations for collection of near-shore samples must be planned with a view to reflect the
 pollution load that was occurring there and the data collected should be processed and forwarded to State Pollution Control Boards
 for taking remedial measures.
 (Para 28)
9.         The Committee feels there is need to concentrate efforts on the project with a view to develop the drugs as expeditiously as
 possible.
 (Para 32)
10.       The Committee observes that Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) has a rich potential to provide pollution free
 renewable energy to meet the power needs of coastal region as well as island groups. Therefore, it recommends the Department to
 build energy plants of higher capacity as this might lessen the demand on fossil fuel for power generation.  Besides, the higher
 capacity plants may cost comparatively cheaper in view of the economies of scale.
(Para 36)
11.       The Committee would like the National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) to ensure that its activities especially in the
 area of Deep Sea Mining did not pollute the ocean floor and depletion of fish stocks from their habitats which could affect the fishing
 communities.
(Para 37)
12.       The Committee is of the view that the Department should undertake research on formulation of appropriate feeds for
 maximum growth of lobsters and also develop the larval rearing technology in Indian spiny lobster.  Efforts should also be made to
 implement
projects on development of technology for sustainable shrimp farming, lobster and seaweed culture and polyculture of marine
 organisms.
(Para 42)
13.       The Committee observes the need to focus on programmes aimed at imparting training to coastal states on use of geographic
 information system (GIS) for management of critical habitats.
(Para 48)
14.       The Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS), being the nodal agency for providing coastal and ocean
 data and value added products to the users, the Department should monitor the performance and work-mechanism of the INCOIS to
 process and disseminate ocean data and data products to user communities like fisheries, weather, climate, ports, shipping etc. on a
 regular basis so that ocean weather forecasting is precise.
(Para 57)
15.       The Committee feels that the Department should focus its efforts in assisting Universities to create infrastructure facilities and
 building up a skilled human resource base in Marine Sciences. Moreover, the Department should also participate and showcase its
 activities in national and international level exposition, exhibition, fairs etc. from time to time. Inter-active computer generated
 information on Ocean Science & Technology could perhaps help educate the public on the ocean and its resources.
(Para 59)
ANNEXURES
Annexure I
 
Budgetary allocations for the year 2002-03
(Rs.in crores)
Sr. No.            Schemes/Programmes B.E.
(2002-03)
A. Plan   
1. Polar Science (Antarctic Research) 26.50
2. Marine Living Resources  
 Drugs from Sea 2.00
 Assessment of Marine Living Resources 7.10
3. Marine Non-living Resources  
 Polymetallic Nodules Programme 20.00
 BENFAN 3.00

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/101streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:40]
 Deep Sea Mineral Exploration 1.00
4. Ocean Observation & Information Services  
 Ocean Observing Systems 10.0
 Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) 11.50
 Satellite & Coastal Oceanographic Research (SATCORE) 1.50
 Ocean Dynamics & Modelling (INDOMOD) 2.00
5. Marine & Coastal Area Management  
 Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS) 2.00
 Coastal Research Vessels 5.00
 Integrated Coastal & Marine Area Management (ICMAM) 5.00
6. Marine Research & Capacity Building  
 Marine Research Programmes 3.50
 Fellowship/Training 0.30
7. Island Development 0.75
8. Ocean Awareness 0.95
9. National Institute of Ocean Technology 23.40
10. Delineation of Continental Shelf 18.00
11. Comprehensive Swath Bathymetric Survey 14.00
12. Gas Hydrates 8.50
13. Geophysical Study of Laxmi Basin 7.00
14. New Research Vessel 2.00
                                                                      TOTAL 175.00
B. Non-Plan   
1. ORV Sagar Kanya, FORV Sagar Sampada 18.91
2. Secretariat & Economic Services 1.89
3. Administrative Support & Infrastructure 2.68
4. International Cooperation 0.80
                                                                  SUB- TOTAL  (B) 24.28
                                                               TOTAL (A +B) 199.28
 
 
Annexure II
BUDGET DEMANDS MADE/APPROVED AND ACTUALLY UTILISED DURING
1999-2000 , 2000-01 and 2001-02
  1999-00 2000-01 2001-02
S.
No.
Schemes / Programmes B.E Actuals B.E Actuals B.E. RE
A. PLAN Schemes       
1. Polar Science/Antarctic Research 20.00 19.72 20.00 20.70 20.00 18.00
2. Marine Living Resources/Drugs from Sea-
MISSION MODE
1.60 1.64 2.00 2.00 2.20 1.70
3. Marine Living Resources / Assessment of
 Marine Living
2.00 1.94 2.96 2.59 2.96 1.55
4. Marine Living Resources / Ocean Science and
 Technology for Islands
1.25 1.20 1.00 0.76 0.75 0.53
5. Marine Non-Living Resources/Polymetallic
 Nodules Programmes
0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
     i  Survey and Exploration 0.30 0.19 1.00 1.81 0.05 0.05
 ii  EIA Study 0.25 0.00 0.31 0.15 0.25 0.25
 iii Mining R&D 8.35 5.13 5.91 4.73 6.00 6.00
 iv Technology Development (Metallurgy) 5.15 5.41 8.00 7.54 6.00 5.00
 vi. Unmanned Submersibles 0.00 0.00 4.09 0.00 5.00 0.00
6. Marine Non-Living Resources/BENFAN 0.50 0.00 0.00 0.05 1.15 1.04
7. Marine Environment and Coastal Zone
 /Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction
 System
1.50 1.62 2.05 2.25 4.05 2.05
8. /Coastal Research Vessels 2.50 2.17 2.50 2.75 3.94 3.0
9. Marine Environment and Coastal
 Zone/Integrated Coastal and Marine Area
 Management (ICMAM)
5.00 3.91 6.70 3.59 6.50 5.0
10. Ocean Observations, Science and Information
 Programme (OOSIP)
11.50 9.18 14.00 11.28 19.70 14.20
11. Marine Research and Capacity
 Building/Assistance for Research Projects
2.30 2.27 2.70 2.89 3.50 3.00

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/101streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:40]
12. Marine Research and Capacity
 Building/Manpower Training for Ocean
 Research Programme
0.20 0.19 0.30 0.30 0.60 0.21
13. Ocean Awareness 0.45 0.45 0.70 0.82 0.80 1.12
14. Ocean Engineering & Technology
 Development (OETD) National Institute of
 Ocean Technology (NIOT)
24.00 24.00 15.70 17.00 13.30 30.30
15. International Cooperation 0.75 0.69 0.60 0.46 0.70 0.50
16 Delineation of Outer Limits of Continental
 Shelf
0.50 3.98 43.00 0.00 43.00 25.00
17. Direction and Administration 1.75 1.42 1.46 1.46 1.50 1.50
18. Marine Instrumentation 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.05 0.00
 SUB - TOTAL (A) 89.85 85.11 135.00 83.13 142.00 120.00
B. NON-PLAN Schemes  
 ORV Sagar Kanya 10.15 10.15 10.30 9.98 13.77 17.17
 FORV Sagar Sampada 8.02 8.02 9.84 7.85 10.31 11.31
 Secretariat & Economic Services 1.61 1.53 1.83 1..31 1.74 1.66
 Administrative Support & Infrastructure 1.10 0.97 1.03 0.58 0.98 0.94
 SUB - TOTAL (B) 20.88 20.15 23.00 19.72 26.80 31.08
 TOTAL(A+B) 110.73 105.26 158.00 102.85 168.8 151.08
M I N U T E S
V
FIFTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 9th April, 2002 in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
 
Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Smt. S. Gokula Indira
Shri C. Apok Jamir
Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
Smt. Savita Sharda
Shri Lachhman Singh
Shri B.P. Singhal
 
LOK SABHA
 
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                   
Dr. Charan Das Mahant
Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
Shri Rupchand Murmu
Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                            
Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                       
Shri B.K. Parthasarathi
Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
Shri Prahlad Patel                    
Prof. R.R. Pramanik                            
Shri Naresh Puglia                               
Shri Ganta Srinivasa Rao         
Shri Ram Prasad Singh
Shri V. Vetriselvan       
Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/101streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:40]
Shri P.P.K.Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
Dr. Harsh K. Gupta, Secretary
Shri D.P. Singh, Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser
Dr. S.P. Seth, Joint Secretary
Shri S.K. Das, Scientist ‘G’
Smt. Krishna Tyagi, Director (Finance)
Dr. V.S. Rao Chintala, Scientist ‘F’
Dr. B.R. Subramaniam, Scientist ‘F’
Shri Girish  Pillai, Director (A)
Dr. V. Sampath, Scientist ‘F’
Prof. M. Ravindran, Director, NIOT
Dr. K. Radhakrishanna, Director, INCOIS
Shri S.N. Srivastava, Additional Director General, IMD
Shri P.K. Sen, Engineer Indian Ltd.
Dr. C.M. Gupta, Director, CDRI
Dr. M.D. Zingde, Scientist
Dr. E. Desa, Director, NIO
Dr. Hanumantha Rao, Advisor
Shri H. Purkait, Deputy Secretary
Dr. M.P. Wakdikar, Scientist ‘D’
Shri R. K. Sharma, Scientist ‘D’
 
2.         At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the Department of Ocean Development and
 requested the Secretary to make a brief presentation on Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Department.  The Secretary made visual
 presentation of the activities and achievements of the Department of Ocean Development and briefly explained the budgetary
 allocations on different heads as also the functioning of the Department.  The Members then sought clarifications on points relating
 to the Demands for Grants.  The Secretary replied to the questions and assured the Committee that he would send written comments
 on the points on which information was not readily available and for want of time.  
            The witnesses then withdrew.
3.         The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 1.30 P.M. for lunch and re-assembled at 3.00 P.M. to hear the Secretary, Department
 of Space.
4.         *                                                          *                                                                               * .
            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 5.40 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 10
th April, 2002.
______________________________________________________________________________
***      Relates to other matters.
IX
NINETH  MEETING
 
The Committee met at 10.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 2nd May, 2002 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
 
Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Smt. S. Gokula Indira
Shri C. Apok Jamir
Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
Smt. Savita Sharda
Shri B.P. Singhal
8.Shri M. V. Rajashekaran
9.Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
 
LOK SABHA
           
Smt. Bhavana Devrajbhai Chikhalia                  
Adv. Suresh Ramrao Jadhav                            

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/101streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:40]
12.Dr. Charan Das Mahant
13.Shri Kailash Meghwal
14.Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
15.Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                                   
16.Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                  
17.Shri Ajit Kumar Panja         
Shri Prahlad Patel
Prof. R.R. Pramanik
Shri Naresh Puglia
Prof. I.G. Sanadi
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
2.The Committee took up for consideration the draft 101
st & *** Reports of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2002-03) of
 the Department of Ocean Development and ***.  The Committee considered and adopted each of the reports.
______________________________________________________________________________
*Relates to other matters.
3.The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri B.P. Singhal and           Smt. Savita Sharda to present the Reports to
 the Rajya Sabha and Prof. R.R. Pramanik and in his absence Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry to lay the Reports on the table of the
 Lok Sabha.
4.The Committee then adjourned at 10.50 A.M.
-------
# Nominated w.e.f. 4th January, 2002. 
& Nominated w.e.f. 24th April, 2002. 
J Nominated w.e.f. 24th April, 2002.
*Shri Cho S. Ramswamy ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.15th February, 2002 on his resignation  from the membership of
   the Committee.
f  Dr. Raja Ramanna ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.18th February, 2002 on his resignation from  the membership of the
   Committee.
b
  Shri Peter Alphonse & Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray  ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of his term  in the Rajya Sabha  
   w.e.f.  2nd  April, 2002.
¥ Smt. Chandresh Kumari and Shri Lachhman Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of his term in the Rajya Sabha 
   w.e.f. 9th  April, 2002.
%  Nominated  w.e.f. 26th April , 2002. 