TWO HUNDRED THIRTY THIRD REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 20th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 20th December, 2012)
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendation Contained in the Two Hundred Twenty
Third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment 
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the 
Department of Science and Technology
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
233
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY THIRD REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations Contained in the Two Hundred Twenty
Third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the
Department of Science and Technology
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  20 th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  20 th December, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—12
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETING OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................. 13—16

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2012-13)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil H. Lad
3. Shrimati Maya Singh
4. Shri M. Rama Jois
5. Shri Alok Tiwari
6. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi
7. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
8. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
12. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
@13. Vacant
#14. V acant
15. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
16. Shri Marotrao Saiuji Kowase
17. Dr. Ajay Kumar
18. Shri O.S. Manian
19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
20. Shri Basori Singh Masram
21. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
22. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
23. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
25. Shri Yashvir Singh
#26. Vacant
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
30. Shri Ramakant Yadav
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
# Shri Ninong Ering and Shri Kodikkunnil Suresh ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon their
induction in the Union Council of Ministers w.e.f. 28 th October, 2012.
@ Shri Bansa Gopal Chowdhury ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 14th December, 2012 on his resignation
from the Membership of the Committee.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra,  Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Thirty Third Report on the Action Taken by the
Department of Science and TEchnology on the recommendations contained in Two Hundred
Twenty Third Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of
Science and Technology.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Science
and Technology on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Third Report of
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Science and Technology
which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18
th May, 2012.
3. There were twenty one recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty Third
Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were
received from the Department on 21
st August, 2012.
4. In the meeting held on 17 th December, 2012, the Committee considered the Draft Action
Taken Report and adopted the same.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
December, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests

(iv)
ACRONYMS
AORC – Assured Opportunity for Research Careers
BEST – Building of Educators for Science Teaching
CII – Confederation of Indian Industry
INSPIRE – Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research
NMSKCC – National Mission for Stratagic Knowledge on Climate Change
PPP – Public Private Partnership
RFD – Results Framework Document
SEA TS – Scheme for Early Attraction of Talents for Science
SERB – Science and Engineering Research Board
SHE – Scholoarship for Higher Education

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Science
and Technology on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Twenty-third Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2012-2013) of the Department of Science and Technology,
which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 18 th May. 2012. There were twenty-one
recommendations in the Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of
the Committee were received from the Department on 21 st August, 2012.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee
on the action taken by the Department of Science and Technology are set out in the succeeding
paragraphs:–
Recommendation (Para 7.2)
The Committee is of the opinion that a robust monitoring mechanism is essential for
ensuring timely completion of the various projects to avoid time and cost overrun and to ensure
full utilization of allocated funds. The Committee appreciates that the Department has adopted the
Results Framework Document (RFD), with the objective of effective review of both the physical
and financial progress/achievements in implementation of policies, programmes projects of major
activities vis-à-vis  agreed targets fixed for each programme. The Committee hopes effective
monitoring of projects would lead to timely completion of projects and optimum utilization of funds
in the year 2012-13.
Action Taken by Government
The Department agrees with the Committee’s opinion to have a robust mechanism for
ensuring timely completion of various projects to avoid time and cost overrun and to ensure full
utilization of allocated funds. The Department under the Chairmanship of Secretary. DST reviews
and monitors all the plan schemes regularly on a monthly basis. Corrective actions, if any, are
taken during such meetings.
Besides regular monthly, quarterly and half yearly review of progress of implementation of
Schemes/programmes, all major activities of the Department are reflected in the Results Framework
Document and are monitored half yearly and annually. At the end of the financial year, a statement
of achievements by the Department is sent to Performance Management Division of the Cabinet
Secretariat. High Power Committee of the Cabinet Secretariat also examines the achievements of
the Department.
The Department will continue to use the monitoring and evaluation mechanism for all the
plan schemes in the year 2012-13 as well.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Department would effectively use
its monitoring mechanism to ensure timely completion of projects and fully utilize the funds
allocated to the Department in the Budget.
Recommendation (Para 8.2)
The Committee commends the fact that in all five years of Eleventh Plan the Department

2
has consistently given good performance of fund utilization and hopes the Department would give
even better performance of fund utilization in the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Action Taken by Government
The Department is determined to maintain the record of full utilization of funds allocated
to it during the Twelfth Five Year Plan as well.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Department would also make all
out efforts to achieve the physical targets set for the Twelfth Plan Period.
Recommendation (Para 8.6)
The Committee takes note of the ongoing programmes of the Eleventh Plan period that are
proposed to be strengthened during the Twelfth Plan period and the new initiatives that are
proposed to be undertaken by die Department during the Twelfth Plan period. The Committee
appreciates the fact that though the major thrust areas of the Department continue to be
strengthening basic research and expanding Research and Development both in terms of Human as
well as Institutional capacities it has also been increasingly involving itself in diverse programmes
aimed at providing benefits of applications of Science and Technology, to the common masses. The
Committee is of the opinion that societal interventions of Science and Technology are needed to
improve the quality of life of our people and therefore such programme should be encouraged. The
Committee also approves of the special attention that has been given to nurture and bring women
scientists to the fore and hopes that the new programme named DISHA will help bring gender
parity in the field of Science and Technology and increase the contribution of women scientists to
science, technology and development.
Action Taken by Government
During its Twelfth Plan preparation the Department has proposed to strengthen the Eleventh
Plan initiatives as well as launch several new programmes. The Department agrees with the
Committee’s observations that major thrust area remains to be strengthening of basic research and
expanding R&D base both in terms of human as well as institutional capacities. Steps are being
taken to increase societal intervention of S&T to improve the quality of life of our people. Both
discovery as well as solution science are being given impetus during the Twelfth Plan period.
Special attention will be given to our women scientists under our new programme called ‘DlSHA’
to bring gender parity in S&T research and development. Attention is also being paid to support
those women scientists who have to shift to other locations in the country due to family reasons.
Comments
The Committee notes with satisfaction the initiatives of the Department in
increasing societal intervention of Science and Technology to improve the quality of life of
the common masses. The Committee hopes that ‘DISHA’ would help bring gender parity in
S&T research and development.
Recommendation (Para 9.4)
The Committee agrees with the justification given by the Department. The Committee is of
the view that increased investment in R&D including the strengthening of human and institutional

3
capacities in Science and Technology are necessary for realizing the vision of India emerging as
one of the top five knowledge powers in the World by 2030.
Action Taken by Government
The Department agrees with the observation of the Committee and will continue to work
towards increasing investments in R&D in the S&T sector which is necessary to make the country
emerge as one of the top five knowledge powers in the world by 2030.
Comments
The Committtee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 9.7, 9.8 and 9.9)
The Committee notes with concern that against a projected demand of Rs.3905.00 crores
in 2012-13 (Plan) for B.E. 2012-13, a meager amount of Rs.2477.00 crores (Plan) was actually
received by the Department, signaling a fall of Rs.1428.00 crores than the projected demand
resulting in non-institution of some the important proposed programmes.
The Committee observes that this is a very serious issue as some of the proposed important
projects will either be not taken up or would be delayed which will not be in national interest. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should pursue the case of higher
allocations with the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission so that the pending amount
of Rs. 1428.00 crores would be allocated to it during the R.E stage of 2012-13.
The Committee is further of the opinion that at least the Scientific Departments should be
spared from the routine cuts both at B.E and R.E stages. The Committee feels that the budgetary
cuts not only hamper the smooth progress of the projects/ Programmes, but also demoralize the
dedicated scientists who are involved in such projects.
Action Taken by Government
The Department will have to reconsider its priorities in implementing the existing projects
or initiating new projects in view of the scarcity of resources.
The Department is equally concerned with the reduction of allocation of funds proposed for
several programmes/schemes and will pursue the case for higher allocation with the Ministry of
Finance and the Planning Commission during R.E. stage of 2012-13.
The Department agrees with opinion of the committee that the Scientific Departments
should be spared from the routine cuts both at B.E. and R.E. stages. It definitely affects the
smooth progress of the projects/programmes and moral of dedicated scientists.
Comments
The Committee reiterates its concern that the Ministry of Finance has reduced the
allocation of the Department despite the fact that the Department has consistently given
good performance of fund utilization in all the five years of Eleventh Plan. It feels that the
initiatives of the Department should be encouraged, if the country has to emerge as one
of the top five knowledge powers in the world by 2030. The Committee hopes that the
Ministry of Finance/Planning Commission will favourably consider the case of higher
allocation at R.E. level so that the Department could carry out its proposed programmes/
projects smoothly.

4
Recommendation (Para 10.5)
The Committee is of the opinion that formation of a body, such as the Science and
Engineering Research Board (SERB), to coordinate and to give a renewed boost to the declining
State of  research in the basic science, was long overdue. A need for de-bureaucratization of the
Scientific departments and providing functional autonomy to the bodies engaged in  research has
long been felt by the Committee. In this direction the Committee welcomes the efforts of the
Department in the formation of the SERB, with administrative and financial autonomy of the Board
in implementing the basic research programmes efficiently and on a real time scale. The Committee
hopes that the SERB will enhance S&T capabilities of the country and lead to increased visibility
of the Indian scientists and Indian research establishments globally.
Action Taken by Government
The Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB), a Statutory body under the Department
of Science and Technology has started implementing R&D programmes with vigour. Close to Rs. 172
crores had been spent in the later half of 2011-12 by the Board and several high value nationally
important R&D projects have been implemented in a short span of its existence. A broad based
planning within the available resources has been made to implement the basic research programmes
efficiently on a real time scale. A large number of R&D projects including those of young scientists
have been sanctioned in 2012-13 wherein the allocation of the Board stands at Rs. 400.0 crore.
Directional changes like rationalization of budget heads, constitution of Peer Review Mechanisms etc.
have already been brought out in the Board. An extensive planning has been made for the Twelfth
Plan period which includes introduction of new schemes namely, Overseas Doctoral Fellowship,
Overseas Postdoctoral Fellowship, Start-Up Research Grant for Indian Diaspora, Establishment of
Joint (virtual) Centres and Challenge Award for Global Positioning. These coordinated activities of the
Board would enhance S&T capabilities of the country and lead to increased visibility of the Indian
scientists and Indian research establishments globally.
Comments
The Committee notes that the SERB has taken for implementation several high
value nationally important R&D projects and has extensive plans for the Twelfth Plan period
to project the visibility of Indian scientists and research establishments on the global
platform. The Committee hopes that the concerted efforts of the SERB would result in
giving the much desired boost to research in basic sciences in India.
Recommendation (Para 10.7)
The Committee expresses serious concern at the low level of investment in the R&D Sector
by the private sector which at present stands at only 0.25% compared to levels of 1.2 – 2.0% of
GDP in many developed and emerging economies. The Committee feels that if India has to emerge
as a scientifically developed nation that private sector investment in R&D has to increase
substantially from the present levels. This calls for greater partnership between the industries and
academia, particularly research institutions and universities. The Committee feels that the
Department should formulate such policies and programmes which would encourage the private
sector to invest substantially in the R&D sector. The private sector should be enlightened about the
advantages that would accrue to them in long term, besides financial benefits, to encourage their
participation in the country’s progress in the scientific field.
Action Taken by Government
The Department agrees with the concern expressed by the Committee to enhance the level

5
of investment in R&D by the private sector. The new Science, Technology and Innovation Policy
being formulated by the Department lays special emphasis on greater partnership among the various
sectors, such as industries, academia, research institutions and the Government to create a viable
innovation ecosystem in the country. Several programmes are being envisaged during the Twelfth
plan period for increased engagement of private sector in R&D through PPP mode in areas such
as water, climate change, energy, affordable health care, etc. Further studies are being initiated to
enhance insights for improving R&D infrastructure in industries as well as research institutions and
to evolve new PPP models for catalysing R&D for the scientific advancement in the country.
Comments
The Committee hopes that the new Science, Technology and Innovation policy would
result h1 increased engagement of private sector and enhance the level of investment by
the private sector in R&D.
Recommendation (Para 11.5)
The Committee appreciates the Department for initiating the Technology Development
Programme which aims at developing the need based indigenous technologies through joint
participation with the industry on one hand and the socio-economic Ministries on the other. The
Committee feels that the programme will help in enhancing the technological prowess of the
country. It also notes that the thrust areas of the programme which inter-alia include technology
needs for North-Eastern States, technology convergence for the production of Sulfate of Potash
are of immense importance. The Committee hopes that the Department will strive hard to make the
programme achieve its objectives. The Committee further recommends that the Department should
initiate more such programmes for the socio-economic development of the common man.
Action Taken by Government
The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
Comments
The Committee hopes that the Technology Development Programme would be given
sufficient thrust, specially for the development of need based indigenous technologies for
the remote areas of the country like the North-East.
Recommendation (Para 12.5)
The Committee notes that there has been an increase of Rs.16.80 crores in B.E. 2012-13
as compared to R.E. 2011-12 under the head of International Cooperation. The Committee is of the
opinion that the need of the hour is to forge new international Science and Technology initiatives/
agreements to help bridge the Science and Technology gaps in the frontier areas of Science and
Technology, besides ensuring sharing of expertise, cost and optimal utilization of resources. The
Committee therefore, supports the programmes and hopes Department would work towards
realization of the objectives of the programme in right earnest.
Action Taken by Government
The following International S&T Cooperation activities have been already been initiated and
launched by the Department with the partner countries:
• Indo-US Endowment Fund for Innovation

6
• Outgoing Fellowship with Australia and South Korea
• Establishment of Indo-Russian Scientific and Technology Centre
• Innovation led R&D Programme with Germany. Canada and Israel
• Significant joint projects in Grand Challenge areas with UK, Australia and Spain.
• Incoming Fellowship from Myanmar
Other activities are being finalized with respective partner countries.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that more such new initiatives/agreements
would he forged with the nations having advanced Science and T echnology programmes.
Recommendation (Paras 13.4, 13.5, 13.6 and 13.7)
The Committee notes with serious concern, the lackadaisical approach adopted by the
Department towards a crucial programme such as the ‘Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research
Programme. It notes that there are overlapping grant of loans and schemes being implemented by
Departments of Biotechnology and Scientific and Industrial Research, providing grants/soft loans on
more attractive terms to pharma industry, which has resulted in a decline in demand for the ‘Drugs
and Pharmaceutical Research’ scheme run by the Department of Science and Technology and
consequent decrease of funds’ allocated under the programme. The Committee feels that this is a
serious case of lack of coordination between the three departments viz; DST, DBT and DSIR.
which incidentally function under the same Ministry.
In this connection, Committee would a1so like to point out that in its 162
nd report on
‘Drugs and Pharmaceutical Research Programme including Herbal Medicines (Para 2.5.5. page 3),
it has been that  wide fluctuations were noticed in allocation made by the Department for ‘Drugs
and Pharmaceutical Research’. While the allocation stood at Rs.150.00 crores in RE. 2005-06. this
was reduced to Rs. 105.50 crores in R.E. 2005-06 and again increased to Rs.130.00 crores in B.E.
2006-07. It is very surprising to the Committee that a programme of the nature of ‘Drugs and
Pharmaceuticals Research’, which assumes paramount importance as it phenomenally contributes to
strategic innovations in medical sector, has been given a allocation of only Rs.60.00 crores in RE.
2011-12, which was drastically reduced to Rs.40.00 crores in B.E. 2012-13. The extent of drastic
decrease in fund allocation under this programme would be evident when present allocation are
compared to allocation six or seven years back which were of the tune of Rs.130 crores to Rs.150
crores. This is despite the prevailing general inflation over the years.
The Committee finds that the logic of the Department is strange, that their programme is
losing its importance as programmes developed by other Departments are more attractive. In the
first place, a coordinated approach ought to have been adopted by all the Departments of the
Government so as to ensure that there is no overlapping between the programmes offered by the
different departments. Secondly, the Department ought to have made its continuing programme as
attractive, if not more attractive than the similar programmes devised by the other Departments.
The Department, it seems, is simply allowing an important programme to slip out of its hands.
The Committee is of the considered view that in a country where poverty is rampant and
sizeable part of population suffers from critical diseases, continued support to drug research
programmes is the social responsibility of the Government for providing affordable drugs/
medicines to the poor masses and this responsibility cannot be diluted or absolved at any stage
through reduced allocations. The Committee feels that for a focused approach the ‘Drugs and

7
Pharmaceutical Research Programme’ should preferably be, promoted by a single Department and
the programme should be regulated in such a manner that there is no overlapping of schemes/loan
grants of the various departments. The Committee further recommends that the various
Departments may however pool their scientific expertise to achieve success of the ‘Drugs and
Pharmaceutical Research Programme’.
Action Taken by Government
The observations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. Inter-departmental
consultations among the DST, DBT & DSIR of the Ministry of Science and Technology will be
organized to bring more coordination and focused approach in Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research
oriented Programmes implemented by these Departments, so that every Department’s programme
caters to the different needs of the end users (institutes/academia/industry) or regulated in such a
manner that there is no overlapping schemes/loan/grants of the various departments. Depending on
the outcome of these consultations, the Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Research Programme of
Department of Science and Technology will be strengthened further to meet the larger interest of
the country.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the consultation would
be completed at the earliest and concrete steps would be taken to strengthen the
programme before the end of this financial year.
Recommendation (Para 14.4)
The Committee expresses its serious concern at the waning of interest among the new
generations towards a career in science, which has led to the shortage of quality scientific and
technical manpower for the country’s scientific and research programmes. The Committee
appreciates the fact that a significant amount of Rs. 400.00 crores has been allocated for the
Alliance and R&D Mission which inter-alia aims towards attracting and encouraging the new
generation towards a research career in science. The Committee feels that the long term
requirement of generation of quality manpower needs to be addressed at different levels by
aggressively upgrading the infrastructure in universities in the field of science and promoting quality
research in them. In this direction the INSPIRE and SHE schemes, which on one hand, aim
towards inculcating an interest towards science amongst the young generation and the BEST
scheme which aims at elevating the professional and teaching skills of the teachers, by providing
them an opportunity for gaining global experience of superior methods of mentoring and teaching,
are highly commendable. The Committee feels that through such schemes the brightest students of
the country can be nurtured and retained for research in science streams and would eventually
enable India to embark on ambitious course of scientific wealth creation.
Action Taken by Government
Building of Educators for Science Teaching (BEST) scheme, aimed at elevating the
professional and teaching skills of the teachers, is being worked out. A concept note has been
preferred. The scheme is to be operated jointly by Ministry of Human Resource Development
(MHRD) and Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST). Creation of new human capacity for
pedagogy-innovation, opportunities for professional updating and exposure to superior methods of
teaching/learning from global best practices and exchange of visits to some leading centres of
science teaching are being envisaged. The sizing and scoping of the scheme would be aimed at
100% coverage of all primary, middle and secondary schools as well as colleges. The benefits of

8
the scheme proposes to reach at least 25% of all potential education targets within Twelfth Plan
period. At least 0.5 million teachers would be targeted in first phase. Active engagement of
scientific community for content and connectivity to international learning centres would be called
for. The main feature of the scheme is contemplated to spot and invest into motivated in-service
teachers already engaged in primary and secondary education and to expose them to various and
superior methods of teaching in the world without affecting their educational responsibilities.
Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research (INSPIRE), an innovative and flagship
programme designed and initiated by the Department of Science and Technology with the objective
of seeding, nourishing, encouraging, enrolling and attracting the best talent in science by providing
necessary opportunities for youth with aptitude for careers seeking innovation and psychic delight
in addition to suitable financial assistance. Government’ of India has approved the INSPIRE
Program, including the Scholarship for Higher Education (SHE); in November, 2008 in the Eleventh
Plan Period and continuing in the Twelfth Plan period.
INSPIRE, including Scholarship for Higher Education (SHE), has three Schemes and
five components. They are (a) Scheme for Early Attraction of Talents for Science (SEATS),
(b) Scholarship for Higher Education (SHE) and (c) Assured Opportunity for Research Careers (AORC).
INSPIRE Components
1
INSPIRE Award: This component
aims to attract talented youth to
study science by providing a one-
time INSPIRE Award of Rs. 5000 to
one million young learners, (2 lakh
awards per year) of the age group
10-15 years for preparing a science
project/model as well as participation
of the Awardees in a three-tier
competition at District, State and
National levels with Models/Projects.
INSPIRE Internship: The second
component of SEATS which
provided a platform to toppers of
Class X science students for
interacting with national and global
science leaders including Nobel
Laureates by organizing five days
Science Camps. More than 250
locations for about one lakh toppers
of Class X Board Examinations with
global leaders in science including 28
Nobel Laureates for experiencing,
excitement in sciences and its future
challenges are organized.
Number of
students covered
in Eleventh Plan
period
2
6.37.881 (The
implementation
started during
2009-10).
99490
Planned for Twelfth Plan Period
3
From 1 million students ( i.e.  2
students per school in 5 years @ 2
lakh children per year) to 2 million
students in five years @ 4 lakh
children per ycar ( i.e. students per
school per year) for about 4.5 lakh
schools in the country having classes
6
th to 10 th.
A provision is made to provide
exposure to about 50,000 - 60.000
students per year under this
component across the country.

9
1
Scholarship for Higher Education
(SHE) aims  to enhance rates of
Attachment of talented youth to
undertake higher education in science
intensive programmes by providing
scholarships and mentoring through
summer attachment to performing
researchers. It offers 10.000
scholarships every year @ Rs 0.80
lakh per year for five years to
undertake Bachelor and Masters level
education in natural and basic
sciences for the talented youth. The
main feature of the scheme is in
mentorship support being planned for
every scholar through INSPIRE
Scholarship.
INSPIRE Fellowship is the first
component of the “Assured
Opportunity for Research Careers
(AORC)” aims to attract, attach,
retain and nourish talented young
scientific human resource for
strengthening the R&D foundation
and base by offering 1000 Nos.
doctoral INSPIRE Fellowships every
year in both basic and applied
sciences including engineering,
agriculture, veterinary and medicine.
INSPIRE Faculty is the second
component of AORC provides an
assured opportunity for 1000 Nos.
Faculty Awards every year for
researchers through a scheme
providing contractual and tenure
track offer for 5 years in both
basic and applied sciences areas
through an INSPIRE Faculty
scheme. This offer is provided to
the Faculty of Indian origin
including NRI/PIO status within 32
years of age and completed their
doctoral research from any
recognized University/academic
institution in the World.
3
Various strategies have been put in
place to reach the full strength of
10,000 scholarships per year to top 1
% students pursuing science
courses.
Intend to increase from 1000 per
year to 2000  per year fellowships for
pursuing doctoral programme in the
country in  basic and applied
sciences.
Attempt to reach the figure of 1000
per year during this Plan period.
2
11950
1416
74

10
Comments
The Committee notes with satisfaction the steps taken by the Department to build
up technical manpower to cater to growing needs of the scientific and research programmes.
In this direction, the Committee hopes that the proposed scheme of the Ministry of Science
and Technology in coordination with the Ministry of Human Resource Development, to
create new human capacities at the school level and the plans that are envisaged for the
Twelfth Plan period through various Inspire components to attract the talented youth viz.
Inspire award, Inspire Internship/Fellowship, SHE etc. would achieve the desired results.
The Committee, however, would like the Ministry to ensure that awards/fellowships are
given to only deserving and meritorious students with a view to promote building of capacity
in Science & Technology and there is no misuse of funds under the scheme.
Recommendation (Para 14.5)
The Committee also commends the initiatives of the Ministry in exploring the Public Private
Partnership (PPP) mode of funding for R&D in order to stimulate the private sector investments
into science; the PAN India S&T missions which inter-alia aims towards providing solutions of
basic problems of the common man such as food and nutrition, affordable health care and water
security and the Climate Change Programme which will focus towards the pressing issue of
Climate change. The Committee would. However, like to caution the Department to ensure the
effective implementation of these commendable programmes so that targeted benefits actually flow
from these programmes.
Action Taken by Government
To enhance the PPP mechanism under National Mission for Strategic Knowledge on Climate
Change (NMSKCC), Department of Science and Technology has organized a stakeholder meet in
collaboration with Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and invited major industrial houses, who
have shown interest to work on key Socio-economic sectors related to climate change viz. water,
agriculture, health, environment and energy. The Meeting was organized on 12
th December, 2011
and chaired by Secretary, DST. The proposals and Climate Change initiatives from industries were
presented and discussed during the meeting. Further discussion needed to identify key players and
setting up of institutional mechanism.
Comments
The Committee hopes that further steps would be taken to identify the key players
and an institutional mechanism under the ‘National Mission for Strategic Knowledge on
Climate Change’ would be set up in a time bound manner to enhance the PPP mechanism
under NMSKCC. The Committee also hopes that the Department would explore and
encourage the PPP mode of funding for Research & Development in other areas as well.
Recommendation (Para 15.2)
The Committee commends the role of the Department in initiating the DISHA scheme,
which it feels would open up ample opportunities for women S&T professionals, whose careers
are otherwise stuck or who are forced to opt out of their careers, due to familial as well as social
obligations. The Committee feels that this scheme would provide an opportunity to women
scientists to re-enter and continue working in S&T fields of their expertise and also to continue
in the field of their choice in case they have to relocate to different places. The Committee is of
the opinion that such schemes which ensure gender parity should be supported adequately through
budgetary support.

11
Action Taken by Government
In order to take the programme of ‘DISHA’ forward, the comments of all the concerned
Ministries, Departments and Authorities have been sought. On receipt of the comments, a suitable
proposal will be placed before the Expenditure Finance Committee for its consideration and
approval. During the Eleventh Five Year Plan the budget allocated for the Women Component Plan
(DISHA Programme) was Rs.200.00 crores. The proposed budget allocation for the DISHA
Programme for the Twelfth Five Year Plan has been enhanced to 350.00 crores to intensify the
gender parity initiatives Indian science.
Comments
The Committee appreciates the increase in the proposed budgetary allocation for the
women component plan of DISHA Programme for the Twelfth Five Year Plan to Rs. 350.00
crores from Rs. 200.00 crores in the Eleventh Plan, which indicates the significance the
Government attaches to the issue of gender parity in Indian science. The Committee hopes
that all the necessary proposals to take the programme of ‘DISHA’ forward would be
finalized expeditiously.
Recommendation (Para 16.4)
The Committee is aware that Nano Technology is an upcoming field of science which holds
great potential specially in the field of designing, developing and application of carbon nano tubes
in many sectors including medicines. The Committee commends that one of the focussed areas of
research of programme, is in the field of nano-device based sensors, diagnostics kits, controlled
and targeted drug delivery systems, which would go a long way in the treatment of critical
diseases. The Committee also appreciates the fact that some of the technological achievements of
the Indian scientists have been patented and commercialized, even in technically advanced countries
like the United States, which proves the competence of the Indian scientists in the field of
nanotechnology. It also appreciates the support that the Department has provided to the scientists
and institutions working in the field of nanotechnology and hopes that in future, efforts would also
be directed towards programmes which directly affect the common man such as use of
nanotechnology for water purification, medical applications etc.
Action Taken by Government
The Department is thankful for the encouraging comments made by the Parliamentary
Standing Committee on the technological achievements made in the country in the field of Nano
Science and Technology. The Department had been funding projects in the field of water
purification, medical applications etc. using nanotechnology. The Department will continue to
promote projects/activities in focussed areas like development of nano-device based sensors,
diagnostics kits, etc. which will help in treatment of critical diseases and other applications. The
Department will also continue to promote programmes/activities which will affect the common man
(such as use of nanotechnology for water purification, medical applications etc.).
Comments
The Committee appreciates the activities and the achievements of the Department in
the field of Nanotechnology, which is an upcoming field of science and hopes that the
Department would more effectively fund programmes in the field of Healthcare, water
purification systems and other such programmes/applications that benefit the common man
so that impact of such programmes on the lives of the people becomes dearly visible in the
near future.

12
Recommendation (para 16.5)
The path-breaking contribution that nanotechnology offers to diverse areas, ranging from
industry to medicine, itself advocates for the fact that increased allocation under this head is a
compelling necessity, specially in view of the country’s excellent performance in this field, which
is apparent from the growth rate of 9.1% per year achieved by India in this field and the fact that
India has already emerged as the sixth major country in nano science output. The Committee,
however, is unhappy over the fact that in the year 2011-12, the Department failed to utilize
allocation of Rs. 105.00 crores made at B.E. stage, which resulted in reduction of allocation at R.E.
stage to Rs. 89.55 crores and provision of Rs. 85.00 crores in B.E. this year. The Committee
hopes that the Department would efficiently utilize the allocations made this year so that, if needed,
allocations could be raised at R.E. stage of 2012-13. The Committee recommends that budgetary
support for this important programme should be suitably raised at R.E. stage, so that the
programme does not suffer for want of adequate funds.
Action Taken by Government
The Department had projected a requirement of Rs.125.00 crore for 2012-13. The B.E. for
2012-13, however, is Rs.  85.00 crore. As recommended by the Parliamentary Standing Committee,
the Department will take necessary steps to launch even more ambitious projects/programmes in
high priority areas of Nano Science and Technology and seek increase in the budget at the R.E.
stage.
Comments
The Committee notes the commitment of the Department to launch more ambitious
plans in the high priority areas of Nanotechnology and hopes that the Department would
make determined efforts to secure higher allocations at RE. stage and further ensure full
and proper utilization of the allocated funds.
Recommendation (Para 17)
The Committee after examining the various aspects of the Demands for Grants (2012-13)
of the Department of Science and Technology is of the view that the Department, through its
various schemes and programmes, apart from promoting research in basic science and technology
is also taking initiative to use technology to benefit the masses. Some of the initiatives of the
Department discussed above are commendable and if properly implemented will bring immense
benefits to the targeted groups. The Department during its interaction with the Committee appeared
largely satisfied with the funds allocated for its various programmes. The Committee, while taking
note of it, is of the opinion that programmes for societal benefits and for securing bright future
for our country men should be adequately funded and hopes that in case the Department needs
more funds at R.E stage, the Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance should give due
consideration to its proposals for enhancement of funds.
Action Taken by Government
The Department respects feeling of the august Committee and will pursue the case with the
Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for restoring proposed allocation of funds at R.E stage.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Department would make sincere
and determined efforts to fully achieve the targets of its various programmes.

13
MINUTES

14

15
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Monday, the 17 th December, 2012 in Committee Room
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri M. Rama Jois
3. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
LOK SABHA
4. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
5. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
6. Shri O.S. Manian
7. Shri Basori Singh Masram
8. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
9. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
10. Shri Pradeep Tamta
11. Shri Joseph Toppo
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and
informed them that the Committee would consider and adopt its draft 232
nd to 238 th Reports on
the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 222 nd to
228th reports on Demands for Grants (2012-13), pertaining to the Ministries/De partments of Atomic
Energy, Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, Space, Earth Sciences, Scientific and
Industrial Research and Biotechnology respectively.
2. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration, one by one, the Draft Action Taken
Reports and adopted the 232
nd to 238 th reports without any amendment.
15

16
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. The Committee, thereafter, decided to present/lay on the table of both the Houses of the
Parliament its 232 nd to 238 th Reports on 20 th December, 2012. The Committee authorised its
Chairman and in his absence Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra to present the Report in Rajya Sabha and
Shri Pradeep Tamta and in his absence Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde to lay the copy of the report
on the table of Lok Sabha.
The Committee, then, adjourned at 10.35 
A.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.