156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
 COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 ONE HUNDRED-FIFTY SIXTH REPORT
 ON
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-2007)
 OF THE
 DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
 (MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
 (DEMAND NO. 82)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 18TH MAY, 2006)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 18TH MAY, 2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
 NEW DELHI
 MAY, 2006/VAISAKHA, 1928 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 2. INTRODUCTION
 3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
 4. SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
 5. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
 ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2004)
1. Shri P.G. Narayanan -- Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr.Prabha Thakur
 3. Shri Dilip Singh Judev
 4. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav
 5. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
 #6. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
 $7. Vacant 
 &8. Vacant
 *9. Vacant
 §10. Vacant

156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
 12. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad 
 13. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
 14. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
 15. Shri Mohan S. Delkar 
 16. Shri Francis Fanthome 
 17. Shri Anantrao Gudhe
 18. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
 19. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
 20. Shri Brahmananda Panda
 21. Smt. Neeta Pateriya
 22. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil 
 23. Shri Bachi Singh 'Bachda' Rawat
 24. Shri K.C. Singh "Baba"
 25. Shri Rakesh Singh 
 26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
 27. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh 
 28. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar 
 29. Shri D. Venugopal
 30. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
 31. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment
 & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred-Fifty
 Sixth Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2006-2007) of the Department
 of Scientific & Industrial Research (Demand No.82).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on the 5th April, 2006 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of
 Scientific & Industrial Research gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought
 clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for
 Grants.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the
 Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of
 the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 15th May, 2006.
NEW DELHI;
 May 15, 2006,
P.G.NARAYANAN
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
 & Technology, Environment & Forests.
REPORT
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) is a part of the Ministry of Science and
 Technology with the mandate of indigenous technology promotion, development, utilization and transfer. The primary
 endeavour of DSIR is to encourage industry to increase their share in country's R&D expenditure, support a larger cross
 section of small and medium industrial units to develop state-of-the art globally competitive technologies of high

156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 commercial potential, catalyze faster commercialization of lab-scale R&D, enhance the share of technology intensive
 exports in overall exports, strengthen industrial consultancy & technology management capabilities and establish user
 friendly information network to facilitate scientific & industrial research in the country. It also provides a link between
 scientific laboratories and industrial establishments for transfer of technologies through National Research
 Development Corporation (NRDC) and facilitate investment in R&D through Central Electronics Limited (CEL).
 2. The following is the allocation of business to the Department: 
 All matters concerning the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
 All matters relating to National Research Development Corporation. 
 All matters relating to Central Electronics Limited.
 National Information System on Science and Technology (NISSAT). 
 Registration and Recognition of R&D Units. 
 Matters relating to UNCTAD and WIPO.
 National Register for Foreign Collaborations.
 Matters relating to creation of pool for temporary placement of Indian Scientists and Technologists. 
 National Register of Scientific Manpower.
 3. The above objectives are sought to be achieved through the following during Tenth Plan.
 Technology Promotion, Development and Utilization (TPDU) Programmes
 National Research Development Corporation (NRDC)
 Central Electronics Limited (CEL)
 Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)
 Other Activities
 Matters relating to International R&D collaboration involving industrial companies and industrial R&D centres. 
 International Cooperation/Collaboration agreements with other countries relating to industrial R&D with the
 concurrence of the Ministry of External Affairs. 
 Matters concerning domestic technology, particularly the promotion of ventures involving the commercialisation of
 such technologies other than those under the Department of Science and Technology. 
 Matters relating to Technology Trade including exports of Technology and Technical Consultancy Services, in close
 cooperation with the Ministry of Commerce. 
 Matters relating to technical, engineering and management consultancy organisations and services. 
 BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 4. The approved outlay for the 10th five-year plan (2002-2007) has been kept at Rs.2575.00 crores as against
 Rs.1356.23 crores for the 9th Plan (1999-2002). 
 TENTH PLAN APPROVED OUTLAY (2002-07)
 (Rupees in Crores)
 CSIR 2430
 Department of Scientific & Industrial Research 145
 Total 2575
 5. The Department has been allocated Rs.1750.00 crores (Rs.975.00 crores under plan and Rs.775.00 crores under Non-
Plan) for the year 2006-07 as against Rs. 1557.00 crores in B.E. and Rs. 1501.00crores in the R.E. for the year 2005-
2006.
 6. The breakup of the financial allocation of CSIR, DSIR and Public Sector enterprises is given below:
FINANCIAL SUMMARY FOR 2006-07 PLAN & NON-PLAN
 (Rupees in Crores)
 Plan Non-Plan Total
 DemandsMade Approved DemandsMade Approved DemandsMade Approved
 A. CSIR 940.00 940.00 827.99 769.75 1767.99 1709.75
 B. DSIR 25.65 25.00 5.74 5.25 31.39 30.25
 C. PSE 10.00 10.00 0.00 0.00 10.00 10.00
 Total 975.65 975.00 883.73 775.00 1809.38 1750.00
 7. In the Tenth Plan under the scheme on National Laboratories, CSIR has initiated some well-focused
 programmes/projects with a view to synergise competencies developed in laboratories and implement them in a
 network mode. Besides, the scheme on New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative has progressed well
 and has matured as a model of Public-Private-Partnership. The Intellectual Property and Technology Management

156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 Scheme has also created a movement of (Intellectual Property) IP protection and valorization. In addition, the Central
 Electronics Limited is seeking to upgrade its capacity from 2 MW to 10 MW of Solar Photovoltaic (SPV), Under
 Technology Promotion, Development and Utilisation (TPDU) Programme. The enhancement is proposed to be utilized
 for enhanced activities under various components like technology development & demonstration projects in frontier
 areas; setting up of technology and innovation management centers setting up of product design centers, consultancy
 clinics, technology incubators and consultancy parks; information support systems for industrial research and
 development.
 8. In reply to a query by the Committee regarding the quarterly expenditure as well as total expenditure for the financial
 year 2005-2006, the Department furnished the following information:- 
 (Rs. In crores)
 1st quarter 257.10
 2nd quarter 493.24
 3rd quarter 437.17
 4th quarter
 (upto March, 2006) 313.49
 __________
 Total: Rs.1501.00 __________
 9. The Department also stated that the major portion of the budgetary allocation to the Department is for grant-in-aid to
 CSIR, which is released on quarterly basis. The pace of expenditure of the Department is almost uniform except the
 first quarter of the financial year. In the first quarter the expenditure has been slightly on lower side as the grant-in-aid
 released to CSIR was based on vote on account, which account for one sixth of the estimated budget of the Department.
 During second quarter the balance grant (i.e. for one month) of first quarter was released along with the grant-in-aid for
 second quarter. Thus the expenditure booked during second quarter is slightly on higher side. The expenditure during
 third quarter is normal. During the fourth quarter the balance amount of the RE stage grant would be utilized. 
 10. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department has made efforts to keep the pace of expenditure
 uniform except for the first quarter for which funds were partially released. The Committee has also been assured that
 the funds for last quarter will be fully utilized. The Committee in its previous report had recommended that the
 Department evolve a mechanism to maintain uniform pace of expenditure, to the extent possible, throughout the year.
 The Committee hopes this healthy trend will continue in future. 
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR)
 11. The Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR), a premier autonomous Research & Development
 organization, is a multi-disciplinary, multi-locational set-up, comprising 38 laboratories and 47 regional centres, has
 completed sixty-three years of its existence. Nourished, fostered and supported, since its inception, CSIR is now
 recognized internationally as an institution, which is moving speedily towards achieving global excellence without
 diluting local relevance. In India, it symbolizes a culture that links science with society through technology and
 industrial infrastructure.
 12. The functions assigned to the CSIR are as follows:
 Promotion, guidance and coordination of scientific and industrial research in India, including the institution and
 financing of specific researches;
 Establishment or development and assistance to special institutions or departments of existing institutions for scientific
 study of problems affecting particular industries and trade;
 Establishment and award of research studentships and fellowships;
 Utilization of the results of the researches conducted under the auspices of the Council towards the development of
 industries in the country and the payment of a share of royalties arising out of the development of the results of
 researches to those who are considered as having contributed towards the pursuits of such research;
 Establishment, maintenance and management of laboratories, workshops, institutes and organizations to further
 scientific and industrial research and to utilize and exploit for purposes of experiment or otherwise any discovery or
 invention likely to be of use to Indian industries;
 Collection and dissemination of information in regard not only to research but also to industrial matters generally;
 Publication of scientific papers and journals; and 
 Any other activity or activities to promote generally the objectives of the Department.
 13. CSIR seeks to usher India into a scientific milieu, creating and nurturing talent in science, innovation and
 technology. It spawned many organizations, many disciplines and most importantly has served as a nursery and training
 ground for most of India's talented scientists and technologists. CSIR operates six Plan schemes, namely:

156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 National Laboratories;
 National S&T Human Resource Development;
 Intellectual Property and Technology Management;
 R&D Management Support;
 New Millennium India Technology Leadership Initiative (NMITLI); and
 ICT Infrastructure, Renovation and Refurbishing.
 14. To promote and foster the upgradation of the stock of qualified, highly specialised scientists/engineers and
 technologists in R&D in all disciplines of S&T in the country, an integrated approach is adopted so that research in the
 universities and institutions of higher learning is promoted and support can be given to organisations to hold
 symposia/seminars and conferences for promotion of scientific temper. CSIR is highly concerned with the gradual
 declining interest in science education and R&D as a career amongst young talents. To reinstate the glory of science
 amongst youngsters various programmes and activities are being taken up through a true Team India partnership, which
 involves participation from eminent scientists and experts from academia, in-house industrial R&D units etc. 
 15. In order to promote interest, excitement and excellence in science education at school and undergraduate levels,
 each CSIR laboratory has a plan to adopt at least one school and one college in its sphere of influence. The laboratory
 will provide its facilities for project work and experimentation as well as carrying out student guidance and
 motivational programmes. 
 16. CSIR has established fellowships in trans-disciplinary areas, to deliberately support researchers to face up to the
 challenges of the future rather than be confined to areas where there are limited opportunities and challenges. Also
 research scholars invariably seek employment with government R&D establishments - self employment and
 entrepreneurship are wholly absent. CSIR inculcates a spirit of entrepreneurship in the research scholars to establish
 their own R&D enterprise through appropriate motivation, skills development and venture financing.
 Intellectual Property & Technology Management
 17. The objective of the scheme is to enhance the volume and value of Intellectual Property (IP) generated by CSIR and
 to share the best innovation and technology management practices organizationally and with the Indian S&T
 community at large. The volume of IP rights secured by CSIR has greatly increased over the time. The major task,
 however, is to realize adequate and appreciable value from the IPR. 
 18. Necessary skills and knowledgebase in the area of IPR in CSIR are being refurbished, particularly in some still
 unresolved issues such as `traditional knowledge', `genomic sequences', `copyright on the Net' etc. It is proposed to
 advise the policymakers appropriately on the new development and changes proposed in international IPR arena 
 R&D Management Support
 19. The various functional units/divisions located in CSIR Headquarters provide the R&D Management support to the
 national laboratories through the Scheme. The Headquarter is the nerve centre of the organization and catalyses and
 facilitates the laboratories by establishing, equipping and realising excellence in R&D, promoting brand equity,
 financial self-sufficiency, global competitiveness and disseminating organizational learning. It provides support to the
 laboratories for human resource development, international scientific collaboration, publicity and public relations,
 performance appraisal, scientific audit etc. It is the link between the laboratories, the government, the parliament and
 international agencies.
 New Millenium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative (NMITLI)
 20. The NMITLI scheme envisages to catalyze innovation centered scientific and technological developments as a
 vehicle to attain for Indian economy a global leadership position in selected niche areas in a 'Team India' partnership.
 NMITLI therefore looks beyond present day technologies and seeks to build, capture and retain for India a leadership
 position in the global arena based on technology by synergising the best competencies of publicly funded R&D
 institutions, academia and private industry. Thus, it is based on the premise of consciously & deliberately identifying,
 selecting and supporting potential winners.
 IT Infrastructure Renovation and Refurbishment
 21. The CSIR has translated the S&T goals into viable, low risk and profitable choices. These are multi-location/multi-
institution programmes with well-defined tasks. The tasks identified in each programme and their linkages form a
 matrix of inter-related milestones and activities with an identified inter-disciplinary teams at different
 locations/institutions. Managing information and computational requirements at various levels in the execution of these
 milestones/activities is the key to success. Therefore, effective and timely access to computing resources across
 laboratories/disciplines becomes imperative in the management of these milestones/activities. 
 22. In order to expedite research through network approach, the vital components are:
 Strengthening of computation and data resources

156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 ICT support to S&T programmes and R&D areas.
 Inter-laboratory networking
 Cross boundary information and compute resource sharing
 Information access (intra and inter) laboratory
 Utilisation of generated knowledge
 ICT Infrastructure in Labs
 Monitoring and assessment of CSIR Networked Projects
 E-enabled uniform system for business development, inventory control, purchases, personnel management and human
 resource development
 Information system to support insight to the R&D issues
 23. These requirements necessitate that CSIR set-up an efficient Scientific Knowledge Management System by creating
 a CSIR wide Grid consisting of functional virtual Grids related to areas of concern. These virtual sub-Grids may consist
 of labs/institutes, where specialists and data together form a complete resource in an area of research. These may be
 managed and used systematically to conduct globally competitive R&D.
 24. The key feature of CSIR's programmes during the Tenth Plan is the creation of major and innovative knowledge
 networks across and beyond CSIR laboratories. They have been classified as follows:
 (i) Steering Committee identified Network Programmes in Mission mode
 (ii) CSIR Working Group identified Network Programmes
 (iii) CSIR Core Programmes
 (iv) Programmes for Building up Core Competencies & Housing for Scientists 
 (v) Ongoing Commitments
 (vi) Infrastructure Renovation & Refurbishment (Civil)
 (vii)Common Minimum Programme - CSIR Inputs & Linkages
 25. The Committee would like to emphasize the importance of indigenous technologies and the crucial role they are
 going to play in an increasingly globalized world. Cutting edge technologies and patentable innovations are the only
 hope for wealth generation in a cut-throat competitive environment. Scientific establishments of the country like the
 CSIR have a huge responsibility of training human resource to that effect and creating an enabling environment for
 such innovations to take place. The Committee is hopeful that the Council will leave no stone un-turned to show
 concrete results, which can help create wealth and contribute in improving people's life.
NATIONAL LABORATORIES
 26. The National Laboratory scheme is operated through 38 National Laboratories and 39 field Centres. The research
 programmes/projects/activities of the National Laboratories have been categorized into fourteen major socio-economic
 sectors viz. Aerospace; Biology and Biotechnology; Chemicals; Earth Resources and Natural Hazards Mitigation;
 Ecology & Environment; Electronics and Instrumentation; Energy; Food & Food processing; Health Care, Drugs &
 Pharmaceuticals; Housing & Construction; Information Dissemination and Products; Leather; Materials, Metals,
 Minerals and Manufacturing and Metrology.
 27. CSIR during the Tenth Five Year Plan has undertaken major network projects across CSIR laboratories. The aim of
 the projects evolved is to synergise the vast competencies developed over the years in CSIR Laboratories and to
 implement them in network mode. CSIR is currently operating 55 projects in a network mode during the current year.
 Two more projects would be included as Network projects. The projects interalia encompass establishment of
 capabilities in the newer S&T areas, generation of technological know-how and strategic options over a wide spectrum
 of science & technology, human resource development etc. 
 28. Basic research is the major source of advancement of knowledge in science and provides the foundation for
 development of newer generic technologies for the future. CSIR has to continuously upgrade its core competencies and
 research areas to be planned so as to provide the needed strength for successfully competing in emerging technologies
 for the years to come. The core competencies to be continuously developed are in the areas of aerospace science &
 technology, modern biology and biotechnology, chemistry, geophysics, oceanography, material science, computer
 aided studies, expert system, parallel computation etc. CSIR infrastructure was built or acquired more than thirty years
 ago. Selective refurbishment & renovation of existing infrastructure are planned for the year. 
 29. On being enquired about enhanced Allocation made to National laboratories from Rs.1054.43 crore BE and
 Rs.1012.49 crore RE in the year 2005-2006 to Rs.1167.25 crore BE in 2006-2007 along with reasons for fluctuations,
 the Committee has been informed that the budgetary allocation for 2006-07 is Rs.1167.25 crore of which Rs.735 crore
 is under Plan and Rs.432.25 crore under Non-Plan. The increase under the Plan is essentially to meet requirements for
 four new projects which have been approved during 2005-06. These would require substantial financial inputs for

156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 2006-07 .The projects are :
 Setting up a World Class Drug Research Institute;
 Spearheading Small Civilian aircraft, design, development & manufacture;
 Acquisition of Oceanographic Research Vessel (ORV) and 
 Creation of a facility for Proteomics & Protein Research.
 30. In addition, all other ongoing projects under the scheme would require budgetary support for its sustenance.
 31. The Scientific research in various fields is mainly dependent on the availability of modern environment and major
 research facilities. With the global competitiveness in different fields there is a need to focus on the issues relating to
 modernization of our national laborites. The Committee in its 142nd Report had recommended building of new
 infrastructure and renovation of the existing ones should be taken up in right earnest. The Committee would like to
 reiterate the same and would like to see renovation carried out as early as possible. The Committee recommends that
 the Council should draw a time-frame for such programme and should finish the task within the prescribed time-limit.
 Since the CSIR laboratories are located all over the country, having people's interface in a much better way, the
 Committee recommends that there is need for setting-up a special Technology Dissemination Cell in all the CSIR
 laboratories so that the technology support can be given to SMEs also. 
RESEARCH SCHEMES, SCHOLARSHIPS AND FELLOWSHIPS
 32. The Committee has been informed that the CSIR has always strived towards promoting and fostering the
 upgradation of the stock of qualified, highly specialised scientists/engineers and technologists in R&D in all disciplines
 of S&T in the country; an integrated approach for the national human resource development for S&T by encouraging
 and promoting research in the universities and institutions of higher learning and support organisations to hold
 symposia/seminars and conferences for promotion of scientific temper. There are following five schemes being
 operated under this head.
 CSIR Programme on Youth for Leadership in Science (CPLYS) 
 Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Fellowships
 (iii) Fellowships in Trans-disciplinary Areas:
 (iv) Entrepreneurship support to Research Scholars
 (v) Faculty Training & Motivation and Adoption of Schools and Colleges by CSIR Labs
 33. The Committee feels that there is a need to improve quality of science education in the country. The start has to be
 made right at the school level. Quality of science education should not only generate keen interest in children but also
 be able to fire their imagination in order to make them stick to the science stream. A holistic 'start- to-finish 'approach is
 the need of the hour, where children once initiated in science are not left confused after their schools but are provided a
 link to higher research institute via universities. Improving quality of research courses in Universities and their
 affiliation with research institutes, can be followed according to our own requirements. The Committee is of the
 opinion that an ambitious programme, which caters both to the supply of rich human resource right from the school
 level at the lower end to rich dividends produced in the market by way of intellectual property finally is what should be
 aimed.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY & TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT
 34. The objective of the scheme is to enhance the volume and value of Intellectual Property (IP) generated by CSIR and
 to share the best innovation and technology management practices organizationally and with the Indian S&T
 community at large. The volume of IP rights secured by CSIR has greatly increased over the time. The major task,
 however, is to realize adequate and appreciable value from the IPR. 
 35. It is also felt that necessary skills and knowledgebase of those in CSIR engaged in the IPR game and to advise the
 policymakers appropriately on the new development and changes proposed in international IPR arena need to be
 refurbished, particularly in some still unresolved issues such as `traditional knowledge', `genomic sequences',
 `copyright on the Net' etc.
 36. CSIR has made Intellectual Property its business, for it continued to be the number 1 position securing Patents in
 India and abroad. During 2002-2003, CSIR was granted 146 patents in USA, a feat unmatched by any other Indian firm
 or organization. During the year 2004-05, CSIR filed around 496 Foreign and 419 Indian Patent applications. It is by
 far the largest Patent holder in India and ranked at first position alongwith Samsung.
 CSIR Patents Filed/Granted:
 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
 Filed Granted Filed Granted Filed Granted
 India 421 166 406 276 418 175
 Abroad 728 189 520 223 500 272

156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
CSIR diamond Jubilee Invention Award for School children:
 37. The objectives of this competition were (a)To capture creativity and innovativeness amongst children; (b) Create
 interest and awareness for IP amongst children and (c) Make known CSIR's contribution to IPR. During the last three
 years a High Level Award Committee selected around 30 inventions from various parts of the country for various
 prizes and provisional patent applications have also been filed for these inventions.
 38. During the last three years various Conferences/Workshops/Seminars were organized on varied areas of IPR such
 as (a) Capacity Building in the Area of IP Management, b) Conference cum Workshop on the theme 'Leveraging
 Intellectual Property for Organizational Strategy', (c) Advanced IP Training Program on 'Negotiating, Contracting and
 Valorization of IP', '(d) International Seminar on 'International Enactments and Practices on Intellectual Property
 Rights', (e) PCT Users' Meet, (f) Workshop on Dispute Resolution in Technology Agreements, (g) Meeting on
 Intellectual Property Management and Commercialization Benchmarking Study, (h) M-CAM Doors Training, and (i)
 International Workshop on 'IP Litigation'.
 39. Systematic efforts were made to evaluate and license CSIR's IP. Two portfolios comprising bio-enhancers and the
 chromatographic finger printing of herbal formulation were got evaluated by valuation firm, and second stage effort for
 licensing of these portfolios are being initiated.
 Targets 2006-07:
 IP Copyrights/Trademarks
 Filing Grant 
 India 400 250 
 Foreign 500 220 
 Other forms of IP 50 50
40. In reply to a question regarding increase under the head 'Intellectual Property and Technology Management' in B.E.
 2006-2007 at Rs. 40.00 as compared to R.E. 2005-2006 where the allocation was Rs. 30.00 crores; the Committee has
 been informed that the increase in allocation has been sought to provide broader geographical coverage of IP Protection
 and invention in the fields of drugs, pharmaceuticals and biosciences. Also, to enhance the volume and value of
 intellectual property generated by CSIR.
 41. In a world where a substantial share of wealth produced is intellectual and a major portion of economy is
 knowledge-based, definition of wealth and property has undergone a sea change. India, being a fast-growing knowledge
 economy with a huge human resource potential, is well poised to be a leader in such a scenario. Property is no longer
 just natural and physical but increasingly intellectual. To exploit the huge intellectual capital we will have to ensure
 certain fundamentals like awareness and an understanding of market mechanism so that we do not lose out to other
 competitors in an environment of patents and copyrights. The Committee appreciates the good work done by the
 Department and hopes more results will follow in the future. 
NEW MILLENIUM INDIAN TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP INITIATVE (NMITLI)
 42. The NMITLI scheme envisages to catalyze innovation centered scientific and technological developments as a
 vehicle to attain for Indian economy a global leadership position in selected niche areas in a 'Team India' partnership.
 NMITLI therefore looks beyond present day technologies and seeks to build, capture and retain for India a leadership
 position in the global arena based on technology by synergising the best competencies of publicly funded R&D
 institutions, academia and private industry. With over 50 private sector companies and over 150 institutes and
 laboratories networked together, NMITLI is the largest public-private partnership in India today.
 43. The scheme involves two types of projects viz. (i) nationally evolved and (ii) industry originated. Presently,
 NMITLI projects are not limited to the core areas of agriculture & plant bio-technology, bio-technology, drugs &
 pharmaceuticals, bioinformatics, chemicals, materials, information technology & communication, energy and
 miscellaneous. NMITLI is seeking to look beyond these areas for project development.
 44. Progress of human civilization is based on innovation of one kind or the other. Material civilization progresses only
 with the progess in technology. Innovations require 'out-of-the box thinking', flexibility and an enabling environment.
 The Committee feels the above programme is a step in the right direction. It is of the opinion that there is a need to take
 care of grass root innovations as small beginnings have big results. Beside this, in an era of intellectual property,
 innovations and wealth are necessarily linked and, therefore, the stress on innovation cannot be over emphasized. 
INFRASTRUCTURE RENOVATION AND REFURBISHMENT
 45. The CSIR has translated the S&T goals into viable, low risk and profitable choices. These are multi-location/multi-
institution programme with well-defined tasks. The tasks identified in each programme and their linkages form a matrix
 of inter-related milestones and activities with identified inter-disciplinary teams at different locations/institutions.

156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 Managing information and computational requirements at various levels in the execution of these milestones/activities
 is the key to success. Therefore, effective and timely access to computing resources across laboratories/disciplines
 becomes imperative in the management of these milestones/activities. 
 In order to expedite research through network approach, the vital components are:
 (i) Strengthening of computation and data resources'
 (ii) ICT support to S&T programmes and R&D areas
 (iii) Inter-laboratory networking
 (iv) Cross boundary information and compute resource sharing
 (v) Information access (intra and inter) laboratory
 (vi) Utilisation of generated knowledge
 (vii) ICT Infrastructure in Labs
 (viii) Monitoring and assessment of CSIR Networked Projects
 (ix) E-enabled uniform system for business development, inventory control, purchases, personnel management and
 human resource development
 (x) Information system to support insight to the R&D issues
 46. These requirements necessitate that CSIR set-up an efficient Scientific Knowledge Management System by creating
 a CSIR wide Grid consisting of functional virtual Grids related to areas of concern. These virtual sub-Grids may consist
 of labs/institutes, where specialists and data together form a complete resource in an area of research. These may be
 managed and used systematically to conduct globally competitive R&D.
 47. The Committee feels that a developing country like India needs basic infrastructure to serve the needs of a fast
 growing economy which needs even further impetus to meet the needs of teeming millions. Development, being an
 integrated process, has a multiplier effect on the economy and growth. Improvement in our scientific infrastructure is of
 utmost importance, as good research requires good laboratories and other logistic support. 
 Central Electronics Limited
 48. The company is performing as a technology platform of the Ministry of Science & Technology not only for
 developing and commercialising in-house technologies but also commercialising the technologies developed at various
 CSIR, DRDO and other R&D institutions of the country.
 49. CEL's operations can be broadly grouped into three areas, viz. solar photovoltaics (SPV), strategic electronics and
 railway electronics. CEL is the pioneer and a leading manufacturer of SPV cells, modules and systems and Railway
 Safety Signaling Equipment. In the field of strategic electronics, CEL is the only indigenous manufacturer of phase
 control modules which is a key element of phased array radars. 
 50. In reply to a query raised by the Committee regarding fresh allocation of Rs. 5.00 Crore BE for Support to R&D
 schemes for Central Electronics Limited, the Committee has been informed that Rs. 5.00 crore (BE) for 2006-07 is part
 of total allocation of Rs. 25.00 crore already sanctioned during 2005-06. The nature of this support is towards grant-in-
aid to CEL for taking up R&D activities related to application of multi-crystalline solar cell technology, which will
 reduce the cost of solar cells drastically. The company will also develop the SPV modules of 200/250 Wp against the
 present module capacity 75/100 Wp, as per market demand.
 51. On being asked about not keeping any provision for Central Electronics Limited in the year 2006-2007 and it's
 consequent effect on the concerned Enterprise, the Committee has been informed that the Planning Commission
 approved Rs. 25 crore during Tenth Plan, out of which Rs. 20.00 crore allocated in debt-equity ratio 1:1 for upgrading
 and upscaling of Solar Photovoltaic (SPV) facilities from 2 MWp to 10 MWp. So far Rs. 2.00 crore in 2004-05 and Rs.
 13.00 crore in 2005-06 have been released. The balance Rs. 5.00 crore as equity is likely to be released before
 31.3.2006. Therefore, no provision has been made in the year 2006-07 under loan and equity and this would not affect
 the enterprise in its endeavour.
TECHNOLOGY PROMOTION, DEVELOPMENT AND UTILIZATION (TPDU) PROGRAMMES 
 52. TPDU Programmes would essentially endeavour to encourage industry to increase their share in country's R&D
 expenditure, support a larger cross section of small and medium industrial units to develop state-of-the art globally
 competitive technologies of high commercial potential, catalyze faster commercialization of lab-scale R&D, enhance
 the share of technology intensive exports in overall exports in the next five years, strengthen industrial consultancy &
 technology management capabilities and establish user friendly information network to facilitate scientific & industrial
 research in the country. 
 53. The following component programmes have been proposed in the Annual Plan 2006-07 - "Technology Promotion,
 Development and Utilization Programmes".
 Industrial R&D Promotion Programme

156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 Technology Development and Innovation Programme
 Technology Management Programme
 International Technology Transfer Programme 
 Consultancy Promotion Programme
 Industrial R&D and Technology Information Facilitation Programme
 The broad objectives of TPDU Programmes are:
 To promote and support industry efforts towards R&D.
 To encourage R&D system-industry cooperation.
 To support industry for technology development, demonstration and 
 absorption of imported technology.
 To build indigenous capabilities for development and commercialization of contemporary products and processes of
 high impact.
 To evaluate the status and performance of technology in selected 
 sectors/areas.
 To facilitate effective transfer and management of technology.
 To promote international technology trade including export of 
 technology projects, services and technology intensive products.
 To promote and strengthen consultancy capabilities for domestic use and 
 export requirements. 
 To support and use mechanisms, both national and international, 
 towards transfer of technology, both within and outside the country.
 Generate endogenous capacities for the development and utilization of 
 digital information resources for providing inputs to scientific & industrial research in the country.
 54. During 2006-07, 19th National Conference on in-house R&D in Industry has been organised and National Awards
 for outstanding R&D achievement have been presented to 11 companies; brought out 10 publications; granted
 recognition to 70 new in-house R&D units, 20 new SIROs and 20 public funded research institutions/ organizations;
 issued around 800 essentiality certificates for claiming customs duty exemption by public funded institutions,
 Registration of about 20 public funded research institutions/ organizations with DSIR for availing Customs Duty
 Exemption on imports made for R&D and central excise duty exemption on domestic purchases for R&D, and gave 15
 approvals under u/s 35 (2AB) (Form No. 3CM) and 10 certificates (Form No.3CL) for weighted tax deduction under
 u/s 35 (2AB).
 55. The Committee feels that the Department should make efforts to encourage more participation from the Industry
 with a good track record for distribution of both risks and rewards. Industry with a rich experience of market can help
 scientific establishments feel the pulse of the market and make scientific research commercially viable. 
DEVELOPING NEW GENERATION FUELS
 56. The Department has intimated that the objective of the Department is to Develop:-
 Gas to Liquid Technologies for DME (di-ethyl methanol) and Fischer Tropsch Fuels; 
 Liquid Fuels and Ethanol Production from Biomass; 
 Biodegradable Lubricants from Vegetable Oils, Sugars, Starch and Cellulose; and
 Development of Catalysts for Atmospheric Residue Processing; Performance Evaluation of New Generation
 Automotive Fuels to Meet Emission Norms. 
 57. Several FT and DME synthesis catalysts were prepared, evaluated, screened and compared on high pressure fixed
 bed reactor system.. Pyrolysis studies with sugar cane bagasse and Calotropis procera were done on a fixed bed reactor.
 Studies on Jatropha curcus biomass on fixed bed reactor carried out. Acid hydrolysis of sugarcane bagasse was studied
 for parameter optimization. Thermophilic microorganisms samples were collected from hot springs in upper Himalayan
 regions. 10 litre of ethanol produced from starchy biomass. Ethanol production from starchy biomass and fermentable
 sugars using yeast strains were studied and produced at 10-liter scale. Process was developed for ethanol production at
 45oC by an immobilized thermophilic biocatalyst. Conversion of 33% rice, wheat flour to fermentable sugars using
 commercial thermostable enzyme was done at 10L scale. Different UDA based alkanol amines prepared, UDA based
 TMP and PE esters, tri hydroxy stearic acid esters and ricinoleic acid estolide (dimer) and its acetate on lab scale and
 prepared bulk samples on pilot plant. Laboratory scale processes were developed for the following:. Enrichment of
 erucic acid containing acyl glycerols from mustard oil, Trimethylolpropane and pentaerythritol esters of undecenoic
 acids, Ricinoleic acid estolide (dimer) methyl ester and its acetylated derivative. 
 Targets 2006-07

156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 58. Preparation of FT & DME catalysts, characterization and screening in slurry reactor. Modification of FT & DME
 catalysts, if required, optimization of parameters. Selection of catalysts for middle distillate and DME synthesis,
 generation of basic design data. Processes for the production of liquid biofuels by pyrolysis of different biomasses.
 Bioprocess for cellulase production on wheat-bran materials and on water hyacinth residue. Developing cheaper
 inducers for cellulose. Ethanol production by Simultaneous saccharification and fermentation; Preparation of
 fermentable sugars from 33% rice flour using enzyme at 500L scale; Fermentation condition optimization for ethanol
 production at 500 L scale using fermentable sugars prepared above with selected/ short lised strains; Fermentation
 Technology demonstration for ethanol production at 400 - 4000L scale. Biodegradable and non-toxic lubricants:
 Scaling up, evaluation and characterization of biodegradable lubes; Preparation of O-and S-alkyl glycerols with
 different alkyl chains with and without functionalities and their evaluation; Up scaling of selected products.
 59. The Committee is of the view that the research on alternative source of energy is still at infant stage. Where success
 has been achieved commercial feasibility is a big problem. Given the volatile situation of fossil fuels; spiraling prices of
 crude oil; environmental concerns and expensive nature of nuclear nature, sooner or later the country will have to turn
 to non-conventional energy sources for it's future needs. The efforts made in this direction may be a good start but there
 is along way to go. A non-conventional source of energy, which is commercially viable and environment-friendly
 capable of changing the present pattern of fuel consumption, is the only solution in the longer run. 
 Setting up a world class drug research institute
 60. The proposal is aimed at creating a new state-of-the-art drug research laboratory with the vision to discover and
 develop new chemical entities in disease areas of national priority and life-style & aging related disorders; The New
 drug research institute would serve as a nodal centre of the CSIR in converting 'hits' into 'new drug candidates' by
 involving its expertise from various disciplines like Medicinal Chemistry, Pharmacology, Pharmacokinetics,
 Pharmaceutics and Animal Toxicity and on the other hand pursue R&D in disease areas of national priority and some
 foresighted health problems likely to affect a large section of the world population in near future.
 61. A country still not free from diseases which acquire epidemic proportions, a research programme for drug
 development cannot be overemphasized. Given the fact that major chunk of people suffering from such diseases are the
 ones with least purchasing power makes the challenge doubly complex. Government funded research institutes, not
 being solely driven by profit motive, are not left with a choice but to shoulder the responsibility, along with other
 departments of the Government, of providing affordable drugs as no multi-national company will venture into an area
 where rich returns are not possible. The Committee is of the view that what is required is a close coordination between
 different arms of the Government as individual departments cannot be expected to bring down the cost of drugs below a
 level. The Committee feels that innovative ways like distribution of cost by providing cheap insurance for diseases to
 people have to be devised, as cost of manufacturing of drugs cannot be brought down below a point .
 62. The Committee is also of the opinion that the traditional medicine is popular, accepted and used by most of the
 country's population. Moreover, there is growing importance in traditional health systems in providing health care for
 wider population. Inspite of the Department's efforts in formulating Golden Triangle, there is a need for giving boost to
 the herbal medicines. The Committee feels that with the abundant resources of medicinal plants all over the country
 there is a need to set up a Herbal Research and Development Institute in a location where all the variation of our
 biodiversity can be tapped. 
INDIAN INSTITUTE OF CHEMICAL BIOLOGY, KOLKATA (IICB)
63. The Committee held discussions with the officials of Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata on 5th February,
 2005. During the course of the discussion, the Committee was informed that the Institute has taken up research in the
 field of cancer and significant progress has been achieved as a herbal molecule has been identified to kill chronic
 meylogenous lukemic cells. The Committee, was informed that:-
 "The molecule identified by IICB Scientists from Paan has shown in experimental conditions a beneficial affect for
 chronic meylogenous luikemic cells (CML), a kind of blood cancer. The institute has to do a lot more work on the
 molecule so that it can be passed to pharmaceutical sector for production."
 64. In pursuance of the above statement of the IICB and also in view of the discussion it had with the management of
 IICB at Kolkata, the committee strongly recommends that sicne cancer is the most difficult disease to treat in medical
 science and different types of cancer require different types of medicines, the Institute should put optimum effort to
 develop this molecule of paan to a final drug stage as soon as possible so that it could be passed on to the
 pharmaceutical sector for production in the near future thereby transmitting a lot of benefit to medical sector in treating
 chronic cases of CML.

156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
ANNEXURE
BUDGET ESTIMATES 2005-2006
 ( Rs. in crores)
 SR.NO. HEAD OF DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS/ PROGRAMMES/ SCHEMES Plan Non-Plan Total 
 1. Secretariat Economic Services …. 4.90 4.90
 Other Scientific Research 
 2. Assistance to Scientific Institutions/Professional Bodies 
 2.01 National Institute of Immunology 32.00 0.80 32.80
 2.02 National Centre for Cell Sciences 25.00 0.40 25.40
 2.03 Centre for DNA Finger printing and Diagnostics 20.00 …. 20.00
 2.04 National Brain Research Centre 13.80 …. 13.80
 2.05 National Centre for Plant Genome Research 12.70 …. 12.70
 2.06 Institute of Bioresources and Sustainable Development 3.00 3.00
 2.07 Institute of Life Sciences 12.00 …. 12.00
 TOTAL: 118.50 1.20 119.70
 3. Assistance to other Scientific Bodies 
 3.01 Human Resource Development 18.50 …. 18.50
 3.02 Bioinformatics 17.00 …. 17.00
 3.03 Biotech Facilities, Centres of Excellence and Programme Support 45.00 … 45.00
 3.04 Research and Development 164.00 …. 164.00
 3.05 Biotechnology for Societal Development 11.00 …. 11.00
 3.06 Bio-Process and Product Development 16.00 …. 16.00
 TOTAL 271.50 …. 271.50
 4. I&M Sector 
 4.01 Assistance for Technology incubators, Pilot Project, Biotechnology Parks and Biotech Development Fund 25.00
 …. 25.00
 4.02 Public Private Partnership 18.00 ….. 18.00
 2.00 …. 2.00
 Total 20.00 …. 20.00
 5. International Cooperation 10.00 …. 10.00
 6. International Centre for Genetic Engineering & Bio-Technology …. 7.50 7.50
 GRAND TOTAL: 445.00 13.60 458.60
 ANNEXURE 
 BUDGET ESTIMATES - 2005-06
 (Rs. in crores)
S. No. Head of Development Projects Budget Estimates 2005-06
 Programmes / Schemes Plan Non-Plan Total
 1. Assistance to Council of Scientific & Industrial Research 797.53 705.90 1503.43
 2. Technology Promotion Development and Utilisation Programmes 27.47 0.00 27.47
 3. Support to NRDC
 3.1 Development and promotion of Rural Technology 0.50 0.00 0.50
 3.2 Invention Promotion Programme 0.50 0.00 0.50
 3.3 Interest subsidy to NRDC 0.00 0.20 0.20
 4. Support to R&D schemes to CEL 0.00 0.00 0.00
 5 Investment in public enterprises
 5.1 Central Electronics Limited 10.00 0.00 10.00
 6. Loans to Public Enterprises
 6.1 Central Electronics Limited 10.00 0.00 10.00
 7. Secretariat Economic Services 0.00 4.90 4.90
 8. VRS in CEL 0.00 0.00 0.00
 GRAND TOTAL 846.00 711.00 1557.00
SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS

156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
1. The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department has made efforts to keep the pace of expenditure uniform
 except for the first quarter for which funds were partially released. The Committee has also been assured that the funds
 for last quarter will be fully utilized. The Committee in its previous report had recommended that the Department
 evolve a mechanism to maintain uniform pace of expenditure, to the extent possible, throughout the year. The
 Committee hopes this healthy trend will continue in future. 
 (Para 10)
 2. The Committee would like to emphasize the importance of indigenous technologies and the crucial role they are
 going to play in an increasingly globalized world. Cutting edge technologies and patentable innovations are the only
 hope for wealth generation in a cut-throat competitive environment. Scientific establishments of the country like the
 CSIR have a huge responsibility of training human resource to that effect and creating an enabling environment for
 such innovations to take place. The Committee is hopeful that the Council will leave no stone un-turned to show
 concrete results, which can help create wealth and contribute in improving people's life.(Para 25)
 3. The Scientific research in various fields is mainly dependent on the availability of modern environment and major
 research facilities. With the global competitiveness in different fields there is a need to focus on the issues relating to
 modernization of our national laborites. The Committee in its 142nd Report had recommended building of new
 infrastructure and renovation of the existing ones should be taken up in right earnest. The Committee would like to
 reiterate the same and would like to see renovation carried out as early as possible. The Committee recommends that
 the Council should draw a time-frame for such programme and should finish the task within the prescribed time-limit.
 Since the CSIR laboratories are located all over the country, having people's interface in a much better way, the
 Committee recommends that there is need for setting-up a special Technology Dissemination Cell in all the CSIR
 laboratories so that the technology support can be given to SMEs also. 
 (Para 31)
 4. The Committee feels that there is a need to improve quality of science education in the country. The start has to be
 made right at the school level. Quality of science education should not only generate keen interest in children but also
 be able to fire their imagination in order to make them stick to the science stream. A holistic 'start- to-finish 'approach is
 the need of the hour, where children once initiated in science are not left confused after their schools but are provided a
 link to higher research institute via universities. Improving quality of research courses in Universities and their
 affiliation with research institutes, can be followed according to our own requirements. The Committee is of the
 opinion that an ambitious programme, which caters both to the supply of rich human resource right from the school
 level at the lower end to rich dividends produced in the market by way of intellectual property finally is what should be
 aimed.(Para 33)
5. In a world where a substantial share of wealth produced is intellectual and a major portion of economy is knowledge-
based, definition of wealth and property has undergone a sea change. India, being a fast-growing knowledge economy
 with a huge human resource potential, is well poised to be a leader in such a scenario. Property is no longer just natural
 and physical but increasingly intellectual. To exploit the huge intellectual capital we will have to ensure certain
 fundamentals like awareness and an understanding of market mechanism so that we do not lose out to other competitors
 in an environment of patents and copyrights. The Committee appreciates the good work done by the Department and
 hopes more results will follow in the future. (Para 41)
 6. Progress of human civilization is based on innovation of one kind or the other. Material civilization progresses only
 with the progess in technology. Innovations require 'out-of-the box thinking', flexibility and an enabling environment.
 The Committee feels the above programme is a step in the right direction. It is of the opinion that there is a need to take
 care of grass root innovations as small beginnings have big results. Beside this, in an era of intellectual property,
 innovations and wealth are necessarily linked and, therefore, the stress on innovation cannot be over emphasized. (Para
 44)
 7. The Committee feels that a developing country like India needs basic infrastructure to serve the needs of a fast
 growing economy which needs even further impetus to meet the needs of teeming millions. Development, being an
 integrated process, has a multiplier effect on the economy and growth. Improvement in our scientific infrastructure is of
 utmost importance, as good research requires good laboratories and other logistic support. (Para 47)
 8. The Committee feels that the Department should make efforts to encourage more participation from the Industry with
 a good track record for distribution of both risks and rewards. Industry with a rich experience of market can help
 scientific establishments feel the pulse of the market and make scientific research commercially viable. (Para 55)
 9. The Committee is of the view that the research on alternative source of energy is still at infant stage. Where success
 has been achieved commercial feasibility is a big problem. Given the volatile situation of fossil fuels; spiraling prices of
 crude oil; environmental concerns and expensive nature of nuclear nature, sooner or later the country will have to turn

156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 to non-conventional energy sources for it's future needs. The efforts made in this direction may be a good start but there
 is along way to go. A non-conventional source of energy, which is commercially viable and environment-friendly
 capable of changing the present pattern of fuel consumption, is the only solution in the longer run.(Para 59)
 10. A country still not free from diseases which acquire epidemic proportions, a research programme for drug
 development cannot be overemphasized. Given the fact that major chunk of people suffering from such diseases are the
 ones with least purchasing power makes the challenge doubly complex. Government funded research institutes, not
 being solely driven by profit motive, are not left with a choice but to shoulder the responsibility, along with other
 departments of the Government, of providing affordable drugs as no multi-national company will venture into an area
 where rich returns are not possible. The Committee is of the view that what is required is a close coordination between
 different arms of the Government as individual departments cannot be expected to bring down the cost of drugs below a
 level. The Committee feels that innovative ways like distribution of cost by providing cheap insurance for diseases to
 people have to be devised, as cost of manufacturing of drugs cannot be brought down below a point . (Para 61)
 11. The Committee is also of the opinion that the traditional medicine is popular, accepted and used by most of the
 country's population. Moreover, there is growing importance in traditional health systems in providing health care for
 wider population. Inspite of the Department's efforts in formulating Golden Triangle, there is a need for giving boost to
 the herbal medicines. The Committee feels that with the abundant resources of medicinal plants all over the country
 there is a need to set up a Herbal Research and Development Institute in a location where all the variation of our
 biodiversity can be tapped. (Para 62)
 12. In pursuance of the above statement of the IICB and also in view of the discussion it had with the management of
 IICB at Kolkata, the committee strongly recommends that sicne cancer is the most difficult disease to treat in medical
 science and different types of cancer require different types of medicines, the Institute should put optimum effort to
 develop this molecule of paan to a final drug stage as soon as possible so that it could be passed on to the
 pharmaceutical sector for production in the near future thereby transmitting a lot of benefit to medical sector in treating
 chronic cases of CML.(Para 64)
MINUTES
 MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
 PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
 AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
 XX
 TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 5th April, 2006 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House,
 New Delhi. 
 PRESENT
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan -- Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
LOK SABHA
 Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
 Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
 Shri Francis Fanthome
 Shri Anant Gudhe
 Shri Babubhai Katara
 Shri Brahmananda Panda
 Shri Bachi Singh 'Bachda' Rawat
 Smt. Jayaben Thakkar 
 Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
SECRETARIAT
 Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
 Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
 Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
 Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 Representatives of the Ministry of Ocean Development

156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 Dr. P.S. Goel, Secretary
 Dr. B.R. Subramaniam, Scientist 'G'
 Shri V. Ravindranathan, Scientist 'G' 
 Shri Rasik Ravindera, Director, NCAOR
 Dr. V.S. Rao Chintala, Scientist 'G'
 Shri Ajai Saxena, Director
 Dr. K. Prem Kumar, Director, NIOT
 Shri R.K. Sharma, Scientist 'F'
 Shri T.V. Bhaskara Rao, Scientist 'F'
 Shri Deepak Das, CCA
 Shri Ruchika C. Govil, Director
 Shri Dinesh Kumar, Deputy Secretary (F)
 Shri M.L. Sharma, Deputy Secretary
 Shri Jung Bahadur, Scientist 'D'
 Shri P. Madeswaran, Scientist 'D'
 Shri A.B. Choudhury, Scientist 'D'
 Shri P.G. Ghosh Dastidar, Scientist 'D'
 Dr. V. N. Sanjeevan, Scientist 'D'
 Dr. S.A.S. Naqvi, Scientist 'D'
Representatives of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
 Dr. R.A. Mashelkar, Secretary 
 Shri N. Jha, Joint Secretary, (Admn.) 
 Smt. Rama Murali, FA
 Dr. Naresh Kumar, Head RDPD, CSIR
 Dr. D. Yogeshwar Rao, Head TNBD 
 Dr. A. Lahiri, Adviser, DSIR
 Dr. Somnath Ghosh, Chairman & MD, NRDC
 Dr. S. K. Kaicker, Chairman cum MD, CEL
 Smt. S. Ravindran, Scientist 'G' 
 Dr. R.R. Abhyankar, Scientist 'G'
 2. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry of Ocean Development and requested the
 Secretary to make a brief presentation regarding the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry. Thereafter, the
 Secretary made a visual presentation regarding the major activities formulated for the year 2006-07 and achievements
 of the Ministry during the year 2005-06. He also mentioned about the budgetary allocations under different heads as
 also the functioning of the Ministry. The Members then sought clarifications on points arising out of the presentation.
 The Secretary replied to them. 
 2A. The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 1.00 p.m. for lunch and re-assembled at 3.00 p.m. to hear the Secretary,
 Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
 3. At the outset, the Chairman, on behalf of the Committee, congratulated Dr. R.A. Mashelkar, Secretary, Department
 of Scientific and Industrial Research on being awarded the prestigious "Star of Asia" by Business Week, the first
 Scientist from Asia.
 4. The Chairman, thereafter, welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Department and requested the Secretary
 to make a brief presentation regarding the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department. The Secretary made a
 visual presentation regarding the major activities formulated for the year 2006-07 and achievements of the Department
 during the year 2005-06. Thereafter, he mentioned about the budgetary allocations under different heads and the
 functioning of the Department. The Members then sought clarifications on points that emerged out of the presentation. 
 4A. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
 5. The Committee then adjourned at 04.45 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on Friday, the 7th April, 2006.
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
 PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
 AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
XXII

156th Report of committee on science & technology, env. & forests
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/156threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:18]
 TWENTY SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 15th May, 2006 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament
 House Annexe , New Delhi. 
 PRESENT
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan -- Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
 2. Dr. Prabha Thakur
 Shri Dilip Singh Judev
 Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
 LOK SABHA
 Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
 Shri Francis Fanthome 
 Shri Brahmananda Panda
 Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
 Shri Bachi Singh 'Bachda' Rawat
 Shri K.C. Singh 'Baba' 
 11. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar 
 12. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
 Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
 Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
 Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
 Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 2. The Committee took-up for consideration its draft ***, 156th , ***, ***, ***, *** and *** Reports on Demands for
 Grants (2006-07) pertaining to the ***, Department of Scientific & Industrial Research, ***, ***, ***, *** and ***
 respectively. After some discussion, it adopted all the reports without any modification.
 3. The Committee authorised the Chairman, and in his absence, Dr. Prabha Thakur to present the Reports in the Rajya
 Sabha and Dr. Sujan Chakraborty, and in his absence, Shri Francis Fanthome to lay the same on the Table of the Lok
 Sabha on Thursday, the 18th May, 2006.
 4. The Committee, then, adjourned at 4.20 p.m. to meet again at 3.30 p.m. on Monday, the 22nd May, 2006.
 ***Related to other matters.