PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 201
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)FEBRUARY, 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY , 
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED AND FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-EIGHTH REPORT OF 
THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT 
AND FORESTS ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09) 
OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 17 FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 17 FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 17 FEBRUARY, 2009)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 17 FEBRUARY, 2009)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED AND FIRST REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-EIGHTH REPORT OF
THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT
AND FORESTS ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09)
OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 17 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 17 TH FEBRUARY , 2009)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY , 2009/MAGHA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—19
4. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS .................................................................................................. 21—24

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2008-09)
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Dr. Ejaz Ali
7. Shri Jabir Husain
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
**10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Akbar Ahmad Dumpy
16. Shri Francis Fanthome
*17. V acant
18. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
19. Shri Brahmananda Panda
#20. V acant
21. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
22. Shri Pratik P. Patil
23. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
24. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
25. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
26. Dr. Rampal Singh
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
29. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
30. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
31. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
** Nominated w.e.f. 24th October, 2008.
* Shri Babubhai K. Katara ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his expulsion from the
membership of the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 21st October, 2008.
# Shrimati Neeta Pateriya ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon her resignation from the Lok
Sabha w.e.f. 19th December, 2008.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Gandhi, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred and First Report on the Action Taken by the
Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations contained in One Hundred and
Eighty-eighth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment
and Forests on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Eighty-eighth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests which
was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 29th April, 2008.
3. There were twenty-one recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Eighty-eighth
Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were
received from the Ministry on 16th October, 2008.
4. In the meeting held on 3rd February, 2009 the Committee considered the draft Action Taken
Report and adopted the same.
DR. V . MAITREYAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
February 3rd, 2009 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment
and Forests on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Eighty-eighth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, which
was presented to both the houses of Parliament on 29th April, 2008. There were twenty-one
recommendations in the Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of
the Committee were received from the Ministry on 16th October, 2008.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee
on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests are set out in the succeeding
paragraphs:—
ELEVENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN (2007-12) OUTLAYS
1. Recommendation (Para 3.1)
The Committee notes that for some schemes like Environmental Management in Heritage,
Pilgrimage and Tourist Centres including Taj Protection and National Coastal Management
Programme, which have engaged the attention of the country as a whole, not much emphasis has
been given, even though they demand priority. The Committee feels the most of the Heritage,
Tourist centres are facing a huge problem of pollution due to increase in domestic and foreign
tourist influx. The Committee fails to understand as to how the Ministry will manage to tackle the
problem, with such meager budgetary provisions of Rs.0.01 crore and hopes that in future the
Ministry would take up such cases emphatically with the Planning Commission.
Action Taken by the Government
The scheme of Taj protection was taken up in the Ninth Five Year Plan as a centrally
sponsored scheme on a 50:50 coast sharing basis with states. For the Tenth Five Year Plan an
outlay of Rs.85 crores was approved. However, due to the scheme becoming sub judice , no
releases were made for the scheme, since 2003-04, in the Tenth Plan.
For the Eleventh Five Year Plan, as per requirements for all schemes, an independent
evaluation of this scheme was launched in November, 2006. The final report of this evaluation
study is likely to be received in about another month’s time. Based on the evaluation study report
a suitable decision towards continuation of the scheme and fund requirements in the Eleventh Five
Year Plan will be taken. Pending such a decision, no financial provision has been made for the
scheme in 2008-09. The notional amount of Rs.0.01 crore is only to keep the budget head active.
As regards the National Coastal Management Programme, it is a new scheme aimed at
implementing the recommendations of Prof. M.S. Swaminathan Report on Coastal Regulation. Such
a scheme would require large funds and the same will be posed for external funding as and when
a detailed scheme is formulated. However, as a first step, the World Bank has approved a Project
Preparation Facility (PPF) to prepare a detailed project report for various components of the
scheme. The allocation of Rs.1.55 crores for 2008-09 for this project, it may be noted, is an initial
amount towards establishing such project facility for the actual implementation of the project.
Based on detailed project reports prepared under the PPF, necessary funding will be sought from
Government/donor agencies for implementing the project. Hence the current allocations are towards
the PPF, based on which a full fledged scheme of National Coastal Management Programme would

2
be prepared and implemented. The allocated funds are sufficient for the purpose for which the
same are allocated.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and opines that the Ministry should pursue its
projects in a time bound manner and strive for timely implementation of its projects. It also
opines that Ministry should take all possible steps to avoid administrative and procedural
delays which may lead to project cost overrun.
REASONS FOR SHORTFALL IN UTILISATION OF OUTLAYS
2. Recommendation (Para 6.3)
The Committee notes that the Ministry has attributed the reasons for the shortfall in
utilization of outlays which are procedural, such as delay in release of matching grants by the State
Government/forest departments, time lag in  release of funds by the Ministry and actual availability
of funds to the implementing agencies, delays in receipt of proposals, submission of utilization
certificate, revalidation of unspent balances, completion of works etc. The Committee notes that
the aforesaid reasons stated by the Ministry are routine in nature and mostly relate to procedure
and administrative mechanisms, which need to be overcome and avoided in future by fine-tuning
the procedures involved.
Action Taken by the Government
Performance of the schemes is reviewed by the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and
Forests regularly in Senior Officers meetings of the Ministry. Half-yearly review meetings are also
undertaken by the Planning Commission to monitor progress of various schemes/projects.
Schemes/projects are monitored regularly in Headquarters and by on the spot field visits by
officials. Subject Divisions in the Ministry executing/implementing the schemes undertake regular
field visits to carry out monitoring and review of various schemes/projects. Monitoring process,
inter alia , include audit of accounts of grantee organization, submission of utilization certificates,
expenditure statement and a progress report on the activities conducted by the grantee organization.
Besides, Ministry has designated its senior officers as Nodal Officers for each State/UT, and these
Nodal Officers visit their designated States/UTs regularly to, inter alia , monitor and review
progress of schemes/projects in these States/UTs. Efforts are also being made to release funds
electronically to the State Governments and other implementing agencies to avoid procedural delays
in disbursement of funds.
National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board shares the concern of the Committee in
this matter. To minimize the procedural delays, the guidelines for National Afforestation Programme
are being revised.
Reasons attributed by the Ministry for shortfall in utilization of outlays are routine in nature
and mostly relates to procedural and administrative mechanisms, sincere efforts are being made by
the Ministry to avoid delays. Some of these efforts are as given below:
➢ Initiatives have been taken to streamline the Electronic Clearance Mechanism which
will help to reduce the time lag in release of funds by the Ministry to the recipient.
➢ From current financial year Sanction Order is being issued electronically through
e-lekha website, the status of which can be followed up by the issuer and the recipient
directly.

3
➢ Letters have been sent to the appropriate authorities of the State Government asking
them to submit their proposals along with physical progress report and utilization
certificate in the first quarter of the year, so as to ensure timely release of funds.
Under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme – “Development of National Parks and Sanctuaries”,
Government of India provides financial and technical assistance to State/UT Governments for the
conservation and development of Protected Areas. During the last two years, there has been 100%
utilization of funds under the Scheme. During the Eleventh Five Year Plan, it is proposed to modify
the Scheme by incorporating additional components/activities and rename it as “Integrated
Development of Wildlife Habitats” with an outlay of Rs.800.00 crores.
As regards the pollution abatement works for ameliorating water quality in rivers, funds are
released on a 70:30 cost sharing between Centre and States straight to implementing agencies
nominated by the State Governments and functioning under their control. The fund releases
are made on a recurring basis based on factors that include the progress achieved in the projects
in the States, matching shares by the respective State Governments after taking into account
the Utilization Certificates. While the above essential procedures are followed, close coordination
with the State Governments with correspondence both at official and Minister-level as well as
frequent field visits by Central Government officers are resorted to monitor implementation of
works.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and is of the view that the Ministry should ensure
that procedural delays do not occur. The Committee is of the view that monitoring of
progress of various projects on regular basis by the Ministry should also lead speedy
utilization of outlays earmarked for the purpose.
NEW SCHEMES
3. Recommendation (Para 7.1)
The Committee notes that priority in fund allocation has been accorded to ongoing schemes,
leading to lower allocation for new schemes. The Committee is aware that given the resource
constraint, the need to accord priority to ongoing schemes is genuine. However, the Committee is
constrained to observe that with such low allocations, it would not be possible to pursue the new
schemes with full strength. The new schemes which are proposed by the Ministry are in keeping
with the new demand for conservation of the environment/wildlife in general and, therefore, should
not lag behind due to paucity of funds. The Committee feels that the Ministry should take up the
issue of more fund allocation at R.E. stage for new schemes, with the Planning Commission, in
right earnest and impress upon them the need for such higher allocation, indicating the seriousness
of the Ministry to achieve its new goals.
Action taken by the Government
Allocation of funds for new schemes has been largely dictated by overall availability of
resources made available to the Ministry by the Planning Commission, priority being given to
completion of ongoing schemes/components. It may be noted that the new schemes/new
components of ongoing schemes are yet to be approved from administrative/financial angles, which
are likely to take some more time during the year. Depending upon the progress in obtaining these
approvals and the time period within which these schemes become effectively operational during
the year, the Planning Commission will be approached for additional funds at RE stage, depending
upon the revised fund requirements of these schemes during the financial year.

4
The budget allocation for the new scheme ‘Gram/Panchayat Van Yojana’ for 2008-09 has
been kept at a low level owing to the reason that the Scheme is still under formulation. Only when
it is made fully operational, will there be need for substantial allocation. However if the need arises,
enhanced allocation will be sought at RE stage during the current financial year itself.
Intensification of Forest Management (IFM) is not entirely a new scheme but has been
framed for the scope of the Integrated Forest Protection Scheme (IFPS) which was operational
during Tenth Plan by adding four more components, namely—
(i) Conservation and Restoration of unique vegetation and Ecosystems;
(ii) Protection and Conservation of Sacred Groves;
(iii) Prevention, control and eradication of Forest Invasive Species (FIS); and
(iv) Preparedness for meeting challenges of Bamboo flowering and Improving Management
of Bamboo Forests.
These components have been added to address the requirements of the specific subjects and
to ensure overall health of the forests.
The process of finalization of scheme is still under way and is likely to take sometime,
hence for the current financial year the allocation has been earmarked at a lower side. During the
next financial year, keeping in view the response of the States, enhanced allocations will be asked
for as suggested by the Committee.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and is of the view that Ministry must ensure that
Planning Commission release necessary additional budgetary support to meet the revised
fund requirements of the projects at R.E. stage so that their progress is not adversely
affected due to shortage of funds.
PREVENTION OF POLLUTION OF NATIONAL RIVERS
4. Recommendation (Para 8.6)
The Committee expresses its serious concern over the fact that though from the time of
its initiation, crores have been spent on the Ganga Action Plan, there has not been much
improvement in water quality in r eality, despite the claims of the Ministry. The practice of dumping
untreated sewage from cities on the banks of the Ganga and dead bodies and carcasses in the river
continues unabated causing pollution. The Committee feels that the project has suffered due to
apathy and lack of a suitable system in place to monitor the implementation.
Action Taken by the Government
Regular monitoring of the projects is done both at the Central and State levels through a
multilayer monitoring mechanism which reviews the policy issues, funding pattern and progress of
works from time to time. Field visits ate frequently done by the officers of the Ministry.
Inadequacies in implementation, if any, are brought to the attention of the State Governments
through letters addressed to Chief Ministers/Chief Secretaries. As regards dumping of dead bodies
and carcasses in the river, the Non Government Organizations/public have been requested to
cremate dead bodies in accordance with Hindu ritual using the electric/improved wood based
crematoria constructed under the Plan so that the environment is not polluted. The different local
agencies/bodies are being persuaded to create public awareness in this regard. A number of public

5
participation and public awareness programmes have been undertaken in different towns under
Ganga Action Plan in the form of exhibition/workshops, street plays, rallies/padajatras by local
people, school based programmes, and shramdan programmes by cleaning, sweeping the banks of
river Ganga. Improved wood based crematoria schemes are also promoted under GAP-II in U.P.
and Bihar.
Comments
The Committee expresses its displeasure over the evasive and routine reply
furnished by the Ministry while the Ministry may be content with its efforts to clean the
Ganga, the Committee is not at all satisfied with the progress made thus far in this regard.
Surprisingly, the Ministry has not responded to the dumping of untreated sewage into the
river which is one of the major sources of pollution. The Committee is constrained to
observe that with such an apathetic and complacent attitude of the Ministry, the Ganga
Action Plan would continue to suffer.
5. Recommendation (Para 8.7)
The Committee also expresses its concern at the fact that there has been marginal reduction
in allocation due to slow progress of works in the Yamuna Action Plan in the three States of Delhi,
Uttar Pradesh and Haryana, despite the fact that water quality remains below the acceptable norms.
Industrial and domestic sewage discharge and open defecation continues, despite various legislations
to control and stop the pollution levels. The Committee also expresses its concern at the fact that
though there has been no dearth of funds for the Yamuna Action Plan, no satisfactory results have
been achieved as regards cleaning of the river, which provides drinking water to Delhi, Haryana
and Uttar Pradesh and the river has in fact turned into a dirty drain.
Action Taken by the Government
Though there has been slow progress in the works of Yamuna Action Plan (YAP) Phase-II
in the initial stage, presently works have gained up momentum. Y AP-II is being implemented in the
three States of Delhi, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana on a 85:15 cost sharing basis between the Centre
and the States. In Haryana, out of a total approved cost of Rs.62.5 crores, funds released by
the Government of India till June,  2008 to the State Government have been to the tune of
Rs.17.36 crores against which an expenditure of Rs.19.24 crores (including State share) has been
reported. In Uttar Pradesh, out of a total approved cost of Rs.124 crores, funds released by
the Government of India till June,  2008 to the State Government have been to the tune of
Rs.40.91 crores against which an expenditure of Rs.32.71 has been reported. In Delhi, out of a
total approved cost of Rs.387 crores, funds released by the Government of India till June, 2008
to the State Government amount to Rs.44.27 crores against which an expenditure of
Rs.24.78 crores has been reported.
The second phase of YAP was started in December, 2004 with the completion period of
5 years. This phase-II was formulated to take up other pollution abatement works of the river
Yamuna, as prioritized by the States and includes, (i) installation/rehabilitation of Sewage Treatment
Plants (STPs), rehabilitation/replacement of trunk sewers in Delhi, (ii) installation of STPs, laying
of sewer lines and rising mains in Agra, Uttar Pradesh and, (iii) laying of sewer lines in six towns
of Haryana. The major allocation of Y AP-II is for works in Delhi. The process of tendering and
award of works are gathering momentum. The physical implementation in respect of the four core
components of Delhi Jal Board have commenced and targeted to be completed in a period of two
years. The work for fifth component has also been awarded for which works are likely to start
after monsoon. In the meeting taken by the Chief Secretary, Delhi to review the progress of

6
YAP-II works, Delhi Jal Board was asked to expedite the program of implementation particularly
in view of the forthcoming Commonwealth Games.
In addition to this, the Delhi Government is undertaking large scale sewerage and non-
sewerage works for preventing the pollution of Yamuna river. To ensure that only treated sewage
is discharged into the river Yamuna, Delhi Government/DJB has proposed to implement the
interceptor sewer with the following features in a time bound manner at Rs.1500 crore :
(i) laying of interceptor sewers along three major drains namely, Najafgarh, Supplementary
and Shahdara;
(ii) augmentation of the existing capacity of Sewage Treatment Plants at the mouth of
Delhi Gate drain and Dr. Sen Nursing Home Drain;
(iii) intercepting 13 small drains into Bela Road and Ring Road Trunk Sewer after
rehabilitation; and
(iv) construction of additional Sewage Treatment Plants after utilization of full capacity of
existing plants.
A proper mechanism already exists for ensuring coordination and management between the
Centre and the State Governments for monitoring the works under the Plan. In order to further
strengthen this mechanism, the High Powered Committee constituted under the Chairmanship of
Lt. Governor of Delhi has initiated action for preparation of an integrated plan addressing issues
of both quantity in terms of river flow and quality of Yamuna river.
Comments
The Committee expresses its serious concern over the tardy progress of the project
and low utilization of funds meant for the purpose and desires that the Ministry should
utilize its fund allocation to its optimum level and take all the necessary steps for pollution
abatement works of the river Yamuna.
6. Recommendation (Para 8.8)
The Committee also expresses its concern at the fact that no proper mechanism has been
created towards recharging the Yamuna river. The Committee recommends that a proper system be
set up for recharging the river by creating man-made water bodies like reservoirs and catchment
areas, which can store the monsoon water, which usually goes into drains and then stored water
can be released into the river during the lean season.
Action Taken by the Government
Regarding recharging the Yamuna river, the Ministry of Water Resources while discussing
the issue of the maintenance of minimum flow of 10 cumecs in river Yamuna, has stated that the
construction of proposed upstream storage structures (dams) namely, Renuka (H.P.), Lakhwar
Vyasi and Kishau (Uttarakhand) are likely to augment flows in the river.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and observes that the Ministry should pursue the
Yamuna Action Plan diligently and in a time-bound manner as the target of cleaning
Yamuna is still far from being achieved.

7
7. Recommendation (Para 8.9)
The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to pin-point the reasons for the failure
of such major projects and to take urgent steps towards rectifying the problem areas. The
Committee also recommends that to make the projects result oriented, the Ministry should take
stringent action against officials who are found lacking in terms of deliverance and penal action
be taken against the defaulters for violating of legislations.
Action Taken by the Government
The strategy/approach towards river conservation is reviewed by the Government from time
to time as a continuous process. River conservation is a mammoth task requiring the involvement
of all the stakeholders in the project and Central assistance is provided only to supplement the
efforts of the State Government for pollution abatement through creation of proper civic
infrastructure. Conservation of rivers is a dynamic activity with the ever increasing pollution load
due to increase in population. The projects are implemented by the Implementing Agencies
nominated by the State Governments and they are functioning under their administrative control.
Officers from this Ministry frequently visit the work sites and hold meetings with the officers of
the Implementing Agencies to review the progress of works and inadequacies in implementation, if
any, are pointed out at the highest administrative level.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee is of the view that it is for the
Ministry to take effective action. It has the required resources and experts to undertake
the work. The Ministry should be prepared with outcomes and action taken report.
8. Recommendation (Para 8.10)
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should develop a proper coordination
mechanism with the agencies/departments/ministries involved in cleaning up the river Yamuna and
Ganga to solve the problem. The research activities of the scientific departments with regard to
treatment and waste management may be put to optimum use to prevent pollution of rivers and
lakes in the country.
Action Taken by the Government
The Steering Committee of National River Conservation Authority is having representations
from the agencies/departments/ministries/ State Governments and serves the objective of proper
coordination necessary for implementation of the programme. Besides the above, correspondence
and interactions are resorted to ensure coordination between the concerned agencies. Committee’s
observation regarding utilization of the research activities of the scientific departments with regard
to treatment and waste management for optimum use towards prevention of rivers and lakes has
been noted.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like more effective action and project-wise
accountability in place.
9. Recommendation (Para 8.11)
The Committee notes with concern that an amount of Rs.35.00 crores has been diverted
from such a significant scheme like National River Conservation Programme (NRCP), to a non-

8
critical area viz. the expenditure on establishment related matters. This points towards the
lackadaisical approach of the Ministry towards the problem of river and lake water pollution across
the country, though the pollution levels continue to rise at an alarming level.
Action Taken by the Government
During the Financial Year 2007-08, the decision to re-appropriate funds from the major plan
schemes of the Ministry of Environment and Forests was necessitated by the unilateral cut to the
tune of Rs.70 crores by the Planning Commission and transferring the same to the non-plan budget
of the Ministry. The transferred amount mainly related to salary and establishment related
expenditure of various plan schemes. Lack of provision, by the Finance Ministry, of a
corresponding amount in non-plan budget of the Ministry led to difficulty in payment of salaries
and other establishment related expenses. To resolve the problem Ministry was advised by Finance
Ministry to re-appropriate similar amount of funds from some larger schemes for Ministry’s salary
and establishment provisions. Accordingly , NRCP was one of the schemes from where funds were
so re-appropriated on advise of the Finance Division.
Comments
The diversion of funds from plan to non plan has come to adverse notice of the
Committee. Therefore, it feels that such an unhealthy tendency should be curbed.
FOREST CONSERV ATION, DEVELOPMENT AND REGENERATION
10. Recommendation (Para 9.6)
The Committee notes that the name of the programme ‘Integrated Forest Protection
Scheme’ has been changed to “Intensification of Forest Management’ with broadly the same
objectives as the earlier programme with the addition of only two new components. The Committee
fails to decipher the logic behind simply changing the nomenclature of the programme and feels
that unless there is a will and resolve to do something concrete, mere change in the name would
not result in any substantial gain. The new components that have been added now, could be
accommodated even within the ambit of the earlier scheme, with slight modifications/additions.
Action Taken by the Government
By adding two new components the scope of the scheme has been widened, and it has been
made broad based hence the change of name. The two new components would address the specific
interventions proposed which were not possible within the frame work of existing scheme viz.
Sacred Groves represent an example of community initiative to protect a forest area/patch of
forests. These Sacred Groves are present sporadically in large part of the country, however in the
recent years due to changing circumstances, these groves have remained neglected. To encourage
the communities to protect these areas of unique biodiversity, some financial support is needed to
take up activities which may include inventorization, mapping of resource, site specific fencing,
various cultural operations, documentation of socio-cultural aspects, etc. Similarly, the areas
representing unique vegetation and ecosystems would also require very specific intervention. The
total allocation for the scheme during the Eleventh Plan is Rs.600.00 crores which represents an
increase of 50% over the Tenth Plan allocations.
Comments
The Committee would like to know the details of initiatives taken by the Ministry to
address the specific issues which were not possible within the framework of earlier schemes.

9
The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should make optimum use of the enhanced
budgetary support and inform the Committee about the progress made in this regard.
11. Recommendation (Para 9.7)
The Committee while noting that in the past, even sugarcane fields were counted as forest
cover, recommends that the methodology of assessing the green cover needs to be modified and
the latest satellite imaging techniques along with extensive ground truth cross checking, should be
used to distinguish the actual forest cover from other tall crops and to correctly estimate the actual
area under forest, since correct data assessment is essential for proper policy formulation and
follow up action.
Action Taken by the Government
Corrective measures for improving accuracy of forest cover mapping have already been
taken by Forest Survey of India (FSI). The measures include the following:
(i) Ground truthing for the forest cover mapping has been made more intensive and
objective;
(ii) Interpretational errors of previous assessments i.e. 2001 and 2003 have been rectified
by harmonizing the area figures presented in State of Forest Report (SFR) 2001 and
2003 on the basis of ground truthing and current interpretation;
(iii) Steps for refining the methodology for forest cover mapping have been taken in the
current cycle, The latest Indian Remote Sensing data i.e., IRS P6 LISS III is being
used for the mapping; and
(iv) A Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of FSI has been constituted by the Ministry
of Environment and Forests, Government of India to over see the issues related to
methodology.
TAC includes members from Survey of India, Indian Institute of Remote Sensing
(IIRS), National Sample Survey Organization (NSSO), Space Application Centre
(Department of Space), State Forest Departments, Indian Agriculture Statistical
Research Institutes (IASRI), Wildlife Institute of India (WII), Indian Council of
Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE), Indira Gandhi National Forest Academy
(IGNFA), Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) and FSI.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
NATIONAL AFFORESTATION AND ECO-DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
12. Recommendation (Para 10.9)
The Committee expresses its concern at the fact that even though the Ministry intends to
achieve the target of 33% of Forest cover by 2012, the only scheme that treats afforestation in
a holistic manner and seeks to involve the communities and the society in general in the
preservation and conservation of forests has been deprived of funds. The Committee notes with
concern that the modalities for the scheme-Panchayat Van Yojana, are yet to be worked out with
the Panchayats and feels that the Ministry should have done the ground work for the scheme well
before launching this programme so as to ensure utilization of funds and successful implementation
of the scheme.

10
Action Taken by the Government
National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board (NAEDB) shares the concern of the
Committee about the fact that the required level of plan allocation for achieving the target of 33%
Forest and Tree Cover (FTC) has not been provided to the Ministry which has been pursing the
goal in right earnest. The Eleventh Plan allocation of Rs.2000 crores for National Afforestation
Programme shows an increase over the Tenth Plan allocation of Rs.1205 crores. It is to be brought
to the notice to the Committee that the Planning Commission has revised the target of achieving
increase in forest and tree cover by five percentage points by the Year 2012. It is also to be stated
that the new scheme of Gram/Panchayat Van Yojana is being fi nalized in consultation with the
concerned Ministries/Departments by following due procedures. The notional allocation is to enable
operationalisation of the scheme operational during current financial year.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and is of the view that the Ministry must approach
Planning Commission for additional financial support at R.E. stage so that the programme
may not lose importance on account of financial shortfalls. Further, the Committee is of the
view that the Ministry should take necessary actions to expedite the finalizing of the new
scheme of Gram/Panchayat Van Yojana in consultation with the concerned Ministries/
Departments.
13. Recommendation (Para 10.10)
The Committee recommends that Ministry should formulate an effective strategy to create
mass awareness about afforestation among poor people and tribal communities, who depend on
forests in different ways as it may, in turn not only increase forest cover but would also provide
better opportunity, empowerment, livelihood and security to them.
Action Taken by the Government
NAEB has been undertaking various communication activities like organizing Vriksha Melas
(Tree Fairs) in rural areas, awareness campaigns through Nehru Yuva Kendras, Song and Drama
Divisions, State Forest Departments and advertisement on railway reservation tickets, Meghdoot
post cards, etc. Realizing the need for more effective awareness creation among people, efforts are
being made to develop more such activities in a focused and concerted manner taregeting mainly
the rural people.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION/TRAINING/EXTENSION
14. Recommendation (Para 11.5)
The Committee feels that to deal with the issue of conservation and preservation of
environment, in a broad perspective, the younger generation should be made fully aware of the
environmental concerns that are engaging the attention of the country and world at large. Though
the Ministry has been doing a commendable job in promoting environmental education by imparting
non-formal education at the primary and secondary school level and in colleges and universities,
the Committee, however, feels that there is a greater need to stress upon the system of formal
education, by including the environmental concepts in the school/colleges/universities curriculum

11
itself. In this direction the Committee recommends that the Ministry’s proposal to enhance financial
assistance to the States for training of school teachers for effective transaction of environment
education curriculum in the school under the component of strengthening environment education
in the school, should be given top priority. Effort should also be made to recognize schools that
go green by banning use of plastic bags, etc. thereby sensitizing children towards environment and
environmental issues.
Action Taken by the Government
Ministry of Environment and Forests has encouraged and initiated several programmes and
schemes to strengthen Environmental Education in the formal education system. One of the major
initiatives taken in the formal education sector’s Environment Education in School System (EESS)
Project. This project initiated in 1999, was divided into two phases. In the first phase a
comprehensive study was conducted to assess the status of environmental content in the school
curriculum and to assess the effectiveness of classroom teaching. The study was conducted in all
the States/UTs of the country and textbooks of all the classes from standards I to XII were
analyzed. Based on the findings of the study, textbooks of the upper primary classes were infused
with environmental concepts. These modified textbooks were used in the selected 100 schools of
15 States on pilot basis. The teachers involved in teaching these textbooks were also trained. While
some of the States mainstreamed these textbooks, some others used the environmental content of
these textbooks while developing textbooks for the entire State.
The Supreme Court of India also strengthened these efforts by issuing a directive to make
environment education compulsory at all levels of education. At present the MoEF is helping the
States/UTs in complying with this directive by providing financial assistance and technical expertise
for infusion of environmental concepts in textbooks, training of teachers involved in teaching EE
and development of resource material on EE.
Recently, the work accomplished by MoEF along with ‘Centre for Environment Education’
(Centre of Excellence) was compiled into a report named “Environmental Education in the Indian
School System” - Status Report 2007. This report was launched at the 4th International Conference
on Environmental Education.
Ministry of Environment and Forests is dedicated to the cause of strengthening EE in all
the sections of the society from children to adults; Formal Education System is one of the best
media to achieve this goal. The process of providing financial and technical support to the States
has already been initiated. The aim is to train all the teachers involved in teaching EE and to infuse
environmental concepts in textbooks of all languages in all regions of the country.
Comments
The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should ensure compliance of the
direction of the Hon’ble Supreme Court that environment education be introduced at all
levels of education. The orientation of certain sections of the syllabus towards environment
education will not adequately address the issue. The need is to introduce environment
education in school and University education.
PREVENTION OF AIR AND WATER POLLUTION
15. Recommendation (Para 12.3)
The Committee notes with concern that the budgetary support for the Central Pollution
Control Board (CPCB) has been decreased substantially, despite the fact that it is a premier central

12
agency responsible for control and prevention of pollution, and pollution continues to rise unabated
across the country. The Committee is also constrained to note that the responsibility and the funds
for the civic infrastructure projects, for controlling urban pollution, hitherto funded under NRCP,
has been transferred to the schemes like Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission
(JNNURM) and Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns
(UIDSSMT) under the Ministry of Urban Development and the funds under CPCB has been reduced.
Action Taken by the Government
The budgetary support to CPCB during the last three years is provided below:—
Financial Year Fund allocation Expenditure
2007-08 45.00 crore 37.50 crore
2006-07 42.90 crore 37.57 crore
2005-06 39.00 crore 38.46 crore
The explanation for the decrease of expenditure has been furnished by CPCB as under:—
(i) CPCB has set up demonstration projects for implementation of Municipal Solid
Wastes (Management & Handling) 2000 on cost sharing basis with local bodies in respect
of one to two towns in each State of the country. However with the introduction of scheme
like JNNURM and UIDSSMT by Ministry of Urban Development and to avoid duplication
and over lap, the budget estimates for 2007-08 and as envisaged for 2008-09 have been
accordingly revised.
(ii) During the period, CPCB has established continuous air quality monitoring stations,
undertook demonstration project for Solid Waste Management, Source Apportionment
studies and has also established its Zonal Offices in its own premises including slow
process of establishment of the said stations, the expenditure has been lower than it was
expected.
(iii) Utilisation Certificates are awaited from some State Pollution Control Boards for
reimbursement of charges for Water and Air Quality Monitoring for the newly sanctioned
monitoring stations during 2007-08.
(iv) There has been no effect on performance of activities by CPCB and the CPCB has been
adequately utilizing the funds for equipping itself to undertake monitoring of water and air.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
16. Recommendation (Para 12.4)
The Committee also notes that the allocation under the Promotion of Central Effluent
Treatment Plants (CETP) has been only marginally increased from Rs.4.00 crores in R.E. 2007-08
to Rs.4.45 crares in BE. 2008-09 and expresses its concern that the CETPs which are an essential
component in the treatment of industrial and domestic sewage, has been allocated lesser funds. The
Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry should seriously look into the issue of polluting
industries, which discharge their effluents directly into river and lakes. It also recommends that the
Ministry may think in terms of taking some harsh measures like imposing heavy penalties and

13
issuing closure notice to such Industrial setups, if they fail to install the requisite effluent treatment
plants within a specified time.
Action Taken by the Government
The concept of CETPs envisages to treat the effluent emanating from the clusters of
compatible small and medium scale industries. A Centrally Sponsored Scheme has been under
implementation by the Ministry of Environment and Forests for enabling the small and medium
scale industries to set up Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETP) including upgradation of the
existing CETPs. The scheme for financial assistance for the CETPs is given below;
• State Subsidy – 25% of the total project cost;
• Matching Central Subsidy – 25% of the total project cost;
• Entrepreneurs contribution – 20% of the total project cost;
• Loan from financial institutions – 30% of the total project cost;
(IDBI, ICICI or any other nationalized Banks, State Industrial Financial Corporation etc.)
Central assistance upto 25% of the total cost of the CETP is provided as a grant to the
CETP on the condition that a matching grant is sanctioned and released by the State Government.
The funds to the CETPs are routed through the concerned SPCBs.
It is found that most of the State Governments are not forthcoming in sending proposals
of the CETPs. The State Governments have been requested many times to send proposals for
establishment of the CETPs in their State along with their comments after coordinating with their
State Environment Department, so as to consider them for sanction of Central Subsidy. Lack of
response from the State Governments, barring a few, is the main reason for only marginal increase
of the outlay for the scheme of CETPs during the year 2008-09.
Wherever the industries are failing to install the requisite effluent treatment plants or failing
to comply with the discharge standards, necessary actions are being taken by the concerned State
Pollution Control Boards under the provisions of various Environmental Acts.
Comments
The Committee is constrained to note that the lack of response from most of the
State Governments in sending proposals for the CETPs hampers the setting up  of plants. It
is of the opinion that the Ministry must play proactive role and ensure better coordination
with the State Governments in this regard and should take all possible actions for timely
setting up of new plants wherever effluents are found to be discharged into rivers and lakes
without treatment.
WILDLIFE PRESERV ATION
17. Recommendation (Para 13.9)
The Committee notes the constitution of the National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA)
for conservation of tiger in the country, the population of which is declining due to unabated
poaching. The Committee expresses the concern at the fact that though anti-poaching legislations
have been in force since 1972, the country has seen a steady decline in population of tigers, which
lead to the intervention at the Prime Ministerial level. These point towards the failure of the
Ministry in ground implementation of existing legislations. The Committee expresses its doubts as
to whether the Ministry would be able to check the decline in the number of tigers, just by

14
renaming the already existing schemes. The Committee, therefore, recommends that initiative for
wildlife protection should be taken up by the Ministry with full vigour and resolve, that it does not
remain a mere legislation on paper.
Action Taken by the Government
Milestone initiatives taken by Government of India for conservation of tiger :
Legal steps
(i) Amendment of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 for providing enabling provisions for
constitution of the National Tiger Conservation Authority and Wildlife Crime Control Bureau.
The punishment in cases of offence within a tiger reserve has been enhanced. The Act also
provides for forfeiture of any equipment, vehicle or weapon that has been used for
committing any wildlife offence.
Administrative steps
(ii) Strengthening of antipoaching activities, including special strategy for monsoon patrolling,
by providing funding support to Tiger Reserve States, as proposed by them, for deployment
of antipoaching squads involving ex-army personnel/home guards, apart from workforce
comprising of local people, in addition to strengthening of communication/wireless facilities.
(iii) 100% Central assistance provided to 17 Tiger Reserves as an additionality for deployment
of Tiger Protection Force, comprising of ex-army personnel and local workforce.
(iv) Constitution of the National T iger Conservation Authority with effect from 4.09.2006, for
strengthening tiger conservation by, inter alia , ensuring normative standards in tiger reserve
management, preparation of reserve specific tiger conservation plan, laying down annual/
audit report before Parliament, constituting State level Steering Committees under the
Chairmanship of Chief Ministers and establishment of Tiger Conservation Foundation.
(v) Constitution of a multidisciplinary Tiger and Other Endangered Species Crime Control
Bureau called as Wildlife Crime Control Bureau with effect from 6.6.2007 comprising of
officers from Police, Forest, Customs and other enforcement agencies to effectively control
illegal trade in wildlife.
(vi) Approval accorded for declaring eight new Tiger Reserves.
(vii) The revised Project Tiger guidelines have been issued to States for strengthening tiger
conservation, which apart from ongoing activities, inter alia , include funding support to
States for enhanced village relocation/rehabilitation package for people living in core or
critical tiger habitats (from Rs. one lakh/family to Rs. ten lakhs/family), rehabilitation/
resettlement of communities involved in traditional hunting, mainstreaming livelihood and
wildlife concerns in forests outside tiger reserves and fostering corridor conservation
through restorative strategy to arrest habitat fragmentation.
(viii) A scientific methodology for estimating tiger (including co-predators, prey animals and
assessment of habitat status) has been evolved and mainstreamed. The findings of this
estimation/assessment are benchmarks for future tiger conservation strategy.
(ix) Around 31111 sq.km. of critical/core tiger habitat identified in 17 States.
(x) Memorandum of Understanding developed for better/concerted implementation of
conservation inputs through tiger reserve States.

15
Financial steps
(xi) Financial and technical help is provided to the States under various centrally sponsored
schemes, viz. Project Tiger and Development of National Parks and Sanctuaries for enhancing
the capacity and infrastructure of the States for providing effective protection to wild animals.
International Cooperation
(xii) India has a Memorandum of Understanding with Nepal on controlling trans-boundary illegal
trade in wildlife and conservation, apart from a protocol on tiger conservation with China.
(xiii) A Global Tiger Forum of Tiger Range Coun tries has been created for addressing
international issues related to tiger conservation.
(xiv) During the 14th meeting of the Conference of Parties to CITES (Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species), which was held from 3rd to 15th June, 2007
at The Hague, India introduced a resolution along with China, Nepal and the Russian
Federation, with directions to Parties with operations breeding tigers on a commercial scale,
for restricting such captive populations to a level supportive only to conserving wild tigers.
The resolution was adopted as a decision with minor amendments. Further, India made an
intervention appealing to China to phase out tiger farming, and eliminate stockpiles of Asian
big cats body parts and derivatives. The importance of continuing the ban on trade of body
parts of tigers was emphasized.
Reintroduction of Tigers in Sariska Tiger Reserve
One male and a female tiger have been reintroduced in Sariska Tiger Reserve (Rajasthan),
based on the recovery strategy suggested by the Wildlife Institute of India. Initially the tigers were
housed in in-situ enclosures for acclimatization. Both the tigers have been now released in the wild
with GPS radio collar. Their movements are being closely monitored.
Creation of Special Tiger Protection Force (STPF)
(a) The policy initiatives announced by the Finance Minister in his Budget Speech of
29.2.2008, inter alia , contains action points relating to tiger protection (para 114,
Sl. No. 73). A one-time grant of Rs.50.00 crore has been proposed to the National
Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA) for raising and deploying the Special Tiger
Protection Force. A proposal in this regard has been prepared and process is underway
for the needful.
(b) Proposal relating to Promulgation of an Ordinance for amending the Wildlife
(Protection) Act, 1972 to provide enabling provisions for constituting the Special Tiger
Protection Force submitted with the concurrence of Union Ministry of Law and Justice
to the PMO. Process is ongoing for the needful.
Forest occupancy and population estimates of tiger as per the refined methodology
State Tiger Tiger Numbers
km
2 No. Lower limit Upper limit
1 2345
Shivalik-Gangetic Plain Landscape Complex
Uttarakhand 1901 178 161 195
Uttar Pradesh 2766 109 91 127

16
12 3 4 5
Bihar 510 10 7 13
Shivalik-Gangetic 5177 297 259 335
Central Indian Landscape Complex and Eastern Ghats
Landscape Complex
Andhra Pradesh 14126 95 84 107
Chhattisgarh 3609 26 23 28
Madhya Pradesh 15614 300 236 364
Maharashtra 4273 103 76 131
Orissa 9144 45 37 53
Rajasthan 356 32 30 35
Jharkhand** 1488 Not Assessed
Central Indian 48610 601 486 718
Western Ghats Landscape Complex
Karnataka 18715 290 241 339
Kerala 6168 46 39 53
Tamil Nadu 9211 76 56 95
Western Ghats 34094 412 336 487
North-East Hills and Brahmaputra Flood Plains
Assam* 1164 70 60 80
Arunachal Pradesh* 1685 14 12 18
Mizoram* 785 6 4 8
Northern West Bengal* 596 10 8 12
North East Hills, and 4230 100 84 118
Brahmaputra
Sunderbans 1586 Not Assessed
Total Tiger Population 1411 1165 1657
* Population estimates are based on possible density of tiger occupied landscape in the area, not assessed by double
sampling.
** Data was not amenable to popula!ion estimation of tiger. However, available information about the landscape
indicates low densities of tiger in the area ranging from 0.5 to 1.5 per 100 km 2.
Comments
While appreciating the efforts made by the Ministry for conservation of tigers, the
Committee is hopeful that the population of tigers in the country would increase following
the action taken. There is need to set up a validation of count on a regular basis.

17
18. Recommendation (Para 13.10)
The Committee expresses concern over the general apathy, that the Ministry has shown
towards implementation of legislations regarding forest conservation, protection of wildlife etc. and
recommends that the legislations may be forcefully enforced to prevent any further degradation of
environment. In this direction the Ministry should take into account the man - animal conflict that
the country is currently facing due to pressure of development and encroachment of forest land.
The Committee welcomes the increase of the funds for relocation of families from the tiger habitat
to the periphery, from Rs.1 lakh to Rs.10.00 lakhs and recommends that the Ministry make
concerted efforts towards expediting the relocation of families, and ensuring peaceful co-existence
of both man and animals.
Action Taken by the Government
Through the 2006 amendment to the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 the National Tiger
Conservation Authority and the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau has been established. This has
considerably strengthened the legal provisions for dealing with wildlife matters in the country.
Similarly, addressing man-animal conflict is one of the priority areas of the Ministry. The Ministry
under various Centrally Sponsored Schemes provides financial and technical assistance to the State/
UT Governments for various activities aimed at the conservation of wildlife including mitigation of
man-animal conflicts.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to see better implementation of
legislation and accountability at all levels.
19. Recommendation (Para 13.11)
The Committee ‘expresses its concern that a large number of vacancies, both in the centre
and States have yet not been filled up. The Committee had last year expressed its concern over
this matter. Filling of the vacancies in the posts of forests wardens and forests guards are of prime
importance for the implementation of the legislations regarding forest conservation and animal
protection; the State Governments are lagging behind in the filling of a large number of vacancies
at these levels. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should vigorously pursue the filling
up of posts with the State Governments and monitor the filling up of vacancies, besides filling up
of vacancies at the Central Level.
Action Taken by the Government
The day-to-day management of Protected Areas, Tiger Reserves and Elephant Reserves is
vested primarily with the concerned State/UT Governments. As such, the filling up the vacancies
of frontline staff in such areas lies with the State/UT Governments. The Ministry has time and
again requested the State/UT Governments to fill up the vacant posts on a priority basis.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and observes that the Ministry could not absolve
itself of its responsibilities by citing laxity on the part of the State Governments. The
Committee is of the view that the Ministry is the Central authority for wildlife
conservation and through better co-ordination and management it could enforce the
defaulter States to fill up the vacancies of frontline staff. The Central financial aids and

18
grants sanctioned under the wildlife preservation schemes to these States could be withheld
or curtailed on account of non-compliance.
20. Recommendation (Para 13.12)
The Committee further recommends that Ministry should adopt a strategy towards
controlling supply of wildlife and its products to both domestic as well as international markets.
The control would not only require strengthening human but also enhanced technical surveillance;
web patrolling; media watch; creation of crime data bank; strengthening/capacity building of
enforcement and prosecution process; life style/livelihood issues of communities subsisting on
wildlife, etc. The Ministry should also embark on a strategy of creating awareness amongst the
international buyers; using bilateral and multilateral mechanisms in trade; international trade
regulatory mechanisms and other foreign policy measures to reduce the demand.
Action Taken by the Government
Control of poaching, taxidermy and illegal trade in wild animal and plant species is identified
as a strategy for action under the National Wildlife Action Plan (2002-16). The implementation of
the Action Plan is periodically reviewed and monitored by the Ministry with the concerned State/
UT Governments. Further, the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 has stringent provisions against
hunting and illegal wildlife trade.
India is signatory to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora (CITES), which regulates international wildlife trade. India also is a member of
the International Whaling Commission (IWC), Global Tiger Forum (GTF).  Further, India is a
founder member to the Coalition Against Wildlife Trafficking (CAWT). Similarly, India has bilateral
arrangements with China and Nepal on preventing illegal wildlife trade across the borders.
Through the 2006 amendment to the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, the Wildlife Crime
Control Bureau was established in 2007. The Bureau compliments the efforts of Enforcement
Agencies and enhances their technical capacity to deal with the illegal wildlife trade and raises
awareness about that. The Bureau is in the formative stages of its functioning and has initiated
actions to fulfill the above mandate to combat wildlife crime.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and is of the opinion that India being signatory to
international forum can prevent the illegal wildlife trade across the borders to some extent,
but in addition Ministry must deal violations of laws with stringent actions to combat
wildlife crime.
URBAN W ASTE MANAGEMENT
21. Recommendation (Para 14.2)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of  Environment and Forests should seriously
pursue the stakeholders-municipalities, corporations, etc., to use these technologies which besides
being environment friendly have a number of  advantages over the conventional means like
incinerations, landfills, dumping in the sea or other water-bodies, composting, etc. The Ministry
should ensure that such sewage treatment plants are integrated/installed at least in Delhi, Kanpur
and other cities along with the Yamuna and the Ganga which have virtually turned the river into
a nallah by dumping untreated sewage. The Committee also recommends that action in this regard
be taken on priority in a time-bound manner.

19
Action Taken by the Government
Since, the Secretary-in-Charge of the Department of Urban Development of the concerned
State or the Union Territory has the ‘overall responsibility for the enforcement of the provision of
the Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000 in the Metropolitan Cities and
the District Magistrate or the Deputy Commissioner of the concerned District has the responsibility
for enforcement of these Rules within the Territorial Limits of their Jurisdiction as per the criteria
and the procedure and time limits laid down in Schedule II, the Ministry has forwarded the
recommendation of the Committee to Ministry of Urban Development to take necessary action. on
the recommendations. Further, they are responsible to develop the necessary infrastructure for
collection, storage, segregation, transportation, processing and disposal of municipal solid waste.
The municipal authority or an operator of a facility has to obtain an authorization from the State
Pollution Control Board or the Committee before setting up the waste processing and disposal
facility including landfills. The selection of technology for the Solid Waste Treatment Plant is
entirely the decision of the State/Local Bodies depending on the quantity and characteristics of the
wastes and the local circumstances. The Ministry has no role in prescribing these technologies. It
is upto the implementing agencies to decide and adopt any suitable technology as per the filled
conditions. However, the information with regard to the two technologies developed by Bhabha
Atomic Research Centre (BARC) have been made available to the Government of NCT of Delhi.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and desires that the Ministry should neither abdicate
its responsibility of controlling pollution nor leave the matter entirely to other agencies like
Municipalities/States etc. The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry should continue
to play a proactive role so as to control and abate all kind of pollution including urban
waste.

MINUTES

22

23
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 3rd February, 2009 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kamal Akhtar
3. Shri Saman Pathak
4. Shri Jabir Husain
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
9. Shri Akbar Ahmad Dumpy
10. Shri Francis Fanthome
11. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
12. Shri Pratik P. Patil
13. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
14. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
15. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri A.K. Gandhi, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
2. The Committee took up for consideration its draft 201st Report pertaining to the Action
Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the 188th Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests. The Committee
adopted the report with certain additions/modifications as suggested by Members.
23

24
3. The Committee decided to present the 201st Report on Action Taken by the Government
on the Demands for Grants (2008-09) Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests to the
House on 17th February, 2009. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence
Shri D. Raja to present the Report in Rajya Sabha and Dr. Sujan Chakraborty and in his absence
Shri Francis Fanthome to lay the copy of the report on the table of Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3:30 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 10th February, 2009.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.