PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY SEVENTH REPORT
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Two Hundred and Seventy Ninth Report of the Department
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for
Grants (2016-17) of the Department of Space
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
287
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY SEVENTH REPORT
Action taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the Two Hundred and Seventy Ninth Report of the Department
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for
Grants (2016-17) of the Department of Space
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2016/ Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-12
5. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 13-16

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-17)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2016)
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury— Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
5. Shri C.P. Narayanan
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
8. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Shri Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
(i)

(ii)
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati M. Vasanthi
31. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Two Hundred Eighty seventh Report on the Action Taken by the Department of
Space on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Seventy ninth Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Department of Space, which was presented/laid in the both
the Houses of Parliament on 9th May, 2016.
2. There were twenty two recommendations in the Two Hundred Seventy ninth Report of the Committee.
Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Department on
23rd August, 2016.
3. In the meeting held on 29th November, 2016, the Committee considered the draft Report and
adopted the same.
   N
EW D ELHI; RENUKA CHOWDHURY
1 December, 2016 Chairperson,
 Agrahayana 10, 1938 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests,
Rajya Sabha.

(iv)
ACRONYMS
DOS : Department of Space
GSL V : Geostationary Satellite Launch Vehicle
CES : Crew Escape System
ECLSS : Environmental Control and Life Support System
SAR : Synthetic Apreture Radar
ISRO : Indian Space Research Organisation
INC : ISRO Navigation Centre
IRNWT : IRNSS Network Timing Centre
JSG : Joint Steering Group
PDR : Preliminary Design Review
DECU : Development & Educational Unit
NDMA : National Disaster Management Authority
FLEWS : Flood Early Warning System
ASDMA : Assam State Disaster Management Authority

REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Space on the
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Seventy-ninth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2016-17) of the Department of Space, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament
on 9th May, 2016. There were twenty two recommendations in the Report of the Committee. Action
Taken Note on the recommendations of the Committee was received from the Department on 23rd
August, 2016. The Committee, on examination of Action Taken Notes, is not satisfied with action taken
by the Department in respect of one recommendation (para 11.4) and would like the Department to take
further action thereon as indicated in the Report.
The Committee's recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the
action taken by the Department of Space are set out in the succeeding paragraphs:-
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF DEPARTMENT
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the fact that the cuts in the budgetary grants at the R.E. stage in
financial years 2013-14 and 2014-15 were above Rs.1600 crore and Rs.1400 crores respectively
which results into delays and disruption in launching of crucial programmes of strategic importance.
However, in 2015-16, the allocation was reduced by Rs. 428.75 crore. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the cuts in the grants at R.E. stage should be avoided so that the Department could
continue with work as per the priorities set by it without any obstacles of resource crunch. In
addition, the Department should also be provided adequate funds to undertake all its critical
programmes and schemes in right earnest. (Para 4.1)
Action Taken by government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. The views of the Committee will be communicated
to Ministry of Finance at the time of Budget discussions.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed of the outcome of the
discussions.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2016-17
Recommendation
The Committee strongly recommends that the Government should positively consider the requirement
of additional funds for the Department in order to facilitate undertaking works of strategic importance.
(Para 5.2)

2
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. The Department has already requested an
additional amount of Rs. 750 Crore during the first supplementary stage in June 2016 which is under
consideration of Ministry of Finance.
Comments
The Committee notes the action taken by the Department and would like to be informed
of the progress in the matter.
PHYSICAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT IN 2015-16
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the achievements of the Department. Launching of ASTROSAT, India's
first space observatory, completion of Indian Regional navigation Satellite System and launching
of some of the important communication satellites has demonstrated India's potential to become a
world leader in Space Technology. The Committee strongly feels that such achievements should not
only be continued but should also be sustained and improved so as to make India self-reliant, self
independent and successful in its space missions. (Para 6.1)
Action Taken by Government
The encouraging views of the Committee are noted with gratitude. The Department will strive
towards achieving greater heights in space technology in coming years.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
MAJOR PROGRAMME AND SCHEMES
POLAR SATELLITE LAUNCH VEHICLES
Recommendation
The Committee strongly recommends that a crucial programme of PSLV launches should not be
subjected to resource crunch. Considered as a work horse, PSLV have been extremely successful in
launching most of the significant satellites of India and hence, the Committee recommends that the
programme should not face reduction in budgetary allocation at R.E. stage which would cause
disruption and delays in launches. (Para 9.5)
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. The Department shall ensure that PSLV programme
will be adequately funded, and if needed, the provision will be augmented at RE Stage.

3
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
GEOSTATIONARY SATELLITE LAUNCH VEHICLE (GSLV)
Recommendation
The Committee feels that GSLV-MK III is a successful accomplishment of the Department exhibiting
India's might in the world in launching next generation launch vehicle with indigenously developed
cryogenic engine. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the testing of cryogenic engine and
its induction into the GSLV-MK III launch vehicle should be speeded up and completed by the
Department within its scheduled time frame. (Para 10.5)
Action Taken by Government
The activities for the realisation of the Cryogenic stage for the GSLV Mk III have been speeded
up, and a mechanism for the careful monitoring of the schedule of various activities for the stage
realisation, resting and qualification is already in place. The flight engine has been realized and is currently
undergoing high altitude tests. The flight stage is expected to be delivered for the first developmental
launch of GSLV Mk III, scheduled in the last quarter of 2016-17.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee feels that the adequate budgetary allocation to an important programme like GSLV-
MKIII Development should always be made available to the Department to ensure expeditious
completion of the programme. Since a reduced allocation has been made for the programme in
2016-17, the Committee recommends that no cuts in budgetary grants in the programme should be
made at the R.E. stage in 2016-17 so that the progress of the programme is not adversely affected.
(Para 10.8)
Action Taken by Government
GSLV Mk III Development programme was approved in April 2002 with a total cost of 2498 crores.
Approval of Revised Cost Estimates for the project was obtained during March 2014 revising the total
project cost to Rs.2962.78 crores. In the revised scope, the project envisages testing of one Experimental
flight and two Developmental flights. The project is in the advanced stages of realization. The Experimental
flight was successfully accomplished during December 2014. The cumulative expenditure as on March
31, 2016 is Rs.2698.63 crore which is about 91% of the approved cost. Major procurement activities
towards sourcing of materials, sub-assemblies, components, etc, have already been completed. The
remaining amount is earmarked towards assembly, integration, testing and launch related activities of the
two developmental flights which are scheduled during 2016-17 and 2017-18. The Department will make
all efforts to ensure that these two developmental flights are realized within the scheduled time.

4
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
TRISONIC WIND TUNNEL PROJECT
Recommendation
The Committee had, in its 255th Report on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of Department of Space,
considered the subject and highlighted that budget provision for the project in 2014-15 could not
be utilised due to the inability of the Department to obtain necessary approvals. The Committee had
therefore recommended that the approval for the project should be obtained at the earliest. The
Committee is, however, constrained to note that despite the recommendation, the financial approval
is still awaited which is delaying the programme. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department should exhibit its zeal and obtain all the approvals at the earliest so that the programme
takes off without further delay. (Para 11.4)
Action Taken by Government
The revised Project Report for realization of Trisonic Wind Tunnel Facility has been finalized. The
proposal is being processed further to obtain necessary Government approvals. All efforts will be made
to obtain the financial approval during 2016-17.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed of the concrete action taken
by the Department to obtain all the necessary approvals at the earliest.
MANNED MISSION/HUMAN SPACE FLIGHT PROGRAMME
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the pre-project activities are still in progress and critical technologies like
Crew Escape System (CES) and Environmental Control and Life Support System (ECLSS) are in the
process of testing and validation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such critical technologies
should be completed on a priority basis within a specified time frame without which Manned
Mission/Human Space Flight Programme will not be accomplished. (Para 12.4)
Action Taken by Government
The activities related to the critical technologies, like Crew Escape System and Environmental
Control, and Life Support Systems are progressing well, and are expected to be completed in 2016-17.
The next important milestone in this development is the Pad Abort Test, to validate the Crew Escape
System, which is scheduled in the last quarter of 2016. With Pad Abort Test, the overall scope of the
activity will be completed.

5
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Department will ensure the timely
accomplishment of the Programme.
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the Department's inability to utilize the funds and its failure to make
best use of the funds available to it for completion of the project in 2015-16, as a result of which
the funds were reduced at R.E. stage. The Committee recommends that the Department should take
the programme seriously and should make full utilization of the funds made available to it.
(Para 12.5)
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. The Department shall make efforts in completing
the activities approved under critical technologies for human spaceflight with full utilistion of funds
allocated in 2016-17.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
RADAR IMAGING SATELLITE-RISAT-1A
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that RISAT-1A is an important satellite having applications in
agriculture, forests and in disaster management and therefore its launch is significant for its
contribution in the said fields. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Department should take
required steps for the completion of the programme within its scheduled time frame. (Para 13.3)
Action Taken by Government
Radar Imaging Satellite 'RISAT-1A is a C-Band Synthetic Apreture Radar (SAR) microwave imaging
satellite with all weather and day/night imaging capability. The date from the satellite is intended for
operational applications, such as, agriculture crop monitoring like rice & Jute during the growing seasons,
flood inundation mapping for post flood event mitigation as well as for studies related to wetland
mapping, forest biomass estimation, snow & glaciers, etc. The project was approved in December, 2015.
As recommended by the Committee, actions have been initiated to ensure the spacecraft readiness within
its scheduled time frame, i.e., by August 2018. Some of the major activities initiated for this purpose
are given hereunder:
• Project team formulation has been done. Preliminary configuration review has been completed.
Preliminary Design Review committee order is in place.
• Adoption of 70 v bust for all sub-systems is being finalized. Li-ion battery sizing and mechanical
design has been completed. AOCS configuration has been finalized.

6
• As regards to Payload development, configuration and design have been completed for Antenna
and RF Systems. Active Antenna Tile configuration is in advanced stage of completion.
• Procurement actions have been initiated for sourcing electronic components, materials etc.
required for the project.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee notes that inspite of having augmented the budget allocation for the project at R.E.
2015-16 to Rs. 10.20 crore to meet the requirements towards initial milestone payments for procurement
for long lead electronic equipments, the Department has not been able to utilise any amount till
February, 2016. The Committee recommends that the Department should make sure that all necessary
efforts are made to achieve the desired targets of the project in 2016-17 and there is no underutilisation
of funds. (Para 13.4)
Action Taken by Government
During 2015-16, the Department has utilized funds to the extent of Rs.9.82 crores as on March
2016 under RISAT-1A Project, against RE allocation of Rs.10.20 Crores. During 2016-17, an amount of
Rs.35 Crore has been allocated towards this project. Department shall make all efforts to ensure that the
amount allocated in 2016-17 are fully utilised.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
SATELLITE NA VIGATION PROGRAMME
Recommendation
The Committee congratulates the Department on the successful launch of IRNSS-IG. The Committee
is of the view that with this launch, India will have an independent robust navigation system which
is a significant achievement for the country. The Committee, however, recommends that the Department
should make efforts to complete the additional ISRO Navigation Centre (INC) and IRNSS Network
Timing Centre at Lucknow in scheduled time frame which will assist in functioning and operation
of navigation system. (Para 14.5)
Action Taken by Government
The realization of redundant ISRO navigation Centre (INC), and IRNSS Network Timing Centre
(IRNWT), at Lucknow, has already been commenced. While INC is likely to be ready for operations
by Nov. 2016, the IRNWT is likely to be in place by Aug., 2017.

7
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to be apprised of the current status
of ISRO Navigation Centre (INC) and IRNWT, Lucknow.
SPACE SCIENCES - ASTROSAT MISSION
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the budget allocations for the Astrosat Mission, which was reduced during
2014-15 and 2015-16, at R.E. stage could not be fully utilized by the Department. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should go all-out to avoid underutilisation of the
allocated funds. (Para 15.2)
Action Taken by Government
ASTROSAT, India's first dedicated astronomy satellite was successfully launched by PSLV-C30 on
September 28, 2015. ASTROSAT enables simultaneous multi-wavelength (Ultraviolet to X-Ray) observations
to study Stars and Galaxies. The satellite provides the opportunity to task observations for the scientific
community. With this, the project activities have been completed. Only a nominal amount of Rs. 1 crore
has been allocated towards post launch activities during 2016-17.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
INDIAN LUNAR MISSION - CHANDRAYAAN-2
Recommendation
The Committee notes the increased allocation to the programme in 2016-17 and recommends that
the Department should utilise the allocated budget in an optimal manner so that the Orbiter, Lander
and Rover modules of the mission are realized without any delay. (Para 16.3)
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. An amount of Rs.80.00 Crore has been allocated for
Chandrayaan-2 project in 2016-17. The Department will ensure, that the allocated funds are optimally
utilized for timely realization of Orbiter, Lander and Rover modules of the project.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee is of the opinion that completing the mission Chandrayaan-2 indigenously is both
a challenge and an opportunity before the Department and with its completion, India's capability

8
in launch technology will be proved. However, the Committee notes that the mission is far behind
the targeted schedule and therefore, recommends that the Department should take steps to speed up
the stages of development of the project and complete the designs and testing of the components
to ensure its targeted launch by first half of 2018. (Para 16.6)
Action Taken by Government
A programmatic change was required for the Chandrayaan-2 mission, and the same was revised in
May 2015. As recommended by the Committee, the Department has speeded up the activities related to
realization of the project on schedule. Some of the important activities completed/planned in this direction
are given below:
• The Preliminary Design Review of all the systems of the project have been completed.
• The rover (Engineering Model) has been realized and functional tests are in progress. The
flight model will be assembled by end of 2016.
• The Orbiter structure has been realized and all the Orbiter subsystems are in different stages
of realization/testing. All systems will be realized and integrated/tested by March 2017.
• The design of the new systems in Lander has been completed and developmental model is
undergoing tests. Integrated tests on these new systems will be completed by end of December
2016. The flight model will be realized by middle of 2017.
• All the payloads/instruments are being realized and will be ready for integration by middle of
2017.
• The integration of the flight model of Chandrayaan-2 is targeted to be completed by December,
2017 for launch by the first half of 2018.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
NASA ISRO SYNTHETIC APERTURE RADAR MISSION (NISAR)
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the allocation for NISAR was reduced to nearly half at R.E. stage, out
of which only a meagre amount of Rs. 1.91 crore could be utilised by the Department upto February
2016. The reasons furnished by the Department indicated that either the Department could not
realistically plan the various stages of the programme or could not meet the schedule of events of
the project. The Committee recommends that the Department should monitor the progress of the
programme through an institutional mechanism and ensur e that the funds allocated for the project
during 2016-17 are utilised optimally. (Para 17.5)

9
Action Taken by Government
NASA ISRO Synthetic Aperture Radar (NISAR) mission is a dual frequency (L and S Band) SAR
mission, which has been formulated as a joint mission between ISRO and NASA. In order to monitor
the progress of the programme, Implementing Arrangement between ISRO and NASA for cooperation
on the NISAR mission for scientific studies of Earth was signed on September 30, 2014. It defines the
roles and responsibilities of NASA and ISRO, and also defines the documentation and implementation
aspects. As per the Implementing Arrangement, an ISRO-NASA Joint Steering Group (JSG) has been
constituted to review project status, resolve any outstanding issues, provide institutional resources, to
ensure timely delivery of mission elements and efficient operations, decide any matters that affect the
mission launch schedule etc. The first meeting of JSG was held on July 21, 2015 and Second meeting
was held on August 2, 2016.
Preliminary Design Review (PDR) for S-band SAR payload, and the Spacecraft were completed in
March 28-29, 2016 and May 3-4, 2016 respectively. Overall observatory level (L-band SAR, S-band SAR
and satellite bus altogether) Preliminary Design Review has been completed during first week of August
2016.
During 2015-16, the Department has utilized funds to the extent of Rs.22.47 Crores, as on March
2016 under NISAR Project, against RE allocation of Rs.25.98 Crores. During 2016-17 and amount of
Rs.100 crore has been allocated towards this project. Department shall make all efforts to ensure that
the amount allocated in 2016-17, are fully utilized and the physical targets set for the programme are
met.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
SATELLITE FOR SAARC COUNTRIES
Recommendation
The Committee notes the progress achieved in obtaining concurrence and signing of crucial agreements
with some SAARC countries i.e. Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, and Nepal. The Committee, however, notes
that agreement with other countries, alongwith Afghanistan, are still being pursued and recommends
that the other countries should be actively pursued so that concurrence from all SAARC members
is obtained at the earliest and the funds earmarked for the project are realised. (Para 18.4)
Action Taken by Government
Concurrence for orbital location and frequency for the proposed Satellite has been obtained from
all SAARC member nations, except, Afghanistan and Pakistan. Agreements with Sri Lanka, Nepal, Bhutan
and Maldives are in place. Agreements with Nepal and Bhutan were signed in March 2016. The revised
agreement was signed with Maldives in April, 2016. While Bangladesh has, in principle, agreed to sign
the agreement, a visit of their delegation to India is planned during the second week of August, 2016.
Agreement with Afghanistan is inconclusive and technical discussions are under progress.

10
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to be apprised of the further
developments in this direction.
Space Applications - Contribution to the Society
HORTICULTURE-PROJECT 'CHAMAN'
Recommendation
The Committee notes the application of the spin-off technologies in the sectors of agriculture and
irrigation, which are the backbone of India's economy, and feels that the Department has the
potential to enhance the space applications in these sectors which would tremendously contribute
to growth of the economy of the country at large. The Committee recommends that the Department
should make more efforts in enlarging space applications and in pursuing projects which involve
societal and economical benefits. (Para 19.7)
Action Taken by Government
Space based applications are being effectively utilized in agriculture and irrigation sector, and many
such applications have been adopted by the concerned Ministries/Departments for operational use. Some
of the major applications, which have been internalized include - (i) pre-harvest crop production estimation
to support policy decisions on food grain procurement, (ii) acreage assessment of horticulture crops and
site suitability for its expansion in under-utilized areas, (iii) identification of cultivable wastelands for
suitable reclamation measures to bring more areas under cultivation, (iv) assessment of crop condition
& crop damage, (v) monitoring of irrigation infrastructure & identifying gap areas for better planning,
(vi) irrigation monitoring in command areas to assess cropping intensity & water-use efficiency.
Department of Space has taken initiatives for developing techniques for pre-harvest crop production
estimation for more number of major crops, precision farming, enabling advisories on soil health for
optimal nutrient management, crop pests & diseases in endemic regions, and developing models to enable
efficient water usage and improved soil & water conservation measures through development of locale-
specific action plans.
Department of Space is working closely with various Central Ministries/Departments and State
governments towards maximizing the use of space based tools/applications in governance & development
and harnessing the benefits of space technology for societal and economical benefits. About 160 application
projects have been taken up in various sectors right from agriculture, urban & rural planning to disaster
risk reduction. Many flagship programmes viz. AMRUT, Housing-for-all programme, National Mission
for Clean Ganga, MGNREGA etc., are being supported utilizing space based tools.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee had recommended in its 255th Report that the Department of Space should avoid
reduction in Development & Educational Unit (DECU) and other programmes of societal benefit.

11
The Committee, however, observes substantial reduction in budgetary allocations to Development &
Educational Unit (DECU) programme and also notes underutilization in many projects of Space
applications. The Committee recommends that the policy framework for SATCOM based societal
applications should be finalised at the earliest. The Committee also recommends that the Department
should take all measures to avoid underutilization of funds available at the Department's disposal
which adversely affects the programmes having long term societal benefits. (Para 19.11)
Action Taken by Government
As recommended by the Committee, measures are being initiated, to fully utilise the allotted funds
for programmes of societal benefits, like expansion of tele-education facilities in North Eastern states,
tele-medicine facilities in Char Dham, etc. Drafting of refined policy-framework for SATCOM based
societal applications is under formulation by factoring user demands, newer technologies etc.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
DISASTER MANAGEMENT SUPPORT
Recommendation
The Committee notes the work done by the Department in the monitoring of Chennai floods of 2015
and also steps taken to improve Flood Warning Systems. The Committee is of the view that floods
can cause damage to lives and property and recommends that the Department should provide all
necessary support and strengthen early flood warning systems and detection of unseasonal floods
and rainfall to minimise the loss in case of such natural calamities. (Para 19.16)
Action Taken by Government
All the major flood events are being monitored, and the area of inundation is being intimated to the
concerned state relief commissioners and central agencies, such as, National Disaster Management
Authority (NDMA), and Ministry of Home Affairs. In the 2016 flood season, till date, 18 flood maps have
been disseminated for 8 flood incidents in 6 states (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Madhya Pradesh,
Manipur and Uttar Pradesh). In addition, a flood inundation viewer (beta version) for Bihar State is
released for the Disaster Managers, to understand the inundation due to rise of water level at different
parts of the river (gauge stations).
Under the Flood Early Warning System (FLEWS) project, being carried out in Assam in association
with Assam State Disaster Management Authority (ASDMA), 41 flood alerts have been released for
different regions of Assam during 15 May 2016 - till date. Out of these 41 flood alerts, inundation has
happened in 17 cases, river level rise was observed in 18 cases and 5 cases were found to be false alerts.
One case is yet to be validated.
Godavari flood forecast model is being applied in real-time during monsoon period, since 2010, with
real-time data support from CWC, Hyderabad and IMD, Hyderabad. Web-enabled spatial flood forecast

12
system is developed for the Godavari River using Bhuvan portal of NRSC, and the results are disseminated
through the portal during flood season. The Mahanadi flood forecast model is being tested in real-time
data support from CWC, Bhubaneswar and IMD, Bhubaneswar. Similar models are under preparation for
Krishna, Brahmani-Baitarani, Ghagra, Gandak, and Kosi rivers.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.
SPACE PROGRAMME AND INDUSTRY PARTICIPATION
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the recommendations of the Internal Committee on supporting Start-Ups
in Space Sector is still under review. The Committee feels that encouraging start-ups by the
Department would foster indigenous capability in space related manufacturing sector . The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the recommendations of the Internal Committee should be reviewed at
the earliest and efforts should be made to give a boost to the start-ups. (Para 20.2)
Action Taken by Government
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. The Department is in the process of identifying
areas where start-ups can play a meaningful role in Indian space programme. It is envisaged to create
technology incubation centres, to incubate their ideas in novel technology areas.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply and would like to be apprised of the development
in this area.
NATIONAL SPACE ACT OF INDIA
Recommendation
The Committee feels that a National Space Act of India would be beneficial for the overall growth
of Space activities facilitating participation of both public and private sectors, enforcing
commercialization including better delivery of space services and supervision and regulation of
space related activities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should take all
necessary action for the enactment of the law at the earliest. (Para 21.3)
Action Taken by Government
A draft version of the bill, has been prepared based on consultations with experts of space law,
followed by an appraisal to space commission. This has been submitted to the Prime Minister's Office,
seeking in-principle approval from Hon'ble Prime minister as Minister-in-Charge for the Department of
Space, to proceed with the pre-legislative consultation process. Upon approval, notification for public
comments and inter-ministerial consultations would be taken up.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply.

13
MINUTES

V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 29th November, 2016 in Room No.'67' First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury— Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
6. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
8. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
9. Kum. Sushmita Dev
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Shri Laxman Giluwa
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Chirag Paswan
14. Shri Nana Patole
15. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
16. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
17. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
18. Shri Vikram Usendi
19. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
15

16
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. She
informed the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 286th, 287th,
288th, 289th, 290th and 291st reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations contained in reports of the Committee on the Demands for Grants
(2016-17) pertaining to Departments of Biotechnology, Space, Scientific and Industrial Research, Science
& Technology, Atomic Energy and Ministry of Earth Sciences. The Committee then considered the draft
286th to 291st Reports and after some deliberations adopted the same.
3. The Committee also decided to present/lay its 286th to 291st reports to both the Houses of
Parliament on 1st December, 2016. The Committee authorised the Chairperson and, in her absence, Shri
Prasanna Acharya and in his absence Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan to present the reports in the Rajya
Sabha and Shri Vikram Usendi and, in his absence, Shri Laxman Giluwa, to lay the reports on the Table
of Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.05 
P.M.
*** relater to other matters.