PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED ELEVENTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Department
of Scientific and Industrial Research
(Demand No. 86)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th March, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th March, 2018 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)
311
REPORT NO.

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED ELEVENTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Department
of Scientific and Industrial Research
(Demand No. 86)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 13th March, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th March, 2018 )
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2018/Phalguna, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)-( V)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-29
5. R ECOMMENATIONS /OBSERV ATIONS— AT A GLANCE ......................................................... 30-35
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 37-43

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
(Constituted on 1st September , 2017)
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
6. Shri C. P. Narayanan
7. Shri Parimal Nathwani
8. Shri Sharad Pawar
9. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri P. P. Chauhan
16. Kumari Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20 Shrimati V asanthi M.
21. Shri Daddan Mishra
22. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
23. Shri Chirag Paswan

(ii)
24. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
130. Vacant
231. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
1 Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan ceased to be a member of the Committee  w.e.f. 12th December, 2017.
2 Shri Nana Patole ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from the Lok Sabha w.e.f.
 14th December, 2017.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report
on its behalf, present this Three Hundred Eleventh Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the
detailed Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (Demand
No.86).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on the 13th February, 2018, the Secretary and other officers
of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research gave an overview of the various activities of the
Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department
to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications
sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise
the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 6th March, 2018.
  N
EW D ELHI; ANAND SHARMA
6 March,  2018 Chairman,
Phalguna 15, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONMYS
APCTT  : Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology
APSCCFC : Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Caste Co-operative Finance
Corporation Ltd.
ASCI : Agricultural Skill Council of India
B E  : Budget Estimate
BIRD-CRF  : Building Industrial Research & Development - Common
Research Facilities
CDC  : Consultancy Development Centre
CEL  : Central Electronics Ltd.
CII  : Confederation of Indian Industry
CSIR  : Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
CSIR-CCMB  : CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology
CSIR-CMERI  : CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute
CSIR-IGIB  : CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology
CSIR-IICB  : CSIR - Indian Institute of Chemical Biology
CSIR-IIIM  : CSIR- Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine
CSIR-IMT  : CSIR - Institute of Microbial Technology.
CSIR-NCL  : CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory
CSIR-NEIST  : CSIR- North East Institute of Science and Technology
CSIR-URDIP  : CSIR-Unit for Research and Development of Information
Products
DSIR  : Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
EDP  : Entrepreneurship Development Programme
GBP  : Guwahati Biotech Park
IPR : Intellectual Property Rights
MSMEs : Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
MTCC : Microbial Type Culture collection
(iv)

(v)
NET : National Eligibility Test
NRDC : National Research Development Corporation
P ACE : Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research and Technology
Development
PDTC ; Programme for Development of Technologies for
Commercialisation
PIII ; Programme for Inspiring Inventors and Innovators
PRISM : Promoting Innovations in Individuals, Start-ups and MSMEs
R&D : Research and Development
RE : Revised Estimate
SCA : Sickle Cell Anemia
SDGs : Sustainable Development Goals
SHG : Self Help Group
SRF : Senior Research Fellowships
TDD : Technology Development and Demonstration
TKDL : Traditional Knowledge Digital Library

REPORT
MANDATE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
1.1 The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research is one of the three Departments of the
Ministry of Science and Technology. The mandate of Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
includes promotion of industrial research through indigenous technology promotion, development, utilization
and transfer.
1.2 The primary endeavour of DSIR is to foster development of state-of-the-art technologies and
products through Research and Development (R&D), encourage industry to increase their share in the
country's R&D expenditure, support industrial units in developing competitive technologies of high
commercial potential, catalyze faster commercialization of laboratory-scale R&D, and strengthen consultancy
and technology management capabilities.
1.3 The DSIR has two Public Sector Undertakings viz. National Research Development Corporation
(NRDC) and Central Electronics Ltd. (CEL) and two autonomous institutions viz. Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research (CSIR) and Consultancy Development Centre (CDC). The Department also
provides host facilities and assistance to Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology (APCTT)
as the focal point in the country.
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
and Forests considered the Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research in its meeting held on 13th February, 2018.
3. FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT:
3.1 A chart showing the BE and RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the Department
during 2015-16, 2016-17,2017-18 and allocation made in 2018-19 of the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research is as under:
(` in crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Actual Expenditure Percentage
Utilisation (B.E)
2015-16 4031.00 4036.70 4028.57 99.93
2016-17 4062.80 4062.80 4051.68 99.72
2017-18 4446.00 4629.70 3759.04 84.54
(upto 31.01.2018)
2018-19 4795.97 - - -

2
3.2 The Committee finds that financial performance of the Department has been by and large
satisfactory in the past years. However, the Committee notes that during 2017-18, the Department
could utilize only ````` 3759.04 crore as on 31st January, 2018 against the allocated amount of
````` 4629.70 crore (RE 2017-18), which means that an amount of ````` 870.66 crore still has to be
utilized with two months left in the current financial year. The Committee therefore recommends
that with periodic monitoring on quarterly basis, optimum utilization of allocated funds may be
ensured.
4. SCHEMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
4.1 The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research intimated that during 2018-19 under Umbrella
Scheme "Industrial Research and Development", it will be pursuing the following Schemes:
(i) Promoting Innovations in Individuals, Start-ups and MSMEs (PRISM): Under this
programme, financial assistance is extended to the independent innovators for converting
innovative ideas into demonstrable working models/prototypes/processes that may take the
form of new or improved products, processes, or services and assist them to become
incubatees/techno-entrepreneurs.
4.2 The BE and RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the Department during
2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-18 and allocation made in 2018-19 of the above scheme are as under:
(` in crore)
Y ear  B.E. R.E. Actual Expenditure
2015-16 7.00 3.00 1.67
2016-17 4.00 2.50 2.27
2017-18 5.00 2.50 1.73 (upto 31.01.2018)
2018-19 4.50 - -
4.3 The Committee was informed by the Department that Programmes and Targeted Deliverables during
2018-19 are as under:
Sl. No. Head Physical ` in crore
Deliverables
1. Support to on-going PRISM Projects 35 N os. 1.15
2. Support to on-going/ new TePP Outreach cum Cluster 10 Nos. 1.20
Innovation Centre
3. Support to new Projects under PRISM 35 Nos. 1.80
4. Participation in workshops, Exhibitions/ review meets 5 Nos. 0.35
T
OTAL 4.50

3
(ii) Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research and Technology Development (PACE):
Under the programme, support is provided to industries and institutions for development and
demonstration of innovative technologies.
4.4 The BE and RE allocations made and actual expenditure incurred by the Department during 2015-
16, 2016-17,2017-18 and allocation made in 2018-19 for the above scheme are as under:
(` in crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Actual Expenditure
2015-16 7.00 5.00 3.29
2016-17 6.00 7.00 5.76
2017-18 6.50 3.00 0.67
(upto 31.01.2018)
2018-19 7.00 - -
4.5 The Committee was informed by the Department that ` 7.00 crore has been allocated for this
scheme with the following Programmes and Targeted Deliverables during 2018-19:
• Support to 5 on-going technology development and demonstration (TDD) projects
• Support to 10 new technology development and demonstration projects
• Support to 5 new IMPRINT projects
(iii) Building Industrial Research and Development - Common Research Facilities (BIRD-
CRF): Under this programme, R&D in industry is encouraged and supported; and support is
provided for creation of Common Research and Technology Development Hubs for micro,
small and medium enterprises.
4.6 The BE and RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the Department during
2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-18 and allocation made in 2018-19 of the above scheme are as under:
(` in crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Actual Expenditure
2015-16 9.00 6.30 2.10
2016-17 5.50 5.50 4.93
2017-18 7.00 6.00 3.44 (upto
31.01.2018)
2018-19 10.00 - -

4
4.7 The Committee was informed by the Department that ` 10.00 crore has been allocated for this
scheme with the following Programmes and Targeted Deliverables during 2018-19:
- Setting up of new CRTDHs in Phase-III in 5 identified sectors.
- Continued support to seven CRTDHs already set up during 12th plan period, for industrial
R&D innovation by Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs). R&D equipment shall
be procured and installed by the already approved CRTDHs with partial grants released.
- Providing assistance in technological problem-solving and capacity building to MSMEs thereby
enhancing their productivity and competitiveness.
- Facilitation of MSMEs to conduct their research and development activities, including testing
of innovative products and new technologies using the infrastructure and equipment established
at these CRTDHs.
- Invoking industrial participation through networking and nation-wide publicity of the created
facility. Each CRTDH shall cater to a maximum number of MSMEs within a time-frame of
five years.
(iv) Access to Knowledge for Creation of Innovative Capacity and Dissemination (A2K+):
Under this programme, studies and conferences in up-coming areas of industrial research are
taken up besides carrying forward the Technology Development and Utilization Programme for
Women.
4.8 The BE and RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the Department during
2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-18 and allocation made in 2018-19 of the above scheme are as under:–
(` in crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Actual Expenditure
2015-16 11.00 8.70 6.90
2016-17 9.00 6.50 2.46
2017-18 5.00 5.00 3.75 (upto 31.01.2018)
2018-19 5.00 - -
4.9 The Committee was also informed about the Targeted outcome/deliverables from the scheme during
2018-19 which are as under:–
• Following three TDDP shall be completed:
Sl. No. Project Title Company
1. Low Temperature Polymer Exchange Elpro Energy Dimensions Pvt. Ltd.
Membrane Fuel Cell and Stack
2. Development of Fuel Cell Bus Tata Motors Limited

5
Sl. No. Project title Company
3 Process Up-scaling and Clinical Evaluation Panacea Biotech Limited
PBL-1427: A Novel Long Acting DPP IV
Inhibitor for the treatment of Type 2
Diabetes
• 5 new TDUPW projects to be initiated, 2 Satellite Centres shall be established and two TAC
meetings will be organised for recommending project proposals for funding. 7 PRC meetings
will be held to monitor the progress of the supported projects.
• 25 fresh events to be supported/organized.
• 10 new Studies shall be supported.
4.10 The Committee observes that there has been persistent underutilization of allocated funds
in all the above mentioned four Schemes, not only during 2017-18 but also in the previous years
too. The Committee expresses its deep concern over the underutilization of fund with regard to
PACE scheme in 2017-18 in particular where only `````0.67 crore (upto 31.01.2018) have been
utilized against allocation of `````3.00 crore (RE 2017-18). The reasons for underutilization of allocated
funds have also not been given by the Department. Because of underutilizations, allocation at
RE stage for 2017-18 in some of the said schemes has been reduced substantially. The Committee,
therefore, insists that the Department should strengthen its administrative and monitoring
mechanism for utilizing the allocated resources and evaluation in respect of expenditure is done
on quarterly basis. The Committee hopes that the Department would utilize the funds allocated
under all said Schemes and achieve the projected targets during 2018-19.
5. PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS
5.1 The Department has two Public Sector Undertakings namely (i) National Research Development
Corporation (NRDC); and (ii) Central Electronics Ltd. (CEL).
National Research Development Corporation (NRDC)
5.2 NRDC was incorporated on 31st December, 1953 as a Section 25 company under the Companies
Act with the objective to promote, develop and commercialize indigenous technologies. As per the
objectives set out in its Memorandum and Articles of Association, NRDC was mandated to commercialise
the technologies developed by all the research laboratories and institutes of CSIR and other public funded
research institutes, universities including autonomous research institutions.
5.3 To meet the objectives, the Corporation, therefore, has been carrying out both commercial and
promotional activities. The details of activities carried out are summarized below:–
Development and Commercialisation of Technologies
• Technical evaluation of the technology.
• Licensing of technologies to companies and end user organizations.

6
• Development of Technologies in association with R&D laboratories to validate or scale-up
laboratory processes prior to commercialisation.
• Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) consultancy to R&D Institutes and Corporates.
• Export of Indian technologies/know-how and services.
• Execution of turnkey projects abroad based on indigenous technologies.
5.4 NRDC also carries out the following promotional programmes with support from DSIR:–
(i) Programme for Inspiring Inventors and Innovators (PIII)
The programme is planned to encourage the innovators/inventors in developing new innovative
technologies and products and tap these technologies for NRDC's business activities. To
achieve this NRDC carries out various activities like awarding meritorious inventions, protection
of IP's, evaluation of technologies, and knowledge management and provide techno-commercial
support to the new innovations/technologies etc. The major activities carried out under the
scheme are:
• Prize Award to meritorious Inventions, Start-Ups and Budding Student Innovators
• Intellectual Property and Innovation Facilitation
- IPR Facilitation and Management
- Intellectual Property and Technology Facilitation Centre
- NRDC-University Innovation Facilitation Centers
- Patent assistance, patent awareness programme in Universities and R&D Organisations
• Technology Knowledge Management
- Techno-commercial support to scientists, innovators and students for process trial and
validation of technologies
- Knowledge Management for promotion of Innovations/Technologies
(ii) Programme for Development of Technologies for Commercialisation (PDTC)
The programme is planned to encourage the innovators/inventors in developing new innovative
technologies and products and tap these technologies for Corporation's business activities.
Under this scheme the Corporation would carry out various activities like Development of
Innovation Portal, Value addition through BEDP, Market Surveys, dissemination of information
through exhibitions/seminars/workshops etc., promotion of indigenous technologies abroad
through showcasing of indigenous technologies and promotion of innovations in rural and
north-eastern regions.
The major activities carried out under the scheme are:–
• Digital Knowledge Base
- Innovation Portal for commercialisation of Innovations, updation of Website, and Hardware

7
• Technology Value Addition
- Basic Engineering Design Packages
- Market Survey, Techno-economic feasibility reports, project reports, DPR etc. on assigned
technologies
- Development Projects and Value Addition for Priority Projects
• Promotion of innovations in Rural and North East Regions
- Rural: Entrepreneurship in backward and rural areas through innovative appropriate
technologies
- Socio-economic development of North-East
- Enhancing Shelf-life of Fruits and Vegetables through Innovative technological
intervention
- Certified Organic Fruit Cultivation and Processing Programme at Mizoram and
Village adoption
• Promotion of technology commercialization in the country and abroad - Dissemination of
Information through R&D - Industry Interaction Meet, Support/Organize Seminar/Workshops/
Study tours/conclaves, Exhibitions, Publication etc.
5.5 The BE and RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the Department during
2017-18 and allocation made in 2018-19 of the NRDC are as under:–
(` in crore)
PSU B.E. 2017-18 R.E. 2017-18 Utilization till % Utilization BE 2018-19
31.01.2018 of BE
NRDC 6.00 3.75 1.74 29% 10.00
5.6 The Committee appreciates the efforts of NRDC in acting as a link between scientific
laboratories and industrial establishments for transferring technologies. However, the Committee
feels that a lot more is needed to be done to reach out to people living in rural areas by
developing appropriate technologies for those areas which will improve their living conditions.
5.7 The Committee notes that only ````` 1.74 crore (upto 31.01.2018) has been utilized against the
allocated amount of ````` 3.75 crore (RE 2017-18) and hence expresses its deep concern over
underutilization of allocated amount during 2017-18. The Committee hopes that proper planning
would be done for optimum utilization of allocated amount during 2018-19.
6. CENTRAL ELECTRONICS LTD. (CEL)
6.1 Central Electronics Limited (CEL) is a Public Sector Enterprise under the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research (DSIR), Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of India. It was

8
established in 1974 with an objective to commercially exploit the indigenous technologies developed by
National Laboratories and R&D Institutions in the country. CEL is one of the rare companies, which
utilized the home-grown technologies during all these years of its existence.
6.2 CEL has developed a number of products for the first time in country through its own R&D efforts
and in close association with the premier National and International Laboratories including Defence
Laboratories. Presently the company has been carrying out commercial production as well as R&D on
four fields:
• Solar Photovoltaic
• Railways Safety and Signaling Systems
• Strategic Electronics - Defence Application
• Security and Surveillance Systems
6.3 As a public sector undertaking of the Government, CEL's programmes and business plan projections
are aligned with the national mission and other strategic opportunities that have opened up in the context
of the resurgent Indian economy. CEL has already established partnerships and linkages with various
stake-holders and business associates in the areas of telecom, railways, police, power generation and
distribution companies, service providers in the energy sector, public funded institutions and even rural
communities through the State Governments. The existing marketing channels are being consolidated and
expanded harnessing the unique advantage CEL has in terms of its Government backing.
6.4 The Committee was informed about the proposed Programmes/Projects undertaken by CEL during
2018-19 which are as under:–
• Development of Centralized Battery Storage System for Solar Power Plants/DG/Grid
• Demonstration of Solar Warehouse
• Demonstration of Solar Train
• Development of Mini Grid with Distribution Network at Home Appliance
• Establishment of Solar Park
• New products for Railways
6.5 The BE and RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the Department during
2017-18 and allocation made in 2018-19 of the CEL are as under:–
(` in crore)
PSU B.E. 2017-18 R.E. 2017-18 Utilisation till % utilization BE 2018-19
31.01.2018 of BE
CEL 9.75 9.75 6.25 64.10% 5.00

9
6.6 The Committee notes that only 64.10 % (upto 31.01.2018) amount was utilised by CEL
during 2017-18. The Committee fails to understand that why CEL sought funds at BE and RE
stage during 2017-18 on higher side but was unable to utilize that optimally. The Committee
observes this trend for the last three years. The Committee hopes that Department would be able
to utilize the allocated amount of ````` 5.00 crore (BE 2018-19). CEL also should try to find out the
reasons responsible for not utilizing the funds fully and take preventive action in the next
financial year i.e. 2018-19.
7. AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS
7.1 The Department has two Autonomous Institutions namely (i) Consultancy Development Centre
(CDC); and (ii) Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR).
Consultancy Development Centre (CDC)
7.2 Consultancy Development Centre (CDC) is an Autonomous Institution of the Department set up for
promoting and strengthening of consultancy skills and capabilities including exports and promote cooperation
with other countries.
The objectives of CDC are as follows:–
• To be the Nodal Agency on Professional Services.
• To Promote Development of Consultancy Sector.
• To Promote Quality, Integrity and Sustainability Development in Professional Services.
• To Enhance Capacity of Consultants/Experts.
• To be Export Promotion Council of Professional Services.
• To be Regulator of Professional Services in India.
7.3 The Committee was informed about the proposed Projects/ Activities undertaken by CDC during
2018-19 which are as under:–
• Registration/Accreditation of Consultants.
• Educational/Capacity Building Programmes.
• Development, Promotion and Export of Consulting Services.
• Development of Consulting Capabilities to achieve Objectives of programmes such as Skill
India, Start-up India, Make in India and MSME Sector.
• Strategic Roadmap, Feasibility Studies, DPRs for Technology Transfer/Commercialization.
• Database of Consultants/Experts for meeting requirements of S&T and other Sectors.

10
7.3 The BE and RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the Department during
2017-18 and allocation made in 2018-19 of the CDC are as under:–
(` in crore)
Institution B.E. 2017-18 R.E. 2017-18 Utilisation till % U tilisation BE 2018-19
31.01.2018 of BE
CDC 2.00 1.00 1.00 50% 2.00
7.5 The Committee hopes that no cut or reduction in the allocated amount would be done during
2018-19 at RE stage for smooth and effective functioning of CDC.
8. COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR)
8.1 The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, constituted in 1942 is an autonomous body. The
detailed functions assigned to the Council are as follows:–
(i) Promotion, guidance and coordination of scientific and industrial research in India, including
the institution and financing of specific researches;
(ii) Establishment or development and assistance to special institutions or departments of existing
institutions for scientific study of problems affecting particular industries and trade;
(iii) Establishment and award of research studentships and fellowships;
(iv) Utilisation of the results of the researches conducted under the auspices of the Council
towards the development of industries in the country and the payment of a share of royalties
arising out of the development of the results of researches to those who are considered as
having contributed towards the pursuits of such researches;
(v) Establishment, maintenance and management of laboratories, workshops, institutes and
organisations to further scientific and industrial research and to utilize and exploit for purposes
of experiment or otherwise any discovery or invention likely to be of use to Indian industries;
(vi) Collection and dissemination of information in regard not only to research but also to industrial
matters generally;
(vii) Publication of scientific papers and journals;
(viii) To enter into arrangements with foreign scientific agencies and institutions for exchange of
scientists, study tours, training in specialized areas of science and technology, conducting joint
projects, providing technical assistance in the establishment of scientific institutions and for
other matters consistent with the aims and objectives of the Society;
(ix) To do all other such things as the Society may consider necessary, incidental or conducive
to the attainment of the above subjects etc.; and

11
(x) The CSIR has been striving to perform these functions in accordance with the priorities laid
down in Five Year Plans and perceived needs of the nation from time to time.
8.2 The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research is known for its cutting edge R&D knowledge
base in diverse S&T areas. Having pan-India presence, CSIR has a dynamic network of 38 National
Laboratories, 39 Outreach Centres, 3 Innovation Complexes and 5 units. CSIR's R&D expertise and
experience is embodied in about 4500 active scientists supported by about 5700 scientific and technical
personnel.
8.3 CSIR covers a wide spectrum of science and technology from radio and space physics, oceanography,
earth sciences, geophysics, chemicals, drugs, genomics, biotechnology and nanotechnology to mining,
aeronautics, instrumentation, environmental engineering and information technology. It provides significant
technological intervention in many areas with regard to societal efforts which include environment,
health, drinking water, food, housing, energy, leather, farm and non-farm sectors. CSIR is the Nation's
custodian for Measurement standards of Mass, Distance, Time, Temperature, Current etc. CSIR has
created and is the custodian of Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) which is a powerful
weapon against unethical commercial exploitation of Indian traditional knowledge. CSIR maintains Microbial
Type Culture collection (MTCC) and Gene Bank.
8.4 CSIR has been pursuing cutting edge science and advancing new knowledge frontiers. In 2013,
2014 and 2015 CSIR published 5086, 5824 and 5776 papers in SCI Journals with an average impact
factor per paper of 2.86, 2.97 and 3.005 respectively. During the year 2016, CSIR had published 5337
research papers in International SCI journals. In the year 2017, CSIR published 5277 papers in SCI
journals with an average impact factor per paper as 3.217.
8.5 The Committee during its meeting on 13th February, 2018 was informed by the Department that
our scientific journals/papers in terms of scientific indices, its impact factor, quality, number of citations
our papers get, India is amongst top ten countries of the world. However, the Committee had observed
good work in respect of researches and inventions made very often does not translate into sustainable
technology for benefit of the citizens of the country.
8.6 On being enquired about the efforts made by the Department for undertaking original research work
and the details of the plans and strategy to ensure original research work, the Department informed the
Committee that CSIR pursues original research in the form of basic research, applied research and
translational research in identified S&T domains which results in high quality publications, technologies,
products, knowhows and knowledge based services. Majority of the research works are published in SCI
journals emanating from original research work. During project formulation exhaustive literature survey
and patent mapping is done. The project proposals are deliberated in Research Council of respective
laboratories. Research Councils have external experts of the specific domains. All these efforts are
derived at ensuring that well positioned original research is pursued.
8.7 The Committee appreciates the efforts of CSIR in publishing large number of research
papers in International SCI journals every year. The Committee notes that CSIR was able to
publish 5277 papers in SCI journals in the year 2017 with an average impact factor per paper

12
as 3.217. However, the Committee observes that good work done by the CSIR in the form of
research papers do not translate into sustainable technologies for use of the masses. Hence, the
Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation made in its 297th Report that the Department
should make all out efforts so that researches and inventions may be translated into sustainable
technologies and also for undertaking more original research work.
CSIR - Schemes
8.8 CSIR as an autonomous organization under Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR),
Ministry of Science and Technology, do not operate any Central Sector Scheme or Centrally Sponsored
Scheme from FY 2017-18 onwards. As per rationalization process of expenditure of the Central
Government, the budgetary outlay concerning autonomous Bodies would be allocated under the head
"Other Central Sector Expenditure - Autonomous Bodies" for further requirements under different heads
of establishment and administrative expenditure and for projects/schemes concerning research and
development. However, CSIR has two non-central sector schemes namely, (1) National Laboratories
Scheme; and (2) National S&T Human Resource Development. While the former covers a whole gamut
of R&D and S&T aspects, latter deals with Human Resources and different awards.
8.9 Following table provides details of BE/RE allocation, utilization alongwith % utilization during
2017-18 and approved allocation for 2018-19 of the above mentioned Schemes:
(` in crore)
Sl. No. Scheme 2017-18 Approved
B.E. R.E. Utilisation till % BE 2018-19
31.1.2017 Utilisation of
BE 2017-18
1. National Laboratories 4062.91 4357.12 3504.72 86.26% 4434.71
2. National S&T Human 325.00 225.00 225.00 69.23% 300.00
Resource Development
T
OTAL 4387.91 4582.12 3729.72 85% 4734.71
9. NATIONAL LABORATORIES SCHEME
9.1 The Committee enquired as how the Department proposes to utilize the allocated amount of
` 4434.71 crore with respect to this scheme during 2018-19. In response, the Department informed the
Committee about the programmes/activities that would be undertaken during 2018-19:- It was informed
that CSIR has put in place a new R&D management strategy for planning and participative performance
of R&D projects through formation of sector specific Theme based Clusters. CSIR constituent laboratories
across the country have been grouped under the aforementioned Theme based Clusters, viz. (i) Aerospace,
Electronics, Instrumentation and Strategic Sectors; (ii) Civil, Infrastructure and Engineering; (iii) Ecology,

13
Environment Earth and Ocean Sciences and Water; (iv) Mining, Minerals, Metals and Materials;
(v) Chemicals (including leather) and Petrochemicals; (vi) Energy (Conventional and Non-Conventional)
and Energy Devices; (vii) Agri., Nutrition and Biotech; and (viii) Healthcare. The R&D activities are
pursued through inter-disciplinary efforts by drawing synergy and gainfully utilizing the expertise and
infrastructure of CSIR laboratories.
9.2 The R&D efforts of CSIR are aligned to the needs of the domestic industry and the social needs
of the nation, exemplified by the Government Mission Programs and Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), chartered by UN. Thus, the R&D of CSIR caters to the Government initiatives such as Make
in India; Swachh Bharat; Namami Gange; Swasth Bharat; Smart Cities; Smart Villages; Clean, efficient,
affordable and renewable energy technology solutions; Innovate in India; etc. CSIR will focus on "S&T
Innovation, Technology Development and Commercialization" to cater to these National Goals. Recently,
CSIR has undertaken several initiatives to translate laboratory leads into marketable/value-added technologies/
products and thereby enhance interactions and connect to stakeholders for enabling ease of doing
technology licensing. The initiatives include:–
(a) Theme based clusters have been created for aligning and enhancing industrial/stakeholder
focus of CSIR R&D activities. The business plan and roadmap of each theme would be
developed that focuses at contributions towards each of the parameters - public good, private
good, strategic good and societal good. A Strategic Business Development Group constituted
meets regularly and is evolving a roadmap for enhancing business development in CSIR.
(b) CSIR has signed Agreements of cooperation with Technology Transfer Organizations and
Industry Associations such as Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and National Research
Development Corporation (NRDC). The efforts are to enhance technology commercialization
and deployment of CSIR interventions and also enabling synergy with the needs of the line
Ministries.
(c) An Innovation Fund of ` 400 crores has been created for the purposes of seed funding of
S&T based entrepreneurs and for the handholding of S&T based start-ups. The CSIR Innovation
Fund will be deployed to enable commercialization of high-risk high-reward cutting edge
technologies as well as for technologies with high socio-economic impact but long-term
commercial payback.
(d) Technology Incubation Centres are proposed to be set up across the CSIR laboratories in the
next three years to provide support to start-ups.
(e) R&D activities being pursued in the following categories of projects that are technology/
product oriented:–
(i) 'Fast Track' Translational research projects addressing national goals (including problems
of common man) are under implementation. These projects are oriented towards technology/
product development with relatively short term outcomes (less than 3 years) with clear
solutions to pre-defined problems and challenges.

14
(ii) Mission Mode Projects with significant stakeholder focus, targeting cutting edge,
internationally benchmarked cost effective technologies of high national impact are proposed
to be implemented. The projects focus on time-bound deliverables and outcomes, with
3-5 year timeframe. Some examples include programs on Aroma, Phyto-pharmaceuticals,
Cotton, Sickle Cell Anemia, Chemical Intermediates and API and Catalysis.
(iii) Fast Track Commercialisation (FTC) Projects
• Positioned to create new business opportunities or expand existing businesses,
preferably in alignment with business plan and partner/s.
• Duration: 6 to 12 months; in exceptional cases, could be expanded.
• Multiple CSIR institutional partners/facilities to be harnessed.
(iv) Projects based on leads from 12th Five Year Plan projects as recommended by Sectoral
Monitoring Committee.
• Niche Creating High Science/High Technology (NCP) Projects.
• Based on the niche and opportunity created by a group in the laboratory.
• Focused on retaining the leadership achieved, aimed at global leadership.
• Duration: Up to 36 months.
(v) Focused Basic Research (FBR) Projects.
• High end basic research.
• Duration: 12 to 36 months.
(vi) Niche Creating High Science/High Technology (NCP) Projects.
• Based on the niche created by a group in the laboratory.
• Focused on retaining the leadership achieved, aimed at global leadership.
• Duration: 36 months.
9.3 New Major Initiatives Launched
(a) CSIR Aroma Mission
CSIR has contributed significantly in the development, nurturing and positioning of essential oil-
based aroma industry in the country. This has led to creation of an ecosystem benefitting the industry,
farmers and next generation entrepreneurs. The effort has had been aimed at socio-economic development
on one hand and creation of desired capability and capacity on the other. CSIR has committed itself to
contribute for the purpose in a mission mode. CSIR Aroma Mission has been conceptualized for the

15
purpose and is being made operational. The objectives of the Mission have been divided into eight
verticals. These include:–
- Development of superior varieties and their agro-technologies and assessment of their suitability
for specific agro-climatic regions;
- Promotion of cultivation and processing of aromatic crops, enhancing area under selected
aromatic crops along with enabling interventions including setting up of distillation units and
catalyzing setting up of cooperatives for marketing of the produce;
- Value-addition of aromatic crops (High-end aroma chemicals and products);
- Skill development activities;
- Intellectual property generation, valuation and management;
- Entrepreneurship development/Spin-offs;
- Business development; and
- Making public aware of Mission activities and achievements using appropriate interface.
(b) CSIR Phytopharmaceuticals Mission
The CSIR Mission on phytopharmaceuticals aims to improve the availability (through cultivation)
of such medicinal plants which are in high demand by global and domestic industry involved in the
preparation of medicines of Indian traditional systems. Under this mission, it is proposed to prevent
exhaustion of medicinal plants from their native locations by identifying the elite germplasm and conserving
it by cultivation and in gene banks. Improved varieties along with their agro technologies will be
developed to increase productivity and profitability per unit land area, and to make use of such areas
which are affected by abiotic stresses such as drought, salinity, flood, shade etc. Chemical processes
will be developed for the preparation of standardized extracts and enriched fractions of selected medicinal
plants to transfer the value-addition technologies to the entrepreneurs to promote use and export of value-
added material instead of the raw plant material. Efforts would be made to translate the potential clinical
leads in different CSIR laboratories to develop them into phytopharmaceutical drugs which would be
affordable and acceptable at global standards. The verticals are:–
- Captive cultivation of medicinal plants;
- Conservation and revival of engendered and threatened medicinal plant species;
- Technology Packages for production of GMP grade medicinal plant extracts;
- Phytopharmaceutical development from important medicinal plants;
- Intellectual Property generation, valuation and management;
- Design and Development of Digital Library of Indian Medicinal Plants and Natural Products; and
- Showcasing CSIR technologies/products/services with appropriate interface.

16
(c) CSIR Mission on Sickle Cell Anemia
Sickle Cell Anaemia (SCA) is the most common blood related disorder in India with a high prevalence
among ethnic groups that have a socio-economic disadvantage, such as tribal populations. Every year
approximately 5,00,000 children are born with SCA worldwide with India accounting for nearly 50% of
the cases.SCA is a genetic disease caused by a point mutation in the sixth codon of the P-globin
expressing gene resulting in the replacement of glutamic acid by valine, which under deoxygenation state
oligomerizes with a-globin and gives rise to a type of haemoglobin named as HbS (Haemoglobin sickle).
The mutated valine favours the hydrophobic interactions between the P subunits of the haemoglobin
tetramers leading to the HbS polymerization and formation of long haemoglobin fibers. These fibers
deform the disc shaped RBCs to sickle shaped cells. The sickle shaped cells lose flexibility with reduced
oxygen carrying capacity and induce dehydration in the cells. Due to irregular shape of these cells, they
are prone to physical stress leading to haemolysis and capillary occlusion. Individuals suffering from
sickle cell disease show symptoms such as body pain, clotting, dyspnoea, anaemia, jaundice, pneumonia,
repeated infection etc. Their lifespan is usually reduced to 5-25 years with 50% of children with SCA
dying before the age of 5. Hence early and affordable detection, treatment as well as preventive measures
are important in managing this disease. CSIR has developed a Mission Mode Project on Sickle Cell
Anaemia through brainstorming and domain expert group discussions. The CSIR Mission on Sickle Cell
Anaemia aims at:
- Managing Genetic Burden of Sickle Cell Anaemia and Understanding Genetic Basis of Differential
Response to Hydroxyurea Therapy;
- Drug discovery and development for management of SCA;
- Genome editing and stem cell research approach for the treatment of SCA; and
- Development and on-ground implementation of an affordable, accurate and accelerated diagnostic
kit.
The project will be implemented by CSIR-IIIM, Jammu; CSIR-CCMB, Hyderabad; CSIR-IICB,
Kolkata; CSIR-IMT, Chandigarh; CSIR-IGIB, Delhi; CSIR-NCL, Pune and CSIR-URDIP, Pune.
(d) CSIR Mission on Catalysis for Sustainable Development
The Indian Chemical Industry is the 3rd largest contributor to the overall chemical industry in Asia
and the 8th largest chemicals producer worldwide with estimated size of about US$ 100 billion contributing
about 6.7% of the Indian GDP. Chemical industry worldwide relies mostly on fossil feedstock. Due to
geopolitical reasons, limited availability and fluctuations in price of these feedstock, it might be precarious
to depend on them for our future needs. Thus, it is imperative to focus on alternative and renewable
feedstock for chemicals synthesis. This mission mode program addresses this vital issue and intends to
develop chemical products and processes utilizing renewable raw materials (in-edible biomass, carbon
dioxide (CO2), water and shale (natural) gas) instead of the conventional fossil fuels.

17
Catalysis plays a key role in the chemical industry. While most of the conventional catalysts are
tuned for fossil feedstock, the challenge is to develop efficient catalysts for converting renewables at
benign and near ambient conditions. While addressing this challenge, this program adopts a multi-prong
approach utilizing thermochemical / electrochemical / photochemical / photo electrocatalytic methods in
the process development. In other words, this project would be important from the point of view of
nation building as well from knowledge/skill development.
The project focuses on following components:
  - Biomass valorisation (in-edible lignocellulose, animal derived chitin and chitosan and vegetable
oil);
  - Value addition to carbon dioxide;
  - Solar Splitting of water; and
  - Shale (natural) gas utilization.
9.4 The Committee appreciates the Department for launching major initiatives on Mission Mode
such as CSIR Aroma Mission, Phytopharmaceuticals Mission, Mission on Sickle Cell Anemia,
Mission on Catalysis for Sustainable Development etc. These initiatives would certainly benefit
the citizens of the country in general and farmers, industries, entrepreneurs and the children
who are suffering from Sickle Cell Anemia in tribal areas in particular. The Committee hopes
that with the concerted and co-ordinated efforts of the Department would yield desired results
and immensely benefit the various stakeholders. The Committee is also of the view that these
mission initiatives would generate employment opportunities and also add to the cause of self
employment for the youths of the country.
9.5 The Committee was also informed that during the year 2018-19, new projects under FTT and
Mission Mode will be launched. In addition to Mission Projects and FTT Projects, a new category - Fast
Track Commercialization (FTC) projects, with 6-12 month horizons, will be created to fund the marketing
and supply chain efforts that will enable CSIR technologies to realize full value in the marketplace in a
time-bound manner.
9.6 The Committee was further informed that efforts are underway to attract funding from Government
and Industry (both Public and Private within India and from abroad). For instance, CSIR has recently
closed a deal of US$ 7 million with Ethiopia. CSIR has also launched programmes with Japan (Hiroshima
University, AIST, JAMSTEC, SRL labs) in the areas of Electronics and IT, Life Sciences and Biotechnology,
Marine Research and Mechatronics including Artificial Intelligence/Sensors. All these programmes are
targeted towards technology/National development and forms part of Indo-Japan Strategic S&T partnership.
CSIR has also launched a technological partnership arrangement with Industrial Technology Research
Institute (ITRI), Taiwan in Electronics/Mechatronics area in November 2017. Other International
partnership with Germany, France and USA are actively being pursued as part of Internationalization
Strategy.
9.7 The Committee feels that collaboration/partnership with international agencies of the different
countries in various fields of science would go a long way in terms of knowledge sharing and

18
gathering experiences as well as attracting funding for R&D of the CSIR. Hence, the Committee
recommends that Department should make earnest efforts to have more and more collaboration/
partnership with the scientific institutions of the developed countries.
9.8 The Secretary, DSIR deposing before the Committee in its meeting held on 13th February, 2018
had informed that CSIR labs are engaged in various sectors  viz. (i) Aerospace, Electronics, Instrumentation
and Strategic Sectors; (ii) Civil, Infrastructure and Engineering; (iii) Ecology, Environment Earth and
Ocean Sciences and Water; (iv) Mining, Minerals, Metals and Materials; (v) Chemicals (including leather)
and Petrochemicals; (vi) Energy (Conventional and Non-Conventional) and Energy Devices; (vii) Agri.,
Nutrition & Biotech; and (viii) Healthcare and the main focus are on outcomes. The Secretary also
submitted before the Committee that CSIR is 75 years old organization and its some of the labs are quite
old i.e. 50-60 years old and many of them require major modernization as equipments have become
obsolete. He also stated that from time to time, Government has been helping CSIR to modernize. But
the kind of modernization this institution requires in keeping with the performance and the world ratings
that it has managed to get, it requires a major input i.e. the cost of modernization would be very high.
9.9 The Chairman of the Committee observed that the instruments might have been also old. Given the
fact that CSIR has to keep pace with the latest innovation and also develop new technologies, what
would be requirement? What should be taken up in the immediate future, say, beginning this year to the
next five years for upgradation which are urgently needed? The Chairman directed Secretary, DSIR to
submit details of major labs which need up gradation.
9.10 On being enquired by the Committee that whether allocated amount of `4795. 97 crore (BE 2018-
19) is adequate to carry out the whole activities including its various Projects/ Schemes or any additional
amount is required?
In Response, the Department informed the Committee that CSIR being 75-year-old organisation, it has
aging infrastructure. While CSIR would earn ECF to augment the pursuance of cutting edge R&D, it
is necessary for keeping the lab infrastructure state-of-the art. A stage-wise modernization grants of at
least `1000 crore per year for the next 5 years be provided.
9.11 CSIR is keen on setting up Incubation Centres at its laboratories as well as Technology Parks at
strategic locations across the country. These establishments are to facilitate focused technology development
and deployment in collaboration with industry (MSME) partners. CSIR has also proposed establishing a
"Centre for Scaling up and Demonstration of Relevant CSIR Technologies" at Amravati, Andhra Pradesh
where an MoU has been signed with the State Government. Additional financial resources, over and
above the allocation, may be required for CSIR to put in sizeable efforts for meeting the desired
objectives.
9.12 Further, CSIR requires more funds for carrying out launching new Mission Mode projects such as
Civil Aircrafts programmes, - new variants of HANSA, SARAS (14/19 seater) and 90 seater aircrafts,
Indigenous Body Armour, etc., so the efforts are meaningful and would result in achieving meaningful
results.

19
9.13 NRDC has ambitious plans to modernize its infrastructure, establish Incubation Centers in CSIR
labs and establish outreach centers across the country to rapidly deliver the R&D outcome to the society.
It requires an additional budgetary support of ` 50 crores during 2018-19 for achieving these goals.
9.14 The Committee appreciates the role of CSIR labs in improving lives of citizens of the
country through scientific advancement and its R&D efforts which are aligned to the needs of
the domestic industry and the social needs of the nation, exemplified by the Government Mission
Programs and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The Committee feels that it is necessary
to keep and maintain pace with the latest technological developments in the world and keeping
in view of the fact that CSIR infrastructures ( with regard to labs) were built or acquired quite
earlier, building of new infrastructures and upgradation of the existing ones are of utmost
importance and should be taken up in right earnest. Therefore the Committee recommends that
modernization process of CSIR labs should be started at the earliest. However, the Committee
is of the view that since modernisation of CSIR labs require huge amount of money, it should
be done in phased manner and after prioritizing the services of the labs i.e. after determining
the order of preference of the labs on the basis of their high value to the citizens and analysing
its criticality and necessity. For this, the Department should prepare a blue print and thereafter
approach Ministry of Finance for additional allocation of funds in order to modernize CSIR labs.
9.15 The Committee notes that an Innovation Fund of ````` 400.00 crores has been created for the
purposes of seed funding of S&T based entrepreneurs and for the handholding of S&T based
start-ups. The CSIR Innovation Fund will be deployed to enable commercialization of high-risk
high-reward cutting edge technologies as well as for technologies with high socio- economic
impact but long-term commercial payback. The Committee recommends that this fund may be
utilized substantially in rural and far flung areas of the country especially in the backward States
such as Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh etc. in order to augment
employability in these places.
9.16 The Committee has observed that maximum of BE 2018-19 has been allocated for CSIR for
its two Schemes, one is National Laboratories and second one is National S&T Human Resource
Development. The Committee also notes that during 2017-18 only `````3504.72 crore was utilised
under National Laboratories Scheme till 31.01.2018 against the allocation (RE) of `````4357.12 crore
which was enhanced at RE stage. The Committee fails to understand that the Department had
sought more money at RE stage but could spent only ````` 3504.72 crore. This shows the lack of
proper planning and monitoring on the part of the Department. The Committee is of the view
that at one hand the Department is contemplating the additional amount for its various projects
and for upgradation of its labs, but on the other hand the Department could not utilize the
allocated amount. Therefore, the Committee recommends that Department should have a robust,
proper monitoring and planning mechanism in place so that allocated amount is utilised fully
during 2018-19.

20
10. NATIONAL S&T HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
10.1 Human Resource Development is of paramount importance in the national building process and
creating a knowledge society. CSIR has focused in a significant manner on the development of S&T
Human Resource and has been rendering yeoman service by fostering, sustaining and helping in upgradation
of the stock of highly specialized scientists, engineers and technologists in diverse disciplines of S&T,
in the country. It awards fellowships, gives grants, and recognizes excellence through various prizes and
awards. The main objectives of the National S&T Human Resources Development Programme are as
under:
• To promote and foster the upgradation of the stock of well qualified, highly specialized
scientists, engineers and technologists for R&D in all disciplines of Science and Technology
in the country.
• To have an integrated approach to National Human Resource Development for Science,
Engineering and Technology by encouraging and promoting research in the Universities and
Institutes of higher learning.
• To invest in basic and interdisciplinary research that is harbinger of the 'high-tech' and
technology of tomorrow.
10.2 The Committee desired to know as to what steps had been taken by CSIR for enhancing and
nurturing S&T human resources. The Committee was informed that CSIR has a mandate to develop and
nurture S&T manpower at the national level. It also promotes scientific research through research grants
to scientists/professors working in universities/R&D institutes. To attract the young science students at
early stages of their career towards scientific research, CSIR conducts CSIR-UGC National Eligibility
Test (NET) for Junior Research Fellowship (JRF-NET) to the science undergraduates. Amendments have
been made in the NET scheme with regard to qualification and validity of CSIR-JRF to widen the scope
of NET and to attract bright students at early stages of their career to opt science subjects for higher
studies. The validity to avail the JRF-NET has been increased to two years and students with BS-four
year programme/BE/B. Tech/B. Pharm/MBBS/Integrated BS-MS/MSc or equivalent degree, B.Sc. (Hons)
or equivalent degree are eligible for appearing in NET.
10.3 The Committee was further informed that the number of JRF-NET awarded has recently been
increased from 1200 pr exam to about 2000 per exam in June-2016 NET. Further, the number of JRF-
GATE fellowship which is tenable only in CSIR laboratories has recently been enhanced to 120 each year
for pursuing the doctoral research in engineering, technology and pharmaceutical sciences. It has further
been planned to increase the number of Senior Research Fellowships (SRF) through interview mode to
nurture the budding scientific talent. Further, CSIR enhanced the rate of stipend in respect of JRF-NET,
JRF-GA TE, SRF-Direct, SPMF, CSIR-Nehru PDF, RA w.e.f. 01-10-2014.
10.4 The details of budget allocation and utilisation of National S&T Human Resource Development
Scheme during 2015-16, 2016-17, 2017-18 and allocation made in 2018-19 are as under:-

21
(` in crore)
Period B E RE Actual Expenditure
2015-16 288.00 295.00 225.00
2016-17 300.00 300.00 300.00
2017-18 325.00 225.00 225.00
(upto 31.01.2018)
2018-19 300.00 - -
10.5 The Committee desired to know about the physical and financial achievements of the Department
w.r .t. Capacity Building and Human Research Development during 2017-18. In response, the Department
informed the Committee that a total of ` 225 crore (RE) had been allocated during the current financial
year 2017-18 for Capacity Building and Human Resource Development which includes the programmes:
(i) Doctoral and Postdoctoral Fellowships; (ii) Research Schemes and Emeritus Scientist Scheme;
(iii) Promotion and Recognition of Excellence through Awards Scheme; and (iv) Promoting Knowledge
Sharing through Travel and Symposia Grants Scheme. Scheme-wise physical achievements made during
current financial year and till 31/01/2018 are given in the table below:
Sl. No. Scheme/Programme Number of schemes/fellowships
awarded during
2017-18*
1 Doctoral and Postdoctoral Fellowships Doctoral Postdoctoral
Fellowships Fellowships
2242 114
2 Research Schemes and Emeritus Scientist Scheme Research Emeritus
Schemes Scientist
44 9
3 Promotion and Recognition of Excellence through YSA awards SSB prize GNR Gold
Awards Scheme medal
41 0 1
4 Promoting Knowledge Sharing through Travel and Symposia Grant Travel Grants
Symposia Grants Scheme 424 781
*The interview process for the award of SRF, JRF-GA TE, RA, SRA and CSIR-Nehru PDF for the financial year is in progress.
Also, the number of fellowships pertains to CSIR-UGC NET JRF held in June 2017 only and these figures will be revised on
declaration of result for NET held in December 2017. Similarly, the meetings for sanctions of news Research Schemes, Emeritus
Scientists Scheme, Travel grant and Symposia grants are underway. The final figure will be available on 31st March 2018.
10.6 The Committee also enquired from the Department as how the allocated amount of `300.00 crore
w.r .t. Capacity Building and Human Resource Development would be utilized during the year 2018-19.

22
Responding to this query, the Department informed the Committee that the allocated funds of `300 crore
will be utilized during the financial year 2018-19 for Capacity Building and Human Resource Development
which includes the programmes: (i) Doctoral and Postdoctoral Fellowships; (ii) Research Schemes and
Emeritus Scientist Scheme; (iii) Promotion and Recognition of Excellence through Awards Scheme; and
(iv) Promoting Knowledge Sharing through Travel and Symposia Grants Scheme. The component-wise
proposed targeted achievements under "Capacity Building and Human Resource Development” are given
in the table below:
Sl. No. Scheme/Programme Proposed number of Estimated
schemes/fellowships amount
to be awarded ( ` in crore)
during 2018-19
1 Doctoral And Postdoctoral Fellowships Doctoral Postdoctoral 245.00
Fellowships Fellowships
4500 300
2 Research Schemes and Emeritus Research Emeritus Scientist 42.00
Scientist Scheme Schemes
250 45
3 Recognition and Promotion of YSA SSB GNR 10.00
Excellence through Awards awards prize Gold
Scheme medal
10 14 1
4 Promoting knowledge Sharing through Symposia Grant Travel 3.00
Travel and Symposia Grants Grants
Scheme 500 700
10.7 The Committee welcomes the enhancement in allocations for this Scheme from `````225 crore
in 2017-18 (RE) to `````300 crore in BE 2018-19. However, the Committee expresses its concern over
the fact that during 2017-18, an amount of `````325 crore (BE 2017-18) was initially allocated under
this Scheme which was reduced to `````225 crore (RE 2017-18) which clearly reflects that physical
targets set for 2017-18 could not have been achieved fully and many of the deserving students
might have been denied the opportunities to get the fellowships/Scholarships. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that in future, the Department should ensure that no reduction is done
in the allocated amount at RE stage in the important Scheme like this.
10.8 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department for stimulating interest and
awareness among young students towards scientific research. However, the Committee notes that
most of the Scholarships/Fellowships are provided to students at the higher level i.e. PhD/

23
Research levels except few like Junior Research Fellowships through CSIR-UGC National Eligibility
Test etc. The Committee feels that Scholarships/Fellowships may be provided at entry level i.e.
graduation level or even Senior Secondary level to attract youth of the country to opt for science
studies.
11. FILING AND GRANT OF PATENTS
11.1 The Committee desired to know from the Department about the efforts made and results achieved
to improve upon its performance in terms of filing and grant of patents in India and abroad vis-a-vis
results thereof. The Department informed the Committee that the Department (CSIR) is pursuing cutting
edge R&D in diverse domains and the IP emanating has been secured systematically. It maintains close
interaction with Inventors/IP coordinators of respective CSIR laboratories, Indian Patent Office, IP
Attorneys (both in India and Abroad) to enhance the IP filing and securing. CSIR files patent application
in India without engaging any attorney and subsequently handles prosecutions to get the application
granted in India. Indian prosecution starts, 4 to 5 years after the date of filing the patent applications,
therefore, CSIR gets patents granted after five to six years of initial filing of applications. During the last
three years CSIR has been granted 281 patents. For filing the foreign patents, CSIR engage patent
attorney who help in filing, prosecution and get grant of foreign patents on behalf of CSIR. During last
three years CSIR has been granted 948 foreign patents.
11.2 The Committee was also informed by the CSIR about the Patents filed in India and Abroad vis-a-
vis Patents granted for the last six years i.e. 2011-12, 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15, 2015-16 and
2016-17 which are as under:–
Y ear Patent Filed Patent Patent Filed Patent Granted
(India) Granted (India) (Abroad) (Abroad)
2011-12 197 99 290 282
2012-13 199 108 381 272
2013-14 263 92 349 373
2014-15 310 65 448 336
2015-16 318 115 430 303
2016-17 225 100 314 290
11.3 The Committee commends the efforts of CSIR in obtaining patents in India and abroad. The
Committee hopes that the Department would maintain its position. However, the Committee
feels that with a good number of patents, CSIR should make efforts to help Indian industries
in order to develop more and more globally competitive products, for that alone will determine
usefulness of patents earned by CSIR scientists. Further, the Committee also hopes that quality
of the patents should be given utmost importance than quantity and CSIR will remain vigilant
to safeguard our age old indisputable rights over our traditional knowledge.

24
12. WORLD RANKING OF CSIR
12.1 The Committee desired to know the world ranking of CSIR and the various steps taken by CSIR
to improve its ranking and overcome the factors adversely affecting its ranking. In response, the
Committee was informed by the Department that CSIR has pursued cutting edge science and advanced
the knowledge frontiers. In 2017, CSIR published 5227 papers in SCI journals with an average impact
factor per paper of 3.217. According to the SCImago Institutional Ranking World Report 2017, CSIR
has been ranked 9th in the world amongst the 1207 government institutions, with an overall global
ranking of 75, covering 5250 institutions of the world. In the Asian region, it ranks at 14 out of 1431
entities, and at No. 3 among 284 Government-funded research bodies, with only Chinese Academy of
Sciences and Japan Science and Technology Agency ahead of CSIR. CSIR is the only Indian Organization
among the top 100 global institutions out of a total of 252 Indian organizations, covered in the evaluation.
According to the Nature's Innovation Index 2017, among Top 50 global institutions by normalized WIPO
patent families, CSIR is at 16, and is the only Indian organization in this top 50 list CSIR ranked at no.
16 is the only Indian organization in the top 50 list.
12.2 The Committee was further informed that CSIR is the pioneer of India's intellectual property
movement. CSIR today is strengthening its patent portfolio to carve out global niches for the country
in select technology domains. Commercialization of CSIR patents is 13.33% in comparison to ~3% global
average. Amongst its peers in publicly funded research organizations in the world, CSIR is a leader in
terms of filing and securing patents worldwide. Thus in terms of S&T outputs, besides scientific
publications in scholarly journals CSIR is also mindful of protecting its Intellectual Property (IP) through
patents. Thus CSIR is consciously and continuously endeavoring to improve its global ranking, the
results of which are quite evident.
12.3 The Committee appreciates that CSIR has improved its world ranking in Government
institutions as well as its overall global Ranking. However, the Committee is of the view that
CSIR' s global ranking of 75 among scientific institutions is not very encouraging or satisfactory
and is still far behind amongst the globally benchmarked scientific organisations in the world.
The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation made in 297th Report that in
order to place India in the list of the top country in the scientific world, CSIR should aim to
improve its place in ranking in its field and it should strive hard to achieve that ranking.
13. PROJECTS/SCHEMES IN NORTH - EASTERN STATES
13.1 The Commi ttee desired to know about the Projects/Schemes undertaken in North-Eastern States by
the Department and whether Department has any plan to initiate new Schemes/Projects during 2018-19
in the North-Eastern States. Responding to this query, the Department informed the Committee that the
Department through CSIR runs a number of projects for North-Eastern States. A constituent laboratory
of CSIR namely, CSIR-North East Institute of Science and Technology (CSIR-NEIST), Jorhat is located
in the State of Assam, which pursues focused R&D activities and the proceed of which have been

25
gainfully utilized in the States of North Eastern region The Institute has been undertaking projects in the
following areas:–
• Exploration of plant resource/traditional knowledge base of NE India and development of
Affordable healthcare products, Nutraceuticals & functional foods, Herbal pest control agents;
• Exploration and sustainable utilisation of plants and microbes;
• Development of high yielding varieties of medicinal and aromatic plants;
• Bio-remediation and restoration of degraded environment;
• Development of formulations/technologies for supporting MSMEs;
• Advance materials for water and air purification;
• Carbon based composite materials;
• Heterogeneous catalysts for organic transformations;
• Eco-friendly pulping for paper industry;
• S and T solution to geo-hazards, safe and sustainable exploitation of geo-resources and climate
change; and
• Membrane technology for separation;
13.2 The Committee was further informed that CSIR-NEIST has undertaken following Fast Track
Translational Projects also which targets time-bound delivery of product/process/technology: In-situ
bioremediation technology; Herbal product for management of pain; Membrane Based Process Technology
for Commercial Production of Biomolecules; and Modular Bricks from Brahmaputra River Bed Sand. Also
CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute (CSIR-CMERI), Durgapur is implementing a
project on 'Appropriate Technological Interventions for Ensuring Sustainable Livelihood for Womenfolk
in Mizoram'. CSIR-CMERI in collaboration with NGOs has also set up High Efficiency Post Harvest
Drying and Processing Centres in the States of Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh for post harvest
processing of Ginger, Big Cardamom, Turmeric, Chilies etc.
13.3 The Committee was also informed that DSIR, under its PRISM programme has set up outreach
centres at IIT-Guwahati and CSIR- North East Institute of Science and Technology (CSIR-NEIST),
Jorhat, which scout proposals and provide mentorship to individual innovators in the region to convert
their innovative ideas into models/prototypes. National Research Development Corporation (NRDC), a
PSU of DSIR organizes Entrepreneurship Development Programmes (EDP) in North East. NRDC has
also signed a MoA with Guwahati Biotech Park (GBP) to assist its incubatees in creating start-ups by
providing technology and IPR management services.
13.4 The Committee notes that many initiatives have been taken up by the Department in the
form of various projects/schemes being run in the North-Eastern States of the country through
one of the CSIR's constituent laboratory namely CSIR-North East Institute of Science and

26
Technology located at Jorhat in the State of Assam. The Committee is aware that this institute
has been engaged in pursuing focused R&D activities in various areas such as affordable healthcare
products, Nutraceuticals and functional foods, exploration and sustainable utilisation of plants
and microbes, development of high yielding varieties of medicinal and aromatic plants,
bioremediation and restoration of degraded environment, development of formulations/technologies
for supporting MSMEs, advance materials for water and air purification, carbon based composite
materials, heterogeneous catalysts for organic transformations, eco-friendly pulping for paper
industry, S&T solution to geo-hazards, safe and sustainable exploitation of geo-resources and
climate change; and membrane technology for separation etc.
13.5 The Comm ittee also notes that CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute (CSIR-
CMERI), Durgapur is implementing a project on 'Appropriate Technological Interventions for Ensuring
Sustainable Livelihood for Womenfolk in Mizoram'. CSIR-CMERI in collaboration with NGOs has also
set up High Efficiency Post Harvest Drying and Processing Centres in the States of Mizoram and
Arunachal Pradesh for post harvest processing of Ginger, Big Cardamom, Turmeric, Chilies etc.
13.6 However, the Committee feels that lot more is needed to be done in this region as the whole
region is bountifully endowed with rich minerals, forest wealth, water bodies, agro-biodiversity
and rich traditional knowledge besides diversified flora and fauna including many varieties of
herbal and medicinal plants. The Committee is of the opinion that the potential of the diversified
natural resources of the region has not been fully tapped. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that all out efforts be made for R&D in various scientific fields specific to the North-East region
to the extent possible which will certainly go a long way in order to augment the incomes and
improve the quality of lives of millions of people geographically spread across the North-Eastern
States of the country.
14. SKILL DEVELOPMENT
14.1 The Committee enquired from the Department about the steps taken in the field of Skill Development
in order to provide employment opportunities for unemployed youths of the country and imparting such
training so that they may be skilled enough to fit in the industries.
14.2 In response, the Department informed the Committee that large emphasis is being laid on quality
S&T human resource development. Some initiatives launched include: CSIR has launched an Integrated
Skill Development Initiative for gainful utilisation of its state-of-the-art infrastructure and human resources.
The plan is for expanding the present 30 programmes to 75 in diverse areas with varying duration (8
weeks to 52 weeks). The skill development programmes cover the following areas: Leather process
Technology; Leather Footwear and Garments; Paints and coatings for corrosion protection; Electroplating
and Metal Finishing; Lead Acid Battery maintenance; Glass Beaded Jewelry/Blue Pottery; Industrial
Maintenance Engineering; Internet of Things (IoT); and Regulatory - Preclinical Toxicology. Recently an
agreement has been signed between CSIR and Andhra Pradesh Scheduled Caste Co-operative Finance
Corporation Ltd. (APSCCFC) for Skill training and Entrepreneurship in Leather Sector. The initiative is
set to benefit 10,000 Scheduled Caste Candidates from Andhra Pradesh, creating income generation

27
assets to the households and thus enabling social and economic development. An investment of ` 30.00
crore is being made by APSCCFC in next 2-3 years.
14.3 The Committee was further informed that CSIR has signed a Memorandum of Understanding
(MoU) with the Agricultural Skill Council of India (ASCI), to collaborate for capacity-building programmes
focused on upgrading local workers' skills in aquaculture and fishery.
14.4 The Committee was also informed that a program named, JIGYASA, has been launched in collaboration
with the Ministry of Human Resource Development. The focus is on connecting school students and
scientists so as to extend student's classroom learning with that of a very well planned research
laboratory based learning. The "JIGYASA" would inculcate the culture of inquisitiveness on one hand and
scientific temper on the other, amongst the school students and their teachers. The Programme is
expected to connect 1151 Kendriya Vidyalayas with 38 National Laboratories of CSIR targeting 100,000
students and nearly 1000 teachers annually.
14.5 It was also apprised to the Committee that CDC conducts Degree Programme (MBA) in Management
Consulting in collaboration with BITS, Pilani and Certificate Programme in Technical Consulting and
Management Consulting for generating employment opportunities for the youths of the country.
14.6 The Committee was informed that NRDC is promoting appropriate low cost technologies relevant
to rural areas through its Skill Development/ Entrepreneurship Development Programmes (EDP's). NRDC
creates awareness amongst the rural youth about the potential of Science and Technology in changing
the face of Rural India. The programme envisages skill upgradation of unemployed youth, Capacity
building of NGOs and Women Self Help Groups (SHG) and other developmental agencies engaged in
rural development through the application of S&T tools.
14.7 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department in the field of skill development.
The Committee is hopeful that efforts of the Department would yield desired results in generating
employment opportunities for the youths of the country. However, the Committee feels that
linkages in the form of MoUs etc. must be done with the various private industries / Public Sector
industries alongwith the Ministry of Skill Development which also runs various programmes so
that these skilled persons are engaged optimally. The Committee, keeping in view of the above
recommends that a system be put in place to have a constant vigil and to facilitate the unemployed
youths of the country in order to integrate them in the industries after attaining their respective
skill development courses.
15. CSIR'S ROYALTY AND EARNINGS OF DEPARTMENT BY TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER
15.1 The Committee enquired from the Department about its earnings during last three years on account
of royalty component and efforts made to augment the same. Responding to this query, the Department
informed the Committee that Department provides support to industry for development and demonstration
of technology. For technology transfer and licensing of knowledgebase, CSIR Guidelines for Technology
Transfer and Utilization of Knowledgebase has been revised and new one is put in place from September,
2017. CSIR has been continuously endeavoring to earn higher premia and royalty through technology

28
transfer and licensing of knowledgebase, but much depends upon the paying capacity of industry in a
given sector. Further, CSIR has always focused on strengthening the technology base of industry leading
to socio-economic development in the country. Royalty received from industries during the last three
years by CSIR and DSIR is given below:
Y ear Royalty received by the DSIR from industries CSIR ( ` in crore)
upon commercialization of technologies
(` in crores)
2014-15 6.53 12.22
2015-16 12.75 12.29
2016-17 18.78 18.09
15.2 While deposing before the Committee during its meeting held on 13th February, 2018, the Secretary
informed the Committee that Department gives technologies to private companies/industries. The Department
has strengthening ties with various State Governments for transfer of technologies and a digital platform
for showcasing CSIR technologies and knowledge has also been created. The department has also
linkages with industries associations such as Confederation of Indian Industries (CII) and other
organisations.
15.3 The Committee during the meeting had observed that income of the Department from
royalty component is very low as compared to the huge investment of the Government on
account of research/innovations/R&D etc. vis-a-vis profit earned by the private companies/industries
by making commercial use of technologies developed by the Department. In view of this, the
Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation made in 297th Report and recommends that
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) should be signed with the companies/industries for fixing
royalty component while making technology transfer/inventions for allowing its product for
commercial utilization so that Department could be financially self reliant and also invest in
R&D.
15.4 The Committee has observed that investment in Research and Development (R&D) from
the Central Government is 0.6 % of GDP which is a fraction of GDP whereas in other countries
investment in R&D is US (2.8), China (2.1), Israel (4.3), and Korea (4.2). As per Economic
Survey 2017-18, in most countries, the private sector carries out the bulk of R&D even though
the Government play an important role in the area. However, in India, the Government is not
just the primary source of R&D but also the primary user of the funds, thus Government
expenditure on R&D is undertaken almost entirely by the Central Government. Private investments
in research have lagged in India. According to one analysis (Forbes, 2017) there are 26 Indian
companies in the list of the top 2,500 global R&D spenders compared to 301 Chinese companies.
19 (of these 26) firms are in just three sectors: pharmaceuticals, automobiles and software. India
has no firms in five of the top ten R&D sectors as compared to China that has a presence in
each of them. In view of the above, the Committee is of the view that investment in R&D in

29
the country is required to be enhanced substantially by the Central Government. The Committee
feels that Department must evolve some institutional mechanism to involve private companies/
industries for investing towards R&D by providing them some kind of incentives like tax benefits
etc.
15.5 The Committee further feels that States should also play an important role by making
contribution in the R&D of the country. The Committee is also of the view that CSIR should
focus R&D in its various labs keeping in view of market oriented/demand related research in
order to easily commercialise the research output and augment the earnings of the Department.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that earnings of the Department should be further
reinvested in the R&D Sector in addition to allocation from the Government side.
16. NATIONAL  CIVIL  AIRCRAFT  DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAMME  (NCAD)
16.1 The Secretary while deposing before the Committee in its meeting held on 13th February, 2018
apprised the Committee that the Department on 24th January, 2018 had tested a 14-seater civil aircraft
and also propose to have Indian New Generation Regional Transport Aircraft which would have many
benefits such as very low acquisition cost, low operating cost, low fuel consumption, low maintenance
cost, lower emission, take off and landing from unequipped airfields, all weather operation and enhanced
safety.
16.2 The Committee was also informed that Government of India is promoting Regional Air Connectivity
(UDAAN) under new Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 within clusters of small Indian towns with less than 2-
3 million people to the closest metros (less than 500 Km.) for education, employment, medical, trade,
industry and businesses which shall ultimately enhance economic growth. The expected air fliers would
be 300 million by 2022 and 500 million by 2027. The expected demand for the next 10 years with regard
to civil aircrafts (Turbo Props) are 250 to 350 and 100-to 150 for military aircrafts (Turbo Props).
16.3 The Committee notes that the Department has been pursuing manufacturing of civil aircraft under
its National Civil Aircraft Development Programme (NCAD) at CSIR- NAL, Bengaluru since long. The
Committee enquired about the progress made in this regard and by when this project would be made
operational. In response, the Department informed the Committee that the formation of a Special Purpose
Vehicle between Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. (HAL) and CSIR-National Aerospace Laboratories has been
agreed in-principle by both HAL and CSIR. However, the programme is yet to be made operational. The
nodal Ministry/ Department for taking the whole responsibility need to be identified. Also a commercial
partner for co-development needs to be decided for strategically launching the project.
16.4 The Committee is unable to understand that why this project is making no headway for the
last many years. The Committee also expresses its deep concern over the fact that we have
mastered the space technology indigenously but still not been successful in making civil aircraft
for the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that proper and realistic planning be
made for this project alongwith adequate budgetary provision so that this project could take off.
Further, the Committee also recommends that the nodal Ministry/Department for taking the
whole responsibility be identified and decision on the commercial partner be taken for strategically
launching the project at the earliest.

30
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS - AT A GLANCE
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT
The Committee finds that financial performance of the Department has been by and large
satisfactory in the past years. However, the Committee notes that during 2017-18, the Department
could utilize only ````` 3759.04 crore as on 31st January, 2018 against the allocated amount of `````
4629.70 crore (RE 2017-18), which means that an amount of ````` 870.66 crore still has to be utilized
with two months left in the current financial year. The Committee therefore recommends that
with periodic monitoring on quarterly basis, optimum utilization of allocated funds may be
ensured. (Para 3.2)
SCHEMES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
The Committee observes that there has been persistent underutilization of allocated funds
in all the above mentioned four Schemes, not only during 2017-18 but also in the previous years
too. The Committee expresses its deep concern over the underutilization of fund with regard to
PACE Scheme in 2017-18 in particular where only `````0.67 crore (upto 31.01.2018) have been
utilized against allocation of `````3.00 crore (RE 2017-18). The reasons for underutilization of allocated
funds have also not been given by the Department. Because of underutilizations, allocation at
RE stage for 2017-18 in some of the said schemes has been reduced substantially. The Committee,
therefore, insists upon that the Department should strengthen its administrative and monitoring
mechanism for utilizing the allocated resources and evaluation in respect of expenditure is done
on quarterly basis. The Committee hopes that the Department would utilize the funds allocated
under all said Schemes and achieve the projected targets during 2018-19. (Para 4.10)
PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKINGS
The Committee appreciates the efforts of NRDC in acting as a link between scientific
laboratories and industrial establishments for transferring technologies. However, the Committee
feels that a lot more is needed to be done to reach out to people living in rural areas by
developing appropriate technologies for those areas which will improve their living conditions.
(Para 5.6)
The Committee notes that only ````` 1.74 crore ( up to 31.01.2018) has been utilized against
the allocated amount of ````` 3.75 crore (RE 2017-18) and hence expresses its deep concern over
underutilization of allocated amount during 2017-18. The Committee hopes that proper planning
would be done for optimum utilization of allocated amount during 2018-19. (Para 5.7)
CENTRAL ELECTRONICS LTD. (CEL)
The Committee notes that only 64.10 % (upto 31.01.2018) amount was utilized by CEL
during 2017-18. The Committee fails to understand that why CEL sought funds at BE and RE
stage during 2017-18 on higher side but was unable to utilize that optimally. The Committee
observes this trend for the last three years. The Committee hopes that Department would be able
to utilize the allocated amount of ````` 5.00 crore (BE 2018-19). CEL also should try to find out the

31
reasons responsible for not utilizing the funds fully and take preventive action in the next
financial year  i.e. 2018-19. (Para 6.6)
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS
The Committee hopes that no cut or reduction in the allocated amount would be done during
2018-19 at RE stage for smooth and effective functioning of CDC. (Para 7.5)
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR)
The Committee appreciates the efforts of CSIR in publishing large number of research
papers in International SCI journals every year. The Committee notes that CSIR was able to
publish 5277 papers in SCI journals in the year 2017 with an average impact factor per paper
as 3.217. However, the Committee observes that good work done by the CSIR in the form of
research papers do not translate into sustainable technologies for use of the masses. Hence, the
Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation made in its 297th Report that the Department
should make all out efforts so that researches and inventions may be translated into sustainable
technologies and also for undertaking more original research work. (Para 8.7)
NATIONAL LABORATORIES SCHEME
The Committee appreciates the Department for launching major initiatives on Mission Mode
such as CSIR Aroma Mission, Phytopharmaceuticals Mission, Mission on Sickle Cell Anemia,
Mission on Catalysis for Sustainable Development etc. These initiatives would certainly benefit
the citizens of the country in general and farmers, industries, entrepreneurs and the children
who are suffering from Sickle Cell Anemia in tribal areas in particular. The Committee hopes
that with the concerted and co-ordinated efforts of the Department would yield desired results
and immensely benefit the various stakeholders. The Committee is also of the view that these
mission initiatives would generate employment opportunities and also add to the cause of self
employment for the youths of the country. (Para 9.4)
The Committee feels that collaboration / partnership with international agencies of the
different countries in various fields of science would go a long way in terms of knowledge sharing
and gathering experiences as well as attracting funding for R&D of the CSIR. Hence, the
Committee recommends that Department should make earnest efforts to have more and more
collaboration/partnership with the scientific institutions of the developed countries. (Para 9.7)
The Committee appreciates the role of CSIR labs in improving lives of citizens of the
country through scientific advancement and its R&D efforts which are aligned to the needs of
the domestic industry and the social needs of the nation, exemplified by the Government Mission
Programs and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The Committee feels that it is necessary
to keep and maintain pace with the latest technological developments in the world and keeping
in view the fact that CSIR infrastructures (with regard to labs) were built or acquired quite
earlier, building of new infrastructures and upgradation of the existing ones are of utmost

32
importance and should be taken up in right earnest. Therefore the Committee recommends that
modernization process of CSIR labs should be started at the earliest. However, the Committee
is of the view that since modernization of CSIR labs require huge amount of money, it should
be done in phased manner and after prioritizing the services of the labs i.e. after determining
the order of preference of the lajbs on the basis of their high value to the citizens and analysing
its criticality and necessity. For this, the Department should prepare a blue print and thereafter
approach Ministry of Finance for additional allocation of funds in order to modernize CSIR labs.
(Para 9.14)
The Committee notes that an Innovation Fund of  ````` 400.00 crores has been created for the
purposes of seed funding of S&T based entrepreneurs and for the handholding of S&T based
start-ups. The CSIR Innovation Fund will be deployed to enable commercialization of high-risk
high-reward cutting edge technologies as well as for technologies with high socio- economic
impact but long-term commercial payback. The Committee recommends that this fund may be
utilized substantially in rural and far flung areas of the country especially in the backward States
such as Bihar, Jharkhand, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh etc. in order to augment
employability in these places. (Para 9.15)
The Committee has observed that maximum of BE 2018-19 has been allocated for CSIR for
its two Schemes, one is National Laboratories and second one is National S&T Human Resource
Development. The Committee also notes that during 2017-18 only `````3504.72 crore was utilized
under National Laboratories Scheme till 31.01.2018 against the allocation (RE) of `````4357.12 crore
which was enhanced at RE stage. The Committee fails to understand that the Department had
sought more money at RE stage but could spent only ````` 3504.72 crore. This shows the lack of
proper planning and monitoring on the part of the Department. The Committee is of the view
that at one hand the Department is contemplating the additional amount for its various projects
and for upgradation of its labs, but on the other hand the Department could not utilize the
allocated amount. Therefore, the Committee recommends that Department should have a robust,
proper monitoring and planning mechanism in place so that allocated amount is utilized fully
during 2018-19. (Para 9.16)
NATIONAL S&T HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
The Committee welcomes the enhancement in allocations for this Scheme from `````225 crore
in 2017-18 (RE) to `````300 crore in BE 2018-19. However, the Committee expresses its concern over
the fact that during 2017-18, an amount of `````325 crore (BE 2017-18) was initially allocated under
this Scheme which was reduced to `````225 crore (RE 2017-18) which clearly reflects that physical
targets set for 2017-18 could not have been achieved fully and many of the deserving students
might have been denied the opportunities to get the fellowships/Scholarships. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that in future, the Department should ensure that no reduction is done
in the allocated amount at RE stage in the important Scheme like this. (Para 10.7)
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department for stimulating interest and
awareness among young students towards scientific research. However, the Committee notes that

33
most of the Scholarships/Fellowships are provided to students at the higher level i.e. PhD/
Research levels except few like Junior Research Fellowships through CSIR-UGC National Eligibility
Test etc. The Committee feels that Scholarships/Fellowships may be provided at entry level i.e.
graduation level or even Senior Secondary level to attract youth of the country to opt for science
studies. (Para 10.8)
FILING AND GRANT OF PATENTS
The Committee commends the efforts of CSIR in obtaining patents in India and abroad. The
Committee hopes that the Department would maintain its position. However, the Committee
feels that with a good number of patents, CSIR should make efforts to help Indian industries
in order to develop more and more globally competitive products, for that alone will determine
usefulness of patents earned by CSIR scientists. Further, the Committee also hopes that quality
of the patents should be given utmost importance than quantity and CSIR will remain vigilant
to safeguard our age old indisputable rights over our traditional knowledge. (Para 11.3)
WORLD RANKING OF CSIR
The Committee appreciates that CSIR has improved its world ranking in Government
institutions as well as its overall global Ranking. However, the Committee is of the view that
CSIR's global ranking of 75 among scientific institutions is not very encouraging or satisfactory and
is still far behind amongst the globally benchmarked scientific organisations in the world. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendation made in 297th Report that in order to
place India in the list of the top country in the scientific world, CSIR should aim to improve its place
in ranking in its field and it should strive hard to achieve that ranking. (Para 12.3)
PROJECTS/SCHEMES IN NORTH - EASTERN STATES
The Committee notes that many initiatives have been taken up by the Department in the
form of various projects/schemes being run in the North-Eastern States of the country through
one of the CSIR's constituent laboratory namely CSIR-North East Institute of Science and
Technology located at Jorhat in the State of Assam. The Committee is aware that this institute
has been engaged in pursuing focused R &D activities in various areas such as affordable
healthcare products, Nutraceuticals and functional foods, exploration and sustainable utilization
of plants and microbes, development of high yielding varieties of medicinal and aromatic plants,
bioremediation and restoration of degraded environment, development of formulations/technologies
for supporting MSMEs, advance materials for water and air purification, carbon based composite
materials, heterogeneous catalysts for organic transformations, eco-friendly pulping for paper
industry, S & T solution to geo-hazards, safe and sustainable exploitation of geo-resources &
climate change; and membrane technology for separation etc. (Para 13.4)
However, the Committee feels that lot more is needed to be done in this region as the whole
region is bountifully endowed with rich minerals, forest wealth, water bodies, agro-biodiversity
and rich traditional knowledge besides diversified flora and fauna including many varieties of

34
herbal and medicinal plants. The Committee is of the opinion that the potential of the diversified
natural resources of the region has not been fully tapped. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that all out efforts be made for R&D in various scientific fields specific to the North-East region
to the extent possible which will certainly go a long way in order to augment the incomes and
improve the quality of lives of millions of people geographically spread across the North-Eastern
States of the country. (Para 13.6)
SKILL  DEVELOPMENT
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department in the field of skill development.
The Committee is hopeful that efforts of the Department would yield desired results in generating
employment opportunities for the youths of the country. However, the Committee feels that
linkages in the form of MoUs etc. must be done with the various private industries/Public Sector
industries alongwith the Ministry of Skill Development which also runs various programmes so
that these skilled persons are engaged optimally. The Committee, keeping in view of the above
recommends that a system be put in place to have a constant vigil and to facilitate the unemployed
youths of the country in order to integrate them in the industries after attaining their respective
skill development courses. (Para 14.7)
CSIR'S ROYALTY AND EARNINGS OF DEPARTMENT BY TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER
The Committee during the meeting had observed that income of the Department from
royalty component is very low as compared to the huge investment of the Government on
account of research/innovations/R&D etc. vis-a-vis profit earned by the private companies/industries
by making commercial use of technologies developed by the Department. In view of this, the
Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation made in 297th Report and recommends that
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) should be signed with the companies/industries for fixing
royalty component while making technology transfer/inventions for allowing its product for
commercial utilization so that Department could be financially self reliant and also invest in
R&D. (Para 15.3)
The Committee has observed that investment in Research and Development (R&D) from
the Central Government is 0.6 % of GDP which is a fraction of GDP whereas in other countries
investment in R&D is US (2.8), China (2.1), Israel (4.3), and Korea (4.2). As per Economic
Survey 2017-18, in most countries, the private sector carries out the bulk of R&D even though
the Government play an important role in the area. However, in India, the Government is not
just the primary source of R&D but also the primary user of the funds, thus Government
expenditure on R&D is undertaken almost entirely by the Central Government. Private investments
in research have lagged in India. According to one analysis (Forbes, 2017) there are 26 Indian
companies in the list of the top 2,500 global R&D spenders compared to 301 Chinese companies.
19 (of these 26) firms are in just three sectors: pharmaceuticals, automobiles and software. India
has no firms in five of the top ten R&D sectors as compared to China that has a presence in
each of them. In view of the above, the Committee is of the view that investment in R&D in

35
the country is required to be enhanced substantially by the Central Government. The Committee
feels that Department must evolve some institutional mechanism to involve private companies/
industries for investing towards R&D by providing them some kind of incentives like tax benefits
etc.  (Para 15.4)
The Committee further feels that States should also play an important role by making
contribution in the R&D of the country. The Committee is also of the view that CSIR should
focus R&D in its various labs keeping in view of market oriented/demand related research in
order to easily commercialise the research output and augment the earnings of the Department.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that earnings of the Department should be further
reinvested in the R&D Sector in addition to allocation from the Government side.  (Para 15.5)
NATIONAL CIVIL AIRCRAFT DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (NCAD)
The Committee is unable to understand that why this project is making no headway for the
last many years. The Committee also expresses its deep concern over the fact that we have
mastered the space technology indigenously but still not been successful in making civil aircraft
for the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that proper and realistic planning be
made for this project alongwith adequate budgetary provision so that this project could take off.
Further, the Committee also recommends that the nodal Ministry/Department for taking the
whole responsibility be identified and decision on the commercial partner be taken for strategically
launching the project at the earliest. (Para 16.4)

MINUTES

VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 13th February, 2018 in Committee Room 'A',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
3. Shri Sharad Pawar
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. K. Gopal
6. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
7. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
***
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The Committee reassembled at 1:04 
P.M. and the following representatives of Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research appeared before the Committee:–
1. Dr. Girish Sahni, Secretary, & DG, CSIR
2. Dr. Anjan Ray, Director, Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun
***Relate to other matters.
39

40
3. Ms. Sumita Sarkar, Financial Advisor
4. Shri K.R. Vaidheeswaran, Joint Secretary (Admn.)
5. Dr. Sudeep Kumar, Chief Scientist Head, Mission Directorate, CSIR
6. Dr. Ashwani Gupta, Scientist 'G'
7. Shri S.K. Lalwani, DG, CDC
8. Dr. Nalin Singhal, CMD, Central Electronics Ltd.0
9. Dr. H. Purushottam, CMD, NRDC
10. Dr. Viswajanani Sattigeri, Sr. Principal Scientist
11. Dr. K. Venkatasubramanian, Sr. Principal Scientist, CSIR
12. Dr. R.K. Sinha, Principal Scientist, CSIR
8. The Chairman of the Committee welcomed the Secretary and other officers of Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research to the meeting. The Chairman sought to know the views of the
Secretary about the budgetary allocation for the year 2018-19, projected outlay, budgetary reduction, if
any, and its impact on the ongoing/new projected programmes/projects/activities of the Department, road
map prepared to utilise the budgetary allocation for the year 2018-19, targets set for the next financial
year, targets achieved during 2017-18, challenges faced by the Department and the corrective measures
taken thereon, steps taken by the Department to popularise the scientific advancements, internal monitoring
mechanism, etc.
9. The Secretary of the Department informed that the Department is responsible for linking Science
and Technology sector in the Government and its efforts through its various bodies like the National
Research Development Corporation (NRDC). He informed that the Department has an autonomous body
namely Council of Scientific and Industrial Research. It was informed that one of the most important
activities of the Department relates to certification of R&D units of Industrial Enterprises. He also stated
that the main challenge of the Department is to remain relevant to the needs of industry and the common
man. The Committee was also informed that the Department has formed an Innovation Fund of `400
crore from its own royalty and other earnings in order to cater to the funding, fielding and supporting
early stage innovation projects. A power point presentation was also made by the Secretary informing
the Committee about the various schemes/programmes/projects/activities/functioning of the Department.
The Secretary also highlighted the various achievements of the Department, technology transferred
during the last few years, farmer-centric initiatives, linkage with the State Governments, linkage with the
industry associations and technology transfer associations, etc.
10. On the issue of the activities proposed by the Department for the year 2018-19, the Secretary
submitted that Department proposes to strengthening the partnerships with CSIR, ICAR, DRDO, ICMR,
Universities and other R&D institutions and had signed 78 MoUs for sourcing of technologies, partnering

41
with institutions for setting-up and managing incubation centres, setting-up of IP exchange, seed funding
of manufacturing start-ups in incubation centres, national technology licensing survey and preparation of
technology database and intellectual property promotion and facilitation. The Committee was also briefed
about the financial performance of the Department during 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18.
11. The Chairman and the Members of the Committee then raised certain issues such as actual expenditure
of the Department during 2017-18; adequacy of the budgetary support; main thrust areas of the Department;
total administrative expenditure; distribution of budgetary support amongst various wings of the Department;
physical and financial targets and achievements; upgradation of CSIR labs. steps taken to address the
issue of scientific manpower; progress achieved regarding the National Civil Aircraft Development
Programme; policy of the Department to augment the share of investment by private companies or
industries in R&D of CSIR; progress made on account of capacity building under the Human Resource
Development Programme and Integrated Skill Development Initiatives, etc.
12. The representatives of Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, while presenting their
views, also replied to some of the queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the Committee. The
Chairman also directed the Secretary to furnish the written replies to the queries/points/issues raised by
the Chairman and the Members of the Committee, which could not be replied during the meeting, to the
Secretariat within ten days.
13. The witnesses then withdrew.
14. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
15. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 2.04 
P.M.

42
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 6th March, 2018 in Room No. '63', First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
6. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
7. Shri Daddan Mishra
8. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
9. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
10. Shri Nagendra Singh
11. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Director
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He informed
the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 309th, 310th, 311th,
312th, 313th, 314th and 315th reports on Demands for Grants 2018-19 of the Departments of
Biotechnology, Science and Technology, Scientific and Industrial Research, Space, Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change, Department of Atomic Energy and Ministry of Earth Sciences, respectively.
42

43
3. The Committee, after considering the recommendations made in the draft reports, adopted the draft
309th, 310th, 311th, 312th, 313th, 314th and 315th reports after some alterations/modifications suggested
by the Chairman of the Committee in the 314th Report of Department of Atomic Energy. The Committee
also decided to present/lay the reports to both the Houses of Parliament on 13th March, 2018.
4. The Committee also decided to nominate the Chairman and in his absence Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
and in her absence Shri Prasanna Acharya to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. K. Gopal and
in his absence Shri Vikram Usendi to lay the reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 13th March, 2018.
5. *** *** ***
6. *** *** ***
7. *** *** ***
8. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3.40 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.