R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED-THIRTEENTH REPORT
 
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2003-2004) OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
 (DEMAND NO. 81)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE  2ND MAY, 2003)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE   2ND MAY, 2003)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2003/VAISAKHA, 1925  (SAKA)
 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Website: http://parliamentofindia.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
 
1.       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE    
2.       INTRODUCTION                                                                                        
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                
4.         SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                                                        
5.         ANNEXURE                                                                       
6         MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                      
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2003)
 
 
1.                  Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 
2.                  Shri C. Apok Jamir
3.                  Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
4.                  Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharma
5.                  Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
6.                  Shri B.P. Singhal
7.                  Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
8.                  Smt. Savita Sharda
9.                  Smt. S. G. Indira
10.              Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
11.              Shri Lalit Suri
12.              Shri T. S. Bajwa
   * 13.Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
   * 14.Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
  @15.Vacant
 
LOK  SABHA
 
16. Smt. Margaret Alva
17. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                     
18. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
19. Chowdhary Talib Hussain
20. Adv. Suresh Ramrao Jadhav                         
21. Shri G.J.Javiya
22. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
23. Shri C. Kuppusami
24. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
25. Shri Kailash Meghwal
26. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
27. Shri Rupchand Murmu
28. Shri S. Murugesan                              
29. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                
30. Shri B.K. Parthasarathi   
31. Shri Suresh Pasi                                         
32. Dr. Ashok Patel                                        
33. Shri Prahlad Singh Patel    
34. Shri Shriniwas Patil
35. Prof. R.R. Pramanik
36. Shri Naresh Puglia  
_____________________________________________________________________________
      *      Nominated w.e.f. 23rd Janaury, 2003.
@    Dr. Vijay Mallya ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 27th February, 2003 consequent upon his 
        nomination to the Committee on Defence.
                 
37. Shri Ganta Sreenivasa Rao     
38. Prof. I.G. Sanadi
39. Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
40. Shri Vishvendra Singh   
41. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
42. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
43. Shri Balram Singh Yadav
          #44.      Dr. Bikram Sarkar
            45.      Vacant

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
SECRETARIAT
 
      Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
      Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary         
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
____________________________________________________________________________
#            Nominated w.e.f. 7
th April, 2003.
 
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
 Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One
 Hundred-Thirteenth Report of the Committee.  This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of
 the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research (Demand No.81).
2.         In the meeting of the Committee held on the 24 th March, 2003 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department
 of Scientific & Industrial Research gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought
 clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3.         The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by
 the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of
 the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research.
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on 29th           April, 2003.
 
NEW DELHI
April 29, 2003
 
C. RAMACHANDRAIAH
Chairman,
Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Scienc& Technology, Environment & Forests.
 
 
R E P O R T
            Long years back while fighting for freedom Mahatma Gandhi, the father of our nation had conjured up a vision of
 India studded with research laboratories for the service of her people.  Establishment of the Council for Scientific and
 Industrial Research in 1942 was a landmark event in our quest for using science and technology, for national
 reconstruction.  During sixty years of its existence it has emerged as one of the largest R&D organizations in the world for
 scientific and industrial research.  In spite of budgetary constraints and many other bottlenecks the CSIR has striven to
 achieve excellence in promoting and applying science for nation building.  Responding to the new challenges of our
 society, economy and international environment it has now remained in the forefront of forging science-business
 partnerships.  It is now awake to the new norms of competition and innovation and is moving towards the path of self-
financing by generation of its own funds.  After the formation of a separate   Ministry of Science and Technology on
 January 4, 1985 the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research became part of this Ministry.  Business allocated to
 this Department under the Notification is: All matters concerning the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
 (CSIR), National Research Development Corporation (NRDC), Central Electronics Limited (CEL), National Information
 System on Science and Technology (NISSAT), Registration and Recognition of R&D Units, Matters relating to
 UNCTAD and WIPO, National register for foreign collaborations, the Creation of a pool for temporary placement of
 Indian Scientists and Technologists and  National register of Scientific Manpower.
2.         The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research deals with the Technology Promotion, Development &

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 Utilisation (TPDU) programmes (other than supporting the two public sector enterprises namely National Research
 Development Corporation and Central Electronics Limited.
            The scheme on “Technology Promotion, Development and Utilization (TPDU) Programmes” has been formulated
 by merging the following schemes:
      i      Research and Development by Industry (RDI)
      ii.      Programme Aimed at Technological Self Reliance (PATSER)
      iii.   Scheme to Enhance the Efficacy of Transfer of Technology (SEETOT)
            Besides the above, the Department carries out the following activities;
      i.    Matters relating to International R&D collaboration involving industrial companies, and industrial R&D centres.
      ii.            International Cooperation/Collaboration agreements with other countries relating to industrial R&D with the
 concurrence of the Ministry of External Affairs.
      iii.   Matters concerning domestic technology, particularly the promotion of ventures involving the commercialisation
 of such technologies other than those under the Department of Science and Technology.
      iv.   Matters relating to Technology Trade including exports of Technology and Consultancy Services, in close
 cooperation with the Ministry of Commerce.
      v.   Matters relating to technical, engineering and management consultancy organisations and services.
 
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
4.         The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), an autonomous organization with its 38 laboratories and
 fifty outreach, centers has recently completed sixty years of their existence. CSIR has emerged as a scientific institution
 which has been highly acclaimed inside and outside India.  It aims at achieving global excellence with local relevance; it
 symbolizes a culture that links science with society through technology , industrial manufacture, and dissemination of
 scientific temper among people.
5.         The Committee was informed that during the Ninth Five Year Plan, CSIR had effected wide spread changes to
 meet the challenges of economic reform, introduction of new industrial and trade policies and liberalization of economy.
 It also effected a reorientation of its programmes with the aim to make CSIR more responsive and move towards a self
 sustaining R&D institution. The cardinal feature of the Ninth Five Year Plan was the White Paper on CSIR focusing on its
 Vision and Strategy. Some of the reform process effected relate to re-engineering of the organizational structure; linking
 research to market place; mobilizing and optimizing the resources base; creating conducive and workable infrastructure
 and investing in high quality science that would be a harbinger of future technologies.
6.         As a result, CSIR stands today amongst the finest publicly funded scientific industrial research establishments of
 the whole world. As the nation’s strongest holder of intellectual property rights (IPR), it leads the way in protecting
 traditional knowledge strength while adding to the new IPR capital.   CSIR today ranks second amongst the major PCT
 applicants from developing countries at USPTO.
7.         CSIR has also promoted excellence in science and is the only S&T organization which had nurtured and supported
 human-tech from 16 to 65 years of age through numerous schemes on human resource for scientific research.  CSIR’s
 mission is to provide scientific industrial R&D that maximizes the economic, environmental & societal benefits for the
 people of India.
8.         The detailed functions assigned to the Council are:
      i.            Promotion, guidance and coordination of scientific and industrial research in India, including the institution
 and financing of specific researches;
      ii.            Establishment or development and assistance to special institutions or departments of existing institutions for
 scientific study of problems affecting particular industries and trade;
      iii.      Establishment and award of research studentships and fellowships;
      iv.            Utilization of the results of the researches conducted under the auspices of the Council towards the
 development of industries in the country and the payment of a share of royalties arising out of the development of

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 the results of researches to those who are considered as having contributed towards the pursuits of such researches;
      v.            Establishment, maintenance and management of laboratories, workshops, institutes and organizations to
 further scientific and industrial research and to utilize and exploit for purposes of experiment or otherwise any
 discovery or invention likely to be of use to Indian industries;
     
            vi.            Collection and dissemination of information in regard not only to research but also to industrial matters
 generally;
      vii.      Publication of scientific papers and journals; and
      viii.Any other activity or activities to promote generally the objects of the resolution.
9.         The Committee was informed that the guiding principle for CSIR during the Tenth Five Year Plan would be to
 provide scientific industrial R&D that maximizes the economic, environmental and societal benefits for the people of
 India and accordingly, the Tenth Five Year Plan of CSIR and the Annual Plans have been formulated keeping in mind 8%
 growth rate envisaged by the Planning Commission and Government policy to invest 2% of GDP on Science &
 Technology. 
10.       CSIR seeks to foster the organizational values of: Excellence in science; Global competitiveness in technology
 based on high science; Local relevance in tune with socio-cultural and economic ethos of the people; and Innovation
 ranging in all the spheres of activities from science to technology and from management to financing.  These principles
 coupled with detailed analysis on strength, weakness, opportunities and threats carried out by CSIR laboratories were
 taken into consideration in deriving the opportunities for CSIR in the market place as well as for socio-economic
 development.
11.       The other factors which has bearing on CSIR programmes for the Annual Plans are: Responsibilities on CSIR
 arising out of International Intellectual Property Rights arena; continuous training and re-training of CSIR staff;
 advancement of knowledge through enlarging the scope of fellowships to trans-disciplinary areas and supporting basic
 research that dovetails with its own requirement and expansion of S&T to proliferate CSIR technologies to the masses.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
12.       The approved outlay for the 10
th five-year plan has been kept at Rs.2575.00 crores as against Rs.1356.23 crores for
 the 9th Plan (1999-2002). The Department during the 10 th Five year Plan proposes to operate six schemes based on zero
 base Budgetary (ZBB) review.  Five of the Schemes are ongoing schemes of the Ninth Five Year Plan and a new scheme
 on Infrastructure Renovation and Refurbishment is being implemented from the Tenth  Five Year Plan.   The detailed
 breakup is given below;
TENTH PLAN APPROVED OUTLAY (2002-07)
        (Rupees in Crores)
CSIR 2430
DSIR 145
Total 2575
 
13.       The Department has been allocated Rs.1136.41 crores (Rs.520 crores under plan and Rs.616.41 crores under Non-
Plan) for the year 2003-04 as against Rs.1040.93 crores in B.E. and Rs.985.00 crores in the R.E. of the year 2002-03.The
 details of the budgetary  projections for the programmes of DSIR during the year 2003-04 are given in Annexure-I.
                  The breakup of the financial allocation of DSIR, CSIR and Public Sector enterprises is given below:
FINANCIAL SUMMARY FOR 2003-2004 PLAN & NON-PLAN
                                                                                  (Rupees  in Crores)
 Plan Non-Plan Total
 Demands
Made
Approved Demands
Made
Approved Demands
Made
Approved

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
A. CSIR 550.00 492.00 669.60 611.61 1219.60 1103.61
B. DSIR 15.30 15.00 4.30 4.00 19.60 19.00
C. PSE 19.50 13.00 5.30 0.80 24.80 13.80
Total 584.80 520.00 681.10 616.41 1264.00 1136.41
 
14.       When the Department was asked by the Committee as to how the enhanced budgetary allocation would be helpful
 to promote its activities, it informed that the enhanced allocation of Rs.95.48 crores (Rs.80 crores plan and Rs.15.48
 crores under Non-Plan) would be helpful in meeting the demands of higher expenditure as successful concepts move
 towards commercialization/field implementation stage.  In the Tenth Plan, CSIR has focused attention on programmes of
 National Laboratories under the three categories viz. (i) continuously building & refurbishing competence at globally
 competitive level, skills and competency, in all scientific areas; (ii) taking up in house projects with well defined
 objectives, deliverables, time frame; and (iii) performing contract R&D for industry and other users to deal with problem
 through expertise gained over the years.  Accordingly, some well focused programmes/projects were identified and
 formulated with a view to synergising the competencies developed in laboratories and getting them implemented in a
 network mode.
15.            Explaining the reasons for reduction on allocation in R.E stage last year the Department informed that the
 projects, after formulation, were sent to the Planning Commission for “in-principle” approval.  This procedure took time
 as apart from coordination within CSIR laboratories, formal letters of approvals were also needed from participating
 concerned ministries before the “in principle” approval of Planning Commission could be obtained.  Thus, due to resource
 constraints and the delays in obtaining the “in principle” approval from the Planning Commission, the progress of
 expenditure was not commensurate with allocations. Finance ministry effected a cut of Rs.65 crores under the plan
 scheme at RE stage.
NATIONAL LABORATORIES
16.       CSIR today has a network of 38 Laboratories and 50 field stations/extension centres/regional centres located all
 over the country that undertake R&D in various S&T areas and disciplines. The extension and regional centres have been
 established to reach  out to the diverse users and disseminate knowledge and information on R&D capabilities, techniques
 and technologies developed by the National laboratories of CSIR.
17.       The Committee was informed that CSIR in the Tenth Five Year Plan (TFYP) would seek to further broaden and
 strengthen this trend and undertake more of its activities in the project mode by networking and alliancing on a Team
 India basis. The programmes of National Laboratories have been further categorized sectorally under the following
 sectors: Aerospace; Biology and Biotechnology; Chemical; Earth Resources and Natural Hazards Assessment; Ecology &
 Environment; Electronics and Instrumentation; Energy; Food & Food processing; Health Care, Drugs & Pharmaceuticals;
 Housing & Construction; Information Dissemination and Products; Leather; Materials, Metals, Minerals and
 Manufacturing and Rural Development so as to enable and facilitate an easy alignment with the overall ‘National
 Planning process’. The areas of thrust in these categories have been identified through interactions with various national
 agencies, government departments, industry associations and potential clients keeping in view the strengths and
 capabilities in the CSIR laboratories and the external opportunities. 
18.            Projects of the Tenth Five Year Plan have been evolved, over a period of one year, through interactive and
 repetitive consultations with the Steering Committee on S&T, Working Group for Tenth Five Year Plan, Sectoral
 Subgroup of the Working Group, Research Councils of the respective National Laboratories.  The evolution of the
 Projects, thus, has gone through a great deal of churning of vast S&T expertise available in the country and also in the
 concerned departments/agencies of the Government.
19.       When the Committee asked the Department whether they have identified any core areas for research activities for
 which an increased allocation for national laboratories have been sought the Committee was informed that CSIR has
 formulated programmes to be implemented in Network and Mission mode during the Tenth Plan.  The emphasis is on
 synergising the core competencies available at various laboratories.  The core areas identified include genomics &
 proteomics, integrative biology, herbal preparations for global positioning, bioinformatics, green technologies,
 nutraceuticals & nutragenomics, new approach to drug development, specialty materials, waster minimization through
 new routes, advanced manufacturing technologies, nano technology etc.
20.       The Committee was informed by the Department that during the Tenth Plan CSIR laboratories would synergise

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 vast competencies of its laboratories and  initiate selectively major projects that could realize high value for the Indian
 economy.  A major programme on development and commercialization of bioactive molecules has been initiated to
 harness and derive the fullest benefit of the synergy lying at 20 CSIR labs and external agencies such as Central Council
 for Research in Unani Medicine, Arya Vaidya  Sala, Indian Council of Medicine and Homeopathy,  Universities etc. 
 Similarly the network programmes which have been initiated during the Tenth Plan systematically complements and
 supplements the core expertise available at various laboratories and putting them together to derive the maximum
 benefits.  Under the projects, at times laboratories ranging from 4 to 21 would be working together to address the
 objectives and sharing their expertise to realise the gains.
21.       The Committee appreciates the Department for carrying out research in many frontier areas of science and
 technology.  It notes with satisfaction the laudable claim of the CSIR that science is one of the areas which can bring
 leadership and meet the kind of objectives that India has set for itself.  However, it is of opinion that the Department
 should make efforts to raise funds from Industry by successful transfer of technologies. There is also a need for wider
 dissemination of technologies so that there is a greater interface between Industry & R&D laboratories.   
National S&T Human Resource Development
22.       The Committee was informed that CSIR has initiated schemes to attract brightest of youth to science education and
 R&D as a career viz. CSIR Programme on Youth for Leadership for Science (CPYLS) and Shyama Prasad Mukherjee
 (SPM) Fellowships at school level & post graduate levels respectively. Through them CSIR provides support to higher
 institutions of learning on S&T.  It also supports research schemes for the development of science and technology in the
 country. It also provides fellowships and associateships for pursuing research by scholars.
23.       It will establish fellowships in trans-disciplinary areas.  In a calculated manner it will support researchers to come
 out of the areas where there are limited opportunities and challenges and enable them to rise to the new problems and
 opportunities offered by ever widening of scope of science and technology.   Since research scholars hardly seek
 opportunities for self employment and entrepreneurship they end up looking for employment opportunities in government
 R&D establishments.  CSIR would make efforts to inculcate a spirit of entrepreneurship   among research scholars to
 establish their own R&D enterprise through appropriate motivation, skills development and venture financing.  It also
 aims at enlarging CPYLS to attract bright school leaving children.
24.       The Committee was informed that CSIR would continue to upgrade extra mural human resources in diverse
 disciplines of S&T by providing appropriate fellowships in transdisciplinary areas. The Shyama Prasad Mukherjee awards
 were introduced to promote creativity and nurture talent at postgraduate level of science.
25.       The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation made in 86
th Report that there is a need for reviewing and
 strengthening /revamping the existing S&T support systems in the universities and other educational institutions. The
 Committee is of the view that an agreement be reached with various financial institutions for providing loans to those
 research scholars for setting up their own enterprises.
Intellectual Property & Technology Management (IP&TM)
26.       CSIR today occupies the number one position in Indian & Foreign patent filings.  CSIR would stress to maintain its
 number one position of patent holder in India. It would create electronic/digital databases on CSIR’s IP & knowledge base
 holdings. It would also build capacity to defend and initiate action against patent infringement for which it could refurbish
 the skills and knowledgebase of those engaged in the IPR game and also advise policy makers appropriately.
27.       CSIR has been on the forefront of filing & managing IPR since its inception.  However a massive programme of
 education and skills acquisition on diverse aspects of IPR, innovation and technology management was mounted at the
 commencement of the Ninth Plan Period only. As a result most of the CSIR scientists are now IPR and R&D business
 savvy and literate.   The earlier operating slogan of CSIR 'patent, publish and prosper has since been enlarged to 'patent,
 publish, peddle and prosper" so as to derive value from the IPR portfolio. The laboratory-wise patent progress is given in
 the Annexure-II.
28.       The Committee was informed that It was CSIR that initiated the action with the US PTO for the re-examination
 and revocation of the patent granted on turmeric as a wound healing agent. This was followed by meticulous and
 strenuous efforts in compilation of voluminous scientific data. Finally it resulted in  successful revocation of the US
 Patent. This demonstrated CSIR's capabilities to understand the complex techno-legal-issues of IPR both defensively and
 aggressively and reassure the Indian public and policy makers of India's capacity and capability to meet the challenges of
 globalization and WTO.  Thereafter,  CSIR  have  globally  pioneered  the concept of
According ‘Traditional Knowledge' due recognition and privileged position in the IPR domain. Traditional Knowledge

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 properly documented and codified will now be used for 'prior - art - search'-in granting of IPR. This has conclusively
 demonstrated CSIR's pre-eminent position not only as a generator and manager of IPR but also on the conceptual and
 policy frame in India & internationally.
29.            Manipulation & management of IPR and technology management for organizational advantage had been taken
 up seriously. Customer satisfaction evaluation was taken up - perhaps the first ever by an Indian R&D institution. A
 dedicated and at-arms length unit was setup. In order to promote the organized & structural research on management of
 technology, CSIR has been organizing an annual 'R&D Management Conference’, which has come to occupy a place of
 pride for the Technology Management Community. As a planned strategy CSIR seeks networking and alliancing with
 technology based companies.  This was explored, promoted, and successfully achieved by over 50% of the CSIR
 laboratories, Taking advantage of the World Wide Web for marketing, CSIR has forged partnerships with other leading
 players to set-up web-based incubation & business development. Thus CSIR has been pioneering new mechanisms and
 techniques of Intellectual Property and Technology Management.  IPMD is initiating steps to set-up mechanisms to effect
 international licensing of its IP along with its validation and enforcement.
The Department targets for 2002-2003 in patent filing would be :
 Target Anticipated Target Achieved
(till October, 2002)
 Indian Filing Foreign Filing Indian Filing Foreign Filing
2002-2003 450 650 92 100
 
CSIR has achieved a unique distinction of being the first organization in the country to obtain the grant of 100 US
 patents during 2002 (calendar year).  At the moment its PCT filings has put it at 2
nd rank amongst developing nations
 during 2002.
            While the targets for  2003-2004 would be;
 Target Anticipated
 Indian Filing Foreign Filing
2003-2004 600 800
 
30.       The Committee commends the Department for emerging as a pioneering institute to achieve number one position
 in Indian & Foreign patent filings.  The Committee hopes that the Department would maintain its position.  Earlier
 Basmati rice was patented and some NGOs filed PILs in courts to activate the Government to take appropriate action. 
 The Committee hopes that CSIR will remain vigilant in future to safeguard our age old indisputable rights to our
 traditional knowledge.
R&D Management Support
31.       CSIR Headquarters, through various functional Units/Divisions provides the R&D management support and
 common and unified infrastructure to and for the National Laboratories. The Headquarters functions as the nerve Centre
 for the organization and catalyses and facilitates the
Laboratories by establishing, equipping and realizing excellence in R&D, promoting brand equity, financial self-
sufficiency, global competitiveness and disseminating organizational learning. It provides support to the laboratories for
 human resources development, international Scientific Collaboration, publicity and public relations, performance
 appraisal, scientific audit etc. It is the link between the laboratories, the Government, the Parliament and International
 agencies.
32.       The major initiative to be mounted during the Plan period is on setting up of an organizational Human Resources
 Development Centre in the premises vacated by the erstwhile Structural Engineering Research Centre at Ghaziabad. The
 CSIR Review Committee in 1986 had recommended the setting up of such a HRD Centre but it could not be pursued for a
 variety of reasons. The Centre depends heavily on expertise for specialized knowledge. In the initial phase the Centre will
 cater to scientists, engineers, technologists and senior managers in CSIR aggregating to around 10,000 personnel.
            Besides, due to the globalisation of economies the opportunities for international scientific collaboration have
 vastly increased. Initiatives will be made to scout for and pinpoint partnerships that could synergise and add value to R&D

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 activities in the National Laboratories.
33.       CSIR HQs also operates under it two Units for (a) R&D in Information products and (b) a customer satisfaction
 evaluation.  The first seeks to catalyse and mobilize packaging of information products based on CSIR databases and
 developments and the second a pioneering unit by any publicly funded R&D to assess the customer response to CSIR
 rendering R&D and technical services.
34.       The Committee observes that although CSIR initiates  good works in various fields for the development of our
 country and indeed the mankind, these accomplishments have not been made known to the people.  It notes with
 satisfaction that efforts are being made to establish CSIR brand equity among the public.  To reach out to the people for
 making them aware of the important role played by CSIR publicity through electronic and Print Media, must be made. 
 Even the organization of exhibitions in rural areas displaying activities of the CSIR must be made for the benefit of our
 people.
34(A)   The Committee has been given to understand that due to personal efforts of one of its Members the Minister of
 Information & Broadcasting has approached the Minister of Science & Technology to find out as to how the Ministry of
 I&B  could be of use to provide publicity for the scientific and technological programmes.  The Committee also
 understands that the Minister of I&B has also extended all cooperation in this regard.  The Committee therefore
 recommends that the Director General of CSIR must seize this opportunity and assist the Minister of Science &
 Technology in sending plans for giving wide publicity to its various programmes and activities. 
INFRASTRUCTURE RENOVATION & REFURBISHMENT
35.       The Committee was informed that in 1997 CSIR was amongst the first to plan for V-SAT connectivity to all its
 laboratories.  It was established to some limited extent; however, the delays in implementation and the radical changes in
 communication set-up since then have made it imperative that it be upgraded into an efficient internet.  CSIR has been
 advising and assisting other organisations to take up computerization and the use of information technology but it has not
 benefited fully from the revolution, except in isolated pockets.  Thus the organizational benefits of the radical gains in
 productivity brought about by IT have not yet been realised.   The IT Task Force has also enjoined that  every
 organization devote  2 % of its outlay on IT. In order to inculcate an IT
 
Culture in the system, it would be assigned a driving role.  Internet connectivity to all the laboratories will be sought
 through a national level ISP including VPN solutions to establish a CUG (Closed User Group), high speed, satellite-based
 communication network, interconnecting around 100 nodes: Hqs & 39 labs and 50 field Centres to provide an “on-line”
 Management Information System (MIS) for: R&D Project management System; Technology Management System;
 Intellectual Property Management System, Human Resource Management System, Financial Accounting & Management
 System; Investment Management System.
36.       When the Committee asked the Department as to how the infrastructure renovation & refurbishment is different
 from the scheme on modernization undertaken during the ninth five year plan it was informed that in Infrastructure
 renovation & refurbishment emphasis was on renovation and refurbishing of infrastructure facilities  (e.g. old buildings,
 old electrical wirings, etc.) whereas in modernization the emphasis was on the modernization and upgradation of
 equipment and R&D facilities.
37.       The Committee asked the department to find out as to why adequate steps were not taken to improve the
 infrastructure for laboratories. It was informed that CSIR infrastructure was built or acquired more than thirty years ago
 and some of the laboratories like the CDRI, CFTRI, CSMCRI etc. are housed in palaces, which are centuries old.  The
 premises were converted into laboratories by carrying out only small renovations.  Most of the laboratories are thus not
 suited for modern day R&D especially in terms of Good Laboratory Practices, standardization of facilities as per ISO
 standards, NABL requirements for accreditation and certification, IT connectivity through LAN, WAN etc. Also many of
 them today are at a stage of dilapidation and pose safety hazards.  Most laboratory buildings need strengthening of
 foundations and roofs, revamping of electrical wiring and substations, better communications connectivity, lifts etc.  The
 38 CSIR Laboratories and 50 field centers are to be renovated and refurbished. Accordingly, the new scheme specifically
 dedicated to renovation & refurbishing has been initiated and an outlay Rs. 100 crore is placed during TFYP.
38.       The Committee feels that the state-of-art infrastructure / laboratories are extremely important to further augment
 and enrich our capabilities in the fields of science and technology so as to face the increasing challenges thrown up by
 intense research activities in many scientific and technological institutions across the globe.  The infrastructure should be
 seen as a strategic national resource and funding should be given on a continuing basis to maximize their effectiveness,

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 improvement and relevance for our scientific community.  The infrastructure should also be developed keeping in view
 the future advances in science & engineering.  The Committee also feels that high-speed internet access facility be
 established as vast amount of scientific data is available on the internet. This will enable our scientists to have faster
 access to scientific databases
TECHNOLOGY PROMOTION, DEVELOPMENT AND UTILIZATION PROGRAMME
39.       The Committee was informed that Technology  Promotion, Development and Utilization Programmes has been
 formulated by merging some of the ninth Plan schemes as per the recommendation of the planning Commission under
 zero base budgeting exercise. The Schemes are: Research and Development by Industry  (RDI); Programme  Aimed at
 Technological Self-reliance (PASTER) and Scheme to Enhance the Efficacy of Transfer of Technology (SEETOT) .
a)   Research and Development by Industry  (RDI)
      The component scheme on Research and Development by Industry (RDI), deals with all activities relating to
 recognition of in-house R&D units in industry and non-commercial Scientific and Industrial Research Organizations,
 fiscal incentives and  other  mechanisms and  initiatives  towards  supporting  and  encouraging  the  R&D efforts  of 
 industry.  There  were 1175  in-house  R&D units  in Industry having valid recognition by DSIR as, on 31 December
 2002.
b)   Programme Aimed at Technological Self-reliance (PASTER)      
            The component scheme on Programme Aimed at Technological Self-Reliance (PATSER) aims at catalyzing and
 supporting activities relating to technology absorption, adaptation and demonstration including capital goods
 development, involving industry and R&D organizations.  Under this scheme   research, development, design and
 engineering projects for absorption and up-gradation of imported technology as well as development and demonstration of
 new and improved technologies are supported.  While DSIR support has been catalytic and partial, the bulk of the
 financial contribution in any project has been from the industry. These projects cover products and processes in various
 important industries such as metallurgy, electrical & electronics, instrumentation, mechanical engineering, earth moving
 & industrial machinery, chemicals, explosives and drugs & pharmaceuticals. A distinctive feature of PATSER funding is
 that many of the programmes also involve Govt. research laboratories or IITs, IISc. or Universities as partners along with
 the industrial companies concerned. 
40.       Under PATSER, about 74 projects are in progress and these have considerable commercial potential for products/
 processes. PATSER projects have strengthened the linkages with more than 25 national research laboratories/ institutions.
 The Committee was informed that during the 10
th Plan Department would further enhance its efforts to strengthen
 industry’s linkages with CSIR and other research labs. It aims at networking with other funding schemes such as
 Technology Development Board, Home Grown Technology Programme of TIFAC and other financial institutions. 
 Department has interacted with other ministries for identification of technology development projects. More such
 interactions with other economic ministries are being planned. 
c)   Scheme to Enhance the Efficacy of Transfer of Technology (SEETOT)
            The component scheme essentially aims at facilitating acquisition and management of technologies, accelerating
 trade and export of technologies and services, enhancing our consultancy capabilities and increasing awareness about the
 usefulness of consultancy services among the customers. Technology status reports on various industries/sectors/products
 have also been brought out. A number of activities relating to technology management have been undertaken.  Preparation
 of reports, newsletters, organization of seminars and participation in trade fairs related to promotion of technology trade
 and exports were supported.  To develop sectors specific consultancy capabilities and provide doorstep consultancy
 services to SMEs, Design Engineering and Consultancy Services Centres as well as Consultancy Clinics were promoted
 Select studies on consultancy capabilities were supported and reports brought out.  The activities of Consultancy
 Development Centre (CDC) and International Organisation concerned with technology transfer, namely, Asian and
 Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology (APCTT) were supported.
41.       The Committee feels that the merging of these programmes would not in any way effect the importance of these
 schemes and that they would continue to do the commendable work of transfer of technology for commercial
 exploitation.  The Committee also feels that such efforts of the CSIR would further encourage  the entrepreneurship 
 among our scientists
and contribute towards technological self-reliance.   However the Committee recommends that greater attention must be
 paid by the CSIR to ensure that our industrial enterprises take necessary and important steps for augmenting their
 contributions to R&D.  Our expenditure for R&D as percentage of G.D.P. has fallen from 0.98 during 1958-59 to 0.8%

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 during 21st Century.  Out of it 80% is contributed by the government and only 20% comes from industry.  In all most all
 the developed countries contribution to R&D as percentage of GDP is 3%.  Out of it industry contributes 80% and the
 government only 20%.  Our vision is to make India a developed country by the year 2020.  While the Committee strongly
 recommends that at least during the first quarter of the Tenth five year plan contribution to R&D as percentage of GDP
 must target at 1% and the percentage contribution of industry to it must rise substantially.  In the age of innovation and
 competition, it is appropriately said, “real temples of India have to be industry”.  For this to happen their contribution to
 R&D has to be bolstered.  Money spent in R&D is not expenditure but an investment for the future.  It is also important
 that the know-how is sold to industry on competitive bids to extract the best return.
NEW MILLENNIUM INDIAN TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP INITIATIVE (NMILTLI)
42.       CSIR has been assigned the responsibility to conceptualise and manage this far reaching Indian Technology
 Leadership Initiative which seeks to support innovation centered scientific and technological developments as a vehicle to
 attain for the country a global leadership position in some selective niche areas.  CSIR through large-scale national
 consultation and brainstorming is supporting in true Team India spirit 9 projects encompassing 65 R&D institutions @ 20
 Industrial firms.  Another 10 projects are being taken up in 2003-04.  The TFYP would see the maturing of a few of the
 projects for upscaling.
43.       The Committee was informed that during the year it would continue its endeavour to synergise the best
 competencies of publicly funded R&D institutions, academic and private industry.  Six new projects are to be initiated
 which would involve 65 research institution and 27 industrial firms with an outlay of Rs.45.45 crores spread over a period
 of 2-4 years. 
44.       During the year 2002-2003 under NMITLI scheme till date, 3 new projects originated from industries have been
 launched while 7 projects originating from research institutions and academia have been developed. Fresh conceptual
 proposals from Indian Industry were again invited during the year. These proposals are at an advanced level of processing
 and development. It is planned to develop at least 5 such proposals into projects. 
45.       When the Committee asked as to how the reduction in allocation to Rs.35.00 crores during the year 2003-04 will
 effect the scheme, the Department replied that the budgetary allocation of the scheme is regulated on the basis of available
 projects and progress of the ongoing programmes. Thus ,the allocation of Rs.35.00 crores for the year would be sufficient
 to meet the requirements. However, if need arises to enhance the allocation, they would review it during the R.E stage.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BY INDUSTRY (RDI)
46.            Recognising the need for developing an indigenous technological base for technology absorption and
 indigenous technology development for achieving technological self reliance, the Government has initiated several
 measures to encourage industry to carry out R&D for meeting their needs and also for establishing close links between the
 national laboratory system and industry. In house R&D units in industry provide a desirable and essential interface for
 the national laboratories,  educational  institutions  and   industry.  There  were  1175 in house  R&D   units duly
recognised by DSIR as on 31 December 2002. They employ over 50,000 R&D personnel and the R&D expenditure
 incurred by these units was of the order of Rs.2600 crores.
47.       The Department through this programme aims to strengthen linkages among in - house R&D system, SIROs,
 national laboratory system and educational system and strengthen R&D infrastructure and promote and support R&D
 initiatives in industry.
48.       The Committee was informed that during year the it has carried out the following activities viz.  organisation of
 16th National Conference on in house R&D in Industry; presentation of  National Awards for Outstanding R&D
 Achievements to 8 companies; bringing out 10  publications; recognition of  104 new in house R&D  units; recognition
 of 20 new SIROs and  renewal of recognition to 230 in house R&D units.  Around 670 essentiality certificates for
 claiming customs duty exemption were issued to public funded institutions and 76 essentiality certificates for claiming
 excise duty exemption were issued to SIROs.  Registration of about 100 public funded research organisations was
 renewed for purposes of availing customs duty exemption on imports made for R&D. 21 new public funded research
 organisations / institutions were registered with DSIR for purposes of availing customs duty exemption on imports made
 for R&D. 14 approvals u/s 35 (2AB) (Form No. 3CM) and 31 certificates (Form No.3CL) for weighted tax deduction u/s
 35 (2AB) were issued by DSIR to the Director General (Income Tax Exemptions).  Approvals to 6 commercial R&D
 companies were issued.
49.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the activities of the CSIR is broad based and wide-ranging.  It has taken
 laudable steps to augment R&D facilities in industry. It is important that such facilities are further enhanced and bolstered

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 by the  industries themselves to augment their scientific and technological abilities so that they stand on their own for
 upgrading their knowledge base.  It would also enable them to successfully compete in the national and international
 arena.  In the age of geo-economics research and development will only open new vistas of technological innovations and
 help our industries to successfully meet the challenges of the present and future.  The Committee recommends that CSIR
 must redouble its efforts to realize this objective in practice and in full measure.  The Committee observes that closer
 coordination among research laboratories should be obtained for producing better products, which would eventually reach
 the end users of such products.
PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES
A.  National Research Development Corporation (NRDC)
50.            National Research Development Corporation (NRDC), a public sector enterprise under DSIR, is engaged in
 development, upscaling, licensing and commercialisation of indigenous technologies as well as export of technologies.
 The objectives of the Corporation are: commercialising of indigenous technologies; promotion and commercialisation of
 inventions; dissemination of information on technology transfer; and development and promotion of rural technology.
51.       The National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) is a unique organisation, which is wholly dedicated to
 the promotion, development and commercialization of new technologies.  Its basic charter involves technical, commercial
 and financial measures needed for closing gaps in the “innovation chain” through which an idea, invention, or process is
 converted into a product in the market. 
52.       As a result of a "New Approach" to the Corporation activities, the Corporation has been able to reverse the
 declining trend in technologies acquired from R&D laboratories for licensing.  The organisations from which such
 technologies were acquired have been widened enormously to cover many laboratories under CSIR, ICMR, ICAR,
 DRDO, BARC, CPRI, DOE, RDSO, IITs, Universities and other large public sector enterprises.
53.       The Committee was informed by the Department that NRDC also operates two promotional programmes viz.
 Invention Promotion Programme and Technology Promotion Programme which are funded totally by DSIR. The
 promotional programmes are essentially to build up R&D and technological capacity of the country and do not generate
 any revenue.
54.       The NRDC during the year licensed/expects to licence the following technologies–– Test kit for microbiological
 quality of drinking water, Liposomal Amphoterecin B, Rectractable Anchoring & Locking Device, Nutan Himveer
 Bukhari, Instant Gel, Pithplus – A process for bio-conversion of coir waste to organic manure, Coco Lawn – A readymade
 Lawn, Neem Based Spermicidal Formulation, Thrombinase, etc. Besides the Corporation  obtained/expects to obtain
 assignment of the following processes for arranging commercialization of  Herbal Beer, Herbal Lipstick, Natural Dyes
 Textile Grade, Emulsifiable Concentrate Powder from Citrus Waste, Kerosene Wick Stove, Hurricane Lantern, LPG
 Domestic Burners, LPG Commercial Burners, Kerosene Wick Lamp Type-I, Kerosene Wick Lamp Type-II, Bukhari,
 Process for preparation of Herbicide, Weedicide,  Khoa Powder, Gulab Jamun Mix Powder, Rasogolla mix powder,
 Instant Kulfi mix powder, long shelf life Paneer, Malted Milk food, Shikhand, Nutritionally improved infant formulation,
 Low fat spread, Mozzarella cheese, lassi, etc.
55.       The corporation continued to pursue the programme of Development and Promotion of Technologies appropriate
 for rural areas.  The programme is aimed at bringing the key elements of the innovation chain e.g. development on a
 carefully selected basis, of new and innovative technologies for the rural areas, demonstrating them under actual field
 conditions and stimulation of interest through publications and mass media.  The publicity through DD needs a quantum
 jumps & the CSIR should be ready with the required software so that as & when Information Broadcasting Ministry
 extends its cooperation, no time is lost in going on the air with their publicity material. 
56.       The Annual Report of the Department States. “The Corporation proposed to establish a National Rural Technology
 Development Centre in Delhi in collaboration with IIT to showcase the various technological developments at one place
 to various visiting foreign delegates, dignitaries and also to demonstrate these for the benefit of the people within the
 country.  The centre is likely to be established in 2002-03.
57.       The Committee appreciates the efforts of the National Research Development Corporation in acting as a link
 between scientific laboratories and industrial establishments for transferring technologies.  However, the Committee feels
 that a lot needs to be done to reach out to our people living in rural areas.  In fact it is aptly said that rural areas are
 thirsting for science and technology. By developing appropriate technology for rural areas and transferring them for the
 benefit of our people a silent revolution can be  ushered    in for improving the living conditions of our teeming millions.
            The Committee poignantly observed that we have yet to produce a prototype of a modern bullock cart for our

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 farmers that could be more sturdy, far less strenuous for the bullock as well as passengers, distinctly faster & safer on
 roads.   Director General of CSIR, in one of his interviews, some time back had observed that  “I  do not believe that
 indigenous
science and technology, barring very few notable exceptions, has contributed as much to economic development as one
 would have desired”.  Therefore it recommends strongly that more attention must be given to produce appropriate
 technologies for use in rural areas, the Committeestrongly feels that the living and working conditions of our people living
 in thousands of villages across the country have to be improved by making their hut roofs fireproof and longer-lasting. 
 Besides, it emphasizes that their hygienic conditions have to be improved so as to ensure them proper sanitation and better
 atmosphere for prevention of diseases.  Therefore the Committee recommends that appropriate technologies may be used
 in rural areas for achieving these objectives. 
58.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the National Research Development Corporation, through transfer of
 technology and other activities have earned Rs.33.51 lakhs (slightly over 3 million).  In a country of India’s size profit of
 Rs.3 million is just a peanut.  Therefore the Committee recommends that transfer of technology must take place at a faster
 pace so that greater revenue generation is ensured.  Only after achieving  this we can realize the goal of making CSIR less
 dependent on government funds.  The Committee further recommends that transfer of technology in areas such as
 defense, nuclear energy, biotechnology, aerospace, electronics and computer should be such that it takes care of the
 problems of obsolescence.  
POLLUTION MONITORING MITIGATION SYSTEMS AND DEVICES
59.       The Committee was informed that as a result of rapid urbanization and industrialization most Indian cities have
 higher levels of gases, particulate matter and chemical pollutants in air than is permissible.  Mortality and morbidity
 statistics also indicate that respiratory infections and chronic illness are becoming wide spread among the urban
 population.  The quality of water in most water bodies has considerably degraded and in most cases cannot be used for
 any human purposes unless adequately treated. Solid wastes abound   in    cities and their hinterland.  In fact human
 beings have emerged as  the greatest waste makers among all the species inhabiting this planet.  This imposes a high cost
 on the economy in terms of loss of life, mandays, productivity and production. Thus the department felt there is an urgent
 need to undertake networked & coordinated mission programme to better understand pollution and its impact on human
 health so as to devise systems and mechanisms for its mitigation. Keeping this as an objective the Department plans for
 development of analytical tools and devices for monitoring selected pollutants in small quantities in water, air and food
 materials, Development of new instruments/methods for analysis and monitoring of the pollutants including biosensors
 and cleaner technologies for reduction of waste generation have received attention.  Waste disposal of industries such as
 bakeries, brick kilns, refractoriness etc, which adversely affect the environment of metropolitan and industrial
 conglomerates has to be addressed.  Vehicular Pollution Monitoring and Management has to be accorded priority.  An
 Integrated Approach to Wastewater Management Systems and Appropriate Effluent Treatment Technologies and the
 Study of Structural and Functional Characteristics of Organic Compounds of Environmental Significance have to be done
 with a sense of urgency.
60.            Keeping in view the objectives to be achieved the Department plans to undertake the study of impact of
 discharge of waste water at elevated temperature from a thermal power station on surrounding ecosystem and developing
 of quantitative structure actively relationship (QSAR) model for prediction of biodegradability of organic compounds.
61.       The Committee feels that all pollution monitoring devises should be site specific as the causative agents in different
 areas are diverse and every anti-pollution process must have measurable parameters to monitor its efficacy. The
 Committee observes that pollution in the country has become acute and it is being seen as a challenge to the scientists to
 come up with new scientific tools to monitor and review the existing health based ambient quality standards. The
 Committee observes that the department should coordinate with Pollution Control Boards in various states so that
 effective action is taken to sharply curb & finally prevent pollution in the country.
            As far as the presence of arsenic content in water is concerned the Committee was informed that Bangladesh has
 developed some technology to rectify it.  The Committee recommends that CSIR may study that technology with a view
 to adopting it for our country’s benefit. 
ASTHMATIC AND ALLERGIC DISORDERS MITIGATION MISSION
62.       The Department informed the Committee that allergy related disorders such as asthma, rhinitis are on the rise in the
 developing countries especially in India due to diverse reasons. These diseases are acquiring dimension of an epidemic
 resulting in huge cost to public health and the economy. Asthma alone affects around 15% of the Indian population and in
 the four metropolises the incidence is placed as high as 30%. Genes and environment both play a very important role in

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 this disease. Environment contributes in precipitating the disease due to the increased exposure to sensitizing allergens
 and reduced stimulation of the immune system. A clear understanding of the cellular and molecular  mechanisms of this
 allergic disease is lacking. However, discovery of the highly expressive gene for asthma brings optimism and the
 possibility that this disorder can be prevented by inhibiting the expression of the genes.
63.       The objective of the programme would be to target those  molecules which manifest asthma for mitigating
 asthmatic and allergic disorders, extraction, identification, purification of herbal preparations / molecules, showing
 activity on early & late phase pathways, chemical screening by finger printing and purification by gel-permeation, ion-
exchange & reverse phase chromatography; screening of promising molecules through in-vivo animal models and 
 Identification of new pollens and fungal allergens.
64.       The Committee was informed that emphasis would be given to explore the mechanism of actions of the
 preparations / molecules on specific target sites. Biochemical, immunological, genetically and pharmacological aspects
 will also be covered.
65.       The Committee is pained to note that the percentage of Asthma patients of all ages has risen sharply.  It is
 assuming dimensions of a wide spread public health disaster.  There is a need to create awareness about the symptoms of
 the disease for early detection and cure. The research should focus on the medicines, which are affordable to all classes in
 society.  The publicity of the medicine already discovered by the CSIR is grossly inadequate. Special attention needs to be
 focused on allergic Asthmas. 
NEWER SCIENTIFIC HERBAL PREPARATIONS FOR GLOBAL POSITIONING
66.       There is upsurge of interests on holistic science of medicines. World over people are increasingly relying on herbal
 formulations. In 1929, Dr G.E. Clarke of Philadelphia wrote,  “If the physicians of the present day world drop from
 pharmacopoeia all the modern drugs and chemicals, and treat their patients according to the methods of Charaka, there
 would be less of work for the undertakers and fewer chronic invalids  in the world.”  Indian  Medical  Gazette  also 
 wrote  seven
decades back, “ Old Ayurveda … modernized and rejuvenated… will not only be the national medicine of India, but will
 play no small part in the uplift of the international medical system of the World”.
However, Ayurveda languished in developing itself due to absence of research and development.  As early as 1921
 Mahatma Gandhi had lamented, “The condition of indigenous medicine is truly deplorable.  Not having kept abreast of
 modern research, their profession has fallen largely into disrepute”.  
67.       The committee was further informed that CSIR has already established a wide spread networking of 20 of its
 laboratories with the leading players in Indian systems of medicines. During the Tenth Plan the Department would aim at
 developing benign and synergistically acting disease specific new scientific herbal preparations to facilitate enhancing
 Indian share in the global market place and during the year 2003-2004 it aims at generating  of knowledge base on new
 herbal preparation.
68.       The Committee feels that intensive efforts should be made for acceptance of herbal medicines as complementary to
 modern mainstream medicines.  Besides, the Committee feels that a regular watch has to be kept on those agencies who
 patent our traditional formulations and claim them as their own.  The Committee appreciates the observation of the
 Director General of CISR who while replying to clarifications of members said that world wide attention is being focused
 on digital, herbal and spiritual ethos of which India has an abundant reserve.  The Committee entirely endorses the point
 that if our scientists apply themselves with dedication to harness these reserves twenty first century would be an Indian
 century.  In fact Eric Hobsbwam in his book  A New Century has written that India might surpass many other countries in
 the world and emerge as a great country primarily  because of the originality of her scientific and technological traditions
 which date back thousands and thousands of years.  At the same time the Committee feels that a check should be
 exercised on quacks in the healing profession specially those people who pose as doctors after having attained a degree in
 Ayurveda and misuse their positions to prescribe mainstream allopathic medicines or vice-versa.  The graduates in
 Ayurveda should be given the nomenclature of Ayurvedacharya & not doctor.
69.       The Committee is heartened to note that the CSIR has entered into a strategic alliance with Arya Vaidya Sala and
 the Central Council of Research in Unani Medicine for revitalizing these ancient systems of medicines and make them
 relevant to our modern life and problems.  The Committee is satisfied to note that modern biological tools, techniques,
 processes and focused R&D are being applied to prepare herbal formulations.
69-A.   The Committee discussed the severe handicap of Indian medicine systems which have to seek validation through
 western allopathic systems.  Evidently India, China & the originators of Unani Systems of medicine have to fight together

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 in all international fora including WHO.  The region specific systems of medicine get their validation from their ancient
 scriptures and if field trials establish their success they require to be validated all over the world on the basis of their
 conforming with their textual versions.   It is a veritable humiliation to the millennium old systems of ancient medicines to
 force them to pass the strait-jacket test systems of western pharmacology.  Just as homeopathy has never had to pass
 through those validation procedures for getting world recognition as a valid system of medicine similarly validation of a
 system of medicine in India & China should get world recognition if they fulfill the conditions laid down by the founders
 of their indigenous systems
of medicines.  This calls for a concerted drive at world forums and the Committee recommends that CSIR is best suited to
 become the bulwork of this Campaign.
DEVELOPING NEW GENERATION FUELS & LUBRICANTS
70.The Committee was informed that the emphasis of this programme has been to upgrade ,develop as  refine technology
 to process the available heavier and high sulphur crude to produce new generation fuels and lubricants.
            The development aims to develop additives/catalysts for dissociation of water and to decrease the condensation
 reactions of aromatics free radicals and also development of lubricants and greases from vegetable oils.
71.       The Committee appreciates the Department for venturing into the development of new fuels.  The Committee feels
 that there is a need for adoption of wide variety of new generation alternative fuels as this would, apart from curbing the
 consumption of petroleum, help in reduction of pollution in our cities and towns.  The Committee would like the
 Department to develop fuels from waste matter and other non-bio-degradable substances which otherwise cause
 environmental degradations.
            The Committee finds that similar research is being carried out by the Research & Development centre of Indian oil
 Corporation at Faridabad. It would be appropriate if the Department coordinated with them so as to prevent the
 duplication of research.
SETTING UP A WORLD CLASS DRUG RESEARCH INSTITUTE
72.       The Committee was further informed that the target of the department is to establish a world class drug R&D
 institution to assist the Indian pharma industry to emerge as a global player; In 1951, CSIR set up, the Central Drug
 Research Institute (CDRI) – a laboratory specifically dedicated to drug research.  Since then CDRI continued to develop
 capability, expertise, infrastructure for new drug development and generated human resources in diverse areas – which
 has formed the bulwark of Indian pharma industry and has found prestigious position in the best of multinational pharma
 firms abroad.  CDRI has developed 14 new drugs and myriads of leads.  However, new drug discovery could not get the
 due prominence hitherto because of the prevailing patent regime.  Thus while its performance was tenable, it could not
 keep in step with the intensive, competitive modern R&D and management culture of new drug development prevailing
 abroad.  CDRI is housed in a premise, which is 200 years old.  The building has been declared an archeological
 monument.  CDRI has been asked to shift from the building.  CSIR has taken the advantage of this opportunity and has
 decided to set up a futuristic world-class drug research institute in conformity with global thinking and practices not of
 today but that of tomorrow.  Diverse steps needed for the setting up of the new entity have been taken during the year and
 the progress has been satisfactory.
73.       The Committee commends the challenging vision of the Department to set up  a world-class drug research centre. 
 The Committee feels that the new centre should aim at developing drugs for a wide range of diseases especially
 tuberculosis, Kala azar, AIDS, Hepatitis, Asthma by inter-alia intensive interaction with all varieties of Indian & Folk
 systems of medicine. Besides, the Committee feels that the new Institute should go for manpower training and research to
 help pharmaceutical companies to improve the quality of their formulations.  For example, in the budget for 2003-2004
 government has given some incentives for Glucometers, but the prices of insulin are very high.  Diabetes is spreading like
 an  epidemic.   India has  been  described  as  the  future  diabetic  capital  of  the world.   The
Committee feels that the Department should make persistent efforts not only to produce  insulin in our country by
 recombinant method  so that its cost is reduced and it is made affordable for poor people, but also to create Ayurvedic
 cheaper formulations to treat diabetes for curing it and not just controlling it.
DEVELOPING NEW BUILDING CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
74.       The Committee was informed that there is a necessity for taking up this project as the alternative building material
 utilizing natural and waste resources can substantially reduce the cost of dwelling units. CSIR laboratories have already
 developed such materials and transferred them to users. However, the Department felt that there is a need for more

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 aggressive dissemination of technologies already available.  The emphasis has also been laid for the production of new
 ones.
75.       The Committee is of the opinion that new construction materials should be less energy intensive for building
 economical dwelling units for millions of our people.  As large parts of our country live in villages, locally available
 material may be used to produce technologies for construction of houses & the technologies need to be region-specific.
INFECTIOUS DISEASES HANDLING STORAGE AND RESEARCH FACILITIES
76.       The Committee was informed that diseases like tuberculosis, cholera, leprosy and filaria are serious health
 problems to our people. India has no option but to take the lead to develop therapeutics and vaccines against such
 infectious diseases.  There are apocalyptic predictions that in the twenty first century infectious diseases might return
 back. In India the situation is presently alarming. We are in no position to work on these virulent strains due to lack of
 safe and proper preservation facilities. More so because as most of the developed countries have banned or severely
 restricted the access to their reference strains owing to the potential use of these materials as biological weapons. There is
 also increased global pressure to adopt and implement the international guidelines on handling of dangerous pathogens.
77.       In order to encourage and undertake basic research on pathological microbes of interest to tropical countries, CSIR
 seeks to create facilities for storage, handling, cultivation of virulent pathogen strains and invitro and invivo screening
 facility caused by these strains to develop therapeutics against parasitic and infectious diseases. Also such facilities may
 be utilised for conducting tests on disease specific transgenic animals that will be increasingly used in the future for new
 drug discoveries. Thus there is a need to create one each of biosafety level BSL-3 and BSL-4 facility in select CSIR
 laboratories.
78.            Apprising the Committee of the objectives of the programme, the Department stated that Construction of bio-
safety level 3 (BSL-3) facilities in selected CSIR labs and a BSL-4 facility at CCMB with Formulation and
 implementation of appropriate safety guidelines would be undertaken.  The Committee was also informed that
 Networking and accelerating the ongoing research work on infectious microorganisms at these facilities would be
 undertaken.
79.       The Committee feels that the new storage and handling facilities should be of world-class standard.  The
 Committee hopes that this facility would conduct basic research for controlling infectious diseases to reduce the risk of
 morbidity. The Committee hopes that the Department would conduct periodic review of such facilities to properly
 maintain their standards.  The Committee emphasizes the need for adopting measurable parameters for effective
 monitoring of the progress being made in this direction.
 
NEW AND IMPROVED ROAD TECHNOLOGIES
80.      Connecting different parts of India particularly the rural areas through a network of all-weather roads remained an
 immense challenge and goal for our nationalist leaders right from the days of our struggle for independence. While
 fighting for freedom Mahatma Gandhi, the father of our nation was once asked a question as to what he would do if he
 had power to wield.  In his characteristic way he replied, “I would build good and fine roads which would be useful both
 for man and beast”.  That was a remarkable statement of a great visionary of the world to have sustainable roads for the
 use of human beings and animals.  During 1950’s the Brooking Institute, a major think tank of USA made a study on the
 roads of India and commented that India needs good quality roads for ending stagnation of her people and different
 regions caused by distance and isolation.  Successive plans emphasized on the building up of all weather roads.  The
 present condition of roads in our country particularly the quality of its surface deserves serious attention.  It is heartening
 to know that the CSIR is according priority to build roads by using improved and cost effective technology and material. 
 It is also satisfying to know that the CSIR is focusing attention to develop region specific technologies so as to cater to the
 special requirements of different parts of our country.  In the background note for Demands for Grants the Department of
 Scientific & Industrial research has set the target of developing appropriate cold mix technologies for construction of
 roads in North East and urban areas.  It is also stated in the note that technology would be developed to use fly ash for
 road construction purposes.
81.       The Committee takes note of the priority of the government to construct National Highways and village roads
 through the National Highway Development programme and Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana respectively.  Mobility
 of people is an important indicator and determinant of the overall progress registered by our country.  Roads, which
 constitute the artery of a nation, thus remain central to its forward advancement.  The vision of making India a developed
 nation by the year 2020 will remain only a dream without appropriate connectivity though a network of roads.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
82.            Therefore the Committee recommends strongly that the DSIR should exert itself with redoubled vigour to build
 a network of fine roads through development of cost effective technologies.
ESTABLISHMENT OF GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOODS REFERRAL FACILITY (GMFRF)
83.       The advancement in modern agricultural biotechnological R&D has led to development of diverse novel food
 crops.  These have been designed to possess unique nutritional characteristics.  Such crops are being increasingly used in
 food processing without proper labeling. The market is flooded with imported processed foods without specifying their
 content of GM component. At present there is no referral facility in the country for detection and analysis of GM foods
 and their safety as well as nutritional aspects. Hence they propose to establish such a facility in CFTRI, which will also
 network with ITRC and CCMB under the CSIR umbrella.  In the market many irradiated foods and food products are
 available. They are erroneously confused with GM foods by consumers. It is also believed that radiation brings about
 changes at molecular levels in the food. It is very important to distinguish irradiated food from GM food because
 irradiation constitutes the cheapest method of food preservation. Therefore the proposed facility will also develop
 methods for distinguishing irradiated foods from GM foods.  The facility will be a referral centre for the nation and will
 boost export of foods and food products based on their declared absence or presence of the GM component.
84.       The new Centre has a short term as well as long-term objectives. The short-term objectives include: to develop and
 standardize appropriate detection procedures for identification of GMOs in raw, processed and complex foods using DNA
 and protein based methods;  to establish a single robust method for accurate quantification of GMOs in raw and processed
 foods; to Validate  methods with Certified Reference Materials (CRM) for suitability and certainty; to  develop sampling
 plans to ensure adequacy of testing; to document time  tested procedures, practices on a sound scientific basis so as to
 ensure their replicability in other testing laboratories; to develop database containing data on GM foods worldwide; to 
 evaluate safety of GM food in the light of  Allergenicity, physico chemical stability toxicity,  to establish  a GMO
 germplasm preservation centre and maintain a culture collection of microorganisms used in Indian traditional foods.
 Long-term Objective would be to evolve the GMFRF as the reference centre for the South East Asia.
85.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department has taken an important step by establishing this unique
 centre, which would monitor the quality and content of G.M. food.  The Committee feels that such a referral centre is
 necessary for checking the activities of those who flout laws related to the import of G.M. food and target those who trade
 in such foods without proper trials and approvals.
86.       The Committee observes that innovative ideas on scientific aspects not only come from urban educated people but
 also from persons who are not educated and who hail from rural areas.  Scientific discovery of excellence gives rise to
 technological innovations of excellence.  The Committee therefore recommends that the Department should create special
 awards for uneducated people who apply their genius in scientific fields and make important discoveries.  There is also
 need for publicity about the quality testing facility so that people at large avail of it.
NATIONAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
87.       The Committee notes with concern the lack of interest on the part of students for science education.  Many
 prominent scientists in their write-ups in the media have also sounded alarm bells in this regard.  In fact the total
 allocation for the year 2003-2004 for the programme ‘Research Schemes, Scholarships and Fellowships’ is Rs.57 crores
 as against Rs.55.65 crores in B.E. and Rs.54.94 crores at R.E. for the year 2002-2003.  Such a marginal increase was a
 cause of concern for the Committee.  It wanted to know from the Department as to how such marginal enhancement of
 funds would attract young scientists/students to pursue science education.
88.       The Department in its reply stated.
            The scheme on National S&T Human Resource Development comprising Research Schemes, Scholarships and
 Fellowships and Scientists Pool has been provided with a budgetary allocation of Rs.61 crores (Plan Rs.7 crores; Non
 Plan Rs.54 crores) during 2003-04, which is higher by Rs.1.35 crores than B.E. 2002-03.  This enhanced outlay would
 permit CSIR to initiate new schemes for the Tenth Plan but will not permit it to meet the total requirements of the desired
 number of scholarships being presently envisaged.  The additional requirement of Rs.16 crores is mainly due to the
 upward revision of the amount of scholarship/fellowship and associated emoluments and contingencies effective from
 1.8.2002.  In addition, CSIR envisages increasing the number of fellowships and scholarships to encourage young
 scholars to pursue science.
This additional requirement could not be fully provided at the time of pre-budget discussions by the Ministry of
 Finance.  Analysis since then indicates that number of scholarships and their seeker are continuously increasing.
89.       The Committee feels that the amount is not at all enough for developing human resources for science and

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 technology and therefore recommends that substantively higher allocations must be made for the above scheme.
            Interest and awareness among students for science and technology has to be sustained.  The Committee feels that,
 Science Cafes, in the pattern of Cyber Cafes, may be opened in different localities and educational institutions.  Exposure
 to scientific works and activities in such cafes would encourage the youth of our country to show more interest in science. 
 The Committee strongly recommends that some time (at least five minutes) may be allocated in the chaupal    programme
 of Doordarshan to show the activities of CSIR for promoting people’s awareness about them.  The Minister  I & B has
 already indicated his enthusiastic willingness to provide all help in this direction.  The Committee would like to know the
 quantifiable impact that the scholarship scheme has produced.  It is hoped that individual record of progress of scholarship
 holders is being maintained & there is provision to terminate the scholarships of indifferent students.  If there is no such
 specific mechanism in place, it would be desirable to introduce one.  That alone will ensure optimum benefit from the
 investment made.
REGIONAL CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE
90.            Different parts of our country is endowed with variety of resources.  For instance while Rajasthan is replete with
 marbles and precious stones, North-East has enormous amount of bamboo and leather.  There is a feeling that CSIR has
 not opened adequate number of institutes to exploit these resources.  Therefore the Committee strongly feels that Regional
 Centres of Excellence on Technology may be established in different regions to develop those resources.  This will also
 go a long way in fostering the team-India spirit which the CSIR is now making the central strategy for pooling our talents
 and abilities for the advancement of our country.
PROMOTION OF SCIENTIFIC TEMPER
91.            Evolution of human civilization from steam age to the age of biotechnology is indeed fascinating and exciting. 
 While human capability is expanding through science and technology, the attitude and outlook of people do not change
 correspondingly.  Enormous technological strength without a scientific and humane approach would create imbalances in
 as well human personality and society at large.  To enable our scientists to file their patents we teach them patent literacy. 
 It is important for their success in the age of competition and innovation.  Even more important is to promote scientific
 temper among our people.  The Committee has been focussing  its attention on this issue.  Swami Vivekananda regarded
 modern science as a manifestation of the real religious spirit, for it sought to understand truth by sincere effort.  Pandit
 Jawaharlal Nehru in his book “The Discovery of India” wrote that the future would witness an increasing alliance between
 science and humanism producing what he called scientific humanism.  Our country is witnessing a counter revolution
 which is reviving outmoded practices and rituals.  This rising tide of counter revolution can be reversed by promoting
 scientific temper.  It is heartening to note that the Council for Scientific and Industrial Research is a vital source of science
 and technology for national societal missions which combine technology with a human face. The Committee recommends
 that the CSIR, while pursuing the challenging goal of becoming a self-financing R&D institute must remain committed to
 promote scientific humanism among our people.
92.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research and assessing the
 various programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee Recommends that the Demands for Grants of
 Rs.1136.41 crores, as sought by the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research for the year 2003-2004 under,
 Demand no.81 may be approved.
SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS
 
1.         The Committee appreciates the Department for carrying out research in many frontier areas of science and
 technology.  It notes with satisfaction the laudable claim of the CSIR that science is one of the areas which can bring
 leadership and meet the kind of objectives that India has set for itself.  However, it is of opinion that the Department
 should make efforts to raise funds from Industry by successful transfer of technologies. There is also a need for wider
 dissemination of technologies so that there is a greater interface between Industry & R&D laboratories.   
(Para 21)
2.         The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation made in 86
th Report that there is a need for reviewing and
 strengthening /revamping the existing S&T support systems in the universities and other educational institutions . The
 Committee is of the view that an agreement be reached with various financial institutions for providing loans to those
 research scholars for setting up their own enterprises.
(Para 25)

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
3.         The Committee commends the Department for emerging as a pioneering institute to achieve number one position
 in Indian & Foreign patent filings.  The Committee hopes that Department would maintain its position.  Earlier Basmati
 rice was patented and some NGOs filed PIL in courts to activate the Government for appropriate action.  The Committee
 hopes that CSIR will remain vigilant in future to safeguard our age old indisputable rights on our traditional knowledge.
(Para 30)
4.         The Committee observes that although CSIR initiates  good works in various fields for the development of our
 country and indeed the mankind, these accomplishments have not been made known to the people.  It notes with
 satisfaction that efforts are being made to establish CSIR brand equity among the public.  To reach out to the people for
 making them aware of the important role played by CSIR publicity through electronic and Print Media, must be made. 
 Even the organization of exhibitions in rural areas displaying activities of the CSIR must be made for the benefit of our
 people.  
            The Committee has been given to understand that due to personal efforts of one of its Members the Minister of
 Information & Broadcasting has approached the Minister of Science & Technology to find out as to how the Ministry of
 I&B  could be use for providing publicity to the scientific and technological programmes.  The Committee also
 understands that the Minister of I&B has also extended all cooperation in this regard.  The Committee therefore
 recommends that the Director General of CSIR must seize this opportunity and assist the Minister of Science &
 Technology to send out the plans for giving wide publicity to its various programmes and activities.  
(Para 34)
5.         The Committee feels that the state-of-art infrastructure / laboratories are extremely important to further augment
 and enrich our capabilities in the fields of science and technology so as to face the increasing challenges thrown up by
 intense research activities in many scientific and technological institutions across the globe.   The infrastructure should be
seen as a strategic national resource and funding should be given on a continuing basis to maximize their effectiveness,
 improvement and relevance for our scientific community.  The infrastructure should also be developed keeping in view
 the future advances in science & engineering.  The Committee also feels that high speed internet access facility be
 established as vast amount of scientific data is available on the internet. This will enable our scientists to have faster
 access to scientific data bases
(Para 38)
6.         The Committee feels that the merging of these programmes would not in any way effect the importance of these
 schemes and that they would continue to do the commendable work of transfer of technology for commercial
 exploitation.  The Committee also feels that such efforts of the CSIR would further encourage the entrepreneurship among
 our scientists and contribute towards technological self-reliance.   However the Committee recommends that greater
 attention must be paid by the CSIR to ensure that our industrial enterprises take necessary and important steps for
 augmenting their contributions to R&D.  Our expenditure for R&D as percentage of G.D.P. has fallen from 0.98 during
 1958-59 to 0.8% during 21
st Century.  Out of it 80% is contributed by the government and only 20% comes from
 industry.  In all most all the developed countries contribution to R&D as percentage of GDP is 3%.  Out of it industry
 contributes 80% and the government only 20%.  Our vision is to make India a developed country by the year 2020.  While
 the Committee strongly recommends that at least during the first quarter of the tenth five year plan contribution to R&D
 as percentage of GDP must target at 1% and the percentage contribution of industry to it must rise substantially.  In the
 age of innovation and competition, it is appropriately said that “real temples of India have to be industry”.  For this to
 happen their contribution to R&D has to be bolstered.  Money spent in R&D is not an expenditure but an investment for
 the future.  It is also important that the know-how is sold to industry on competitive bids to extract the best return.
 (Para 41)
7.         The Committee notes that the activities of the CSIR is broad based and wide-ranging.  It has taken laudable steps to
 augment R&D facilities in industry. It is important that such facilities are further enhanced and bolstered by the industries
 themselves to augment their scientific and technological abilities so that they stand on their own for upgrading their
 knowledge base.  It would also enable them to successfully compete in the national and international arena.  In the age of
 geo-economics research and development will only open new vistas of technological innovations and help our industries
 to successfully meet the challenges of the present and future.  The Committee recommends that CSIR must redouble its
 efforts to realize this objective in practice and in full measure.  The Committee observes that closer coordination among
 research laboratories should be obtained for producing better products which would eventually be disseminated among the
 people who are the end users of such products.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
(Para 49)
8.         The corporation continued to pursue the programme of Development and Promotion of Technologies appropriate
 for rural areas.  The programme is aimed at bringing the key elements of the innovation chain e.g. development on a
 carefully selected basis, of new and innovative technologies for the rural areas, demonstrating them under actual field
 conditions and stimulation of interest through  publications and mass media.  The  publicity through DD
needs a quantum jumps & the CSIR should be ready with the required software so that as & when Information
 Broadcasting Ministry extends its cooperation, no time is lost in going on the air with their publicity material.  
(Para 55)
9.         The Committee appreciates the efforts of the National Research Development Corporation in acting as a link
 between scientific laboratories and industrial establishments for transferring technologies.  However, the Committee feels
 that a lot needs to be done to reach out to our people living in rural area.  In fact it is aptly said that rural areas are thirsting
 for science and technology. By developing appropriate technology for rural areas and transferring them for the benefit of
 our people a silent revolution can be  ushered    in for improving the living conditions of our teeming millions.
            The Committee poignantly observed that we have yet to produce a prototype of a modern bullock cart for our
 framers that could be more sturdy, far less strenuous for the bullock as well as passengers, distinctly faster & safer on
 roads.  Director General of CSIR, in one of his interviews, some time back had observed that  “I do not believe that
 indigenous science and technology, barring very few notable exceptions, has contributed as much to economic
 development as one would have desired”.  Therefore it recommends strongly that more attention must be given to produce
 appropriate technologies for use  in rural areas, the Committeestrongly feels that the living and working conditions of our
 people living in thousands of villages across the country have to be improved by making their hut roofs fireproof and
 longer-lasting.  Besides, it emphasizes that their hygienic conditions have to be improved so as to ensure them proper
 sanitation and better atmosphere for prevention of diseases.  Therefore the Committee recommends that appropriate
 technologies may be used in rural areas for achieving these objectives. 
(Para 57)
10.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the National Research Development Corporation, through transfer of
 technology and other activities have earned Rs.33.51 lakhs (slightly over 3 million).  In a country of India’s size profit of
 Rs.3 million is just a peanut.  Therefore the Committee recommends that transfer of technology must take place at a faster
 pace so that greater revenue generation is ensured.  Only after achieving  this we can realize the goal of making CSIR less
 dependent on government funds.  The Committee further recommends that transfer of technology in areas such as
 defense, nuclear energy, biotechnology, aerospace, electronics and computer should be such that it takes care of the
 problems of obsolescence.  
(Para 58)
11.       The Committee feels that all pollution monitoring devises should be site specific as the causative agents in different
 areas are diverse and every anti-pollution process must have measurable parameters to Monitor its efficacy. The
 Committee observes that pollution in the country has become acute and it is being seen as a challenge to the scientists to
 come up with new scientific tools to monitor and review the existing health based ambient quality standards. The
 Committee observes that the department should coordinate with Pollution Control Boards in various states so that
 effective action is taken to sharply curb & finally prevent pollution in the country.
            As far as the presence of arsenic content in water is concerned the Committee was informed that Bangladesh has
 developed some technology to rectify it.  The Committee recommends that CSIR may study that technology with a view
 to adopting it for our country’s benefit. 
(Para 61)
12.       The Committee is pained to note that the percentage of Asthma patients of all ages has risen sharply.  It is
 assuming dimensions of a wide spread public health disaster.  There is a need to create awareness about the symptoms of
 the disease for early detection and cure. The research should focus on the medicines, which are affordable to all classes in
 society.  The publicity of the medicine already discovered by the CSIR is grossly inadequate. Special attention needs to be
 focused in allergic Asthmas.
(Para 65)
13.       The Committee feels that intensive efforts should be made for acceptance of herbal medicines as complementary to

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 modern mainstream medicines.  Besides, the Committee feels that a regular watch has to be kept on those agencies who
 patent our traditional formulations and claim them as their own.  The Committee appreciates the observation of the
 Director General of CISR who while replying to clarifications of members said that world wide attention is being focused
 on digital, herbal and spiritual ethos of which India has an abundant reserve.  The Committee entirely endorses the point
 that if our scientists apply themselves with dedication to harness these reserves twenty first century would be an Indian
 century.  In fact Eric Hobsbwam in his book “ A New Century” has written that India might surpass many other countries
 in the world and emerge as a great country primarily  because of the originality of her scientific and technological
 traditions which date back to thousands and thousands of years.  At the same time the Committee feels that a check should
 be exercised on quacks in the healing profession specially those people who pose as doctors after having attained a degree
 in Ayurveda and misuse their positions to prescribe mainstream     allopathic medicines or vice-versa.  The graduates in
 Ayurveda should be given the nomenclature of Ayurvedacharya & not doctor.
(Para 68)
14.       The Committee is heartened to note that the CSIR has entered into a strategic alliance with Arya Vaidya Sala and
 the Central Council of Research in Unani Medicine for revitalizing these ancient systems of medicines and make them
 relevant to our modern life and problems.  The Committee is satisfied to note that modern biological tools, techniques,
 processes and focused R&D are being applied to prepare herbal formulations.
            The Committee discussed the severe handicap of Indian medicine systems which have to seek validation through
 western allopathic systems.  Evidently India, China & the originators of Unani Systems of medicine have to fight together
 in all international fora including WHO.  The region specific systems of medicine get their validation from their ancient
 scriptures and if field trials establish their success they require to be validated all over the world on the basis of their
 conforming with their textual versions.   It is a veritable humiliation to the millennium old systems of ancient medicines to
 force them to pass the strait-jacket test systems of the western pharmacology.  Just as homeopathy has never had to pass
 through those validation procedures for getting world recognition as a valid system of medicine similarly validation of  a 
 system  of medicine in  India  &  China  should  get  world
recognition if they fulfill the conditions laid down by the founders of their indigenous systems of medicines.  This calls for
 a concerted drive at world forums and the Committee recommends that CSIR is best suited to become the bulwork of this
 Campaign.
 (Para 69)
15.       The Committee appreciates the Department for venturing into the development of new fuels.  The Committee feels
 that there is a need for adoption of wide variety of new generation alternative fuels as this would, apart from curbing the
 consumption of petroleum, help in reduction of pollution in our cities and towns.  The Committee would like the
 Department to develop fuels from waste matter and other non-bio-degradable substances which otherwise cause
 environmental degradations.
            The Committee finds that similar research is being carried out by the Research & Development centre of Indian oil
 Corporation at Faridabad. It would be appropriate if the Department coordinated with them so as to prevent the
 duplication of research.
(Para 71)
16.       The Committee commends the challenging vision of the Department to set up  a world-class drug research centre. 
 The Committee feels that the new centre should aim at developing drugs for a wide range of diseases especially
 tuberculosis, Kala azar, AIDS, Hepatitis, Asthma by inter-alia intensive interaction with all varieties of Indian & Folk
 systems of medicine. Besides, the Committee feels that the new Institute should go for manpower training and research to
 help pharmaceutical companies to improve the quality of their formulations.  For example, in the budget for 2003-2004
 government has given some incentives for Glucometers, but the prices of insulin are very high.  Diabetes is spreading like
 an  epidemic . India has been described as the future diabetic capital of the world.   The Committee feels that the
 Department should make persistent efforts not only to produce  insulin in our country by recombinant method  so that its
 cost is reduced and it is made affordable for poor people, but also to create Ayurvedic cheaper formulations to treat
 diabetes for curing it and not just controlling it.
 (Para 73)
17.       The Committee is of the opinion that new construction materials should be less energy intensive for building
 economical dwelling units for millions of our people.  As large parts of our country live in villages, locally available
 material may be used to produce technologies for construction of houses & the technologies need to be region-specific.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
(Para 75)
18.       The Committee feels that the new storage and handling facilities should be of the world-class standard.  The
 Committee hopes that this facility would conduct basic research for controlling infectious diseases to reduce the risk of
 morbidity. The Committee hopes that the Department would conduct periodic review of such facilities to properly
 maintain their standards.  The committee emphasizes on the need for adopting measurable parameters for effective
 monitoring of the progress being made in this direction.
(Para 79)
19.       The Committee observes that innovative ideas on scientific aspects not only come from urban educated people but
 also from persons who are not educated and who hail from rural areas.  Scientific discovery of excellence gives rise to
 technological innovations of
excellence.  The Committee therefore recommends that the Department should create special awards for the uneducated
 people who apply their genius in scientific fields and make important discoveries.   There is also need for publicity about
 the quality testing facility so that people at large avail of it.
(Para 86)
20.       The Committee feels that the amount is not at all enough for developing human resources for science and
 technology and therefore recommends that substantively higher allocations must be made for the above scheme.
            Interest and awareness among students for science and technology has to be sustained.  The Committee feels that,
 Science Cafes, in the pattern of Cyber Cafes, may be opened in different localities and educational institutions.  Exposure
 to scientific works and activities in such cafes would encourage the youth of our country to show more interest in science. 
 The Committee strongly recommends that some time (at least five minutes) may be allocated in the chaupal programme of
 Doordarshan to show the activities of CSIR for promoting people’s awareness about them.  The Minister  I & B has
 already indicated his enthusiastic willingness to provide all help in this direction.  The Committee would like to know the
 quantifiable impact that the scholarship scheme has produced.  It is hoped that individual record of progress of scholarship
 holders is being maintained & there is provision to terminate the scholarships of indifferent students.  If there is no such
 specific mechanism in place, it would be desirable to introduce one.  That alone will ensure optimum benefit from the
 investment made.
(Para 89)
21.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research and assessing the
 various programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee Recommends that the Demands for Grants of
 Rs.1136.41 crores, as sought by the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research for the year 2003-2004 under,
 Demand no.81 may be approved.
(Para 92)
ANNEXURE
 ANNEXURE – I
 BUDGET ESTIMATES – 2003-04
            (Rs. in crores)
S. No.
Head of Development Projects Budget Estimates 2003-04
 Programmes / Schemes
Plan
Non-Plan Total
1. Assistance to Council of Scientific & Industrial Research 492.00 611.61 1103.61
2. Technology Promotion Development and Utilisation Programmes 20.00 0.30 20.30
3. Research and Development (APCTT & NISSAT) 0.00 0.00 0.00
4. Investment in Public Enterprises    

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
4.1 Central Electronics Limited 4.00 0.00 4.00
4.2 National Research Development Corporation 0.00 0.00 0.00
5. Loans to Public Enterprises    
5.1 Central Electronics Limited 4.00 0.00 4.00
5.2 National Research Development Corporation 0.00 0.00 0.00
6. Secretariat Economic Services 0.00 4.00 4.00
7. Management, Administration and Infrastructure 0.00 0.00 0.00
8. VRS in CEL 0.00 0.00 0.00
 GRAND TOTAL 520.00 616.41 1136.41
 ANNEXURE-II
CSIR PATENTS FILED AND GRANTED IN INDIA DURING 2001-2002
 Filed Granted
CBRI 2 1
IGIB 4 9
CCMB 0 1
CDRI 17 18
CECRI 9 34
CEERI 3 7
CFRI 8 4
CFTRI 100 8
CGCRI 30 5
CIMAP 11 20
CLRI 10 5
CMERI 2 1
CMRI 6 8
CSIO 0 1
CSIR (SCH) 19 1
CSMCRI 4 1
IHBT 3 0
IICB 1 12
IICT 44 21
IIP 9 7
IMT 2 4
ITRC 2 3
MERADO (P) 0 1
NAL 3 2
NBRI 2 0
NCL 43 90
NEERI 4 1
NIO 2 1
NML 10 23
NPL 9 4
RRL (BH) 17 11
RRL (BP) 7 2
RRL (J) 10 9
RRL (JT) 8 21

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
RRL (T) 6 5
SERC (M) 3 0
TOTAL 410 341
 
 
CSIR PATENTS FILED AND GRANTED ABROAD DURING 2001-2002
Laboratory Name Filed Granted
IGIB 22 1
CCMB 4 0
CDRI 27 6
CECRI 2 0
CEERI 0 1
CFRI 10 0
CFTRI 60 2
CGCRI 8 3
CIMAP 31 25
CLRI 0 2
CSIO 12 0
CSIR (SCH) 23 1
CSMCRI 30 0
IHBT 36 0
IICB 9 5
IICT 92 17
IMT 11 0
NBRI 10 1
NCL 43 16
NEERI 1 0
NGRI 5 0
NIO 29 0
NML 20 0
NPL 20 3
RRL (BHU) 3 0
RRL (J) 48 1
RRL (JT) 4 0
RRL (T) 20 2
TOTAL 580 86
 
 
COPYRIGHT, TRADE MARK & DESIGN APPLICATIONS FILED DURING
THE YEAR 2001-2002
Copyright 50
Trade Mark 78
 
MINUTES
VI
SIXTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 1
st April, 2003 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
           
                  PRESENT

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 
1. Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
3. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
4. Shri B.P. Singhal
5. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
6. Smt. S. G. Indira
7. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
8. Shri T. S. Bajwa
9. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
LOK  SABHA
10. Smt. Margaret Alva
11. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                     
12. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
13. Chowdhary Talib Hussain
14. Shri C. Kuppusami
15. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
16. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
17. Shri Suresh Pasi                                         
18. Dr. Ashok Patel                                        
19. Shri Prahlad Patel    
20. Shri Shriniwas Patil
21. Prof. R. R. Pramanik                                
22. Shri Ganta Sreenivasa Rao
23. Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
24. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
25. Shri Balram Singh Yadav
SECRETARIAT         
                        Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
                        Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
                        Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIO-TECHNOLOGY
 
Dr. (Mrs.) Manju Sharma, Secretary
Dr. V. K. Vinayak, Adviser
Dr. S. N. Natesh, SG
Dr. V. P. Gupta, SG
Dr. (Mrs.) Seema Wahab, SG
Dr. K. K. Tripathi, SG
Shri Arun Sharma, JS & FA
Shri S. L. Bhat, JS
Shri Ajay Kumar, Director
Shri M. P. Banga, DS
Dr. (Ms) Kana Talukdar, DS
Dr. (Ms.) Renu Swarup, SF
Dr. K. S. Charak, SF
Dr. S. R. Rao, SF
Dr. Mohd. Aslam, SE

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
Shri Sham Lal, US
Shri K. K. Khattar, US
Shri O. P. Rastogi, US
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT 
 
Dr. Harsh K. Gupta, Secretary
Shri D. P. Singh, AS & Financial Adviser
Shri S. K. Das, Scientist
Dr. B. R. Subramaniam, Scientist
Shri V. Ravindranathan, Scientist
Shri Ajai Saxena, Director
Dr. V. Sampath, Scientist
Prof. M. Ravindran, Director, NIOT
Dr. K. Radhakrishnan, Director, INCOIS, Hyderabad
Shri R. K. Sharma, Scientist
Shri Rakesh Kumar, DS
Dr. M. P. Wakidikar, Scientist
Dr. K. Somasundar, Scientist
Shri P. Madeswaran, Scientist
Shri K. V. Sharma, Scientist
Dr. S. Rajan, Scientist, NCAOR
Dr. S.A.S. Naqvi, Scientist
Shri A. B. Chaudhury, Scientist
Shri K. Narayanan, US
Shri B. L. Kureel, US
 
 
REPRESENTATIVES FROM OTHER OFFICES/ORGANISATIONS
 
Dr. R. R. Kelkar, DG, Indian Meteorological Department, New Delhi
Shri P. C. Mandal, DG, GSI, Kolkata
Dr. M. D. Zingde, Scientist-in-charge, Regional Centre for NIO, Mumbai
Dr. E. Desa, Director NIO, Gao
Dr. C. M. Gupta, Director, CPCB, Lucknow
Shri R. C. Trivedi, AD, CPCB, New Delhi
Shri P. K. Sen, GM, EIL, New Delhi
 
2.         At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the Department of Bio-technology
 and requested them to make a brief presentation on Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department.  The Secretary
 made visual presentation on the activities and achievements of the Department of Bio-technology and briefly explained
 the budgetary allocations on different heads as also the functioning of the Department.
3.   The Secretary requested the Committee to recommend more budgetary allocation especially in the non-plan side to
 take care of the requirements of the demands of the Institutes/Organisations under the Department. She also pointed out
 that during the year 2002-2003 at R.E stage, a drastic cut was made on the allocations of the Department which hampered
 the progress of its scientific activities.  Then, the Committee decided to meet Finance Minister to impress upon him to
 make more financial allocation for the Scientific Departments and not to reduce plan allocations at R.E stage. 
4.   Thereafter, Members sought clarifications on points relating to the Demands for Grants of the Department.  The
 Committee also decided to hold a separate meeting to understand and assess the policies and achievements of the
 Department and the institutions under its control.
            The witnesses then withdrew.
5.         The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 02.00 P.M. for lunch and re-assembled at 3.00 P.M. to hear the Secretary,
 Department of Ocean Development.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
6.         The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Department of Ocean Development. Chairman
 then requested the Secretary to make a brief presentation regarding the Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department. 
 Thereafter, the Secretary made a visual presentation regarding the major activities and achievements of the Department. 
 The Secretary also explained briefly the budgetary allocations on different heads as also the functioning of the
 Department.  Thereafter Members sought clarifications on the points that emerged out of the presentation of the
 Secretary.  The Secretary replied to the questions.
                        The witnesses then withdrew.
            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 05.30 P.M.
 
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
 
 
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 23
rd April, 2003 in Committee Room ‘E’, Basement,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
           
                  PRESENT
 
1. Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
3. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
4. Shri B.P. Singhal
5. Smt. S. G. Indira
6. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
7. Shri Lalit Suri
8. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
            LOK  SABHA
9. Smt. Margaret Alva
10. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
11. Chowdhary Talib Hussain
12. Shri G.J.Javiya
13. Shri C. Kuppusami
14. Shri S. Murugesan
15. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
16. Shri Naresh Puglia
17. Prof. I. G. Sanadi
18. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
SECRETARIAT
                        Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
                        Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
                        Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee considered the draft 112
th Report pertaining to Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of the Ministry of
 Environment & Forests.   A Member of the Committee, Shri B.P. Singhal, has suggested some amendments in the report. 
 While discussing the recommendations on Ganga Action Plan in the report, some members raised the issue of proper
 monitoring system of the Action Plan.  Accordingly, the Committee constituted a Two-member Core Group comprising of

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 Shri B.P. Singhal and Shri Lalit Suri to monitor the implementation of Ganga Action Plan (GAP).
After some discussion, the Committee directed the Secretariat to incorporate the suggestions made by Shri Singhal
 in all the reports on Demands for Grants.  The Committee also requested three of its Members, Shri Manoj Bhattacharya,
 Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’Souza and Smt. Margaret Alva, to go through the reports to suggest further amendments, if any.  The
 Committee decided to meet for consideration and adoption of the reports after these were received from the above
 Members.
3.         The Committee also decided to send a congratulatory letter to Shri K. Kasturirangan, Secretary, Department of
 Space and his team of scientists on the successful launch of India’s communication and meteorological satellite INSAT-
3A on 10
th April, 2003.
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 04.00 P.M.
 
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
     
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 29
th April, 2003 in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
                       
                  PRESENT
 
1. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya   –– In the Chair*
 
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C. Apok Jamir
3. Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
4. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharma
5. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
6. Shri B.P. Singhal
7. Shri T. S. Bajwa
8. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
LOK  SABHA
9. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
10. Shri G. J. Javiya
11. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
12. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
13. Shri Suresh Pasi
14. Prof. I. G. Sanadi
15. Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
16. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
17. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
 
SECRETARIAT
                        Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
                        Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
                        Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
2.   The Committee took up consideration of Draft 112th, 113th, 114th, 115th, 116th and 117th Reports of the Committee on
 Demands for Grants (2003-2004) pertaining to Ministry of Environment & Forests, Department  of  Scientific  & 

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/113threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:23:48]
 Industrial  Research, Department of Space, Department of Ocean Development, Department of Biotechnology and
 Department of Science & Technology respectively.  The Committee considered and adopted each of the above reports.
 ____________________________________________________________________________
* In the absence of Chairman, Shri Manoj Bhattacharya was voted to the Chair.
 
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri Manoj Bhattacharya and Shri B. P. Singhal to
 present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Charan Das Mahant and in his absence Shri Suresh Pasi  to lay the Reports
 on the table of the Lok Sabha.
4.         The Committee placed on record its deepest appreciation for the officers and staff attached with the Committee for
 their painstaking effort in drafting quality reports. It further referred to the style of writing of the Reports and noted that
 these blended substantive information on science and environment with literature.
5.         Thereafter, the Committee decided to undertake a study visit, tentatively in the month of June 2003, to different
 institutes / bodies / centers etc., within the administrative control of the Ministries / Departments falling under the purview
 of the Committee to acquaint itself with their working and problems being faced by them.  It was also decided that while
 in the first phase, the Committee would visit Srinagar & Leh, in the second phase it would visit Delhi, Gurgoan &
 Dehradun. The Committee also directed that detailed tour programme may also be chalked out for subsequent approval by
 the Committee.
6.         The Committee then adjourned at 03.30 P.M.
 