144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY-FOURTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-2006)
OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF SPACE
(DEMAND NO. 89)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE     APRIL, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE   APRIL, 2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2005/VAISAKHA, 1927 (SAKA)
E-Mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Web site: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
C O N T E N T S
        1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                   
        2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                                 
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                                                                           
        5.ANNEXURE                                                                                                                                       
        6.MINUTES  OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                             
                            
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2004)
----------
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Dr.Prabha Thakur
4. Shri Jaswant Singh
5. Shri Dilip Singh Judev
6. Dr Biplab Dasgupta
7. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav
8. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
9. Smt. Kum Kum Rai
10. Shri Birabhadra Singh
LOK  SABHA
11. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
12. Shri Jasubhai D. Barad            
13. Shri Sujan Chakraborty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhery
15. Shri Mohan S. Delkar              
16. Shri Anantrao Gudhe
17. Shri Babubhai Katara
18. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik           
19. Shri Brahmananda Panda
20. Smt. Neeta Pateriya

144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
21. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                        
22. Shri K.C.Singh Baba   
23. Smt. Jayaben  Thakkar
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                              
25. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh                           
26. Shri D. Venugopal
27. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
28. Shri V.Aruna Kumar
    *29.Shri Rakesh Singh        
    #30.Shri Shivajirao A.Patil
  @31. Shri Francis Fanthome
 
            ___________________________________________________________________
    * Nominated w.e.f. 13
th August, 2004.
    #  Nominated w.e.f. 20th August, 2004.
   @ Nominated w.e.f. 25th February, 2005.
 
SECRETARIAT
      Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
      Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Assistant Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
INTRODUCTION
      I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
 Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Forty-Fourth
 Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Space
 (Demand No.89).
 
2.  In the meeting of the Committee held on the 1
st  April, 2005 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of Space
 gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the
 performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
 
3.  The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the
 Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the
 Department of Space.
 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 20
th April, 2005.
 
NEW DELHI;  
April 20, 2005  
P.G.NARAYANAN,
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- 
REPORT
The spectacular achievements in the new frontier technology of Space during the last three decades have firmly established
 its capability for bringing out a socio-economic revolution in the world because of its potential to transform even stagnant
 societies in a most cost effective and timely manner.  With the unique ability of a Space platform to provide a synoptic view of the
 universe in the entire electro-magnetic spectrum, Space exploration has been virtually extended to the very end of the universe and
 the very beginning of time, providing for the first time a breath taking glimpse of interplanetary space, solar planetary system and
 the deeper space filled with hitherto unknown exotic celestial objects like quasars, pulsars, neutron stars, X-ray stars and black

144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
 holes.  Even more spectacular is the unleashing of the vast and unlimited potential benefits of Space technology which already
 operationally extend over communication, meteorology, television broadcast, education, agriculture, industrial growth, resource
 management, environmental pollution, disaster mitigation, flood and drought management, health and entertainment virtually
 touching every fact of human endeavour.
2.         The primary objective of the Indian Space Programme is to promote the development and application of space
 technology and space science for the socio-economic benefit of the nation through establishment of operational space services
 in a self-reliant manner. The main thrust areas of the programme are:
§                     Satellite-based communication for various applications.
§                     Satellite-based resources survey and management and environmental monitoring.
§                     Meteorological applications
§                     Development and operationalisation of indigenous satellite launch vehicles and  associated ground segment
 for providing these space-based services.
 
3.         Government of India set-up the Space Commission and the Department of Space (DOS) in 1972.  The Department is
 responsible for implementing the policies framed by the Space Commission.  These are carried out through the Indian   Space
 Research Organisation (ISRO) and the Grant-in-aid institutions viz., National Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA), Physical
 Research Laboratory (PRL), National MST Radar Facility (NMRF) and North-Eastern Space Applications Centre (NE-SAC).
4.      The Secretariat of the Department of Space and the Headquarters of ISRO are located in Bangalore.   Programme Offices
 at ISRO Headquarters co-ordinate the overall programmes like satellite communication, earth observation, launch vehicle,
 space science, space industry development, disaster management support, international co-operation, publications and public
 relations, budget and economic analysis and human resource development.
5.         The major Centres, Units and establishments of ISRO/DOS, responsible for carrying out research and development
 activities as well as for undertaking the various projects and programmes, are given below:
§
         Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC), Thiruvananthapuram, provides the technology base for the country’s
 indigenous launch vehicle (rocket) development.
§         Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre (LPSC), with its facilities at Bangalore, Thiruvananthapuram and Mahendragiri,
 is responsible for development of liquid propulsion and cryogenic propulsion systems for satellite and launch
 vehicles
§
         Satish Dhawan Space Centre (SDSC-SHAR) at Sriharikota, Andhra Pradesh, is the launch base.  Also, it provides
 the facilities for processing of solid rocket motors.
§         ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC), Bangalore, is entrusted with the prime responsibility for the satellite development. 
 The Laboratory for Electro-Optics Systems (LEOS), Bangalore of ISAC has the responsibility for development
 and production of electro optical sensors for satellites.  ISRO Radar Development Unit (ISRAD), Bangalore of
 ISAC has the responsibility to develop the Radar systems for ISRO and other emerging radar systems for national
 development.
§
         Space Applications Centre (SAC), Ahmedabad carries out research and development in space applications as well
 as development of application payloads.
§         Development and Educational Communication Unit (DECU), Ahmedabad is involved in the conception,
 definition, planning and socio/techno-economic evaluation of development communication programmes.

144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
§         ISRO Telemetry, Tracking & Command Network (ISTRAC) with its ground stations at Bangalore, Sriharikota,
 Lucknow, Bearslake, Biak (Indonesia), Bruenei and Mauritius provides the telemetry, tracking and command
 support and spacecraft mission management for the Indian remote sensing satellite missions, space science
 missions and satellite launch vehicle programmes.
§         INSAT Master Control Facility (MCF) at Hassan, Karnataka, has the responsibility for control and operation of
 INSAT satellites.
§         ISRO Inertial Systems Unit (IISU), Thiruvananthapuram, carries out research and development in the area of
 inertial systems for satellites and launch vehicles.
6.         The  National Natural Resources Management System (NNRMS) with the Department of Space as the nodal agency,
 has been established to ensure optimal utilisation of natural resources using remote sensing data in conjunction with
 conventional techniques. Under NNRMS, five Regional Remote Sensing Service Centres (RRSSCs) at Bangalore, Dehradun,
 Jodhpur, Kharagpur and Nagpur have been set up for execution of remote sensing application programmes in the respective
 regions.      
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS
7.         The Committee has been informed that the Plan outlay approved for the Department of Space for the Tenth Plan is Rs.
 13,250 crores.  The estimated Non-Plan outlay during the Tenth Plan is Rs. 2000 crores.  Thus, the total outlay for 10th plan is
 expected to be Rs. 15,250 crores.
8.         The Budget Estimates 2005-06 work out to Rs.3148.42 Crores with a Plan component of Rs.2800.40 Crores and Non-
Plan component of   Rs.348.02 Crores. 
The non-plan and plan break-up of the provision for BE 2005- 06 is as follows:                                                            
                                                            (Rs.in Crores)
 Non-Plan Plan Total
Budget Estimates   2005-06 (Gross) 348.02 2800.40 3148.42
Budget  Estimates 2005-06     (Net) 348.00 2800.00 3148.00
The detailed breakup of the budgetary allocation is given in annexure.
9.         The Committee has been informed that the Department has been rigorously following the Zero Base Budgeting
 methodology for formulation of Annual Budgets. Detailed reviews are carried out at various levels in the organisation to
 arrive at the minimum essential cash flow for each Project, Programme and Centre/Unit, based on the programmatic
 priorities, total cost, scheduled targets, progress achieved so far and the milestones planned for the budgeting
 period.Consistent with the programme directions and targets envisaged for the 10th Five Year Plan period, the specific
 activities/projects to be undertaken and the performance milestones to be achieved have been carefully prioritised while
 arriving at the Budget Estimates for 2005-06.
10.       When the Committee asked the Department to furnish head wise quarterly statement as well as total expenditure of the
 Department for 2004-05 along with the reasons for non-uniform pace of expenditure. It has been  informed that Department
 works in a Project and Mission mode towards the development and production of Satellites launch vehicles and their
 applications.  The Expenditure on these projects is linked to the satisfactory completion of specific designated milestones
 such as design, development, procurement, fabrication and testing activities.  As  the payment milestones  are necessarily
 linked up with delivery schedules, testing and satisfactory technical progress results,   the  expenditure does not necessarily
 follow a uniform pattern.      

144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
The quarterly statement of  expenditure for 2004-05 is given below:
(Rupees in Crores)
Head I quarter II quarter III quarter IV quarter Total
 
1.   Secretariat
Major head 3451)
1.07 1.18 1.39 1.14 4.78
 
2. Space Research
 (Major head 3402 and
 5402)
 
279.00
 
301.26
 
420.36
 
1188.77
 
2189.39
 
3. INSAT system
 (Major head 3252 and
 5252)
 
44.81
 
39.20
 
62.76
 
199.06
 
345.83
 
TOTAL
 
324.88
 
341.64
 
484.51
 
1388.97
 
2540.00
 
11.       In reply to a query about the stage of development in the GSLV MKIII development programme for which an
 allocation of Rs.450 crores has been made for the year 2005-06, the Committee has been informed that the GSLV Mk-III
 Project envisages the development of a launch vehicle with enhanced capability of launching 4 tonne class of communication
 satellites in Geo-synchronous Transfer Orbit (GTO).  The project involves the development of a number of technologies,
 which include, among others, 200 tonne solid stage booster (S-200), 25 tonne cryogenic engines (C-25) and 110 tonne liquid
 stage engines (L-110) as core booster. The project has made significant progress like the detailed design of various
 subsystems and the vehicle has been finalised and an integrated technical review has been conducted to establish the baseline
 design.  Construction of major test and fabrication facilities such as large-size Solid propellant preparation plant   (S-200),
 Liquid hydrogen plant, Integration and testing facilities for higher thrust Cryogenic engine (C-25) and Liquid engine (L-110)
 stage, Structural test facilities, Manufacturing facilities and launch complex facilities have progressed well.  It is expected to
 complete the commissioning and testing of all the test and fabrication facilities by 2006 beginning leading to the hardware
 realisation for the vehicle.
12.       The Department, explaining the reasons for fluctuation in allocation to GSLV Mk III explained that for 2004-05 the
 allocation was based on the milestone payments to be effected for some of the major contracts related to the establishment of
 technical facilities. Due to detailed technical evaluation and the need to seek additional clarifications required to conclude the
 contracts, the milestone payments planned in the current year for Solid propellant plant, launch complex facilities and other
 contracts marginally shifted to next year.  In view of this, the provision of Rs. 490 crores in BE 2004-05 has been revised to
 Rs. 390 crores in RE 2004-05 with a provision of Rs. 450 crores in BE 2005-06 taking into account the revised cash-flow
 requirement for these major contracts.  
13.       In reply to a query regarding the reasons for increase in allocation to Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre (VSSC), the
 Department informed that the increase in allocation has been sought mainly towards initiation of R&D efforts in the area of
 Reusable Launch Vehicles (RLV) and   setting-up of Hypersonic Wind Tunnel Test facility for future advanced space
 transportation system and indigenous production of angular motion simulator for design & development of launch vehicle
 systems.

144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
14.       The Committee has been informed that the increased allocation to ISRO satellite centre has been sought mainly
 towards establishment of a 6.5 meter diameter thermal-vacuum chamber required for environmental testing of large size
 INSAT type of satellites.
15.       When the Committee asked the Department to explain the reasons for increase in allocation and new activities
 proposed under the Megha-tropiques mission, the Department informed thatMegha-tropiques is an Indo-French joint satellite
 mission for studying the contribution of the tropical atmosphere to climate dynamics.  The mission envisages development of
 a satellite using ISRO’s IRS bus and a range of scientific instruments to be developed jointly by ISRO and French Space
 Agency.  The satellite is proposed to be launched using India’s PSLV in 2008 and the increased provision has been sought
 towards development of scientific instruments and   spacecraft subsystems.
INSAT-4 SERIES
16.       The Committee has been informed that INSAT-4 series is planned to have seven satellites. The transponder
 configuration of the series has been worked out after evaluating the requirement projected by different users/user
 departments. INSAT will have about 225 active transponders in various frequency bands by 2007, which can cater to the
 demand upto 11 GBPS capacity with present day technology. The transponders on INSAT-4 series are distributed as follows:
INSAT-4A
17.       INSAT-4A, the first in the INSAT-4, series will carry 12 Ku-band and 12 C-band transponders. The Ku-band
 transponders will primarily meet the growing demand of DTH. The Department when asked about the reasons for reduction
 in allocation to INSAT-4 has  informed that the requirements of materials, components, fabrication and testing of INSAT-4A
 is fully met with the current year’s allocation.  The spacecraft has been integrated and tested and is being transported to the
 launch site.    
INSAT-4B
18.       INSAT-4B will also carry 12 Ku-band and 12 C-band transponders. The Ku-band transponders on INSAT-4B will
 meet the additional demand. It is planned for launch during 2005-06. The realisation of the subsystems has progressed well
 during the year and the payloads are expected to be ready by the first quarter of 2005. The satellite integration is planned by
 the middle of 2005.
INSAT-4C
19.       INSAT-4C is an exclusive Ku-band satellite with 12 transponders. During the year, the configuration of the spacecraft
 including the communication payload and antenna systems, has been finalised. The launch interface has also been defined.
GSAT-4
20.       GSAT-4 is primarily an experimental satellite for Ka band communication payload. The payload composition is as
 follows:
Eight transponders for Ka-band regenerative and bend-pipe payload. Regenerative payload can cater to countrywide
 demand of hubless VSAT connectivity.
Navigation payload as part of GAGAN project using CXL and CXC links to augment GPS system to Category-1 type
 navigation.
Tel Aviv University Ultra Violet Experiment (TAUVEX) consisting of three UV imagers for surveying the sky in the
 wavelengths of 1400 to 3200 Ao .
            The spacecraft level design review has been completed and the interface for the TAUVEX payload has been reviewed.
 The layout of the equipment on the north, south and earth viewing panels has been finalised. The launch of GSAT-4 is
 planned during 2006-07.
 
GSAT-5/INSAT-4D
21.       The Committee has been informed that Government has approved the GSAT-5 project during the year. It is an
 exclusive C-band satellite carrying 24 transponders. Of these, 12 transponders have India coverage and other 12 have
 expanded coverage. The satellite is slated for launch on board GSLV during 2006-07.

144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
22.       The Committee hopes that INSAT-4 series would make India self sufficient in the areas of telecommunication, Mobile
 Satellite Services and acquisition of Meteorological, Hydrological and Oceanographic data. It also hopes that these satellites
 would be successfully launched as per their schedule.
HAMSAT
23.       The Committee has been informed thatHAMSAT is an application-specific micro-satellite designed to provide satellite
 based Radio Amateur Services to Indian as well as international HAM (Amateur Radio Operators) community. The 43.5 kg
 HAMSAT, planned for launch on board PSLV-C6 as a co-passenger of CARTOSAT-I, will carry Linear Mode B
 (UHF/VHF) transponders-one Indian transponder and the other designed by a Dutch Amateur Radio Operator from Higher
 Technical Institute, Venlo, The Netherlands. The transponder chain has been integrated and spacecraft level thermovac test
 completed.
24.       The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Departments for taking up the programme of micro-satellite exclusive for
 HAM radio services as this service has provided generous service to the community in the time of disaster and when other
 conventional means of communication had failed. The Committee recommends that Department should  coordinate with the
 Department of Science & Technology and Ministry of Human Resource Development for popularizing the use of HAM
 radios through training and introduction of Ham radio as a extra-curricular activity in schools and colleges .
VILLAGE RESOURCE CENTRES (VRCs)
25.       The Committee has been informed thatthe Departmenthas embarked upon setting up satellite based Village Resource
 Centres (VRCs) to effectively use the potential of communications satellites like INSAT and earth observation satellites like
 Indian remote sensing satellites to transform the traditional rural societies.  VRCs facilitate access to spatial information on
 important aspects like land use/land cover, soil and ground water prospects and enable the farmers in taking important
 decisions based on their query.  Besides, VRCs will enable online interaction between the local farmers and agricultural
 scientists and provide critical information to fishermen like sea state and wave heights.  Provision of information on many
 governmental schemes, farming system, action plans based on weather, community-specific advice on soil and water
 conservation, etc., are the other services.
26.       In addition, VRCs can act as virtual community centric learning centres and provide access to knowledge at the village
 doorstep.  At the same time, VRCs will provide connectivity to spatiality hospitals and thus can bring the services of expert
 doctors closer to the villages.
28.       VRCs are implemented through partnership with NGOs and other agencies.  The first cluster of VRCs, established
 jointly by ISRO and MS Swaminathan Research Foundation (MSSRF) in Tamil Nadu, was inaugurated in October 2004.  The
 VRC is a totally interactive VSAT (Very Small Aperture Terminal) based network.  To start with, the network consists of
 four nodes located at Thiruvaiyuru, Thankatchimadam, Sempatti and Chennai.  The central node is located at the MSSRF
 office in Chennai.  Persons located at one node of this network can fully interact with others located at another node through
 video and audio links via the INSAT. Each of the four nodes can be further extended using other technologies like Wi-Fi.
 Wireless and Optical Fibre.  These extensions may serve as local clusters around the areas where the VRC is located.
27.       An MoU has also been signed with Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham, Kochi, for setting up more VRCs.  As a follow-up,
 individual Memoranda of Understanding (MoU) for the establishment of VRCs across the country have been signed by
 several prominent IT industries with Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham.  The industries will provide ground infrastructure and
 other IT based systems.  To start with 25, such VRCs will be set up.
28.       The Committee hopes that by this programme all the local bodies, district offices and all people involved in planning at
 the rural areas would be connected resulting into dissemination of vital information. The Committee recommends that special
 focus should be given to issues related to self-employment and forming self-help groups  through them.  The Committee
 further recommends that the  information should be disseminated in local language and  in this endeavour impart necessary

144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
 training to youth in rural areas to utilise the services that will be provided through VRCs and the government may take
 necessary steps to equip every village in the country with the  required equipment.
TELEMEDICINE
29.       The Committee has been informed thatTelemedicine is one of new applications area of satellite communications where
 the remote hospitals/health centres located in villages/districts can be connected to the specialty hospitals located in the
 cities.  ISRO Telemedicine pilot project was started in the year 2001 as a part of proof-of-concept demonstration programme. 
 Telemedicine system consists of customized medical software integrated with computer hardware along with medical
 diagnostic instruments connected to the commercial VSAT (Very Small Aperture Terminal) at each location.  The medical
 record/history of the patient is sent to specialist doctors, who study and provide diagnosis and treatment during
 videoconference with the patient’s end.
30.       During the year, the Telemedicine network has been further expanded and it now covers 100 hospitals-78
 remote/rural/district hospitals/health centres connected to 22 super specialty hospitals located in the major cities like nine
 hospitals in Jammu and Kashmir, six district hospitals including Leh and Kargil and three medical college hospitals connected
 to All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Delhi, Apollo Hospitals, Delhi and Amritha Institute of Medical Sciences, Kochi.
 Five islands of Lakshadweep (Kavaratti, Amini, Agatti Andrott and Minicoy) have been  connected to Amritha Institute of
 Medical Sciences, Kochi. Five remote/field/base hospitals of Indian Army have been connected to research and referral
 (R&R) Hospital at New Delhi. INHS, Dhanvanhri under the Naval Command at Port Blair, Andamans has been connected to
 R&R Hospital, New Delhi. Eleven hospitals of North Eastern States (STNM Hospital Gangtok, Sikkim Regional Institute of
 Medical Sciences, Imphal, Manipur Medical College Hospital, Guwahati and District Hospital at Udaipur, Tripura) have been
 connected to Asia Heart Foundation, Kolkata. Tata Memorial Cancer Centre, Mumbai has been  connected to B B Barua
 Cancer Centre, Guwahati and Wal Waker Rural Cancer Centre at Chiplun, Maharashtra. Three Medical College Hospital of
 Orissa connected to SGPGI, Lucknow. Operational Telemedicine network in Karnataka-11 district/taluk hospitals connected
 have been to five super specialty hospitals in Bangalore and Mysore.
31.       Besides, a temporary Telemedicine facility was set up for two months at Pamba at the foothills of Sabarimala shrine
 for the benefit of visiting pilgrims.  A mobile teleopthalmology facility has been provided to Shankara Netralaya, Chennai
 and Aravind Eye Hospital, Madurai to extend services to rural population in Tamil Nadu. Operational Telemedicine network
 is being established in Chhatisgarh connecting 14 district hospitals/health centers to Raipur Medical college hospital. More
 than 25,000 patients have so far been provided wit teleconsultation and treatment.  An impact study conducted on thousand
 patients has revealed that there is a significant cost saving in the system since the patients avoid expenses towards travel, stay
 and for treatment at the hospitals in the cities.
32.       The Andaman Telemedicine Network consisting of Telemedicine centres at G.B. Pant Hospital, Port Blair, Bishop
 Richardson Hospital, Car Nicobar and INHS, Dhanavanthri Naval Hospital at Port Blair alongwith the Andamans Gramsat
 network was extensively used for tele-consultation and treatment in the aftermath of the tsunami that hit the Island.
33.       The Committee is of the opinion that if better health services are to be provided to smaller towns and remote villages,
 there is an urgent need for establishment of telemedicine network in the country on a wider scale.  Moreover, at present the
 medical community is not fully aware of the development in the field of telemedicine.  The Committee, therefore, feels that
 there is a need for widespread effort to create awareness amongst the doctors and the public for adopting and reaping the
 benefits of this new advancement.  Apart from this, Telemedicine should be introduced as a topic at the graduate level.
34.       The Committee commends the role of the Department in bringing high quality medical care to patients transcending
 the hindrances posed by distances and other geographical barriers.  It believes that this can be a boon for countries like India
 where the majority of  population lives in remote areas without access to even basic health care.  The Committee feels that as
 most of the patients in remote and rural areas are not able to get primary health care and especially in case of women where

144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
 mortality quite is high during childbirth, the Committee recommends that the Department should strive to percolate the
 benefit of this programme to such section of society . 
35.       The Committee is aware that with the development of telemedicine system, there is a possibility of the country facing
 medico legal issues arising out of the system.  As there is no framework available in the country to tackle such situation at
 present, the Committee strongly recommends evolving of a framework in this regard, which should not hamper the growth of
 telemedicine services in the country.
SATELLITE NAVIGATION
36.       The Committee was informed that  the Ministry of Civil Aviation has decided to implement an indigenous Satellite-
Based Regional GPS Augmentation System also known as space-Based Augmentation System (SBAS) as part of the Satellite-
Based Communications, Navigation and Surveillance (CNS)/Air Traffic Management (ATM) plan for civil aviation.   A
 national plan for satellite navigation including implementation of Technology Demonstration System (TDS) over the Indian
 airspace as a proof of concept, has been prepared jointly by Airports Authority of India (AAI) and ISRO.  The TDS is the first
 step towards implementing an operational SBAS system.
37.       The Indian SBAS is planned to be implemented in three phases: Technology Demonstration System, Initial
 Experimental Phase and Final Operational Phase.  The Indian SBAS is expected to bridge the gap between the European
 EGNOS (European Geo Stationary Navigation Overlay System) and the Japanese MSAS (MTSAT Space Augmentation
 System) to provide seamless navigation of aircraft from west to east and vice-versa.  When implemented, the Indian SBAS 
 system will play an important role in the introduction of satellite based navigation services in the Asia Pacific region.  The
 Indian SBAS system has been given an acronym-GPS And GEO Augmented Navigation (GAGAN).  The first navigation
 payload is being fabricated and it is proposed to be flown on the GSAT-4 satellite expected to be launched in 2006-07
38.       The Committee feels that the phase when India can become a major hub in air navigation and be able to operate air
 services from India, there is a greater need for superior space based navigation and as India is  placed at the axis of routes
 connecting Europe with Southeast Asia and  by having an indigenous Satellite-Based Regional GPS Augmentation System
 can gain both in terms of market and strategic importance.
SPACE CAPSULE RECOVERY EXPERIMENT (SRE)
39.       The Committee was informed that Space Capsule Recovery Experiment (SRE) is intended for demonstrating the
 capability to recover an orbiting space capsule. The experiment envisages the development of a 500 kg recoverable capsule
 and the associated technologies. SRE is intended to test reusable thermal protection system, navigation, guidance and control,
 hypersonic aero-thermodynamics, management of communication blackout, deceleration and floatation system, recovery
 operations, etc. SRE will be launched as a copassenger of CARTOSAT-2 on board PSLV during the second half of 2005-06.
40.       SRE comprises aero-thermo structure, spacecraft platform, deceleration and floatation system and micro-gravity
 payloads. It has a sphere-cone-flare configuration with a spherical nose of about 0.5 m radius, base diameter of 2 m and 1.6 m
 height. The capsule is made of mild steel. The parachute, pyro devices, avionics packages of triggering unit and sequencer,
 telemetry and tracking system, sensors for measurement of system performance parameters are placed inside SRE capsule.
41.       After its launch by PSLV, SRE will remain in orbit for a few days during which it will be used to perform experiments
 in micro-gravity environment. The capsule will then be de-orbited and it reenters the earth's atmosphere.  On reentry, after
 initial aerodynamic braking, a parachute system will reduce the touch down velocity. SRE will splashdown in the Bay of
 Bengal, about 140 km east of Sriharikota coast. A floatation system will keep SRE afloat and enables its recovery.
42.       During the year, three airdrop tests have been conducted successfully using aircraft for testing deceleration and
 flotation system. Three drop tests of the instrumented SRE were successfully conducted using a helicopter during June-
August, 2004 from SDSC SHAR.
43.       The Committee feels that the success of this method would save a lot of costs for the nation as the single space capsule
 could be used again for different experiments.
DEPLOYMENT OF RESOURCES DURING TSUNAMI DISASTER
44.       The Committee has been informed that space based systems have no capability to detect and predict natural calamities

144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
 like earthquake and its after effects/tsunami.  However, the remote sensing and communication satellites provide the means of
 assessing the extent of damage and enabling the relief operators for planning the mitigation measures as well as establishing
 emergency communication system.  Department has put into operation all its resources in the aftermath of the tsunami that hit
 India on December, 26th 2004.
45.       A fly-away VSAT ten INMARSAT telephones and four Mobile satellite service (MSS) phones were airlifted to Port
 Blair for augmenting the telecommunication links. VSAT based video conferencing facilities were set up to  connect seven
 taluk headquarters to secretariat. The Andaman & Nicobar administration used the VSATs at Diglipur, Mayabandar, Rangat,
 Port Blair, Hut Bay, Car Nicobar, Comorta and Cambel Bay for relief and rehabilitation. Regular video conferencing facility
 was established between these locations and the main land via INSAT-3E. Satellite based telephone connectivity for video-
conferencing purposes were enabled at the above locations through the telephone exchange at space Application Centre,
 Ahmedabad.
46.       Data from IRS satellites (IRS-1C, 1D, OCEANSAT-1 and REOURCESAT) over affected areas were used for analysis
 and damage assessment and the information was provided to the crisis management group of the ministry of Home affairs and
 state agencies. Satellite data for Car Nicobar, Chennai, Kakinada, Tamil nadu coast (especially Nagapattinam), Andhra
 Pradesh and Kerala were acquired. To obtain high resolution data under cloud/haze conditions, ariel survey, using the aircraft
 of NSRA was undertaken for assessment of inundation, affected agriculture areas, damage coastal vegetation, coastal land
 forms, beach erosions and damage to the clusters of habitations. Satellite imageries clearly indicate large scale damage to the
 southern tip of great Nicobar Island and the Indira point. 
47.       The Committee has been informed that as a member of the International Charter on Disaster, ISRO activated the
 Charter on December, 26
th 2004 and the satellite data from foreign satellites such as SPOT, RADARSAT and ENVISAT over
 port Blair, Car Nicobar, Cudallore and Nagapattinam were  received.
48.       The Committee feels that  inspite of possessing high resolution satellite imageries and sophisticated equipment we
 have failed to disseminate information regarding the onslaught of Tsunami waves in the eastern coast  of  India and have only
 been able to record the large scale devastation. The Committee observes that as India is home to many earthquake prone areas
 and the recent earthquake has given ample proof that Indian landmass is moving forward thus creating high stress zones in
 Himalayan regions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that accurate slope stability studies may be conducted  using
 space technology so as to understand the possible locations where landslides could occur in case of earthquakes
CHANDRAYAAN-1 
49.       Chandrayaan-1 is India’s first scientific mission to moon to be undertaken during 2007-08.   The mission is aimed at
 expanding the scientific knowledge about the moon, upgrading India’s technological capability and providing challenging
 opportunities for planetary research to the younger generation.
50.       The scientific objectives of Chandrayaan-1 are the high resolution remote sensing of the moon in the visible, near
 infrared low energy X-ray and high-energy X-ray regions for preparing a 3- dimensional atlas of regions of scientific interest
 with a high spatial and altitude resolution of 5-10 m and chemical mapping of the entire lunar surface for elements such as
 magnesium, aluminum, silicon, calcium, iron and titanium with a spatial resolution of 10 km and elements of high atomic
 numbers (z), such as 
222 radon, uranium, thorium and gadolinium with a spatial resolution of 20 km.
51.       The spacecraft for Chandrayaan-1 will be a 1.5 m cuboid with a dry weight of 525 kg in its final lunar orbit.  It will be
 3-axis stabilized and powered by solar array generating 750 W of electrical power.  It will have a Lithium-Ion battery back up
 for operation during eclipse.  The spacecraft will use a bipropellant propulsion system for transferring it from GTO to lunar
 orbit and for orbit and attitude maintenance.
52.       PSLV will launch the spacecraft into GTO.  Two consecutive in-plane perigee manoeuvre, using the Liquid Apogee
 Motor (LAM) on board the spacecraft, will raise the apogee to 3,86,000 km. which is very close to the moon (Lunar Transfer

144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
 Trajectory-LTT).  It will take 5 ½ days for the spacecraft to approach the moon.  When the spacecraft is at peri-elene (nearest
 point in an orbit around the moon), another manoeuvre using LAM will place the spacecraft in near circular 1,000 km orbit of
 the moon.  In this orbit, the solar panel of the spacecraft will be deployed.  Subsequently, the orbit height will be reduced to
 200 km and after studying the orbit perturbations at this height the altitude will be reduced to 100 km circular polar orbit.
53.       Chandrayaan-1 will have the following payloads designed and developed in India:
 
Ø
      Terrain Mapping Camera with stereo imaging capability operating in panchromatic band with 5 m spatial resolution
 and 20 km swath.
Ø      A Hyper-spectral Imager operating in 400-900 nm band with a spectral resolution of 15 nm, a spatial resolution of 80
 m and 20 km swath.
Ø      A Lunar Laser Ranging Instrument with a vertical resolution of better than 5 m.
Ø      A Low Energy (0.5-10 keV) X-ray spectrometer for measuring fluorescent X-rays emanating from lunar surface with 
 a footprint of 20 mk.
Ø      A High energy X-ray (10-250 keV) spectrometer with a footprint of 20 km primarily to detect naturally occurring 210
 pb and other radionuclides.
54.       Besides the above, the following scientific instruments have been short listed to be flown on Chandrayaan-1:
Ø      Low Energy X-ray spectrometer (0.5-10 keV) from Rutherford Appleton Laboratory, UK to measure elemental
 abundance of Mg, Al, Si, Fe, Ti, etc.,  distributed over the lunar surface.
Ø      Near IR Spectrometer in the wavelength range ~0.9-2.4 micron from Max Planck Institute of Aeronomie, Germany, to
 detect and measure lunar mineral abundances.
Ø      Radiation Dose Monitor Experiment from Bulgarian Academy of Sciences to measure the particle flux energy
 spectrum and radiation dose map around the moon.
Ø      Sub KeV Atom Reflecting Analyser from Swedish Institute of Space Physics to measure volatiles generated due to
 solar wind impacting on lunar surface and determine the surface magnetic field anomalies.
Ø      A Miniature Synthetic Aperture Radar Instrument from Applied Physics Lab, John Hopkins University, USA to map
 the polar landscape and deposits of water ice in these cold traps up to depth of few meters.
55.       It is also proposed to incorporate an Impact probe as part of the mission for proving technological elements required
 for future landing mission.During the year, considerable progress was made under the Chandrayaan-1 with the finalisation of
 spacecraft configuration, selection and development of core science payloads and selection of payloads from the proposals
 received in response to the Announcement of Opportunity made by ISRO.  Detailed discussions have been held to optimize
 accommodation of science payloads, spacecraft interface and mission operation related aspects. Site survey, including noise
 survey and elevation profiles, has been completed for the Deep Space Network Station to be established at Bangalore to
 support the spacecraft at slant range of up to 4,00,000 km for TTC and payload data reception.  Land acquisition is in
 progress.  A National science Data Centre to process raw data into user-friendly format will be set up at a suitable place.
56.       The Committee has been informed that during the current year, Chandrayaan will enter the hardware realisation phase
 and the activities will be at its peak.  The procurement of critical components, materials and establishment of infrastructure
 including Deep space network and facilities for payload fabrication at scientific institutions are targeted for completion during
 next year. 
57.       The Committee in  its 129
th Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) had suggested for fulfillment of some  scientific

144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
 objectives as research perspective as a part of the Chandrayan-1 Mission.  The Committee would further like to recommend
 that  in addition to the existing moon mission objectives of the Department of Space, possibility of extraction of Helium-3
 from the Moon soil could also be examined.  It is expected to be the cleanest fuel for 21 st century fusion reactors because its
 reaction is efficient and at the same time produces low residual radioactivity. Helium 3 is deposited on the lunar regolith by
 solar winds. So far as extraction of the Helium 3 from lunar regolith  is concerned, which  has been stirred by collision with
 meteorites, Helium 3 is available at several meters depth of the lunar surface.  The Committee has been given to understand
 that the greatest concentration of Helium 3 will be found on the lunar maria.   Since it is extremely potent, non-polluting, with
 virtually no radioactive by-products, the Committee feels  that Helium 3 is the perfect fuel source for the current century.
 Moreover, Helium 3 fusion energy may be the key to future space exploration and settlement.
ALTERNATIVE ROCKET PROPULSION TECHNOLOGIES
58.       In India the rocket propulsion is generally classified into two main areas based on the propellant use, for example,
 Liquid Propulsion and Solid Propulsion.  The Liquid Propulsion is further broadly classified into Earth Storable Propulsion
 and Cryogenic Propulsion System based on the type of propellant used.  Earth Storable Propellant can be stored in the liquid
 form under normal pressure and temperature conditions.  Generally, these are called liquid propulsions, e.g. N2O4
 (DiNitrogen Tetroxide and UDMH (Unsymetrical Dimethryl Hydrazine) (CH3) (2NNH2).    Cryogenic propellants are stored
 at very low temperature i.e. below 120K.  Since they are in gaseous form under normal pressure and temperature conditions
 due to low Boiling Point (BP) e.g. Liquid Hydrogen (LH2) – BP = 20K Liquid Oxygen (LOX) – BP 90K.
59.       Rocket stages using the above propellant combination are classified as earth storable stages and cryogenic stages
 respectively.  Auxiliary Propulsion Systems are  used for controlling the rocket and are also known as control systems.  These
 are small liquid rocket engines positioned at specific locations to control the trajectory of Launch vehicles during its flight.
60.       It is, however, clear from the above that the propulsion system mainly used for the rocket engines by the Department
 of Space, that is, liquid, solid,  auxiliary and cryogenic system,  involves the following problems:
The liquid hydrogen being used for cryogenic propellants is highly flammable.
It produces invisible cold flame.
It is liable to produce large volume of explosive gas cloud sensitive to ignition due to high liquid vapour expansion.
Earth Storable Propellants are toxic in nature.
Hydrazine is also difficult to handle and is highly toxic.
Any exposure to human being is extremely dangerous and environmentally fatal.
61.       The Committee is of the opinion that  any use of these propulsion systems require elaborate safety measures in order to
 avoid any environmental disaster that may arise due to the nature of the systems being used by the Department of Space for
 putting rockets into space.
CRYOGENIC UPPER STAGE (CUS) PROJECT
62.       The Committee has been informed that the objectives of Cryogenic Upper Stage (CUS) project, sanctioned in April 
 1994, is to develop and qualify an indigenous cryogenic stage for the upper stage of GSLV and the cryogenic engine has been
 successfully developed and tested for its flight duration.  The engine has logged more than 7000 seconds of accumulated test
 duration.  The integration of the cryogenic engine with propellant tanks and other subsystems, which together form the
 Cryogenic stage  is in progress.  As most of the materials, components and fabrication services required for the cryogenic
 stage has already been realised.
Safety Measures Against Cryogenic Propellants
63.       The cryogenic propellants, especially liquid hydrogen is highly flammable and produces invisible cold flame.    Due to
 high liquid vapour expansion, it is liable to produce large volume of explosive cloud which is very sensitive to ignition.  The

144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
 Committee, therefore, feels that before using cryogenic propellants very elaborate safety precaution are required to be taken
 since some of the earth storable propellants are toxic in nature and their exposure to human population can lead to serious
 environmental and biological consequences and, therefore, their level of exposure should be made limited and preventive
 steps should be taken  against high level exposure because it has disastrous consequences.  The Committee, therefore, feels
 that adequate safety precaution during storage, handling and servicing of liquid hydrogen, needs to be taken in order to avoid
 any occupational hazards that may arise in future.
SPACE PHYSICS LABORATORY AND AEROSOL ISSUES
64.       The Committee has been given to understand by the Vikram Sarabhai Sapce Centre that specific findings of Space
 Physics Laboratory are focussed on Atmospheric Dynamics, Aerosols and their environmental and radiation effects by
 undertaking spatial studies in Boundary Layer Physics.  In addition to fixed ground based experiments, studies were carried
 out using mobile experiments and also by using satellite data for studying the temporal variation in the spatial distribution of
 atmospheric aerosols, clouds and water vapour to understand the basic chemistry of the dynamic changes in atmospheric
 processes.
65. One of the most important findings of the SPL is that this ABL study is an important approach to climate modelling. The
 Atmospheric Boundary Layer (ABL) is the lowest region of atmosphere which is directly affected by surface processes like
 turbulences vertical and horizontal transport of momentum and moisture.  The Committee is, therefore, convinced that
 Atmospheric Boundary Layer (ABL) is directly affected by the anthropogenic activities on the bio-sphere of the planet.  The
 Space Physics Laboratory has tried to study particularly the coastal ABL to SODAR, LAWP etc. and it has been founded that
 coastal ABL depth varies from 200 to 300 meter and particularly just above the bio-sphere spanning upto to a distance of 1.5
 to 3 kilometers.
66.       The altitude structure of ABL aerosols concentration is modeled for different seasons and its association with boundary
 layer processes was established.  During southwest monsoon period, the ABL aerosols system over Thiruvananthapuram is
 mostly governed by oceanic aerosols, while during the winter &summer periods, it is of continental type.  The columnar
 loading atmospheric aerosols is measured through a multiwave length solar radiometer (MWR).  This is measure of total
 aerosol leading in this atmosphee.  Studies made over last 15 years show an increasing  trend in aerosol loading indicating an
 increase in environmental pollution.  Satellite data revealed intense advection of aerosols from the Indian continent to oceanic
 region especially during the winter/summer period.  During the monsoon period significant mineral dust is being transported
 over to the Arabian Sea sector from the Gulf region.  SPL is the nodal agency for the study of the regional distribution of
 aerosols over the continent using the MWR network of 13 stations under the ISRO-Geosphere-Biosphere Prgoramme
 (IGBP).  Using a high power IDAR, studies were carried out or tropospheric and stratospheric aerosols as well as on high
 altitude clouds.
67.       Atmospheric waves of periodicities and horizontal scales in the lower atmosphere propagate upwards playing a
 prominent role in the momentum and energy budget of the middle atmosphere, (the Atmospheric Dynamics) and in turn
 influence the weather and climate.  Making use of temperature and wind measurements using balloons and rockets (from
 TERLS & SHAR) along with LIDAR and RADAR measurements from TERLS & NMRF, the properties of these waves are
 being characterized.
68.       The Committee is of the opinion that since the findings of the Space Physics Laboratory have a direct bearing over the
 quantum of environmental pollution due to aerosol eroding in the immediate atmosphere over the biosphere of the earth and
 also its influential impact over the predictions of the weather pattern and climate pattern in the atmosphere, any conclusion of
 the findings could be submitted to the IMD under DST for a further study for controlling of air pollution and predicting
 weather and climate changes in the near future.
69.       The Secretary, Department of Space while responding to a query raised by the Chairman of the Committee about the

144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
 number of the obsolete satellites in space, sent by India and steps being taken to remove the satellites from orbit, explained
 that space debris is now worrying international community and norms are therefore, being evolved to remove them .  He
 further, stated that there are two options; first allowing the satellites to go into natural decay over the years or secondly to
 raise  the satellites from 600 km to 4200 km, which is a very expensive project to perform.
70.       The Committee suggests that appropriate steps should be taken by the Department to mitigate the possibility of damage
 to human life.
 AMMONIUM AND STRONTIUM PERCHLORATE POLLUTION AND CONTROL
71.       The Committee has been given to understand that Ammonium Perchlorate Experimental Plant (APEP) was established
 in 1979 at Aluva, Kerala with production capacity of 110 ton per annum. The Ammonium Perchlorate (AP) is being used as
 oxidizer in solid motors used for blasting  rockets into space.  The plant capacity was enhanced to 220 ton per annum during
 1998 for catering to the needs of motors being used in PSLV and GSLV.  This plant is functioning to its full capacity.
72.       The capacity of the plant was further increased to 440 ton per annum in 2003 towards meeting the increased demand of
 launches of PSLV and GSLV.  Additional production plant with a total capacity of 800 ton per annum is planned for meeting
 the future requirements of GSLV Mk III.  APEP is also manufacturing Strontium Perchlorate (SP) which, in solution form, is
 used as injectant in the Secondary injectant Thrust Vector Control System of Launch Vehicles for rockets.  APEP has so far
 made more than 3300 ton of AP and 50,000 liters of Strontium Perchlorate Injectant.
73.       In this connection, the Committee would like to mention that although Ammonium Perchlorate (AP) and Storntium
 Perchlorate (SP) are necessary as oxidizer in solid motors and for injectant for Thrust Vector in control system of Launch
 Vehicles for rockets,  necessary precautionary measures should be taken by Department of Space due to environmental
 pollution potential of AP & SP before using them as oxidizer and injectant in motors for rockets. 
74.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Space and assessing the progress of various
 programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs. 3148.00 crores,
 as sought by the Department of Space for the year 2005-2006, under Demand No. 89, may be approved.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS
1.         The Committee hopes that INSAT-4 series would make India self sufficient in the areas of telecommunication, Mobile
 Satellite Services and acquisition of Meteorological, Hydrological and Oceanographic data. It also hopes that these satellites
 would be successfully launched as per their schedule. (Para22)
2.         The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Departments for taking up the programme of micro-satellite exclusive for
 HAM radio services as this service has provided generous service to the community in the time of disaster and when other
 conventional means of communication had failed. The Committee recommends that Department should  coordinate with the
 Department of Science & Technology and Ministry of Human Resource Development for popularizing the use of HAM
 radios through training and introduction of Ham radio as a extra-curricular activity in schools and colleges .
                                                                                           (Para 24)
3.         The Committee hopes that by this programme all the local bodies, district offices and all people involved in planning at
 the rural areas would be connected resulting into dissemination of vital information. The Committee recommends that special
 focus should be given to issues related to self-employment and forming self-help groups  through them.  The Committee
 further recommends that the  information should be disseminated in local language and  in this endeavour impart necessary
 training to youth in rural areas to utilise the services that will be provided through VRCs and the government may take
 necessary steps to equip every village in the country with the  required equipment.                                                  (Para 28)
4.         The Committee is of the opinion that if better health services are to be provided to smaller towns and remote villages,
 there is an urgent need for establishment of telemedicine network in the country on a wider scale.  Moreover, at present the

144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
 medical community is not fully aware of the development in the field of telemedicine.  The Committee, therefore, feels that
 there is a need for widespread effort to create awareness amongst the doctors and the public for adopting and reaping the
 benefits of this new advancement.  Apart from this, Telemedicine should be introduced as a topic at the graduate
 level.                                                                                                    (para 33)
5.         The Committee commends the role of the Department in bringing high quality medical care to patients transcending
 the hindrances posed by distances and other geographical barriers.  It believes that this can be a boon for countries like India
 where the majority of  population lives in remote areas without access to even basic health care.  The Committee feels that as
 most of the patients in remote and rural areas are not able to get primary health care and especially in case of women where
 mortality quite is high during childbirth, the Committee recommends that the Department should strive to percolate the
 benefit of this programme to such section of society . 
(Para 34)
6.         The Committee is aware that with the development of telemedicine system, there is a possibility of the country facing
 medico legal issues arising out of the system.  As there is no framework available in the country to tackle such situation at
 present, the Committee strongly recommends evolving of a framework in this regard, which should not hamper the growth of
 telemedicine services in the country.            (Para 35)
7.         The Committee feels that the phase when India can become a major hub in air navigation and be able to operate air
 services from India, there is a greater need for superior space based navigation and as India is  placed at the axis of routes
 connecting Europe with Southeast Asia and  by having an indigenous Satellite-Based Regional GPS Augmentation System
 can gain both in terms of market and strategic importance.
(Para 38)
8.         The Committee feels that the success of this method would save a lot of costs for the nation as the single space capsule
 could be used again for different experiments.
(Para 43)
9.         The Committee feels that  inspite of possessing high resolution satellite imageries and sophisticated equipment we
 have failed to disseminate information regarding the onslaught of Tsunami waves in the eastern coast  of  India and have only
 been able to record the large scale devastation. The Committee observes that as India is home to many earthquake prone areas
 and the recent earthquake has given ample proof that Indian landmass is moving forward thus creating high stress zones in
 Himalayan regions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that accurate slope stability studies may be conducted  using
 space technology so as to understand the possible locations where landslides could occur in case of earthquakes . (Para 48)
 10.      The Committee in  its 129
th Report on Demands for Grants (2004-05) had suggested for fulfillment of some  scientific
 objectives as research perspective as a part of the Chandrayan-1 Mission.  The Committee would further like to recommend
 that  in addition to the existing moon mission objectives of the Department of Space, possibility of extraction of Helium-3
 from the Moon soil could also be examined.  It is expected to be the cleanest fuel for 21 st century fusion reactors because its
 reaction is efficient and at the same time produces low residual radioactivity. Helium 3 is deposited on the lunar regolith by
 solar winds. So far as extraction of the Helium 3 from lunar regolith  is concerned, which  has been stirred by collision with
 meteorites, Helium 3 is available at several meters depth of the lunar surface.  The Committee has been given to understand
 that the greatest concentration of Helium 3 will be found on the lunar maria.   Since it is extremely potent, non-polluting, with
 virtually no radioactive by-products, the Committee feels  that Helium 3 is the perfect fuel source for the current century.
 Moreover, Helium 3 fusion energy may be the key to future space exploration and settlement.                                       
                                     (Para 57)
11.       It is, however, clear from the above that the propulsion system mainly used for the rocket engines by the Department
 of Space, that is, liquid, solid,  auxiliary and cryogenic system,  involves the following problems:
The liquid hydrogen being used for cryogenic propellants is highly flammable.

144th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/144threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:09]
It produces invisible cold flame.
It is liable to produce large volume of explosive gas cloud sensitive to ignition due to high liquid vapour expansion.
Earth Storable Propellants are toxic in nature.
Hydrazine is also difficult to handle and is highly toxic.
Any exposure to human being is extremely dangerous and environmentally fatal.                                                
                                                             (Para 60)
12.       The Committee is of the opinion that  any use of these propulsion systems require elaborate safety measures in order to
 avoid any environmental disaster that may arise due to the nature of the systems being used by the Department of Space for
 putting rockets into space.                                                                                            (Para 61)
13.       The cryogenic propellants, especially liquid hydrogen is highly flammable and produces invisible cold flame.    Due to
 high liquid vapour expansion, it is liable to produce large volume of explosive cloud which is very sensitive to ignition.  The
 Committee, therefore, feels that before using cryogenic propellants very elaborate safety precaution are required to be taken
 since some of the earth storable propellants are toxic in nature and their exposure to human population can lead to serious
 environmental and biological consequences and, therefore, their level of exposure should be made limited and preventive
 steps should be taken  against high level exposure because it has disastrous consequences.  The Committee, therefore, feels
 that adequate safety precaution during storage, handling and servicing of liquid hydrogen, needs to be taken in order to avoid
 any occupational hazards that may arise in future.
(Para 63)
14.       The Committee is of the opinion that since the findings of the Space Physics Laboratory have a direct bearing over the
 quantum of environmental pollution due to aerosol eroding in the immediate atmosphere over the biosphere of the earth and
 also its influential impact over the predictions of the weather pattern and climate pattern in the atmosphere, any conclusion of
 the findings could be submitted to the IMD under DST for a further study for controlling of air pollution and predicting
 weather and climate changes in the near future.                                                             (Para 68)
15.       The Committee suggests that appropriate steps should be taken by the Department to mitigate the possibility of damage
 to human life.               (Para 70)
 16.      In this connection, the Committee would like to mention that although Ammonium Perchlorate (AP) and Storntium
 Perchlorate (SP) are necessary as oxidizer in solid motors and for injectant for Thrust Vector in control system of Launch
 Vehicles for rockets,  necessary precautionary measures should be taken by Department of Space due to environmental
 pollution potential of AP & SP before using them as oxidizer and injectant in motors for rockets.                                               
 (Para 73)