 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
May, 2013/ Vaisakha, 1935 (Saka) 
Web site: http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-Mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
 
   
  
TWO HUNDRED FORTIETH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 
(DEMAND NO. 85) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8th May, 2013) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8th May,, 2013) 
 
REPORT 
NO. 
240

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS  
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FORTIETH REPORT 
 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2013-2014) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY 
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY) 
(DEMAND NO. 85) 
 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 8TH MAY, 2013) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 8TH MAY, 2013) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI
 
MAY, 2013/VAISAKHA, 1935 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 


 
C O N T E N T S 
 
         PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE       (i) – (ii)   
2.     PREFACE                                                                                                                               (iii) 
3. ACRONYMS 
4. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                                             
 
●5. SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS  
 ●6. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE         
    
       
MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY,  
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS (2012-13) 
---------- 
1. Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy  –– Chairman  
 
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Anil H. Lad 
3. Smt. Maya Singh 
4. Shri M. Rama Jois 
5. Shri Alok Tiwari 
    6. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi 
7. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra 
   8. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian 
 9. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav 
10. Vacant 
 LOK SABHA 
11. Shri K.C. Singh "Baba"    
   12. Smt. Bijoya Chakravarty 
13. Shri Vincent H. Pala 
14. Vacant 
15. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde 
16. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase 
17. Dr. Ajay Kumar 
18. Shri O.S. Manian 
      19. Shri Dayanidhi Maran 
20. Shri Basori Singh Masram 
21. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel 
22. Smt. Kamla Devi Patle 
23. Shri Ramashanakar Rajbhar 
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy 
                                                
 
● To be appended at printing stage 
 
 
 Prof. M.S. Swaminathan ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 9th April, 2013. 
 Nominated w.e.f 9th January, 2013. 

25. Shri Yshvir Singh 
26. Smt. Supriya Sule 
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta 
28. Shri Joseph Toppo 
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava 
30. Shri Ramaknt Yadav 
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
    SECRETARIAT 
 Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary 
 Shri  Alok Chatterjee, Director 
 Shri  V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director  
Shri  Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director 
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer 
Preface  
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Pa rliamentary Standing Committee on Science & 
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been  authorised by the Committee to present the 
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Fortieth report  of the Committee. This Report 
deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2013-2014) of the Department of Science & 
Technology (Ministry of Science and Technology) (Demand No. 85). 
2.   In the meeting of the Committee held on the 16 th April, 2013, the Secretary and other Officers 
of the Department of Science & Technology gave  an overview of the various activities of the 
Department and the Members sought clarificati ons on various aspects of the performance of the 
Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants. 
3.   The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the 
clarifications sought by the Members and placing  before it the required material to enable the 
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Science & Technology. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted th e Report at its meeting held on the 7 th May, 
2013. 
 
 
NEW DELHI;  
May, 2013   
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
Chairman,
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests.
 
ACROYMNS 
DST  : Department of Science & Technology  
SERC  : Science & Engineering Research Council  
NSCTC   : National Council for Sc ience & Technology Communication  
NRDMS   : National Resources Data Management System  
NEB   : International Division, National Entrepreneurship Board  
NSTMIS.  : National Science and Technology Management Information System  
NATMO   : National Atlas and Th ematic Mapping Organisation  
SOI  : Survey of India  
RFD  : Result Framework Document  
BEST  : Building Educators for Science Teaching  
NGIS   : National Geospatial Information System  
                                                
 
 Nominated w.e.f. 1st May, 2013 

C-DAC  : Center for Development of Advance Computing  
INGO  : Indian Nation al GIS Organisation  
NAB   : National GIS Advisory Board  
HPGC  : High Power Governing Council  
GERD  : Gross Expenditure into R&D  
BEST  : Building Educators for Science Teaching  
SCF & CB  : Super Computing Facility and Capacity Building”  
IRHPA  : Intensification of Res earch in High Priority Areas  
FIST  : Fund for Infrastructure Strengthening of S&T,  
CURIE  : Consolidation of University  Research, Innovation and Excellence  
FIST  : Fund for Improvement of S&T infrastructure  
CURIE  : Consolidation of University  Research, Innovation and Excellence  
IF   : Impact Factor  
NCSTC    : National Council for Science & Technology Communication  
SEED   : Science for Equity Empowerment and Development  
NSTEDB  : National Science & Technology En trepreneurship Development Board  
SOI   : Survey of India  
NATMO  : National Atlas and Th ematic Mapping Organization  
GIS   : Geospatial Information system  
GPS  : Global Positioning System  
SHE  : Scholarship for Higher Education  
INSPIRE   : Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research  
SHE   : Scholarships for Science in Higher Education  
PURSE  : Promotion of University Research and Scientific Excellence  
DSSC  : Developed Prototype of  a dye-Sensitized Solar Cell  
FAIR  : Facility for Antip roton and Ion Research  
INO  : India-based Ne utrino Observatory  
TMT  : Thirty Metre Telescope  
LIGO  : Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave Observatory  
NLST  : National Large Solar Telescope  
      AORC  : Assured Opportunity for Research Careers   
REPORT 
INTRODUCTION 
The Ministry of Science and Technology was established in 1971 to formulate 
and implement Science and Technology polic ies, identify, and promote "frontline" 
research in science and technology infrastr ucture. The Ministry ha s three Departments, 
namely Department of Science & Tec hnology, Department of Biotechnology and 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Re search. Through Department of Science and 
Technology, the Ministry coordinates intra- governmental and international cooperation 
and provides funding for domestic institutions and research programs. The Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Re search is a technology tran sfer organization, and the 
Department of Biotechnology, runs a number of developmental laboratories. 
2. The following constitute the mandate of DST:-  
 Formulation of policy statements a nd guidelines on Science and Technology 
(S&T). 
 Promotion of new areas of scientific research. 
 Co-ordination of inter-Departmental S&T efforts. 
 Support basic and applied research in universities and other institutions. 

 International S&T Co-operation. 
 Support high quality research in autonom ous bodies where specialization ranges 
from advanced medical research materials to astronomy. 
 Catalyzing S&T interaction in societal  programmes, and entrepreneurship 
development.  
 Science popularization, communicati on and S&T Management Information 
System. 
 Promotion of Commercialization of home grown technology. 
 Support to technology development prog rammes, technology information and 
assessment. 
 Providing services in the areas of: 
(i) Surveying & Mapping  
(ii) Technology Development and Application  
3. ORGANISATIONAL SETUP 
3.1 The Department of Science & Technology is the nodal Department of the 
Ministry of Science and Technology.  The Or ganizational Structure of the Department 
has evolved over the years to re spond quickly to the issues relating to the promotion and 
development of Science & Technology in the country. Broadly, the organisational set up 
of the Department has been divided into Autonomous Institutes, Scientific Groups, 
Technology Development Board, Scientific Services besides the Administration and 
Integrated Finance divisions. Ther e are 19 Autonomous Institutes and 5 
Science/Engineering Professional bodies wh ich are working in diverse areas for the 
promotion of Science and Technology. In addition, one new autonomous body viz. 
National Centre for Molecular Material  Rese arch, Thiruvanathapuram has been recently 
set up and National Innovation Foundation, Ahmedabad which was earlier a ‘Corpus 
Funded’ Financial Institute  has been taken over by the Department  as fully funded 
autonomous Research Institute. The Scientific Groups inter-alia consists of the Science 
& Engineering Research Council (SERC), Na tional Council for Science & Technology 
Communication (NSCTC), National Resources  Data Management System (NRDMS), 
International Division, Nati onal Entrepreneurship Board (NEB), National Science and 
Technology Management Information System (NSTMIS). The Scientific Services has 
two subordinate offices, viz., National Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organisation 
(NATMO) and Survey of India (SoI) under its administrative control. 
3.2 The detailed budget allocation of the De partment of  Science and Technology, for 
the year 2013-2014 was considered by the Department-related Committee on Science & 
Technology, Environment & Forests on the 16
th April, 2013. 
4. OUTLAY PROPOSED AND OUTLAY APPROVED FOR THE XII FIVE 
YEAR PLAN 
4.1 The Department had proposed an outlay of  . 31,550 crores for the XII Five Year 
Plan, against which the approved outlay was .  21,596 crores, thus registering a shortfall 
of . 9954 crores i.e. 31.54% less than the proposed outlay.   
4.2 A Chart showing the projected and approved outlay for XII Five Year Plan is 
given below:- 

 
     Projected proposed Outlay and Outlay approved  during the    Twelfth Plan 
(2012-17) 
                                                                     . In crores
Sl. No. Name of the 
Scheme/Programmes 
Projected 
proposed Outlay 
for 12th Plan 
(2012-17)  
Outlay Approved 
for 12th Plan 
(2012-17)  
1 Research & Development 
Support  2695 
1200 
2 Technology Development 
Programme  1725 1500 
3 S&T Programme for socio-
economic development 1505 800 
4 International Cooperation 675 500 
5 State Science and Technology 
Programme 590 350 
6 
Modernization of Mapping 
Organizations (SOI & 
NATMO) 
400 400 
7 Autonomous Institutions & 
Professional Bodies 4900 3700 
8 Synergy projects (O/o Pr. 
Scientific Adviser) 120 100 
9 Drugs & Pharmaceuticals 
Research 300 400 
10 Information Technology 1000 10 
11 National Mission on Nano-
Science & Nano-Technology 1500 650 
12 Mega Facilities for Basic 
Research 4275 750 
13 Science and Engineering 
Research Board 50 3796 
14 Policy Research Cell 350 50 
15 Disha Programme for Women 
in Science 950 390 
16 Alliance & R & D Mission 5215 3200 
17 Subtotal 26250 17796 
18 
Super Computing Facility and 
Capacity  
Building 
5300 
 
 
2000 
 
 
19  National Geographical  
Information System 
10,600 
 1800 
Total  31550 21596 
 
 

4.3 The Committee notes that while the Planning Commission has accepted in toto  
the outlays projected by the Department pertaining to Modernisation of Mapping 
Organisation (SoI and NATMO), it has also substantially increased allocation to Drugs & 
Pharmaceutical Research by 100 crores.  For Science and Engineering Research Board, 
the approved outlay has been phenomenally in creased to   3796 cror es as against the 
projected demand of  only  50 crores. 
4.4 The Committee, however, finds that ther e is a gap of  9964.00 Crores between the 
total demand projected by the Department and the outlay approved. The Committee notes 
that allocation to the Department has been toned down by near ly 32% and feels that such 
drastic reduction in the alloca tion may lead to re-prioritiz ation of allocations among the 
different schemes by the Department specially for such important and crucial schemes as 
Research and Development Support, Mega  Facilities for Basic Research, Disha 
Programme for Women in Science, etc.  
4.5 Considering India’s aspirations to pos ition itself among the top five global 
scientific powers by 2020 and the immense potential of science &technology for societal 
benefits, the Committee is of the opinion that adequate funds should be allocated to the 
Department.  The Committee therefore, recommends that the Planning Commission 
should provide additional funds, if so required by the Department. 
5. TREND OF UTILISATION IN THE LAST THREE YEARS 
5.1 A comparison of the B.E., R.E allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by 
the Department for the years 2010-11, 2011-12 and 2012-13 is given below:  
   ( in crores) 
Year BE RE actuals 
2010-11 2376.50 2376.95 2280.77 
2011-12 2742.64 2615.14 2521.66 
2012-13 2882.86 2559.83 2262.71* 
* (as on 22nd February, 2013) 
5.2 After an examination of B.E. and R.E.  allocations vis-à-vis actuals for the 
financial year 2010-11, 2011- 12 and 2012-13 (up to 22 nd February, 2013) of the 
Department of Science & Technology, it is found that underutilisation of approved outlay 
is a chronic problem with the Department.  
5.3 In the financial year 2010-11, the total a llocation including Plan and Non-Plan at 
B.E. was   2376.50 Crores and R.E.  2376.95 Crores but actua l utilisation by the 
Department was only 2280.77 Crores which is  96.18 Crores less than the RE 
allocation.  Similarly, the total B.E. outlay of  2742.64 Crores for the financial year 
2011-12 was reduced to 2615.14 Crores at the R.E. Stage,  while the actual utilisation 
was to the extent of   2521.66 Crores which is  93.58 Crores less than the RE 
allocation.   
5.4 In comparison to this, for the year 2012- 13, out of the total Plan BE outlay of  
2477.00 crores which was reduced to  2175.00 crores at R.E. stage, only  1911.31 
Crores was utilised by the Department till 22.2.2013.    
5.5 The Committee observes that the compara tive statement depicted on the previous 
page clearly indicates that though funds had been allocated to the Department, it failed to 
optimally utilise them.  This also provides the Planning Commission with an easy excuse 
to resort to cut in the proposed demand of the Department.  
5.6 The Department must keep this fact in mind that budgetary resources are very 
scarce and a priority is given to the scien tific Departments in th e hope of better use of 
funds, both qualitative and quantitative. It  is, noteworthy, that Department’s 
underutilisation of allocated resources for thr ee years in a row does not present a healthy 

picture of the Department.  It ra ther reflects upon its performance.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that every possible e ffort should be made to utilise the 
budgetary allocation optimally.  The Co mmittee finds that the phenomenon of 
underutilisation persists despite the claim of the Department of having a very sound 
and robust monitoring mechanism.  The Co mmittee is constrained to observe that 
the monitoring mechanism of the Department  appears to be strong, on paper only, 
as it has failed to produce satisfactory and desired result of ensuring full utilisation 
of allocated resources, and therefore recommends that the Department should 
further strengthen its monitoring mechanism and make it more robust to ensure full 
and effective utilisation of allocated funds.   
6. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2013-14 
6.1 The Committee has been informed that the Department has been allocated a Plan 
outlay of  2777.00 crores against the projected demand of . 3357 crores, for the year    
2013-14. 
PROJECTED AND APPROVED OUTLAY FOR 2013-14 
.In crores                              
Sl. 
No. Name of the Scheme/Programme 
Projected 
Outlay for 
Annual 
Plan 
Outlay 
Approved 
for Annual 
Plan  
1 Research & Development Support   270 225 
2 Technology Development Programme  175 128 
3 S&T Programme for socio-economic development 110 135 
4 International Cooperation 110 90 
5 State Science and Technology Programme 90 30 
6 Modernization of Mapping Organizations (SoI & 
NATMO) 50 35 
7 Autonomous Institutions & Professional Bodies 760 711 
8 Synergy projects (O/o Pr . Scientific Adviser) 20 15 
9 Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Research 45 30 
10 Information Technology 5 1 
11 National Mission on Nano-Sc ience & Nano-Technology 110 85 
12 Mega Facilities for Basic Research 130 50 
13 Science and Engineering Research Board 575 534 

14 Policy Research Cell 10 10 
15 Disha Programme for Women in Science 70 53 
16 Alliance & R & D Mission 460 345 
17 Subtotal 2990 2477 
18 Super Computing Facility and Capacity Building 120 100 
19 National Geographical Information System 247 200 
  Total Plan Outlay 3357 2777 
 Non Plan Outlay  407.27 
 Total Allocation  3184.27 
6.2 An analysis of the above chart shows that cuts have been imposed in the proposed 
demands cutting across all schemes, and there exists a huge gap between projected 
demand and outplay allocated to the Depart ment under some of the schemes such as 
Mega Facilities for Basic Research, Stat e Science and Technology Programme,etc.  
When the Committee enquired as to whether the funds allocate d were sufficient to carry 
out the activities of the Department, it was st ated that the allocation for the Department 
had been kept at the BE 2012-13 level fo r its on-going activitie s and commitments. 
Further, some of the programmes under the Technology Development and programme for 
Climate Change and Public Private Partnershi p (PPP) for R&D were likely to suffer due 
to insufficient fund allocation.  
6.3 The Committee feels that such  cuts would lead to shor tage of resources and may 
adversely affect the progress of some of th e programmes. The Committee, further, notes 
that these disturbing cuts have been impos ed when the new Science, Technology and 
Innovation Policy, 2013 has been launched with much fanfare.  While on one hand, the 
Government has given a healthy sign of promoting science and innovations in the 
country, it had not shown faith on the scien tific Departments like DST on the other by 
imposing cuts on its proposed allocations.  The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that adequate funds should be made available to the Depa rtment at the RE stage by 
the Planning Commission based on its requirements.   
7. Science, Technology and Innovation Policy 2013 
7.1 Department of Science and Technol ogy is primarily entrusted with the 
responsibility to formulate Policies, their implementation, identification and promotion of 
thrust areas of research in different sect ors of science and technology and assessment of 
science and technology activities in the country.   
7.2 The Department formulated Technology Policy Statement in 1983 and two 
decades later, Science and Technology Policy was introduced in 2003.  New Science 
Technology and Innovation Policy has been initia ted this year by the Department which 

was released by the Prime Minister at the 100 th Session of Indian Science Congress at 
Kolkata.  Some of the key elements of the policy include:- 
 Promoting the spread of scientific tempers amongst all sections of society. 
 Enhancing skill for applications of science among the young from all social strata. 
 Establishing would class infrastructure for R&D for gaining global leadership in 
some select frontier areas of science. 
 Positioning India among the top five global scientific powers by 2020 and 
 Fostering resource-optimized, cost-effective innovations across size and 
technology domains.  
7.3 When the Committee enquired about th e performance of Science & Technology 
Policy 2003, the Department stated that Science and Technology Policy 2003 stressed on 
raising the quality of life of the people of the country, particularly  of the disadvantaged 
sections of society, by creating wealth fo r all; making India globally competitive; 
utilising natural resources in a sustaina ble manner, protecting the environment and 
ensuring national security, etc.   
7.4 The Department further informed that  since the enunciation of the Science & 
Technology Policy 2003 several new programmes and schemes have been introduced to 
vigorously foster scientific research in universities and other academic, scientific and 
engineering institutions; to attract the brightest young persons to pursue careers in science 
and technology by conveying a sense of excite ment concerning the advancing frontiers, 
and by creating suitable employment opportunities for them.  
7.5 The Department also informed that th e industrial R&D investment grew by 250% 
and the sales by 200% between 2005 and 201 0.  The gross budgetary support for the 
science and technology sector has significantly  increased during the last decade.  The 
impact of such increase is becoming evident.    Another significant achievement of STI 
Policy, 2003 is now India ranks ninth globally in the number of scientific publications 
and 12th in the number of patents filed.  Th e Composite Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 
global share has increased from 1.8% in 2001 to 3.5% in 2011. 
7.6 Focus Areas of STI Policy, 2013 
 The main advantage of STI Policy,  2013 over Science & Technology Policy,2003 
is that the former seeks to integrate innova tion, as an instrument of Policy which was 
hitherto not  accorded due importance,  with Science & Technology.  Science, technology 
and innovation can though exist separately on their own in disconnected spaces, it is their 
integration that leads to new value cr eation.  Innovation thus implies Science & 
Technology 
Based solutions that are successfully deployed in the economy or society. 
7.7 The Department informed that with th e STI Policy, 2013, the Department’s focus 
would be on  preparing statement for aspi rational goals; to focus on innovation for 
application of knowledge for wealth and va lue creation; to adopt evidence-based 
approaches for policy development; to enrol stakeholders through wi de consultations; to 
focus on Public Private Partnership for attractin g private sector investment into R&D; to 
strike a balance in R&D priorities- excellence and relevance; to approach by integrating 
science, research and  innovation system for high technology  led path as a specific policy 
goal; and to include measurements and accountability as indicators for investments. 
7.8 Department further added that the Gove rnment has taken some other important 
measures to encourage Research and Devel opment in the country namely: induction of 
new and attractive fellowships; strengthe ning infrastructure for Research and 
Development (R&D); and encouraging public-private R&D partnerships, etc.  

7.9 The Committee understands that STI Policy, 2013 is a Policy document which 
draws a broad roadmap which inter-alia includes use of science & technology for the 
benefit of people and advancement of India as a global scientific power.  These are 
undoubtedly noble objectives but to make them laudable the Department needs to pursue 
them with all vigour and earnestness in order to ensure that they do not remain  only on 
paper but are translated into reality.  
7.10 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the key goals enshrined in the 
Policy document should be realised within the given timeframe particularly the goal 
of positioning India amongst the top five global scientific powers by 2020 and the 
Department must make all out efforts to achieve these goals.   
8. MAJOR PROGRAMMES/SCHEMES OF THE DEPARTMENT 
The Department apprised the Committ ee that besides the ongoing programmes 
new programmes/schemes are proposed to be taken up during the XII Five Year Plan by 
the Department include: Building Educator s for Science Teaching (BEST), PPP for 
R&D, and Climate Change Programmes. Th e XII Plan also includes two nationally 
coordinated programmes for “Super Computing Facility and Capacity Building” (SCF & 
CB) and “National Geographical Informati on System” (NGIS). For implementation of 
SCF&CB and NGIS, the Department of Scie nce and Technology has been allocated  
100 crores and  200 crores respectively, in  the B.E. 2013-14.  The Details of the 
ongoing and newly introduced programmes are as under: 
ONGOING PROGRAMMES NEW PROGRAMMES  
Research & Development Support Policy Research Cell 
Technology Development Programme “Disha” for women in Science 
programme 
International Cooperation Alliance and R&D Mission; 
State Science and Technology Programme Super Computing Facility & Capacity 
Building,   
Modernization of Mapping Organizations (SoI & 
NATMO) 
National Geographic Information 
System 
Autonomous Institutions & Professional Bodies  
Synergy projects   
Information Technology  
Drugs & Pharmaceuticals Research  
National Mission on Nano-Science & Nano-
Technology 
 
Science and Engineering Research Board  
Mega Facilities for Basic Research  
9. RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT  
9.1 The Department through this scheme ai ms to intensify the R&D promotional 
activities through i nnovative programmes such as Intens ification of Research in High 
Priority Areas (IRHPA), Fund for Improvement of S&T Infrastructure in Universities and 
Higher Educational Institutions (FIST), FA ST Track Young Scientist’s R&D programme 
and Prestigious Fellowships like J.C Bose, Ramanujan and  Raman, etc. 
9.2 Research & Development support provided by the Department can divided in two 
broad heads firstly Research & Developm ent Support and the Science & Engineering 
Research Board (SERB) .Coming to the budgetary support, the Department informed that 
an indicative allocation of . 4996.0 crores  was made for Research & Development 

support including . 3796.0 crores for SERB in the XII Five Year Plan. For BE 2013-14, 
allocations to the tune of   226.19 crores  and  534.00 crores respectively have been 
made for these two schemes. The total propos ed  allocation  to R&D support in 2013-14 
is thus   760.19 crores as against  716.5 crores in 2012-13 which is .43.69 crores 
higher than last year’s allocation. 
9.3 The budgetary allocation for SERB has b een seeing an increasing trend over the 
years.  While allocation to SERB was increa sed from .300.00 crores at B.E. 2011-12 to 
.400.00 crores at B.E. 2012-13 it went up to .534.00 crores at B.E. 2013-14 i.e. an 
increase of 134.00 crores over the last year allocation. The Department, while justifying 
higher allocation for SERB in 2013-14, stated th at the SERB, which started its operation 
in mid 2011-12 become fully operational this year. Several the programmes such as 
competitive grants for project proposals submitted by individual investigators under Extra 
Mural Research; Intensification of Research in High Priority Areas  (IRPHA), Fast Track 
Young Scientist project; fellowshi p programmes, etc. are now in full operation.  Besides 
several new and innovative programmes are under implementation in the XII Plan. 
9.4 While the Committee enquired about m echanism and process adopted by the 
Science and Engineering Res earch Board (SERB) to award competitive grants, the 
Department informed that the research proposals received under the competitive grant 
scheme of SERB were subjected to peer review process which involves at least two levels 
of appraisals. Followed by brie f presentation before the designated Programme Advisory 
Committee (PAC), a decision was taken accordi ngly within a stipulat ed time. The Board 
thus awarded the competitive grant based on the recommendation of the Advisory 
Committees.  
9.5 The Committee finds that Science & Engineering Research Board (SERB) 
has been formed after taking into cons ideration the best practices and funding 
models of developed countries including National Science Foundation of USA while 
adopting a research model which suited to Indian setting. The Committee while 
noting that research proposals for competitiv e grants are subjected to two levels of 
appraisals, expects that the Department shall  implement the Basic Research 
Programme efficiently based on the princi ples of transparenc y, impartiality and 
ethical considerations to raise the standards of Basic research in the country.  
10. STATE OF R&D INVESTMENTS    
10.1 The Department of Science and T echnology is running four schemes for 
extending support for infrastructure st rengthening of R&D namely: Fund for 
Infrastructure Strengthening of S&T (FIST), Special packages for regional balancing of 
FIST reach, Consolidation of University Research, Innovation and Excellence (CURIE) 
for women-only universities a nd Sophisticated Analytical Instrumentation Facilities. 
Besides, DST under bilateral S& T cooperation agreements also  supports institutions that 
compete through quality proposals for establis hing science-bridges with institutions in 
other countries such as United Kingdom.   
10.2 As regards the state of R&D investments, the Department stated that, if India has 
to emerge as one of the top five knowledge powers in the world by 2020, right sizing of 
R&D investments while simultaneously br oadening the R&D base with stronger 
participation of the private sector would be necessary.  
10.3 When the Committee enquired about the reasons behind insufficient growth in 
R&D expenditure from the last Scien ce & Technology Policy 2003, the Department’s 
reply was vague. It stated, “Gross Expenditure  into R&D has gone up considerably since 
the enunciation of the Science & Technology Polic y 2003.  Whereas the Gross 
Expenditure into R&D as of 2003 was estimated at US $ 12 billion (after adjustments to 

Purchase Power Parity), currently the corre sponding figures are mo re than double of 
2003 investments.’’  
10.4 It is evident from the reply that no cl ear cut figure for R&D investment in 2013 
was provided by the Department. In absence of current figures of Gross Expenditure into 
R&D the Committee finds it difficult to quantify the achievement of STP 2003. 
10.5 The Department stated that though Indi a’s R& D investment as percentage of 
GDP may seem small in terms of Gross Expend iture, there is a significant increase in 
investment since the coming up of  Scien ce & Technology Policy, 2003. Benefits of such 
investments are becoming evident with improve ments in relative ranking of India with 
respect to publications from 13 in 2003 to 9
th in 2010 and perhaps better than 9 th in 2012 
and from 25th in patent generation in 2003 to XII in 2010.  
10.6 Informing about efforts made for increas ing R&D Expenditure in the country, the 
Department added that it aims at increasing the total R&D expenditure as percentage of 
GDP to 2 percent by the end of XII Five Year Plan period from the current level of less 
than 1 percent. Actual expenditure of the G overnment in real terms is more than double 
during the XI Five Year Plan period in comparison to the  X Five Year Plan.  Allocation 
for the six science Departments for the XII Five  Year Plan is about 160 percent of the XI 
Five Year Plan allocation. These trends repr esent a significant increase in deployment of 
resources considering the overall resources of the country. The Government proposes to 
achieve the targeted goal during the XII Five  Year Plan period through various measures 
such as policy advocacy, increase in invest ment in R&D including industry and strategic 
sectors, expansion of basic science infras tructure, aligning S&T to development needs 
like food and health care, evolving new models of public-private partnership in scientific 
research, encouraging international collaborat ion etc. in the whole development process 
in that particular region.  
10.7 Of late, concerns have also been raised  to increase private s ector investment in 
R& D where India lags much behind China. If we make a comparison of the comparative 
contribution made by the private sector vis- à-vis contribution made by the public sector 
for  R &D programmes in India and the world as per ‘Research and Development 
Expenditure: A concept Paper published in De loitte, July 2011, the contribution made by 
the private sector vis-à-vis public sector fo r R&D programmes for different countries is 
as under:  
Country  Private R&D Expenses 
% 
Government R&D 
Expenses 
China  70 30 
USA  65 35 
Korea & Japan  75 25 
India  20-25 75-80 
10.8 The Committee enquired about the effort s made by the Department for enhancing 
the contribution of the private sector in R & D. In response thereto, Department stated 
that the private sector engagement in R&D is presently small except in a few sectors such 
as pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals, and automotives mainly due to small size of the 
Indian industrial firms, hi gh risks, low appropriability  and disincentives created by high 
transaction costs and weak R&D fiscal support. 
10.9 The Department informed that in order to address few of these bottlenecks and to 
encourage the private sector to take up and st ep up its R&D activities a number of steps  
have been taken by them to address the concern which aim to enhance the contribution of 
the private sector for instan ce enlarging R&D base and invi te greater investments using 
global data base; PPP model for R&D for pub lic and social good, preparation of a 

concept note with regard to the PPP in R& D and clean energy   as a part of sub-
committee of PM’s Council on Trade and Indus try leaders, to study and assess the 
investments of private sector in R&D sect or; devising new modes and mechanisms to 
draw a comprehensive picture of R&D landscape in India by way of making more precise 
estimates of national investments in the R& D that includes the  R&D contributions of 
MNCs as well. 
10.10 The Committee feels that India is lagging far behind ot her countries of the world 
in respect of R & D contribution made by the Private sector.  In comparison to developed 
countries of the world, India’s R&D funding from non-government sector is abysmally 
low.  Even in comparison to our neighbour ing country China, we  lag far behind. The 
percentage contribution of private sector and public sect or to R&D contribution in India 
& China is nearly in reverse order.  In Ch ina private sector cont ribution is nearly 70 
percent of R&D expenses while in India it is Government which makes 75 to 80 percent 
contribution.   
10.11 The Committee feels that in order to e nhance investment in R&D, the private 
sector’s contribution needs to be significantly augmented.  The Committee had in its 
223
rd report emphasised on the need to enhan ce private sector contribution to R&D 
by offering incentives, forming partnership,  etc.  The Department in their Action 
Taken Replies endorsed the view of the Co mmittee but the desired result still eludes 
us. The Committee feels that somewhere we have  failed in our efforts to woo private 
sector and not much has been achieved even in the second year of the XII Five Year 
Plan period.  
10.12 The Committee recommends that Ministry  must devise innovative ways to 
substantially increase private sector investme nt in R&D in order to make it at par 
with the investment of private sector in  R&D in other develo ped countries.  The 
Government may even consider making cont ribution of the private sector in R&D 
mandatory taking a cue from South Korean experience which reversed South 
Korean government’s burden in Science & t echnology Sector in a decade with a 
series of laws.  The Committee, further, recommends that Government should, in all 
situations ensure that investment in R&D gets enhanced to atleast 2% of Gross 
Domestic Product at the earliest so as to realise the goal of becoming a scientific 
super power by 2020. 
11. REJUVENATION OF RESEARCH IN THE UNIVERSITY SECTOR. 
11.1 At a time when research in the univers ity appears to be declining because of 
neglecting of university teachi ng and Research and preferen ce to premiere specialised 
research institutions, the Committee desired to know from the Department the steps taken 
to rejuvenate the quality of university Research.  
11.2 Replying to the query of the Committee, the Department informed that it had 
taken some significant initiatives to improve th e quality of Research in the XI five year 
Plan which are continuing in the current Plan as well. Some significant measures taken to 
increase institutional capacity for Research are: 
a) Promotion of University Research and Scientific Excellence" (PURSE):-  PURSE 
is a Research Incentive Grant program for re juvenation of research at the University 
Sector initiated by the Department of Science and Technology.  
b)  Consolidation of University Resear ch, Innovation and Excellence (CURIE):- for 
women-only universities and Sophisticated Analytical Instrumentation Facilities. 
c) Fellowship Schemes for instance J C Bose fellowship, Ramanujam fellowship, etc 
d) Innovation in scientific pursuit for inspired research (INSPIRE)-  

launched in December 2008, this Program has five components for example faculty, 
scholarships, etc. All  components have been initiated in phases and fellowship is being 
disbursed. 
e) Establishment of six new institutes and 
f) Setting up of National Centres for advanced Research. 
11.3 The Committee in its 209 th Report had also expressed serious concern about the 
decreasing contribution of the Universitie s as regards publicat ion of research 
papers/journals over the years from an ini tial 50 % to current figure of 15 %, which 
essentially was not a favourable indicatio n so far as performance of Science & 
Technology in the country was concerned.  The Committee had recommended that the 
Department should evolve a more effectiv e incentive mechanism to encourage the 
Universities to augment their contribution in terms of publications of quality research 
papers/journals. 
11.4 The Secretary while deposing before  the Committee informed that their 
Department's initiative for rejuvenation of University Research has succeeded in 
increasing the quality of research being done in the universities. He added that based on 
the hircsh-index which is a measure of the citation frequency of publications, an incentive 
grant scheme was designed and awards were presented by the Hon'ble Prime Minister at 
a public function in recognition of performance.  
11.5 In order to implement the program, a st udy on "Status of India in Science and 
Technology" by the National Institute of Scie nce, Technology and Development Studies 
(NISTADS), New Delhi was commissioned employing the Scopus International Database 
for 10 year period  i.e. 1996-2006. The study covering entire India  revealed that 35 
institutions together contributed to nearly 50% of India’s publication share. Among them, 
14 were universities. After a gap of two years, the same study was repeated by NISTADS 
for 1998-2008. While 1998-2008 data revealed th at 44 Universities ha d qualified for the 
PURSE award with the same criteria. PU RSE scheme provides Research Incentive 
Grants of the size  30 crores  (for h-index above 50),  15 crores (for h-index in the 
range of 40 to 49,  9 crores (for h-index in the range of 30 to 39) and  6 crores (for h-
index in the range of 25 to 29)  depending on h-indices of the universities as measured by 
the citation frequencies of scientific publications.   
11.6 The following table shows that there is a trend of 
rejuvenation of Research in University Sector.  
Period H-
index>80 
H-index 
50-79 
H-index 40-
49 
H-index  
30-39 
H-index 
25-29 
Total
96-06 - 3 6 25 2 14 
98-08 - 5 8 25 6 44 
00-10 3 11 20 24 8 66 
 Source- presentation before the Committee 
11.7 It was further informed by the Secret ary, Department of Science and technology 
that if a comparison of  profile of average c itations per paper by the 
universities/institutions from 200409 is made.  19 institutions   are  above the national 
citation average of 3.47 per paper out of which 7  are universities namely Universities of 
Hyderabad, Punjab, Delhi, Pune, Guruna nak Dev, Madras and Jawahar Lal Nehru 
University.  Out of top 50 institutions in publication sector 23 are universities.   
11.8 The Committee takes note of studies  conducted by NISTADS in 2008, 2010 and 
2012, according to which, the share of universiti es in top 100 institutes contributing to 
total volume of publication ha s been increasing and 7 univ ersities spread across the 
country are above the national citation average.  Not only that performance of the 

Universities in Hirsch Index has gone up  but the number of PURSE beneficiary 
universities qualifying incentive grants has also gone up to 44 thereby improving their 
performance.  
11.9 However, situation at the ground level i.e. in the states and backward areas of the 
country has not improved very much. Most of the aforementioned Universities are in the 
major centres of the country. Our Universities and colleges should ideally do both 
teaching and Research but unfortunately in India the task of research has been handed 
over to the Research Institutions and Nationa l Laboratories and number of such Research 
Institutes is going up with every passing year. As per an estimate, only 15-20%  of Indian 
universities and colleges are doing both resear ch and teaching, rest of them are doing 
only teaching.  
11.10 The Committee takes note of considera ble improvement in the performance 
of some major universities in their cont ribution to research and publications. The 
Committee is, however, of the view that we shall have to put in  tremendous efforts 
to make the quality of teaching and research  in our Institutions and Universities at 
par with the best in the world.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Department should provide greater focus on the quality of teaching and research in 
our Institutions and Universities. 
11.11 In addition, the Committee also reco mmends that the Department should 
also  provide support to improve the quality of research and teaching in the 
universities/Higher education Institutions based in backward and far-flung, remote 
areas of the country and bring them at par with Research Institutions/Research 
Laboratories of the country by the end of XII Five Year Plan.  
12. SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PROGRAMMES FOR  SOCIO-
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT 
12.1 Science and Technology Programmes for Socio-economic Development are being 
implemented through S&T institutions, un iversities and S&T based voluntary 
organizations under various schemes.  
12.2 The Department informed that for budge t outlay purposes, many schemes such as 
S&T Entrepreneurship Development, Science & Society Programme, S&T 
Communications & Population, etc. which were hitherto separate Plan schemes have now 
been merged and renamed as S&T Programme for Socio Economic Development. The 
Committee was informed that the allocation for 'S&T Programmes for socio-economic 
Development' has been increased substant ially from .85.00 crores in B.E. 2012-13 to 
.135.00 crores in B.E. 2013-14 i.e. an increase of .50.00 crores. 
12.3 During the year 2012-13, 34 location specifi c projects were supported at the pilot 
scale in farm as well as non farm sector ; management and regeneration of natural 
resources with value addition for Income  generation - aiming towards providing 
affordable technology solutions for better livelihood opportunities and improved quality 
of life. For making wider technology impact, an integrated development programme on 
resource management and livelihoods generati on was implemented exclusively in 25 SC 
dominated villages in Madhya Pradesh, Ma harashtra, Gujarat,  Rajasthan, Andhra 
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Kerala. Development of workable technology packages like 
energy-efficient rural jaggery-making system s; briquetting technology package using 
invasive biomass and fuel efficient stov es with reduced fuel wood consumption; 
development of energy efficient cooking devi ces; small scale unit for extraction of non-
edible oil at village level;  water manage ment in difficult areas.  Artificial glacier 
technology in Leh-Ladakh region;  setting up of small scal e extraction unit of virgin 
coconut oil in Nicobar island and development of value added products from fresh mahua 

(Madhuca indica ) flowers to generate employment in  the rural areas etc. are other 
tangible deliverables of the programme showing potential to benefit society at large and 
SC & ST population in particular.  
12.4 In this endeavour, a long term Core gran t extended to 21 science based  voluntary 
groups under societal programme of DST has enabled them to do innovative and adaptive 
R & D in rural and other disadv antaged areas thus providing  technological solutions at 
the village level  for livelihood generation & so cietal benefits including Scheduled Caste  
&  Scheduled Tribes  population in their geographical coverage area.  
12.5 The Committee feels that in a country such as ours, where a large section of 
the population lives in abject poverty, te chnological achievements made in the 
laboratories would be more  valuable it these also address the cause of the 
underprivileged masses and help in alleviat ing their poverty.  In this context, the 
Committee appreciates the programme undertaken by the Department for 
livelihood generation and improving the quality of life of people at large particularly 
the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes  by providing affordable technology 
solutions and other scientific interventions.   
12.6 The Committee, however, would like to see such benefits extended further to 
cover more and more scheduled castes  and scheduled tribes population and 
accordingly, recommends that the Depa rtment should further expand this 
programme.  
13. MODERNISATION OF MAPPING ORGANIZATIONS (SoI AND 
NATMO) 
13.1 The National Atlas and Thematic Mappi ng Organization set up in 1956 primarily 
aims at preparing National Atlas of India.  Subsequently, its scop e and activities were 
extended to new fields of geographical research, themat ic mapping covering all the 
academic and applied aspects of geography and allied subject.   
13.2 Survey of India, the National Survey  and Mapping Organisation of the country 
under the Department of Science & Tech nology, is the oldest organisation of 
Government of India, set up in 1767.  As the Nation’s principal mapping agency, SoI 
bears special responsibility to ensure that  the country’s domain is  explored and mapped 
suitably to provide base maps  for expeditious and integrated development and that all 
resources contribute their full  measure to the progress, pros perity and security of our 
country now and for generations to come.  Th e Department is undertaking infrastructure 
modernization and technical skill developmen t of Survey of India (SoI) and National 
Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organi zation (NATMO) under the programme 
“Modernization of Mapping Organizations”.  
13.3 So far as the Budgetary allocations are concerned, the Committee finds that 
programme for Modernisation of Mapping Or ganisations was allocated   350.86 Crores 
at B.E. 2012-13 which was reduced to Rs 333.0 7 crores at R.E. 2012- 13 i.e. a reduction 
of  17.79 crores. However, the Department could utilise an amount of  276.36 crores 
by 22
nd February,2013 thus showing underutilisa tion of 66.71crores.  At B.E. 2013-14, 
allocation has been incr eased to .348.62 crores i.e. an increase of about 15.55 crores 
over R.E. 2012-13, despite the fact that both SoI and NATMO failed to fully utilize the 
B.E. allocation. When asked about the reas ons for underutilisation of fund, the 
Department replied that the curtailment of funds at RE 2012-2013 stage was mainly 
attributable to 10% cut imposed on Non-Plan  expenditure by Ministry of Finance.  
Further, from the ‘Salaries’ head of SoI, .11.47 crores was curtailed due to non-
proportionate expenditure.   Hence the allocati ons of both organizations were reduced by 
.17.79 crores at R.E. 2012-13.   

13.4 The Committee desired to know as to  what measures were taken for 
modernization of SoI and NATMO.  Informin g about the schemes for modernization of 
NATMO & SoI, the Department informed th at during the financial year 2013-14, both 
SoI and NATMO proposed to initiate certain schemes and measures for modernization.  
Survey of India proposed to take up the following Plan Schemes : 
(i) Formation of Geospatial Data set fo r National Geospatial Information System 
(NGIS) 
(ii) Redefinition of India Vertical Datum 
(iii) Creation of National Topogra phical Database on 1:10,000 scale 
(iv) Modernization of Tidal Gauge Network 
13.5 Through these Schemes, efforts would be made to mode rnize/upgrade the 
equipments, hardware and software availa ble in SoI; Introduce new technological 
innovation in the field e.g. Advance methods  of Data Capturing, Digital Aerial 
Photography, Digital Photogramme tric Processing, Data storage and Dissemination, etc.  
Capacity building of the human resources by  upgradation of techni cal skills; and up 
gradation and modernisation of the office buildings and other estates. 
13.6 NATMO proposed to mould its activities towards the path forward into the Geo-
spatial space by way of using geo-spatial te chniques in preparation of Micro, macro and 
meso-level maps in NATMO.  Software, Ha rdware, Computer peripherals, Geospatial 
Information system (GIS), Global Positio ning System (GPS) gadgets were being 
procured by NATMO.  NATMO is using GIS,  GPS and Remote Sensing techniques and 
their utilities for catering to geo-spatial data  and other utilities which could be used for 
planning and development by the government bodies as well as the common people of 
the country. The Rashtriya Atlas Bhavan of NATMO is going to be completed very soon 
which will house a special Geo-spatial laboratory.   
13.7 The Committee notes that the Department  is undertaking modernisation and   
upgradation of infrastructure and techni cal capabilities of SoI and NATMO under 
the programme “Modernisation of Mappi ng Organisations”.  The Committee, 
however, notes that in the year 2012-13, Department failed to fully utilise funds 
made available to it under this programme .  Modernisation of infrastructural 
facilities and upgradation of data capturing and processing capabilities and 
technical skills of these organisations a re  essential for efficient exploration and 
mapping of the country's domain and to ensure that all resources  available in the 
country contribute their full measures to the progress, prosperity and security of 
our country.  The Committee, therefore, expresses its displeasure that the 
Department has not even been able to fu lly utilise funds meant for upgradation of 
infrastructure of its two important or ganisations and recommends that the 
Department should take all necessary measures to ensure early and successful 
implementation of this programme.   
14. DISHA PROGRAMME FOR WOMEN SCIENTISTS 
14.1 The Department informed the Committee that during the year 2012-13, under this 
programme 20 new projects to benefit women had been sanctioned. Apart from this, 176 
projects under Women Scient ists Programme (WOS)-A schol arship scheme; 29 projects 
under WOS-B scholarship scheme and 100 sc holarships for training in IPR under WOS-
C scheme were sanctioned by the Department during 2012-13.  
14.2 The Department further informed that ‘DISHA’ for women science and 
technology professionals have been re-looked and redesigned in a holistic manner. New 
initiatives have also been incorporated to address the mobility issue among the women 

scientists and to use the women scientific pool available to work and address societal 
issues through technological solutions and effective science communication.  
14.3 Coming to budgetary allocations to the programme the Committee finds that at 
BE 2012-13, the DISHA programme was allocated . 49 crores and have been enhanced 
by . 4 crores i.e. . 53 crores during the current fiscal 2013-14.   
14.4 The Committee notes that DISHA Programme has been launched by the 
Department to encourage women to pursue a career in science research as also for 
augmenting the pool of women scientists in the country and is a socially useful 
programme.  The Department has funded projects and provided scholarship to 
women scientists under this programme.  Th e Committee, further, notes that there 
has been a marginal increase in the funds allocated to the programme in the current 
fiscal year and hopes that Department will make efficient use of funds allocated in a 
transparent  and objective manner so th at objectives of the programme are 
achieved. 
15. SCHOLARSHIPS FOR RETAININ G RESEARCH TALENT AND 
PROMOTION OF SCIENCE IN THE COUNTRY 
15.1 The Committee desired to know the de tails of efforts being made by the 
Department for retaining research talent in  the Country and initia tives announced in the 
new Science, Technology and Innovation Policy, 2013  to check brain-drain. Replying to 
the query the Department informed that Ministry of Science and Technology is 
implementing several initiatives including the fellowship scheme to attract and retain 
Indian scientists who have se ttled in various part s of the world for pu rsuing research in 
India in their respective field of  expertise as well as in home country research programs.  
These initiatives include:-  
(i)  “Ramanujan Fellowships” seeks to attract brilliant scientists and engineers from all 
over the world to take up scientific research  in India. The Ramanujan Fellows can work 
in any of the scientific institutions and universities in the country and they are eligible for 
receiving regular research grants through the extramural funding schemes of various S&T 
agencies of the Government of India. Sin ce its inception, 184 Indian origin scientists 
working abroad have been offered this “Fellowship”  
(ii)    “ Innovation in Science Pursuit for Insp ired Research (INSPIRE)” Faculty 
Award under ‘Assured Opportunity for Research  Careers (AORC)’ scheme initiated in 
July, 2011 provides opportunity to the scie ntists under 32 years of age who have 
completed their doctoral research from any recognized university/ academic institution in 
the world. Each “INSPIRE Faculty Awardee”  receives a consolidated amount equivalent 
to the scale of the Assistant Professor of an IIT as Fello wship amount with .7 lakh per 
year as Research Grant for 5 years.   
(iii) Collaborative projects with Scientists  and Technologists of Indian Origin (CP-
STIO): The programme seeks to attract the Scientists and Technologists of Indian Origin 
for strengthening institutional and human capacity building.  
(iv)    Young Investigator Meet (YIM): It is organized every year in India and overseas 
to create awareness amongst scientists working in overseas laboratories.  
15.2 The Department has further informed  that with stagnation of R&D funding 
systems in developed economies and improveme nts in R&D funding pattern in India, 
there are indications of reversal  of flow of researchers at this time especially after the 
implementation of 6
th pay commission recommendations. There are also indications of 
attracting talent from manu facturing sector within th e national employment market. 
While international experience in research is  to be welcomed, bleeding-out of talent for 
research for want of opportunities in India needs to be avoided.  

15.3 Informing about the initiatives take n in the new Science, Technology and 
Innovation Policy 2013 the Department apprised that the Policy envisages making careers 
in science, research and innovation attractiv e enough for talented and bright minds. It 
also envisages, establishing world class infrastructures for R&D; creating an environment 
for enhanced private sector participat ion in R&D and creating a robust national 
innovation system that will be conducive to stop the brain drain.    
15.4 The Committee commends the measures taken by the Department to attract 
and retain Indian scientists who have se ttled in various parts of the world for 
pursuing research in India in their respectiv e field of expertise as well as in home 
country research programs and notes with satisfaction that measures taken have led 
to reversal of flow of researchers.  The Committee recommends that further 
measures be taken to make career in sc ience, research and innovation lucrative 
enough to attract best talent available in the country.   
16. NEW PROGRAMMES PLANNED DURING THE XII PLAN        
16.1 The Department of Science and Technology has started two major new 
programmes namely “Building National Capaci ty and Capability for High Performance 
Computing” and “National Geospatial Informat ion System” (NGIS) in the XII Five Year 
Plan. These are large nationally coordinate d projects with super-ordinate goals and 
expectations.  
16.2 These two programmes have been a llocated budgetary support amounting to 
.100.00 crores and .200.00 crores respec tively at B.E. 2013-14.  The Committee 
desired to know the aims and objectives of these new programmes and the roadmap 
drawn under National Geographic Informati on System (NGIS) to enable smooth 
transition of the country from e-governance to geo-spatial governance.  A brief account 
of aims and objectives of these two schemes provided by the Department is given below:-  
16.3 SUPER COMPUTING FACILITY AND CAPACITY BUILDING : 
The Planning Commission has drawn a Na tional Supercomputing Roadmap in the 
XII Plan which covers seve ral aspects of supercompu ting, namely, architecture, 
supercomputing grid resting on National Know ledge Network and the million core cloud 
supercomputer.  The aim of the scheme is  to undertake projected development of high 
capacity petascale (over 1,000,000,000,000,000 flops) supercomputers and technologies 
that may create an opening lead ing to building Exa-scale (over 
1,000,000,000,000,000,000 flops) supercomputing capability.  It also aims at capacity 
and capability development in the area of hardware and more in the area of application 
software to meet the demands of the scientif ic community from all disciplines. The DST, 
the Department of Electronics & Information Technology (Deity) in consultation with the 
Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru and Center for Development of Advance 
Computing (C-DAC), Pune, are preparin g the strategies for implementing the 
Programme. 
16.4  NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM (NGIS) 
The NGIS has been set up with the objectives of establishing a “National GIS” as a 
Decision Support GIS-platform with a systematic nation-wide, seamless GIS Asset and to 
realise an organisational stru cture of Indian National GIS Organisation (INGO) that will 
be responsible for National GIS system, maintaining and operating the GIS Platform. 
16.5 The NGIS Mission will also organise the GSIS Asset-GIS database for the whole 
country for the first time.  The Mission woul d also develop National GIS Applications 
software suite required fo r different Ministries for governance. According to the 
Department, the Major elements of the Na tional GIS platform include creation of 

National GIS infrastructure, GIS portal development, National GIS standardization and 
process definition would be a key for success of National GIS.   
16.6 An innovative mission struct ure is planned for implem entation of National GIS, 
which would take care of overlaps and integration and alignment of all efforts to National 
GIS. The apex body of NGIS will be the National GIS Advisory Board (NAB) to provide 
overall policy-direction, advi ce/guide, and review to a ssess performance and suggest 
improvements and fine tuning of Mission and also function as the think tank for NGIS.  
16.7 DST has also constituted a High Power Governing Council (HPGC), with 
Secretaries of Department of Space, the Department of Electronics & Information 
Technology (Deity) and Ministry of Earth Scie nces as Co-Chairs.  A full time Mission 
Director would also be selected with a small and nimble NGIS Mission Directorate. 
16.8 The Committee feels that the above programmes are of great national 
importance and hence recommends that the Department should make every possible 
effort to successfu lly implement them in a time bound manner.  The Committee, 
further, recommends that the Department must ensure that the allocated outlays for 
these two schemes are fully utilized. 
17. The Committee hopes that Department of Science & Technology shall make 
prudent utilisation of funds allocated to it under Demand No. 85 for the year 2013-
14 having due regard to the recommendations made by the Committee and 
efficiently implement its various programmes and schemes in the year 2013-14. 