PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYASABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/56th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:07]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYASABHA
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT
 AND FORESTS (1998-99)
 
 
FIFTY -SIXTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS 1998-99 OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 76)
 
(PRESENTED ON THE 10TH JULY, 1998)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI
JULY, 1998/ASADHA, 1920 (SAKA)
CON TEN T·S
           
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE .........................................
 
2.         INTRODUCTION  ..............................................................................
 
3.         REPORT Of THE 
COMMITTEE .....................................................
 
4.
                  MINUTES  OF THE MEETINGS Of THE COMMITTEE..................
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
 TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1998-99)
 
     1.    Sh. S.R. Bommai - Chairman  
 RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal  
3. Shri Rahasbihari Barik  
4. Shri Debabrata Biswas  
5. Dr. D. Masthan  
6. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty  
7. Shri Lachhman Singh  
8. Shri W. Angou Singh  
9. Shri Prakanta Warisa  
@IO. Vacant  
@11. Vacant  
*12. Vacant  
l3. Vacant  
#14. Vacant  
 LOKSABHA  
15. Shri Indra Nath Bhagat  

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYASABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/56th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:07]
16.    Shri Ranjib Biswal  
17. Shri Chengara Surendran  
18. Shrimati Bhavana Chikhaliya  
19. Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix D'Souza  
20. Shri M.C. Dhamotharan  
21. Shri George Eden  
22. Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya  
23. Shri K. Krishnamoorthy  
24. Shri Charan Das Mahant  
@ Shri Ram Ratan Ram was nominated w.e.f. 12th June, 1998 and ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 4th July, 1998 on expiry
 of his term in Rajya Sabha.
@ @ Shri N. Abdul Khader ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 29th June, 1998 on expiry of hi. tl~rm in Rajya Sabha.
Shrl O. Swaminathan ceased to be II Member of the Cummllll'c w.e.f. 29th June, 1998 on expiry of hili ll'rm in Rajya Sabhll .
•• Shrl Khan Ohufran Zahldl cellsed 10 be a Memher (If the Commillee w.e.f. 4th July, 1998 on expiry of hlH (erm in Rajya Sabha.
# Shri Pranab Mukherjee ceased to be a Member of the Commillee w.e.f. 29th June, 1998.
25. Shrl Janardan Prasad Misra
26 .. Shrl Rupchand Murmu
27. Captain Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad
28.  Shri Prakash Vishwanath Paranjpe
 29. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
30.  Shrl S. Vijaya Rama Raju
31. Shrl Inderjit Singh Rao
32. Shri Madhavrao Scindia
33. Shrimati Vijaya Raje Sclndia
%34. Shri Maheshwar  Singh
 35.   Shri Virendra Singh
36. Prof. Saifuddin Soz
37  Shrl Devji Bhai J. Tandel
38  Shri Prasad Baburao Tanpure
39   Dr. C.P. Thakur
40.    Shrl Ravi Prakash Verma
41.    Shri Suresh Warpudkar
42.    Shri Mukul Wasnik
·43.     Vacant
$44.     Vacant
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri M.L. Taneja, Committee Officer
 
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to
 submit the report on its behalf, present this Fifty -­sixth Report on the Demands for Grants pertaining to the Department of Scientific and
 Industrial Research for the year 1998-99 (Demand No. 76).
2. In its meeting held on June 19, 1998 the Committee considered the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
 Research on the basis of the documents made available to it and the submission made before it by the Secretary and the other representatives
 of the Department.
3. The Committee thanks the officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it
 the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on July 7, 1998.
 
 
NEW DELHI S.R. BOMMAI
July 7, 1998 Chairman,
 Committee on Science & Technology,
 Environment & Forests.
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYASABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/56th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:07]
REPORT
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) forms part of the Ministry of Science and Technology.  The Department
 deals with the schemes in specific areas of Scientific and Industrial Research including recognition of in-house R&D units of industry and
 Scientific and Industrial Research Organisations (SIROs). DSIR is also concerned with the activities of the Council of Scientific and
 Industrial Research (CSIR), an autonomous body. The National Research Development Corporation and the Central Electronics Ltd. are two
 public sector enterprises of the Department. Apart from supporting the activities of the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, the
 Department administers an autonomous scheme like Research and Development by Industry (RDI), Programme Aimed at Technological Self
 Reliance (PATSER), Scheme to Enhance the Efficacy of Transfer of Technology (SEETOT), National Information System for Science and
 Technology (NISSAT). The Department also provides support to international scientific institutions such as Asian and Pacific Centre for
 Transfer of Technology, New Delhi.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
2. The Secretary, DSIR gave a brief account of the activities of the Department and informed the Committee about the new projects which the
 Department proposes to undertake during the. year 1998-99. Some of the ongoing projects which are proposed to be accelerated are the
 design and development of a Light Transport Aircraft (LTA) which would help build domestic civilian aircraft industry, development and
 commercialisation of bioactive molecules from plant and other sources, exploration of new resources for hydrocarbons, setting up of a pilot
 plant for making nickle  from chrome overburden which would result in creating wealth from waste, extending shelf life of food products,
 development of microwave tubes for strategic application and generation of R&D on information products.
3. The Department had made a demand of Rs. 2075.97 crores under Plan component comprising Rs. 1834.80 crores·for CSIR and Rs. 241.17
 crores for DSIR including its undertakings and against this the Planning Commission had allocated a plan outlay of Rs. 1448.60 crores for
 the Department, comprising Rs. 1321 crores for CSIR and Rs. 127.60 crores for DSIR. During the Eighth Plan period the Department was
 given a plan allocation of Rs. 774.94 crores (Annexure-I). For 1998-99 the total demand made by the Department was Rs. 755.62 crores
 comprising Rs. 312.55 crores under plan and Rs. 443.07 crores under non­plan. As against this, the Department has been allocated a sum of
 Rs. 638.00 crores consisting of Rs. 230.00 crores as plan and Rs. 408.00 crores under non-plan (Annexure-II).
4. The plan component of the budget of the DSIR for 1998-99 has been retained at the Budget Estimates level of 1997-98 which is Rs. 230
 crores, while the non-Plan component has been increased to Rs. 408 crores from Rs. 283.49 crores (B.E.) for the last year. The big chunk of
 allocation has gone to the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research which has got Rs. 610 crores out of which Rs. 204.00 crores is under
 Plan sector and Rs. 406.00 crates is under non-Plan sector against the actual expenditure of Rs. 444 crores in 1996-97 and Rs. 564.13 crores
 at RE stage of 1997-98. There has, thus, been an increase of Rs. 124 crores in the overall budgetary allocation approved for CSIR for 1998-
99 compared with the budget estimates of last year. The plan expenditure of the CSIR was Rs. 161 crores in 1996-97 which was increased to
 Rs. 204 crores in the B.E. of 1997-98 whereas non-plan component has risen from Rs. 251.68 crorres (approved) in 1996-97 to Rs. 282
 crores at B.E. stage in 1997-98. This was increased to Rs. 360.13 crores at the R.E. stage in 1997-98. In the budget estimates of 1998-99, the
 non-Plan. outlay for CSIR has been further raised to Rs. 406 crores. A large part of the Plan expenditure amounting to Rs. 130 crores as
 against the R.E. of Rs. 135.10 crores in 1997-98 has been allocated to national laboratories whereas a sum of Rs. 50 crores has been
 earmarked for modernisation  which is equivalent to the B.E. level of last year. In the case of administrative expenditure, the non-Plan
 provision for 1998-99 is Rs. 65.10 crores, which is higher by Rs. 19.70 crores over the expenditure of 1996-97 and Rs. 19.10 crores over the
 B.E. of 1997-98 and Rs. 4.60 crores over the Revised Estimates of last year.
5. The Committee, during the course of its deliberations was informed that even though for CSIR there is an increase in the non-Plan
 allocation in 1998-99 amounting to Rs. 45.87 crores, yet it is not adequate to cover even the actual committed expenditure arising due to the
 revision in emoluments at all levels. DSIR, therefore, requires for the CSIR additional budgetary support of Rs. ] 04.98 crores for the
 purpose of neutralising this commitment, the details of which are as follows:
 
 
I. Salaries Rs. 29.76 crores
II. Pensions Rs. 30.27 crores
III. Extra Mural HRD  
 (Research Fellowship/ Associateship) Rs. 33.95crores
IV. R&D support expenditure  
 (Library, Chemicals, etc.) Rs. 11.00 crores
 TOTAL: . Rs. 104.98 crores
 
 
Under the Central Management Head which includes, inter alia, salaries, pensionary expenses, etc. during the last year the Department had
 spent a sum of Rs. 88.44 crores against the allocation of        Rs 67 .15crores. For this purpose the Department diverted its internal receipts,
 which otherwise could have been used for the R&D work.
6. The Committee observes that it is not a happy situation. Funds which could have been utilised  for R&D work were used for meeting
 inescapable commitment towards payment of salaries. pensions and other related administrative expenditure. Something need urgently be
 done to remedy the situation. The DSIR should pursue the matter with the Ministry of Finance for higher allocation at the Revised Estimates
 stage to enable it to meet its liability under the Central Management Head. As regards the diversion of Plan funds to non-Plan sector. the
 Committee would like to reiterate its earlier views. as contained in its Thirteenth, Twenty-fourth, Thirty-sixth and Fifty-second Reports in
 which this Committee had recommended in unambiguous terms that sufficient provision be made in the non-Plan outlay of DSIR to meet its
 committed liability. Despite a clear recommendation of the Committee, in the budget estimates of 1998-99, there is stili  a wide gap between
 the allocations made and expected liability of the Department. The plan funds should be utilised  for plan activities only as per the accepted
 budgetary norms.
 
MODERNISATION OF CSIR LABORATORIES
7. An allocation of Rs. 436.47 crores has been made under the Head 'National Laboratories' which comprise Rs. 130.00 crores as plan
 component and Rs. 306.47 as non-plan component as against Rs. 400.55 crores (R.E.) for the year 1997-98 consisting of Rs. 135.10 crores as
 plan outlay and              Rs. 265.45 crores as non-plan outlay.
 
8. The Committee observes that most of the laboratories functioning under the administrative control of DSIR are equipped either with the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYASABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/56th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:07]
 ageing equipments. and facilities or with the obsolete equipment and communication and networking system. Most of the laboratories
 require urgent upgradation and replacement to make them globally competitive. The Secretary, DSIR informed that the Government, keeping
 in view the recommendations of this Committee in Its Thirty-sixth and Fifty-second reports has committed to provide a modernisation grant
 of Rs 250 crores to DSIR during the Ninth Plan period. But the Committee would like the Department to generate internal resources also for
 modernising the CSIR laboratories. DSIR should also make concerted efforts to bring down the Non-plan expenditure of the laboratories
 coming under the CSIR system.
 
FINANCIAL SELF-RELIANCE AND INTERACTION OF CSIR LABORATORIES WITH INDUSTRY
9. The Committee was informed that as far as the issue of self-financing is concerned, CSIR has been able to achieve target with great
 difficulty and by the year 2001 it is going to be only 50 per cent self-financing. A lot is depending on industry's response. The year before
 last DSIR have an earning of Rs. 203 crores as against the budgetary allocation of around Rs. 400 crores. AH laboratories are not equal.
 They are located in different regions. Some of the laboratories do not have access to industries and many of these laboratories do something
 which goes beyond industrial research. They work for the nation. They do projects where they do not expect returns. It is equally important
 to keep the science in CSIR alive and also in view of the fact that there is no high technology without high science and no industry will pay
 for the science, DSIR has to make investment in keeping that science alive. The industry today is not willing to pay for it because of the
 shortsightedness.
 
10. The Committee was informed that CSIR has set up a system of periodic performance appraisal of all the laboratories wherein the level of
 self-financing is a major assessment parameter. The level of financial self-reliance of a laboratory depends on its specific area of activities,
 the local potential client base and competition and it differs from laboratory to laboratory. However, higher growth targets for financial self-
reliance are set every year commensurate with the resource endowments of the laboratories.
 
11. DSIR has created the Customer Satisfaction Evaluation Cell which operates as an independent unit. It takes the feedback from customers.
 There are standard ways of evaluating customer satisfaction. First of all DSIR has taken a group of chemical laboratories as a model for
 intensive discussions for which a procedure for evaluating the customer satisfaction has been devised. In order to put pressure on the
 performance of the laboratories indicators have been set up, which determine their budgets and each laboratory is judged in terms of
 customer satisfaction. DSIR has established Research Councils having around 50 per cent participation by industry. In fact, in many
 laboratories which arc strongly industry-related, even the Chairmen of the Research Councils are from industry, so that they are in a position
 to guide in terms of where the laboratories should be moving. DSIR has also created incentives for laboratories doing industrial research.
 Department of Scientific and Industrial Research also undertakes technology forecasting exercise.
 
12. The Committee is of the view that the industry-related laboratories of the CSIR should aim at having better interface with the industry so
 that the technologies developed by them are eventually commercialised. This would bring self-reliance and confidence within the CSIR
 system providing further impetus to R&D activities of these laboratories.
 
PROVISION OF HOUSING AND OTHER AMENITIES FOR SCIENTISTS
13. The Committee noticed that in the budgetary allocation of the current year an outlay of Rs. 16.30 crores has been earmarked for the
 residential buildings, staff quarters and other amenities while allocation under this Head last year was Rs. 15.70 crores (R.E). There is,
 therefore, an increase of Rs. 67 lakhs only. The Committee wanted to know as to what steps the Department is taking to provide housing
 facility to the scientists so as to attract talented and dedicated scientists.
 
14. The Committee was told that housing for scientists, particularly, in metropolitan cities is an acute problem being faced by the Department.
 Attracting talent to take up S&T as a career, and more so R&D is a major national problem.  CSIR is seeking to ameliorate this problem to
 some extent by providing to young scientists housing and other amenities in the campus. The financial allocations thus earmarked are
 inadequate to realise the objectives of providing dwelling units to house a significant percentage of employees. However, it is hoped that the
 enhancement of HRA as well as HBA arising from the adoption of the Fifth Pay Commission recommendations would ease to some extent
 pressure on the CSIR to provide campus housing. The CSIR has also drawn up a long term strategy to provide housing to its staff to tackle
 this problem. The Committee was further informed that a Committee was set up to look into the housing needs of CSIR and a report has been
 submitted with regard to individual laboratories.
 
15. Tile Committee is of the view that in order to attract talent to take up S&T as a career, and retain them, housing and other amenities be
 provided to the scientists. Possibilities may also be explored for providing campus housing facilities to the scientists working in CSIR
 laboratories.
 
RESEARCH SCHEME, SCHOLARSHIPS AND FELLOWSHIPS
16. The Committee found that in the budgetary allocation under the programme  'Research Scheme, Scholarships and Fellowships' there is a
 meagre increase of Rs. 70 lakhs in this year's budget. The Committee wanted to know as to how successful this programme  of the
 Department ii. It was informed that the CSIR has been a primary source for nurturing budding scientific talent in the country through the
 award of Junior and Senior Research Fellowships and Research Associateships. Its munificence has helped create a band of researchers in
 the country. the Committee was given to understand that the total amount spent on Research Scheme Fellowships was around Rs. 19 crores
 in 1997-98 which now has been raised to Rs. 28.70 crores and 4070 persons were supported comprising around 970 Junior Research
 Fellows, 2080 Senior Research fellows and 1020 Research Associates. The Junior Research fellowships are awarded on the basis of a
 national competitive examination and only the most talented are able to secure these fellowships. DSIR has devised a built-in procedure
 whereby the periodic progress of a Fellow/ Associate is evaluated by a Committee for the continuation or otherwise of the fellowships.
 Considering the high quality of the Fellows, there is negligible rate of dropouts or discontinuance.
 
ECO-FRIENDLY AND COST EFFECTIVE LEATHER TECHNOLOGIES
17. Leather industry in India is presently undergoing a rapid transition form manual techniques to mechanised  production. It faces stringent
 'environmental regulations both within and outside the country. Also cost advantage no longer remains a winning tool in a demanding global
 market. The Committee, therefore, wanted to know about the steps proposed to be taken by the Department during the Ninth Plan period to
 help modernise the leather processing technique by making it more eco-friendly and cost effective.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYASABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/56th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:07]
 
18. The Committee was informed that the Department has been alerting and assisting the leather industry to the challenges of quality, costs,
 fashion and environment. The programmes in this area are drawn up in close association and consultation with the leather industry. The
 Committee was assured that the DSIR would endeavour  to enlarge the scope of its programme  and would see to it that the gains realised
 from the Technology Mission mounted by it to modernise  the leather sector through introduction of eco-friendly and cost effective
 processing techniques and technologies reach the target groups. It is a matter of concern to the Committee that in spite of having the highest
 population of animals in the world, the share of India in the world leather market is very small. According to one estimate it is less than 4 per
 cent. In order to enhance  this share substantially it is necessary to use high technology. The Department is also trying to incorporate
 environmentally clean and benign technologies in the tanneries.
 
19. The Committee is of the view that since we have got the highest cattle population in  the country and, therefore, raw material is available
 in abundance, if the eco-friendly and cost effective technologies and techniques are utilised for leather processing, it would be possible for us
 to compete at the international level and increase our exports. For this there has to be greater interaction between tanneries and the concerned
 laboratories of the CSIR.
 
20. On a specific question on the Calcutta Leather Complex, the Secretary, DSIR informed that the Central Leather Research Institute (CLRI)
 has been given the task of looking at the feasibility of location as well as the design of the Calcutta Leather Complex. CLRI is likely to
 submit its report shortly.
 
DEVELOPMENT OF DRUGS
21. In view of the enormous biodiversity that exist in India, the Committee wanted to know what the Department is doing for the
 development of drugs from plant species and herbs. The Committee was told that CSIR laboratories have a vast potential to create newer
 drug molecules and therapeutics. The laboratories which are doing pioneering work in chemistry and biology' have the capacity from
 identifying a plant source to its isolation and active molecular formulations to its identification to create formulations and testing under the
 regulatory toxicology. The Committee was further informed that the DSIR is trying to bring in all these laboratories together to launch Bio-
active Molecular Programme, which will not only be beneficial in adding value to the natural resources but also create products which are
 globally competitive. The Committee was given to understand that a large number of skills are required in order to have improvement in the
 herbal medicines. It is not only identifying a plant or isolation of a compound or elucidation of a compound, creating lead molecules by using
 inflow in organic chemistry, protein engineering, process development and so on. All these skills are required to be improved particularly, in
 developing new drugs. Therefore, DSIR is trying to link the 19 laboratories which are also being linked with other institutions such as the
 Arya Vaidyashala in Kottakal district in Kerala. DSIR and the Arya Vaidyashala have now formed a memorandum of understanding (MoU).
 
22. The Committee is of the view that plant-based drugs and herbal drugs are becoming popular all over the world. This can become our area
 of strength and the traditional knowledge about plants and herbs which exists in this country is required to be probed scientifically for Its
 medicinal use and further validation. The Committee would like the CSIR to work in this area with appropriate thrust.
 
FOOD PROCESSING TECHNOLOGIES AND COLD CHAIN
23. In regard to development of an indigenous version of the Food Processing Industries rather than making an attempt to push through costly
 imported technology which is beyond the reach of the entrepreneurs of our country, the end products coming from such technology being
 beyond the reach of average consumer, the Committee was informed that NRDC has been at the forefront of commercialising  indigenously
 developed food processing technologies such as Invert Sugar and Spirulina  algae. DSIR is making efforts to implement Technology Mission
 on Oilseeds, Pulses and Maize and for this purpose is involved in development of technologies relating to post harvest and processing
 technologies for Oilseeds, Pulses and Maize. The shelf life of food products especially fruits and vegetables is critically dependent upon
 temperature. India being a tropical country, fruits and vegetables deteriorate fast. If a cold chain could be established from the farm to the
 consumer i(would greatly help to reduce wastage. The Committee was told that there are 3200 existing cold storages with a capacity of
 around 26 million CuM, but nearly 90 per cent of these store only potatoes. Adequate domestic cold storage capacity around 5 ml. tonnes
 also exists and is being enhanced by 2.5 ml. Refrigeration/year. Thus the gaps/shortfalls in the cold chain are to be made up. Firstly, the
 movement from the farm to the local mandi which is non-refrigerated needs to be brought into the cold chain. Thereafter, for most of the
 produce cold storage also is not available. Both these factors together contribute to 40 per cent of the damage. Thereafter, the cold transport
 and distributor storage and retailer cold outlet have to be provided.
 
24. The Committee would like the CSIR to devise appropriate and economically viable solutions for bridging the gap at diverse stages of the
 cold chain for which it is seeking to set up a Technology Mission. The Committee is of the considered opinion that the Food Processing
 sector In our country offers tremendous scope for application of techniques and technologies for reducing post harvest losses and for
 generating wealth and employment in the rural sector. The Committee would like that cheap and simple processing technologies for value
 addition, minimizing post-harvest losses and employment generation be developed which could be easily learnt by the people living in rural
 areas.
 
TECHNOLOGY FOR RURAL ROADS
25. The Committee was informed that the Central Road Research Institute (CRRI) has developed new techniques for planning. design.
 construction and maintenance of rural roads. using local soil, soft aggregates and waste materials. The specific techniques are: (a) use of
 treated soil in place of stone or brick in the lower layers of road pavement; (b) use of naturally occurring gravel mixtures; (c) construction of
 water bound. macadam road in black cotton soil using a sub-base of local expansive soil stabilizer with lime; (d) construction of water bound
 macadam road using a sub-base and the base course of non-expansive soil (moorum, alluvial soils). stabilised  with lime; (e) stabilisation  of
 soil with soft aggregates for the construction of all weather roads in dry areas; and (f) stabilisation  of road with soft aggregates for all
 weather roads in wet areas. These techniques can enable a saving of up to 25 per cent in the cost of road construction as compared to
 conventional techniques. Small lengths of road using these techniques were successfully demonstrated in Punjab. Jammu & Kashmir,
 Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Kerala . Rural roads being a State subject further propagation and i-
nplementation of technologies development by CRRI lies with the State Governments/agencies. The services of CRRI are always available
 for any S&T inputs that may be needed.
 
26. The Committee recommends that innovative work of generating new technologies for rural roads should continue and the State and

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYASABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/56th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:07]
 concerned. agencies may be informed of the low cost road construction technologies available with the CRRI through publicity folders,
 brochures and by producing literature on the subject.
 
INTELLECTUAL'PROPERTY RIGHTS AND PATENTS LITERACY
27. With regard to the intellectual property issue the Committee was informed that DSIR has set consistent targets for our laboratories for
 patenting. Patenting is done not only in India but also abroad. DSIR has world-class laboratories and at least half a dozen of them can run
 shoulder to shoulder with the rest of the world in the fields of chemicals, biology, aerospace, catalysts, etc.
 
28. The CSIR leads in patents movement in India. Out of 1,200 to 1,300 patents coming from India, one-fourth of them belong to CSIR. Last
 year CSIR had 90 patents. That number has gone up substantially now. DSIR has launched a massive programme  on creating intellectual
 property awareness not only within the CSIR but even outside. At the laboratory level, right from proper documentation to writing and filing
 patents, DSIR runs a large number of courses. DSIR is having Intellectual Property Management Division. On the question of promoting
 patent literacy among our scientists, the Committee was assured that DSIR, under the Scheme on Intellectual Property and Technology
 Management, would continue its efforts to spearhead patent literacy and national IPR issues so as to retain its identity as the largest Indian
 patent holder and the first to launch an IPR management programme. For this purpose the Department will keep on providing value added
 patent information services and put its efforts to develop skills to manage IPR for strategic alliances.
 
29. The Committee is happy over the fact that in 1997 DSIR and NRDC had organised over fifteen patents and IPR-related workshops for the
 scientific community with expert resource persons drawn from India and abroad and these Initiatives are being further enlarged. The
 Committee would like the Department to provide wide publicity to its scheme being administered by NRDC under which assistance is
 provided to Indian scientists and inventors to secure patents for their products and processes through engaging of patent attorneys.
 
NATIONAL DRINKING WATER MISSION
30. The Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission was launched in 1986 with the objective to provide drinking water to all the villages
 of the country in a time bound manner. While the Department of Rural Development has been the nodal agency for the implementation of
 the Mission, CSIR as technology provider, has been given the responsibility to provide Science & Technology inputs and undertake R&D
 activities under the Mission. The CSIR has been made responsible to provide S&T inputs for programme !! related to water source finding,
 conservation/augmentation of water, water treatment technologies and for standardization of geophY8lc~1 techniques. The success rate of
 water source location improved from existing 40 per cent to more than 90 per cent. In order to undertake field surveys for water finding and
 water quality assessment technologies for bacteriological testing kit for early detection of faecal pollution, rapid aqua tester and mobile water
 testing laboratory have been developed and released for commercialisation . 21 mobile testing laboratories have been supplied to various
 States. In a bid to remove arsenic from drinking water over 250 excess iron removal plants, 9 defluoridation , 3 fill and draw type of
 defluoridation, 5 stationary reverse osmosis and 3 mobile plants for desalination of water were installed by CSIR laboratories and for
 conservation and augmentation of water improved shallow wells and hand pumps, water economy taps and rain water harvesting structures
 have been designed and developed. Seventy-five shadow structures have also been installed.
31. Around 3000 personnel of PHE Departments of various State Governments were trained for application of geophysical techniques for
 source finding, rain water harvesting, water quality analysis and water treatment technologies; desalination, defluoridation, excess iron
 removal and slow sand filtration, respectively in various blocks of rural areas. During the Ninth Plan, CSIR has intensified its participation in
 the Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission by giving special emphasis on programmes  for: Arsenic removal in ground water, West
 Bengal; Iron/fh.1oride removal in water: Andhra Pradesh, Rajasthan and West Bengal; in diverse states large scale prolilferation  of water
 economy taps, solar operated desalination plants installation; electrochemical defluoridation; hydraulically operated medium-head hand
 pump; water quality assessment and impact assessment meaasures to check bacteriological and chemical contamination of rural water
 resources in problem areas; water prospecting in difficult areas (hard rock, drought prone areas, lateritic rocks,\ etc.), and percolation tanks to
 harvest surplus rainwater.
32. The Committee is of the view that on the front of providing drinking water to all the villages In the country not much work has been done.
 The dream of Rajiv Gandhi, the former
Prime Minister of India, who launched the National Drinking Water Mission, still remain. to be fulnlled. Despite the technical inputs
 provided by CSIR Laboratories to the Mission by way of quality testing of water, removal of arsenic from drinking water, etc. what is
 needed today Is to develop technologies for water conservation and water harvesting. The water table everywhere Is going down. Traditional
 sources of water are drying up. Water is the necessity of life. The Committee would like the Department to coordinate its activities with the
 Ministries of Water Resources, Rural Development and the State Governments for transferring technologies In the area of purifying water to
 make it potable. At the same time scientists working in the area may also think of devising new and cheaper methods of water harvesting and
 water conservation.
33. After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and assessing the progress of various
 important programmes and projects administered by It, the Committee recommends that the Demand for Grants of Rs. 638.00 crores, as
 sought by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, for the year 1998-99, under Demand No. 76, may be approved.
 
 
NEW DELHI S.R. BOMMAI
July7, 1998 Chairman,
 Committee on Science & Technologty,
 Environment & Forests
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________________
MINUTES
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYASABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/56th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:07]
 
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Friday the J 9th June, 1998 in Room No. 63, Parliament House New Delhi.
PRESENT
 1 Shri S.R. Bommai - Chairman
RAJYASABHA
2. Shrl Ramdas Agarwal
3. Dr. D. Masthan
4. Shri Ram Ratan Ram
5. Shri Lachhman Singh
6. Shri Prakanta Warisa
LOKSABHA
7. Shrimati Bhavana Chikhaliya
8. Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix 0' Souza
9. Shri M.C: Ohamotharan
10. Shri Oordhanbhai Javiya
11. Captain Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad
12. Shri Prakash Vishwanath Paranjpe
13. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
14. Shrl lnderjit Singh Rao
13. Shrl Oevji Bhai J. Tandel
16. Shri Mukul Wasnik
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri Taneja, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND  INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH Dr. R.A. Mashelkar, Secretary,
 OSIR and OG, CSIR
Shri K.V. Srinivasan, Adviser
Dr. A. Lahiri, Adviser
Dr. Vinay Kumar, Joint Adviser
 Shri Jagdish Singh, Joint Adviser Shri Ashwani Gupta, PSO
REPRSENTATIVES OF THE COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
Shrl Ajay. Kumar, Joint Secretary
Ms. Pravin Tripathi, Financial Adviser Dr. R.K. Bhandari, Head (ISTAD)
Dr. H.R. Bhojwani, Head (RPBD)
Shrl S.D. Garg, Head (STMD)
Shrl A.K. Verma, Scientist
Shrl D.K. Chakraborty, Deputy Financial Adviser
REPRESEN TATIVES OF THE NATIONAL RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
Shrl N.K. Sharma, Managing Director
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CENTRAL ELECTRONICS LIMITED
8hri D.V. Gupta, Chairman-cum-Managing Director
Shri A.G. Agarwal,'Executive Director (Fin.) Purchase
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE CONSULTANCY DEVELOPMENT CENTRE
Shrl R.C. Kehar, Director-General
2. The Committee took up for consideration the Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
 The Secretary in the Department briefly explained for the benefit of Members the budgetary allocations on different heads as also the
 functioning of the Department: The, Members then sought clarifications on points relating to the Demands for Grants.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 6.05 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on the 20th June, 1998.
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 7th July, 1998 in Room No. 67, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1.
      Shri S.R. Bommai-Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrl Ramdas Agarwal  3. Shrl Rahasbihari Barik 4. Shrl Debabrata
 Biswas 5.Shri Lachhman Singh

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYASABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/56th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:07]
LOKSABHA
6.       Shr! Ranjib Biswal
7.       Shrimati Bhavana Chikhaliya
8.       Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix D'Souza
9.       Shrl K. Krishnamoorthy
10.     Shrl Rupchand Murmu
11.     Shrl Prakash Vishwanath Paranjpe
12.     Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
13.     Shri.Ravi Prakash Verma
14.     Shri Suresh Warpudkar
15.     Shri Mukul Wasnik SECRETARIAT
Shrl N.C. Joshi, Director
Shrl D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary Shrl M.L. Taneja, Committee Officer
2. The Committee took up consideration of the draft '" '" '" 56th and'" '" ••• Reports on the Demand~ for Grants (1998-99) of the'" ••• "',
 Department of Scientific & Industrial Research and ••• '" '" and'" '" '" the reports were adopted.
3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence· Shri Lachhman Singh to present the reports to the Rajya  Sabha and Shri
 Mukul Wasnik and in his absence Shrlmatl Bhavana' Chikhaliya to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.25 A.M. to meet again at 10.00 A.M. on. the 9th July, 1998.
···Relates to other matters.
 