PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/57th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:08]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
 TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1998-99)
FIFTY -SEVENTH. REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1998-99)
OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
(DEMAND NO. 92)
(PRESENTED ON THE 10TH  JULY, 1998)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI
JULY, 1998/ASADHA, 1920 (SAKA)
CONTENTS
 
 Pages
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITIEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITIEE
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
 ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1998-99)
1. Shri S. R. Bommai - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABRA
2.      Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3.      Shri Rahasbihari Barik

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/57th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:08]
4.   Shri Debabrata Biswas
5.   Dr. O. Masthan
6.   Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty
7.   Shri Lachhman Singh
8.   Shri W. Angou Singh
9.   Shri Prakanta Warisa
10. Vacant
11. Vacant
12. Vacant
13. Vacant
14. Vacant
LOKSABHA
15.
       Shri Indra Nath Bhagat
16.        Shri Ranjib Biswal
17.        Shri Chengara Surendran
18.        Shrimati Bhavana Chikhaliya
19.        Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix 0' Souza
20.        Shri M.C. Ohamotharan
21.        Shri George Eden
22.        Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
23.        Shri K. Krishnamoorthy
24.        Shri Charan Oas Mahant
  25.   Shri Janardan Prasad Misra
26.         Shri Rupchand Munnu
27.        Captain Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad
28.        Shri Prakash Vishwanath Paranjpe
29.        Prof. Radhita Ranjan Prarnanik
30.        Shri S. Vijaya Rama Raju
31.        Shri Inderjit Singh Rao
32.        Shri Madhavrao Scindia
33.    Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia
  34.    Shri Maheshwar Singh
35.        Shri Virendra Singh
36.        Prof. Saifuddin Soz
37.        Shri Devji Bhai J. Tandel
38.        Shri Prasad Baburao Tanpure
39.        Dr. C. P. 'Thakur
40.        Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
41.    Shri Suresh Warpudkar
42.   Shri Muml Wasnik
·43.  Vacant $44.   Vacan
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Salish Kumar, Joint Secretary Shri N. C. Joshi, Director
Shri D. P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri M. L. Taneja, Committee Officer
 
INTRODUCI10N
 
I, the Chainnan  of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised  by the
 Committee to present the report on its behalf, present this Fifty-seventh Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the
 detailed Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Department of Ocean Development (Demand No. 92).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on the June 24, 1998, the Secretary and other officers of the Department of Ocean
 Development gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Committee sought clarifications on various
 aspects of the predominance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. 'The Committee express its thanks to the officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the Members and
 placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise  the Demands for grants of the Department of Ocean
 Development.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the July 7, 1998.
 
NEW DELHI S.R. BOMMAI,

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/57th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:08]
July, 1998 Chairman
 Committee on Science &: Technology, Environment &: Forests.
 
REPORT
The Department of Ocean Development since it started functioning in July, 1981 has directed its programmes  towards
 development and use of Science and Technology for the sustainable and environment friendly exploration and exploitation of
 marine resources for the socio-economic benefit of the country. The Department of Ocean Development is a nodal Department for
 organizing, coordinating and promoting ocean development activities in the country. The National level R & 0 Laboratories,
 Educational Institutions and Industries assist the Department in carrying out its plans and programmes of National importance.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
2. The Committee was informed that the Planning Commission constituted a working group comprising eminent scientists in
 the field of Ocean Development to formulate plan proposals for the Ninth Five Year Plan. The working group kept in mind the
 views of six expert groups which had been set up by the Department to draw up a 10 year perspecti ve plan keeping in view the
 vital role oceans could play. The annual plan for 1998-99 is based on t~ese reports and recommendations.
3. The Secretary, Department of Ocean Development (000), in his presentation before the Committee informed that the
 Department of Ocean Development proposed an outlay of Rs. 656 crores for the Eighth Five Year Plan period. The Planning
 Commission allocated Rs. 130 crores only as indicative outlay. However, based on the requirements of various programmes , a sum
 of Rs. 224 crores was provided agai,nst which the expenditure was about Rs. 200 crores. During the Eighth Five Year Plan period
 the strategic areas such as Antarctic Research, Polymetallic  Nodules Programmes and International Cooperation and Programmes
 received higher priority in terms of fund allocation amounting to a total of 66 per cent, followed by societal Programmes 21 per
 cent, Scientific and Technological Development Programmes 8 per cent and Basic Research 5 per cent. The Planning Commission
 has also indicated an outlay of Rs. 557.69 crores for the plan schemes of the Department for the Ninth Five Year Plan period.
4. The plan outlay for the Department for 1998-99 is Rs. 88.00 crores. Besides, it has also been provided with a Non-Plan
 outlay of Rs. 19.50 crores. The Department would thus have a total outlay of Rs. 107.50 crores as against the revised estimates of
 Rs. 102.11 crores (Plan as well as Non-Plan) for 1997-98 whereas the actual expenditure of the Department for that year was Rs.
 100.79 crores. The financial outlay for 1998-99 shows an increase ofRs. 6.71 crores as compared to the actual expenditure for
 1997-98. In the current financial year, as informed by the Secretary, 000, emphasis is more on Technology Development
 Programmes which is around 30 per cent of the total financial outlay for 1998-99. The comparative figures in terms of actual
 expenditures for various programmes  of the Department for 1995­96,1996-97 and 1997-98 are given in Annexure-I and the
 financial allocations earmarked for 1998-99 are set out in Annexure-II.
5. Th~ Committee was informed that the reduced plan outlay for 1998-99 of Rs. 88.00 crores than the allocations made in the
 B.E. for 1997-98 would require the Department to shift some of its activities to the next financial year. The Department would thus
 manage by rescheduling its activities. During 1997-98, on account of the plan outlay being reduced at the level ofRs. 85 crores in
 the revised estimates as against the projected budget of Rs. 88.10 crores compelled the Department to shift some of its activities and
 some of the projected expenditure to the current financial year.
6. The Non-Plan expenditure of the Department has been broadly under four heads, namely (i) ORV Sagar Kanya; (ii) FORV
 Sagar Sampada; (iii) Secretariat and Economic Services; and (iv) Administrative Infrastructure. The major increase in the Non-Plan
 expenditure is against FORV Sagar Sampada, which was acquired in November 1984. It is a sophisticated multi-purpose research
 vessel which; has been carrying out survey of Indian Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) on Living Resources and the Oceanographic
 factors influencing their distribution. It provides a common platform to the National Institutes/Laboratories in the field of
 Oceanographic research. Last year this vessel conducted 14 cruises covering a total track length of 22578 nautical miles both in the
 Arabian Sea and Bay of Bengal. The Major scientific investigations/ research carried out by FORV Sagar Sampada  during 1997-98
 include evaluation of performance of specially designed trawl gears, assessment of fishery resources and location of new grounds,
 post harvest technology and bio-fouling accumulation of biofoulers on copper, brass, aluminium , stainless steel and galvanised iron
 panels, screening of free amino acids, fatty acids composition, trimethylamine oxide degradation, etc. from the muscles of various
 fish species and collection of the sea truth data for validation of modular opto­electronic scanner onboard the Indian Remote
 Sensing Satellite, IRS-P5.
ANTARCI1C RESEARCH PROGRAMME
7. The Indian Antarctic Programme and its scientific expeditions are held on annual basis with the launching of the first
 expedition to Antarctic in 1981. The first Indian research station, Dakshin Gangotri was commissioned in 1983 and replaced by the
 indigenously designed second Indian permanent station 'Maitri' in the Schirmacher Oasis in 1988. The Station 'Maitri ' has adequate
 infrastructural facilities for conducting multi-faceted scientific research in Polar (Antarctic) Science. While using Antarctica as a
 platform for conducting scientific experiments, India has always recognised the importance of preserving the pristine nature of this
 remote and unique continent. In order to uphold this commitment, India, an original votary of the Protocol on Environmental
 Protection to the Antarctic Treaty, has ratified the Protocol in April 1996. The Committee was informed that so far 19 scientific
 expeditions had been launched on a regular basis which have carried out research work in the thrust areas of polar science,
 including two expeditions to the Southern Oceans for assessment of Antarctic Krill. During the period 1998-99, the Eighteenth
 Indian Antarctic Expedition would be launched to continue research in polar science with special emphasis on International

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/57th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:08]
 collaboration. The Scientific Expedition to Antractica will be launched with the participation of the neighbouring countries. The
 Committee was informed that application and utilisation of clean energy sources like wind and sun in Antarctica  will be attempted.
 Upgradation of communication facilities with special emphasis on real time picture transmissjon will be undertaken, studies on
 adoption :techniques  ofhuman beings in adverse conditions would continue and waste handling and discharge facilities are
 proposed to be modified in accordance with the Environmental Protocol.
8. The Antarctic Study Centre (ASC) at Goa is a state-of-the-art national facility for conducting front ranking research in the
 field of polar sciences and launching all expeditions to Antarctic. It will have a unique facility for low temperature research on ice
 cores retrieved from Antarctic and the Himalayas . It will also have an Antarctic  Museum and a data base repository on polar
 sciences. For the entire programme a budgetary provision of Rs. 18.50 crores has been made in the current financial year.
9. The Committee expresses its support to the Antarctic Science Programme though the achievements of this programme
 cannot be significant at the present stage. The programme  has enabled the Department to generate valuable data which would be
 useful at a future date. The programme has provided an opportunity to Indian scientists to interact with scientific community of the
 developed nations. The entire Antarctic Research Programme can prove to be an area of strength of tile Department.
POLYMEI'ALLIC NODULES PROGRAMME (PNP)
10. In 19h7, India was accorded the status of Registered Pioneer Investor and started the Polymetallic Nodules Programme
 (PNP). Accordingly, the International Seabed Authority (ISBA) allotted 150,000 sq.km. mine site for exploitation of nodules in the
 Central Indian Ocean Basin (CIOB). After prolonged negotiations India became member of the Council of ISBA under Investors'
 category in March 1990.
1O.1 The Committee was infonned that Polymetallic  Nodules Programme (PNP) was a national programme with international
 commitments. The major activities proposed to be undertaken in the curtent  financial year are survey and exploitation for
 revalidation of relative concentration and quality charatteristjc of nodules in different pre-determined blocks, environmental impact
 assessment to assess the environmental impact of large scale deep seabed mining activity, technology development for nodule
 mining at greater depths and technology development (extractive metallurgy). The Department proposes to spend Rs. 18.95 crores
 in the current financial year as against Rs. 15.50 crdres spent last year.
10.2 The Committee was further infonned that the R.E. outlay for 1997-98, for Polymetallic  Nodules Programme (PNP) was
 Rs. 15.60 crores of which Rs. 5.50 crores was towards mining technology development. In this year's budget the Department
 proposes to spend an amount of Rs. 15.45 crores towards mining technology development. The Committee was told that the major
 element in this development are the ongoing joint project between University of Siegen (IKS), Germany an<l NIOT and
 establishing facilities in India and operational requirement for system trial. The hardware realisation is in progress and· the system
 is now scheduled for sea trial before the end of 1998.
1.0.3 The Committee was apprised that PN Programme  is still in experimental stage. Therefore, commercial exploitation of
 polymetallic nodules may not be feasible for some more time. However, the technology for exploration and exploitation has been
 demonstrated. Thus development of technologies for nodule mining purposes for the deep sea may be viewed as contribution to a
 long term objective.
10.4 Under the Polymetallic Nodules Programme, it is proposed to set up a continuously operating pilot demonstration plant for
 extraction of copper, nickel, cobalt and manganese from the polymetallic nodules, as a joint programme with MIs. HindustaIt Zinc
 Limited. The estimated cost of this pilot plant is about Rs. 25.00 crores and the project duration will be about 2 years. The
 Committee was informed that in the current financiill year, an additional outlay of Rs. 5.00 crores will be required for implementing
 this programme.
11. The Committee observes that the Polymetallic  Nodules Programme  has a long gestation period and woUld become
 economically viable by the year 2010. Considering the potential benefits that could arise in future from this programme, there is a
 need for India to be among the top ranking nations in the field of generating high technology required for commercial exploitation
 of Polymetallic Nodules. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this Programme should not starve of funds. The Committee is
 of the view that 'at the time of considering revised estimates of the Department, an extra budgetary support for the Department for
 this programme during the current financial year may be considered.
DRUGS FROM THE SEA
12. The National Project on "Drugs from the Sea" initiated during 1990-91 is a multi-institutional project on development of
 potential drugs and chemicals from marine organisms. This project was funded under R & D programme till the end of Phase-II
 (1995-96). The approved allocation for Phase III of the Project for 1996-97 to 1998-99 is "'Rs. 8.16 crores. Out of this, Rs. 4.50
 crores has been spent in the first two years of Phase III, leaving a balance of Rs. 3.66 crores to be released in 1998-99. However,
 keeping in view the resource crunch, the Budget provision for 1998-99 has been restricted to Rs. 2.50 crores.
12.1 The Committee was informed that over 450 species of marine biota were collected and over 500 voucher specimens were
 identified possessing biological properties for treatment of human diseases. The biological screening have led to identification of 17
 organisms possessing promising activities. From these organisms over 100 pure compounds were isolated and characterised . Out of
 these 17 organisms, 5 organisms possessing anti-viral, anti-amoebic, anti-diabelic, anti-anxiolytic and larvicidal activities have been
 taken up for further evaluation and drug development during the current year.
12.2 The Committee was informed that three promising leads have been identified for immediate development which are COR
 134 (Mangrove: Anti-diabetic) which is to be developed as a marine herbal drug using traditional approach, NI0-450 (Mangrove:

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/57th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:08]
 Anti-anxiety) and CU-OO1/OO4 (Fish: Anti-cholesterol) which has a strong lipid lowering activity and a patent has been filed.
13. The Committee reiterates its view expressed in its Forty-seventh Report that the National Project on from Sea a
 comiderable potential, but the exploitation so for been negligible with practically no commercial exploitation. The Department
 should take necessary steps to transfer the technology for commercialisation in regard to the anti-cholesterol drug. The anti-diabetic
 drug derived from marine herbal source needs further probing and if its efficacy is proved in human subjects, it would prove to be a
 significant achievement of the Department.
OCEAN OBSERVATION AND INFORMATION SERVICES (0018)
14. The research programmes viz., Marine Satellite Information Services (MARSIS), National Ocean Information System
 (NOIS), Sea Level Monitoring and Modelling  (SELMAM) and Data Buoy Programme implemented during the Eighth Five Year
 Plan period have now been integrated into Ocean Observation and Information Services (OmS) with a view to synergising and
 generating reliable coastal and ocean data and data products for supporting coastal and of shore developmental activities and
 oceanographic research. The Programme consists of four major projects viz. , Ocean Observing Systems, Ocean Information
 Services, Satellite and Coastal Oceanographic Research and Ocean Modelling and Dynamics.
15. The Committee was informed that under the OOIS, even though the actual expenditure during 1997-98 was Rs. 20.93
 crores, the outaly for 1998-99 has been restricted to Rs. 13.75 crores. Out of this, Rs. 7.00 crores is meant for completing the
 ongoing project on moored data buoys under the National Data Buoy Programme  with NORAD (Norwegian Agency for
 Development Co-operation) assistance, procurement and deployment of drifting buoys, data acquisition and processing, quality
 90ntrol and archival, and other related programmes. A sum of Rs. 4.00 crores is provided for Ocean Information Services which is
 essential to integrate the activities of the Marine Data Centres to generate user driven application-oriented data products and
 interact with user agencies. To support the Ocean Information Services, R & 0 programmes in Satellite Oceanography and Ocean
 Modelling and Dynamics have been evolved and initiated during 1997-98. Due to the overall ceiling the outlay for these R & 0
 efforts is kept at a reduced level or Rs. 1.25 crores for Satellite Oceanography and Rs. 1.50 cror~s for Ocean Modelling and
 Dynamics. To Support these R & 0 efforts, to meet targets as planned, an additional outlay of Rs. 3.00 crores is required. 'The
 Committee feels that the Department should make out a strong case for enhancement of its allocations under this head at the revised
 estimates stage of the current financial year.
COASTAL OCEAN MONITORING AND PREDICTION SYSTEM (COMAPS)
16. The Department is implementing a programme  namely Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction Systems (COMAPS)
 since 1990. The outlay for the programme for 1998-99 has been kept at Rs. 1.5 crores. The COMAPS programme  at present deals
 with monitoring the pollution aspect of marine environment. The variety of pollutants (Chemical and biological) and untreated
 domestic waStes reach the oceans either directly through pipelines or indirectly through rivers and run offs from the land.
16.1 The other causes of pollution include disposal of untreated wastes from a large number of small and medium scale
 industries and few large industries situated along the coastal areas. Most of the small and medium scale industries discharge their
 effluents through domestic sewage channels and many of the large scale industries either in the channels or through pipelines in the
 sea. Oil pollution due to operation of ships and tankers is also a source of pollution. Generally the oil pollution is chronic in nature
 and only during the oil spill incidents mortality of marine organisms occur.
16.2 The Committee was informed that in order to achieve adequate coverage for monitoring of our coastal waters, DOD
 Centrel Units are established in many National laboratories situated in maritime States which are also included in the programme.
17. During 1998-99, in order to make the programme more comprehensive, microbiology programmes would be expanded
 incorporating therein physical oceanographic studies to understand the diffusion and dispersion characteristics of pollutants in the
 sea, which is location specific due to varied current and circulation patterns. Results obtained from this would be useful in setting
 up of disposal standards and locations for their disposal in the sea. Besides, pollutants would be monitored in ecologically sensitive
 areas like Gulf of Kutch wherein large-scale developmental activities are being planned. Levels of pollution would be monitored at
 77 locations along the coastal areas of the country. Data in respect of 25 parameters including nutrients, heavy metals, pesticides,
 pathogenic bacteria will be collected. The programme  was being monitored by a Steering Committee, reconstituted in 1995-96,
 headed by the Chairman of the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and all the Coastal State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs)
 are represented on the Committee.
17.1 It has further been revealed that the pollution levels in Versova, Mahim, Thane and Ulhas creeks in Maharashtra, Veraval
 port in Gujarat, Veli in Kerala, Kakinada  Canal and Visakhapatnam  harbour in Andhra Pradesh and Puri in Orissa are areas of
 concern. The pollution in these areas have reached significant levels.
17.2 The data and information relating to the rising trends of pollution at the observed locations are periodically brought to the
 notice of the concerned State Pollution Control Boards who are empowered to take preventive and control action for mitigation of
 pollution.
17.3 The Committee was also informed that the Programme  was progressing as per the target set for the Ninth Five Year Plan,
 both in physical and financial terms. The Department plans to assess the pollution trends in the areas of high concentration of
 pollutants so as to document the increase or decrease in pollution-related problems.
COASTAL RESEARCH VESSELS (CRV)
18. The Coastal Research Vessels (CRVs) namely, Sagar Purvi and Sagar Paschimi were acquired during 1996-97 for enabling

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/57th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:08]
 continuous collection of samples from the coastal areas for monitoring the pollution levels in different points. These CRVs have
 been deployed to facilitate systematic collection and analysis of water, sediment and biological samples from different locations
 under the guidance of Vessel Management Cell, National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT), Chennai.
18.1 The Committee was informed that during 1998-99 about 48 cruises are proposed to be undertaken for collection of
 chemical and biological parameters. For the successful execution of the programme, suitable linkages with different National and
 State R & D institutions including Universities will be maintained.
19. The Committee is a1anned over the magnitude of marine pollution and the inadequate steps taken to prevent as well as
 control the same. It is stated in para 12 of the Ocean Policy Statement that "Surveillance and conservation of the marine
 environment and its resources call for an integrated legal framework and its concomitant enforcement. Several laws have already
 been promulgated regarding the maritime zone, fisheries, etc. The Coast Guard Organisation looks after the enforcement aspects of
 several of these legislative measures. The co-ordinating mechanisms of the overall structure to legislation will have to be suitably
 strengthened under the aegis of the Department of Ocean Development". The Committee, therefore, recommends that initiatives
 should be taken to develop a co-ordination mechanism between the DOD and various other Ministries with the Ministry of
 Environment and Forests as the key member to prevent and control marine pollution in the coastal areas.
SHORE TO FISHING VESSEL COMMUNICATION SYSTEM
20. The Department of Ocean Development has taken up the Programme "Shore to Fishing Vessel Communication System" in
 two phases. The first phase covers four States i.e., Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka and a part of Goa. The second
 phase covers the rest of the country except Gujarat  because the Government of Gujarat did not want to participate in the
 programme. In phase-II programme , 10 shore stations have been planned to be established i.e., two each in the States of
 Maharashtra, West Bengal and Orissa and one each in Pondicherry, Lakshadweep and Andaman & Nicobar Island. Construction
 work for providing the infrastructure facilities is complete. Equipments are made available to the concerned coastal State
 Governments. This pregramme is being executed by the State Governments. However, the Government of Gujarat did not want to
 participate in this programme.
21. The Committee recommends that adequate steps should be taken to cover Gujarat and Daman & Diu under the Programme
 "Shore to Fishing Vessel Communication System".
ISLAND DEVEWPMENT PROGRAMME
22. The Committee was told that the Andaman & Nicobar Centre for Ocean Development (ANCOD) was set up for
 coordinating the efforts on the Marine Living Resources in the Island Groups. During the current year the ongoing programmes
 such as rejuvenation of coral reef, studies on the ecology and environmental aspects of the A & N waters will be continued.
 Besides, steps for introduction of the Mariculture programmes and a pilot demonstration project for lobster fattening will also be
 initiated. In order to strengthen the Centre, the Department got four posts approved recently and out of which one post has already
 been filled up.
23. According to a survey conducted by the Zoological Survey of India (ZSI), tremendous pressure has been put on coral reefs
 in the country due to human activities, like coral mining, sand mining in coastal areas, situation from soil runoff· mainly due to
 deforestation. The tourist influx in recent years, unplanned collection of shells and corals for ornamental trade and commercial
 exploitation offish have also contributed to reef damage. In addition, the white band disease has resulted in coral mortality and
 increased susceptibility. The Committee recommends that adequate steps should be taken to preserve the coral reef system of the
 country, particularly of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
24. The Committee has noted that a Senior Scientific Officer has been posted at ANCOD. The Committee would like that the
 vacant posts of Technical Officer, Technical Assistant and other supporting staff should also be fillip up on a regular basis. Posts of
 a Technical Officer and a Technical Assistant with supporting administrative staff have also been created. The Committee would
 like that the vacant posts existing in ANCOD be filled up expeditiously.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OCEAN TECHNOLOGY (NIOT)
25. National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) was established in 1993 with a view to developing technology to facilitate
 activities in Ocean Sector. Besides, NIOT is also rendering consultancy services to industry. The Budget allocation for NIOT has
 been substantially increased to Rs. 13.50 crores for 1998-99 as against Rs. 7.50 crores allocated at the revised estimates stage for
 1997-98.
26. The Committee was informed that the increased allocation of Rs. 13.50 crores to NIOT for 1998-99 is mainly due to the
 proposal to take up the pilot activity  on Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC), consolidating the gains made in the wave
 energy programme, technology development for an integrated deep sea mining system, coastal and environmental engineering and
 marine instrumentation.
27. It is observed by the Committee that National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) is still functioning under the administrative
 control of the Ministry of Science & Technology (Department of Scientific & Industrial Research).
28. The Committee reiterates its view that multiplicity of the institutions working in the same field needs to be avoided. The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) should be brought within the administrative
 control of the Department of Ocean Development for better co-ordination and result oriented activities in the marine related fields.
29. After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development and the progress of various important
 programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs. 107.s0 crores, as

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/57th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:08]
 sought by the Department of Ocean Development, for the year 1998-99, under Demand, No. 92, may be approved.
 
NEW DELHI S.R. BOMMAI
July 7, 1998 Chairman
 Committee on Science & Technology, Environment and Forests.
 
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________________
MINUTES
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 24th June, 1998 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi .
      PRESENT
1.      Shri S. R. Bommai-Chainnan
RAJYASABHA
2.      Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3.      Shri Rahasbihari Barik
4.      Shri Debabrata Biswas
5.      Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty
6.      Shri Ram Ratan Ram
7.       Shri Lachhman Singh
LOK SABHA
8.      Shrimati Bhavana Chikhaliya
9.      Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix D'Souza
10.      Shri M.C. Dhamotharan
11.      Shri George Eden
12.      Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
13.      Shri K. Krishnamoorthy
14.      Shri Charan Das Mahant
15.      Shri Janardan Prasad Misra
16.      Captain Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad
17.      Shri Prakash Vishwanath Paranjpe
18.      Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
19.      Prof. Saifuddin Soz
20.      Shri Devji Bhai J. Tandel
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri M.L. Taneja, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
Dr. A.E. Muthunayagam, Secretary
Shri A.K. Chugh, Joint Secretary
Shri P.K. Brahman, Joint Secretary and FA Shri B.N. Krishnamoorthy, Adviser
Shri S.K. Das, Adviser
Dr. V. Sampath, Director
Dr. v.R.S. Chintala, Director Shri Girish Pillai, Director
Shrimati Kr:shna Tyagi, Deputy Secretary Shrimati Rachana Shah, Under Secretary
       Km. Rakesh Sharma, Asstt. Director
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/57th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:08]
    REPRE'SENTATIVE OF THE INTEGRATED COASTAL AND MARINE AREA MANAGEMENT, CHENNAI
Dr. B.R. Subramaniam, Projector Director
     REPRESENTATIVES OF THE CENTRAL DRUG RESEARCH INSTITUTE, LUCKNOW Dr. A.P. Bhaduri,
 Deputy Director
Dr. V.P. Kamboj, Emeritus Scientist
     REPRESENTATIVE OF THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OCEAN TECHNOLOGY, CHENNAI
    Prof. M. Ravindran, Executive Director
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ENGINEERS INDIA LIMITED, NEW DELHI  
Shri P. K. Sen, Deputy General Manager
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE NATIONAL INSTITU" OF OCEANOGRAPHY, GOA
Dr. E. Desa, Director
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE ANTARCTIC STUDY CENTRE, V ASCO-DE-GAMA, GOA
Dr. P.C. Pandey, Director
2. The Committee took up for consideration the Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Department of Ocean Development. The
 Secretary in the Department briefly explained for the benefit of Members the budgetary allocations on different heads as also the
 functioning of the Department. The Members then sought clarifications on points relating to the Demands for Grants.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.15 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on the 25th June, 1998.
 
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 7th July, 1998 in Room No. 67, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
         .1.           Shri S.R. Bommai - Chairman
RAJYASABHA
2.
          Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3.          Shri Rahasbihari Barik
4.          Shri Debabrata Biswas
5.          Shri Lachhman Singh
LOKSABHA
6.          Shri Ranjib Biswal
7.          Shrimati Bhavana Chikhaliya
8.          Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix D'Souza
  9.     Shri K. Krishnamoorthy
10.      Shri Rupchand Murmu
11.      Shri Prakash Vishwanth Paranjpe
12.      Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
13.  Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
14.   Shri Suresh Warpudkar
] 5.   Shri Mukul Wasnik
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri M.L. Taneja, Committee Officer
2. The Committee took up consideration of the draft * * *, * * * and 57th Reports on the Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the
 * * *, * * * and Department of Ocean Development and * * * the reports were adopted.
3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri Lachhman Singh to present the reports to the Rajya  Sabha
 and Shri Mukul Wasnik and in his absence Shrimati Bhavana Chikhaliya to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sahba.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.25 A.M. to meet again at 10.00 A.M. on the 9th July, 1998.
* ** Relates to other matters.
 