Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
REPORT NO.
294
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on st March, )31 2017
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on st March, )31 2017
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FOURTH REPORT
March, 2017/Chaitra, 1939 (Saka)
Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the
Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Demand No. 25)


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

39
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FOURTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the
Ministry of Earth Sciences
(Demand No. 25)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 31st March, 2017)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31st March, 2017)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
March, 2017/Chaitra, 1939 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (iv )-(vi)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-25
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE .............................................................. 26-30
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 31-37

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-17)
 ( Constituted on 1st September , 2016)
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury  —  Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
5. Shri C. P. Narayanan
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
8. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK  SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji  Adhalrao Patil
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
31. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Two Hundred Ninety Fourth Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the
detailed Demands for Grants (2017-2018) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences (Demand No.25).
1. In the meeting of the Committee held on 13
th February, 2017, the Secretary and other Officers of the
Ministry of Earth Sciences gave an overview of the various activities of the Ministry and the Members
sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Ministry to enable it to scrutinise the
Demands for Grants.
2. The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Ministry for replying to the clarifications
sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the
Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
3. The Committee considered and adopted the draft report in its meeting held on the 29 th March, 2017.
(RENUKA CHOWDHURY)
NEW D ELHI; Chairperson,
29 March, 2017 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Chaitra 8, 1938  Science and Technology, Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.
(iii)

ACRONYMS
AAS : Agromet Advisory Services
ACROSS : Atmosphere and Climate Research - Modelling Observing Systems and Services
AMFUs : Agro Met Field Units
AMSS : Automatic Message Switching Systems
APORVS : Airborne Platform and Ocean Research Vessels
AWOS : Automated Weather Observation System
BCWC : BIMSTEC Centre for Weather and Climate
B E : Budget Estimate
BIMSTEC : Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation
BIS : Bureau of Indian Standards
BRGL : Borehole Geophysical Research Laboratory
BSR : Bottom Simulating Reflectors
CA T-ESSC : Centre for Advanced Training in Earth System Sciences and Climate
CCEA : Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
CMLRE : Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology
DAMU : District Agro-Meteorological field Units
EEZ : Exclusive Economic Zone
ESGF : Earth System Grid Federation
ESM : Earth System Model
ESSO : Earth System Science Organisation
GEFS : Global Ensemble Weather Forecasting System
GKMS : Gramin Krishi Mausam Seva
GPS : Global Positioning System
GRCCR : Global and Regional Climate Change
HDPE : High Density Polyethylene Pipe
HPC : High Performance Computing
IARI : Indian Agricultural Research Institute
ICAR : Indian Council of Agricultural Research
ICMAM : Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management
(iv)

IFD : Internal Finance Division
IGIA : Indira Gandhi International Airport
IIT : Indian Institute of Technology
IITM : Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology
IMD : India Meteorological Department
INCOIS : Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services
IndARc-II : Indian Arctic Mooring
INSA T : Indian National Satellite System
IPCC : Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
ITCOocean : International Training Centre for Operational Oceanography
LIDARs : Light Detection and Ranging
LTTD : Low Temperature Thermal Desalination
MLR : Marine Living Resources
MOSAIC : Marine Observation System Along Indian Coast
NCAOR : National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research
NCESS : National Centre for Earth Science Studies
NCMRWF : National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting
NCS : National Centre for Seismology
NDMA : National Disaster Management Authority
NIOT : National Institute of Ocean Technology
OR V : Ocean Research Vessel
OSE : Observation Simulation Experiments
O-STORMS : Ocean Services, Technology Observations, Resources Modelling and Science
OTEC : Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion
PACER : Polar Sciences and Cryosphere Research
PFZ : Potential Fishing Zone
PMCC : Project Monitoring and Coordination Committees
PR V : Polar Research Vessel
QPF : Quantitative Precipitation Forecast
R&D : Research and Development
(v)

RCE : Revised Cost Estimates
RE : Revised Estimate
REACH OUT : Research, Education and Training Outreach
RFP : Request for Proposal
ROSIS : Remotely Operable Subsea In-situ Soil Tester
SAGE : Seismological and Geo-science
SCA TSA T : Scatterometer Satellite
SO : Southern Ocean
TIO : Tropical Indian Ocean
WIS : WMO Information System
(vi)

1
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
Understanding and study of the Earth System and its Components and processes is important for the
mankind. The Earth, being a single, interlinked and self-regulating system, together with its components i.e.
atmosphere, oceans, cryosphere, geosphere and biosphere exhibit complex interactions. Therefore, scientific
understanding of the Earth system becomes necessary for the improvement of the services for socio-
environmental benefits of the country.
1.2  The Ministry of Earth Sciences came into being in 2006 by bringing all the agencies of meteorological
and ocean developmental activities under one umbrella with a view to address holistically various aspects
relating to earth system processes for improving forecasting of weather, climate and various geo-hazards.
Further, to monitor and give an overall policy direction to the Ministry, the Earth System Science Organisation
(ESSO) was also established in the year 2007.
1.3 The primary mandate of the Ministry is to develop and improve capability to forecast, weather,
climate and hazard related phenomena for societal, economic and environmental benefits including addressing
climate change science and developing climate services and integrated Himalayan meteorology. Secondly,
exploring ocean resources for socio-economic benefit including developing required state-of-the art technology
for harnessing marine non-living resources is major mission of the Ministry. The overarching vision of the
Ministry is to excel as knowledge and technology enterprise in the realm of earth sciences for socio-
economic benefit of the society. The major missions of the Ministry include (i) to conduct scientific and
technical activities related to Earth System Science for improving forecasting of weather, monsoon, climate
and natural hazards; (ii) exploration of Polar Regions, high seas and seas around India; and (iii) develop
technology for exploration and sustainable utilization of ocean resources.
2.  OBJECTIVES AND FUNCTIONS OF THE MINISTRY
2.1 The Ministry of Earth Sciences has the following objectives and functions:
Objectives
z To provide weather forecasts and advisories for agriculture, aviation, public safety, water
resources, shipping, sports including the extended and Long Range Seasonal Monsoon
forecasts
z To provide a wide range of ocean information advisories including fishery information
z To improve the understanding of Polar Science and its implications for climate change
z To conduct survey for assessing living and non-living resources
z To develop technology for harnessing marine resources
z To asses coastal marine productivity and Marine Ecosystems
z To improve the understanding of science of Climate Change and to provide regional climate
change scenarios
z To provide early warning of natural hazards viz., tropical cyclones, thunderstorms, floods,
Tsunami, storm surge etc.

2
z To conduct cutting edge research in Earth Sciences
z To promote basic research including Capacity Building in the Earth System Science
z To promote awareness and educate the public by extending support to seminars, symposia,
conferences and conduct workshops with stakeholders
Functions
z To augment and sustain long term observations of atmosphere, ocean, cryosphere and solid
earth to record the vital signs of the Earth System and changes.
z To develop forecasting capability of atmosphere and oceanic phenomena through dynamical
models and assimilation techniques and to build prediction systems for weather climate and
hazards.
z To understand interaction between components of the Earth System and human systems at
various spatial and temporal scales.
z Exploration of polar and high seas regions for discovery of new phenomenon and
resources
z To translate knowledge and insight themes gained into services for societal, environmental and
economic benefits
3. ORGANISATIONAL  STRUCTURE  OF  THE  MINISTRY
3.1 The Ministry of Earth Sciences functions through the Earth Commission. The executive arm of the
Ministry i.e. ‘The Earth System Science Organisation (ESSO)’ is responsible for implementing its policies
and programmes. It has four major branches of Earth Sciences viz., (i) Ocean Science and Technology
Services; (ii) Atmospheric and Climate Science Services; (iii) Geoscience and Technology; and (iv) Polar
Science and Cryosphere.
3.2 The policies and programs of the Ministry are being primarily pursued through its Centres
viz., autonomous bodies and subordinate offices. Currently there are 10 centres / institutes under the
Ministry to pursue programs/policies of the Ministry in different areas of Earth Sciences. The
institutions of the atmosphere sciences are India Meteorological Department (IMD), National Centre
for Medium Range Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF), Noida and Indian Institute of Tropical
Meteorology (IITM), Pune. The institutions relating to ocean science and technology are National
Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR), Goa, National Institute of Ocean Technology
(NIOT), Chennai, Indian National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS), Hyderabad,
Centre for Marine Living Resources (CMLRE), Kochi and Integrated Coastal and Marine Area
Management (ICMAM), Chennai. The National Centre for Earth Science Studies (NCESS) and National
Centre for Seismology (NCS) are also part of the Ministry to conduct research on solid earth and
earthquake monitoring. Each centre of the Ministry has a well-defined mandate to conduct front
research in a specific area of earth System.
3.3 The detailed budget allocation of the Ministry of Earth sciences, for the year 2017-18 was considered
by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests in its meeting held on the 13
th February, 2017.

3
4. FINANCIAL  PERFORMANCE  OF  THE  MINISTRY  AND  BUDGETARY  ALLOCATIONS
FOR  2017-18
4.1 A comparison of the B.E., R.E. allocation made and actual Planned expenditure incurred by the
Ministry for the years 2014-15, 2015-16 ,2016-17 and allocation made (BE) for 2017-18 is given below:-
(` in cr.)
Head 2014-15 2015-16 2016-17 2017-18
Budget  Estimates ` 1281.00 ` 1179.00 ` 1200.00 ` 1719.48
Revised  Estimates ` 925.00 ` 1013.00 ` 1106.08     ––
Actual Expenditure ` 900.28 `  900.00 ` 730.00 (upto
31st January 2017)     ––
% Budget Utilization 97.32% 88.84% 65.99%
with respect to R.E.
4.2 The details of BE, RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred by the Ministry along with percentage
budget utilization for the year 2016-17, project-scheme-wise details and BE for 2017-18 is given below.
(` in cr.)
Sl.        Scheme B E RE Actuals as % B E
No. 2016-17  2016-17  on Utilisation 2017-18
31.01.2017   2016-17
1             2 3 4 5 6 7
A. CENTRE’S EXPENDITURE
1. Secretariat -Economic 30.78 30.07 25.92 86.20 35.46
Services
2. Meteorology 352.20 355.55 320.61 90.17 383.34
3. Oceanographic Survey 50.72 45.89 36.73 80.04 50.41
(ORV and FORV) and
Marine Living Resources
(MLR)
4. National Centre for
Medium Range Weather
Forecasting (NCMRWF) 7.98 7.78 6.80 87.40 8.60
Total-Establishment Expenditure 441.68 439.29 390.06 88.79 477.81
of the Centre
5. Ocean Services, Technology, 355.00 315.00 291.28 92.47 336.00
Observations, Resources
Modelling and Science
(O-STORMS)

4
6. Atmosphere & Climate 360.00 449.97 180.14 40.03 496.00
Research -Modelling
Observing Systems &
Services (ACROSS)
7. Polar Science and Cryosphere 156.00 114.99 90.01 78.28 127.00
(PACER)
8. Seismological and Geo-science 150.00 60.01 26.25 43.74 76.70
(SAGE)
9. Research, Education and 49.90 40.00 23.26 58.15 44.00
Training Outreach
(REACHOUT)
Total-Central Sector Schemes/
Projects 1070.90 979.97 610.94 62.34 1079.70
Autonomous Bodies
10. Indian National Centre
for Ocean Information
Services (INCOIS) 30.00 27.01 15.00 55.53 30.05
11. National Institute of Ocean
Technology (NIOT) 29.00 29.00 16.00 55.17 29.40
12. National Centre for Antarctic
and Ocean Research (NCAOR) 18.90 18.90 10.00 52.91 19.74
13. Indian Institute of Tropical
Meteorology (IITM) 63.96 63.96 54.41 85.07 65.90
14. National Centre for Earth
Science Studies (NCESS) 21.00 21.00 17.64 84.00 20.84
Total-Autonomous Bodies 162.86 159.87 113.05 70.71 165.93
Gross Total 1675.44 1579.13 11 14.05 70.55 1723.44
Recovery 2.99 2.99 3.96
Net Total 1672.45 1576.14 1719.48
4.3 The Committee notes that although there has been a reduction in the budgetary allocation
at RE stage during the last three financial years i.e. 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17, the Ministry
has not been able to utilize the allocated amount optimally and much amount had remained
unspent. The Ministry in its Background Note has tried to explain the reasons for
underutilisation/savings in the budget for the last three financial years. In most of the cases,
delay in finalisation of projects/schemes or deferment appears to be the main reason behind
the underutilisation of funds. In few cases saving has been recorded due to delay in approval
from the end of Internal Finance Division (IFD) of the Ministry. Interestingly in one case the
1               2 3 4 5 6 7

5
saving has been recorded due to reduction of oil prices towards use in vessels on expedition to
Antarctica. But The Committee finds it hard to believe the reason for underutilisation given by
the Ministry at many places that the saving was primarily due to reduction in the budget at the
RE stage, which is contradictory in itself, unless the proposed scheme was dropped completely
due to reduction.
4.4. The Committee during the meeting took the above position very seriously and many Members
articulated their unhappiness over the state of affairs. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that such underutilization by the Ministry should be avoided by taking timely decisions towards
implementing the schemes as the Committee strongly feels that there could be a correlation between
the delay in the implementation by the Ministry and reduction in the budget at RE stage by the
Ministry of Finance.
4.5 While analysing the reason behind underutilisation/saving given by the Ministry, the
Committee has taken note of the fact that IFD has also been responsible in delaying the projects
which has resulted in the underutilisation. The Committee is unanimous over the idea that scientific
ministries should not be treated on par with other ministries headed by trained bureaucrats as far
as financial management is concerned. The Committee feels that scientific ministries headed by
reputed scientists should be allowed to pursue their visions for the country and the Financial Advisors
attached to these ministries should be sensitised to this fact.
4.6 The Committee was informed that the budgetary allocations for the Ministry in B.E. 2017-18 is
` 1719.48 cr. comprising of ` 1604.48 cr. as the ‘Revenue’ and ` 115.00 cr. as the ‘Capital’’ outlay.
The Ministry informed the Committee that it had requested the Ministry of Finance for ‘Plan’ allocation
of ` 2920 cr.. However, the Ministry of Finance had allocated ` 1719.48 cr. for the year 2017-18.
4.7 Also, in its meeting held on 13
th February, 2017, the Ministry apprised the Committee that it is
facing severe financial constraints and at the R.E. Stage in 2016-17 it suffered lack of allocations and cut
in budgetary support. The Ministry further informed that it was extremely difficult to prepare BE 2017-18
within the given ceilings of ` 1719.48 cr. in the budget for 2017-18 against the projection of ` 2,920 cr..
Since there is no classification of Plan and Non-plan allocation for 2017-18, substantial portion of budget
from the programmes will be required to meet the salary expenditure. There is also an increase in salaries
on account of implementation of the 7th Pay Commission which is to be allocated from the ceiling from
the available budget. It was also informed that Ministry has been facing extreme financial constraints for
the past few years due to lack of adequate fund allocation. This has resulted in non-starter of several
programmes recommended for implementation during 12th Plan. There has been a consistent cut in the
budget of the Ministry at RE stage during the last couple of years.  In view of the paucity of funds, some
of the important programmes of the Ministry of societal relevance are adversely affected viz. (i) National
Monsoon Mission (ii) Integrated Himalayan Meteorology (iii) Climate Change Research (iv) Antarctic and
Arctic Research including ocean mineral resources. Besides, a set of infrastructural programmes namely
(i) Acquisition of Polar Research Vessel and Coastal Research Vessel and (ii) National Facility for Airborne
Platform could not be taken up due to inadequate allocation.  Accordingly, the Ministry has prioritized the
programmes and proposed to implement in a phased manner. Recognizing the importance of High
Performance Computing (HPC) System for cutting-edge quality science through running of advanced
high resolution models, which caters to providing important services to various verticals, it is proposed to
procure HPC during the 2016-17 and 2017-18. The Ministry had therefore requested to seek additional

6
` 500.00 cr. so that the functioning of the Ministry is not hampered. In response to the query of the
Committee about the break-up of ` 500 cr additional grants, the Ministry has provided the following
details:
                                                 New Initiatives ` in cr.
Development of high resolution (12 km.) weather prediction models through
augmentation of High Performance Computing – 10 Peta flop 250
Block level forecasts (around 6000) through 660 district centres – Built-in in
ACROSS program 40
Customized  Forecasts for Tourism/Pilgrimage – 300 destinations spread over the
country–Built-in ACROSS program 30
Marine Observation System Along Indian Coast (MOSAIC) at cost of ` 150 cr. 50
Development Ballast Water Treatment Facility at a cost of ` 44 cr. 40
Energy from Oceans-Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) Plant at Kavaratti at
a cost of ` 99 cr. 50
Hiring of Aircraft for monsoon experiments 40
                                                          T OTAL 500
4.8 The Committee while understanding that the budgetary allocation to the Scientific
Ministry/ Departments should not face any cuts or reduction at the R.E. stage during previous
years or in 2017-18, finds it difficult to endorse the idea as the facts during the previous
financial years clearly tell a different story which has been expressed by the Committee in
above paras 4.3 to 4.5. The Committee finds it further difficult to recommend an additional
grant of ````` 500 cr. as it is not sure about the utilisation of the allocated amount at the BE level
to the full.
4.9 The Committee is  aware of the fact that after doing away with the distinction of ‘Plan’
and ‘Non-Plan’ heads the ministries will be tempted to manipulate allocations sometimes
owing to exigencies and sometimes to ‘so-called’ priority areas. It is in this light that the
Committee recommends the Government to provide additional grants at the RE stage to
compensate fully the possible demand created on account of the 7
th Pay Commission
recommendations.
4.10 The Committee is also aware that the financial budget of 2017-18 is likely to be passed by the
Parliament before 31 st march which would mean that there would be no requirement of vote on
account and the ministries will be able to start withdrawing funds from Consolidated Fund of India
from the day one of the financial year 2017-18. Therefore, the Committee hopes that the Ministry
will be able to utilise the allocated funds in time and if that happens, the Committee would be glad
to recommend grant of additional funds of ````` 500 cr for the Ministry at RE stage in order to pursue
important programmes and activities in 2017-18 which had been deferred previously due to paucity
of funds.

7
5. MAJOR  SCHEMES/PROGRAMMES  OF  THE  MINISTRY
5.A ATMOSPHERE AND CLIMATE RESEARCH – MODELLING OBSERVING SYSTEMS AND
SERVICES (ACROSS)
5.1 This programme deals with (i) sustaining and strengthening of atmospheric observation systems to
meet the needs of monitoring as well as providing wide range of services viz. Agriculture, Aviation, city
forecasts, mountain regions, defence and sports, disasters in the country including setting up of a dedicated
forecasting system for the entire Himalayan region with a much focused objective of integrating and
improving the weather related services and climate services (ii) development of a suite of atmospheric
models required for prediction of monsoon weather and climate in India on different time and space
scales ranging from short and medium range to seasonal mean including specific forecast of severe
weather, such as cyclones, heavy rains, storms, floods, heat-waves, fog and air-quality, micro physical
characteristics of aerosols and clouds and associated environmental conditions. (iii) conduct climate
change research to generate a number of regional scenarios of water and other climate services due to
climate Long-term (multi-decadal) simulations, conducting research to enhance understanding of the
changing water cycle and paleoclimatic studies (iv) Continuous augmentation of high performance
computation facilities and its operation and maintenance on 24X7 basis for undertaking all modelling
activities, forecast generation, data centre and data analytics, air borne platform facilities for environmental
observations.
The Ministry also informed that no separate budgetary allocation has been made during 2017-18 as
the necessary budget required to meet HPC programme has been projected under the ACROSS scheme as a
part of rationalization exercise.
5.2 The Committee was apprised about the major activities and achievements during 2016-17 under this
programme. The Committee was informed that a high resolution global deterministic weather prediction
model has been commissioned for generating operational weather forecasts at a horizontal resolution of
12km. Under the Monsoon Mission, operational dynamical model systems have been implemented for extended
range and seasonal forecasts. For the first time, forecasts on different time scales during the hot weather
season (April to May) including heat waves were issued by the India Meteorological Department. Presently
around 19.5 million farmers are being directly benefitted by the agro-meteorological services of IMD. For
the recent cyclone Vardah, accurate predictions were provided almost 3 days in advance, helping the state
government authorities to save thousands of lives. To address the issue of better measurement and
understanding of small-scale processes that drive the variability, seasonality and predictability in the South
Asian Monsoon, a large-scale joint India-UK observational campaign was carried out during the period June-
July 2016.
5.3 The Committee was also informed that an observational campaign to understand different physical
features of Fog and factors responsible for its genesis, intensity and duration was also initiated during
December 2016 at the Indira Gandhi International Airport (IGIA) and at ICAR-IARI in New Delhi. These
observations will be useful for improving model forecasts of Fog.
5.4 The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the proposed plans and activities under the programme
Atmosphere & Climate Research – Modelling Observing systems & Services (ACROSS). The Ministry
informed the Committee that ACROSS is an integrated programme of four major sub-programmes i.e.
Atmospheric Observation Systems Network; Atmospheric Processes and Modelling and Services; Climate

8
Change Research; and High Performance Computing, the expenses for which shall be met from the Budget
Estimate allocation of  ` 496.00 cr. for the financial year 2017-18.
5.5 Through the Background note furnished by the Ministry, it was apprised the Committee that following
activities would be undertaken by the Ministry during the 2017-18 under the ACROSS Programme:
z Development of a high resolution (12km.) Global Ensemble Weather Forecasting System (GEFS)
Development of a coarse resolution (25/17km.) Global Ensemble Weather Forecasting System
(GEFS).
z Setting up of District Agro-meteorological field units (DAMU) in 660 districts and Setting up
of District Agro-meteorological field units (DAMU) in 400 districts.
z Development of mobile/web based applications for communication of customized weather
and climate advisories for 30 tourists’ destinations.
z Atmospheric Observation System Network: Sustenance and Maintenance of meteorological
observational networks on 24×7 basis, Establishment of Automatic Message Switching Systems
(AMSS), WIS for data & product transmission.
z Satellite Meteorology: Establishment of Processing systems to Receive, process, derivation of
products from imager and sounder payloads data of INSAT 3DR, & SCATSAT
z Integrated Himalayan Meteorology Programme for Western and Central Himalayas: Installation
of 3 DWR’s, 2 GPS UA, 4 Compact Radar Systems, 3 HAWOS, 15 SFO’s and 3 Radiometers
in the Himalayan States.
z Aviation Meteorological Services: Installation of AWOS and Drishti Transmissometers at 20
airports and heliports.
z Gramin Krishi Mausam Sewa: Improve the existing district level Agromet Advisory Services (AAS).
z Climate Services: Develop an Advanced Regional Climate Services Framework to cater to the
needs of Agriculture, Water Resources, Alternate Energy Resources and extremes/impacts at
extended monthly scale.
z Weather and Climate Services for the North Eastern states: Installations of 4 M-AWS, 4 GPS-
S, 5 HAWOS in the NE states and operational use of the data obtained from the instruments for
effective meteorological services.
z Modernisation of Weather and Climate Observing Network: To set up atmospheric observational
network at 100x100km grid and upper air observations at 200x200 km, complimented by air-
craft based profiler observations, Doppler Radars, Wind profilers, Radiometers, GPS Pilot,
Lightning detectors, and LIDARs.
z Global and Regional Climate Change (GRCCR): Launch of several multi-century climate
simulations using the IITM Earth System Model (ESM) and high resolution regional models
for Climate Change scientific investigations and for the next IPCC Report.
z Regional climate downscaling CORDEX South Asia: Paleoclimate studies -Observational records
(proxies) and model investigations, Commissioning of Earth System Grid Federation (ESGF)
node for dissemination of CORDEX and CMIP6 data.

9
z Setup observation systems (FLUXNET, GHG monitoring, etc.) at Central India and important
locations. Conduct laboratory experiments for documenting climate change and its impacts.
z Develop outreach programmes for training and capacity building through collaboration among
climate, applications and adaptation communities.
z Physics and Dynamics of Tropical Clouds (Precipitation enhancement experiments, Fog
Campaigns, HACPL, TX project, Weather Modification): Establishment of C-band radar and
ground based observational facility for the Cloud seeding experiment in rain shadow region,
Conduct Winter fog experiment in Delhi and improve fog forecasting options.
z Thunder Storm Dynamics: Expansion of Lightning Location Network over Central, Northeast
and South India. Design and fabrication of Cloud chamber.
z Monsoon Mission: Short Range, Extended Range and Seasonal Prediction; Development of a
system for the Prediction of North-East monsoon, cyclogenesis and extremes, Develop new
methodologies to improve the skill of seasonal monsoon forecasts and prediction of extremes.
z Development of Coupled NWP: Implementation/testing of a NCUM based medium resolution
coupled NWP model (~25 km.).
z Ocean Initialisation: Implement/test global 25 km. ocean initialization system NEMOVar for
coupled modelling.
z Coupled Earth System Data Assimilation: Review of the coupled assimilation output/forecast
from UKMO and other centres.
z Numerical Modelling of Weather and Climate: Operational implementation of ~25/17 km. global
NCMRWF EPS (NEPS) with 22/ 44 members, Up-gradation of the current operational Data
Assimilation for GFS by increasing the resolution of EnKF ensembles to ~12 km.
z Up-gradation of the operational global hybrid 4D-Var data assimilation system for NCMRWF
Unified Model (NCUM) with (i) State-of-the-art data monitoring system, (ii) Additional Indian
and International satellite data and other relevant data.
z High Performance Computing: Up-gradation of 10 Peta Flop.
z National Facility for Airborne Research: Initiation of procurement process of Instrumented
Aircraft system and hangar facility.
z National Programme on Atmospheric Chemistry: Development of a National Programme on
Atmospheric Chemistry, Conduct basic research in Atmospheric Chemistry and Air Quality,
Development and Updating the High resolution emissions for urban areas, Development of
atmospheric Chemistry and air quality products for services.
z Studies on Monsoon and Climate Variability: Investigate monsoon and climate variability using
data analysis, model simulations, coupled atmosphere-ocean models and standalone atmosphere
and ocean models, Research on basic scientific questions.
z Seamless Modelling Strategy including methods of Data Assimilation: Evaluate current seamless
model outputs across scales from days to decade and climate, with emphasis on seasonal and

10
sub-seasonal skill for monsoon, Include high resolution convective scale evaluation in the
seamless model evaluation for monsoon and severe weather, Initiate work on coupled land-
atmosphere-ocean data assimilation system. Meteorological Support for Floods (Hydrological
Information System, Flood Warning Systems).
z Prepare QPF in medium and extended-range for all river Basins in India: Develop a hydrological
information system including all available archived (past) and real-time hydrology data. Examine
the features of flooding events of various rivers in the past and collect data (including remote
sensing) on changing river bed. Implementation of flood models.
z Research Testbeds and Process Studies, Climate Reference Stations: Establish 2-3 climate
reference stations (Himalayas, Arctic and Antarctic) for accurate, continuous (uninterrupted)
and long-term monitoring of climate observations.
z Urban Meteorology: Establish Meso networks, develop Urban Modelling  capabilities and Urban
Meteorology, Severe Weather Prediction System (Heavy Rains, Flash Floods, Thunderstorms,
Heat and cold waves, Decision Support Systems for Multi-hazard warnings).
z Develop capabilities for severe weather prediction systems (heavy rains, flash floods,
thunderstorms, heat and cold waves) and decision support system for multi-hazard warming
-using observational networks (conventional and research testbeds)and high resolution modelling
strategies.
z Weather Forecasts for energy sectors: Develop modelling strategies for forecasting solar and
wind energy potentials for the Indian industries. The project may also set up observation
systems, if required.
5. 6. The details of BE, RE, Actual Expenditure incurred (upto 31.01.2017) of the above mentioned Scheme
in 2016-17 and BE for 2017-18 are given below:-
(
` in cr.)
Sl. No Scheme B E RE Actual as % B E
2016-17 2016-17 on Utilisation 2017-18
31.01.2017   2016-17
1. Atmosphere & 360.00 449.97 180.14 40.03 496.00
Climate Research
Modelling Observing
Systems & Services
(ACROSS)
5.7 The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the reason for increasing the allocated amount
during RE stage 2016-17 (from ` 360 cr. to 449.97 cr.) in respect of this Scheme i.e. Atmosphere and
Climate Research-Modelling Observing Systems and Services (ACROSS) and the actual utilization during
2016-17 under this scheme and in what manner enhanced allocation benefitted the scheme?
High Performance Computing System
5.8 The Ministry informed the Committee that the increase in the allocation is primarily meant for
procurement of HPC, which was accorded during the second batch of supplementary grants. However, the

11
supplementary to a tune of  ` 171.90 cr. to this effect has been allocated within the available savings of other
programmes through reprioritization. As on 31 st January 2017, the percentage utilization of funds under the
ACROSS scheme is about 40% against RE 2016-17.The programme “Implementation of HPC system was
approved by CCEA on 6th Feb 2014 to be implemented during the T welfth plan at a total estimated cost
of ` 567.16 cr. to carry out simulations for generating skilful weather, climate and ocean state forecast for
improved weather, climate and hazard services. The procurement of HPC comes under the program
“ACROSS”. After following due procedures, an RFP has been floated for procuring an HPC with 7-10
petaflop capability on 28th January 2017. The estimated cost of the HPC with 7-10 petaflop will be
approximately ` 450 cr.. The Ministry also informed that no separate budgetary allocation has been made
during 2017-18 as the necessary budget required to meet HPC programme has been projected under the
ACROSS scheme as a part of rationalization exercise.
5.9 The Committee is of the view that development of High Performance Computing is significant for
improving the quality of atmospheric, oceanic, polar and geosciences services and enhancing accuracy in
monsoon forecasts, studies related to Observation Simulation Experiments (OSE) and targeted observation
experiments, ensemble predictions for weather, ocean state, cyclone track, short and medium range weather
forecast, satellite and in-situ data assimilation, understanding of the science of climate change and climate
variability, etc.
5.10 The Committee also recalled that it had been underlining the importance of high powered
computers since the year 2014, however, actualisation of it is still eluding. The Committee reiterates
that augmentation of High Performance computing to 10 peta flops will go a long way in achieving
the high level of accuracy in prediction relating to weather services. Hence, the Committee
recommends that sincere efforts be made for achieving it in time bound manner so that this project
is completed without further delay.
ACCURACY IN WEATHER FORECASTING
5.11 Weather forecasting for the country as a whole and region-wise is one of the most important mandates
of the Ministry. On being enquired about the steps taken by the Ministry to improve the accuracy of weather
forecasts and bring it at par with the international standards, the Ministry informed the Committee that
upgradation and sustenance of weather forecasting capabilities to an optimum level was the major program
launched to improve the accuracy of weather forecasts and to bring it at par with the international standards
through sustenance and augmentation of atmospheric observation network, data integration, product
generation and dissemination of Weather Forecast and Warning information.
5.12 The Ministry informed that this has resulted in improved capabilities for predicting high impact weather
events like cyclones, severe thunderstorms, heavy rainfall and floods in a significant manner. Noticeable
improvements achieved in Skills of Heavy Rainfall Forecast (False Alarm Rate reduced from 46% to 11%
and Probability of Detection increased from 49% to 67% from 2002-12 to 2013-15). Noteworthy improvement
in track and intensity forecast of the tropical cyclones (24 hour forecast error in track prediction reduced
from 137 km. to 97 km. and Landfall error from 101 Km. to 56 Km. during 2007-11 to 2012-16). The
landfall point forecast error 24 hrs in advance has been almost zero for recent cyclones, Phailin in 2013,
Hudhud in 2014 and Vardah in 2016.
5.13 The timely and accurate forecast and warning services led to (i) increase in confidence of disaster
managers and triggered the actions for cyclone management. It led to minimum loss of lives and minimum

12
area of evacuation. It can be seen that the death toll was less than 50 in each case and was very less as
compared similar cyclones in previous years.
5.14 The Ministry further informed that thus, during the recent few years significant improvement has
been achieved in severe weather and associated predictions. India Meteorological Department (IMD) played
the crucial role, supporting those responsible for managing crisis during the events such as the extreme
rainfall events and cyclonic storms in the Bay of Bengal. A remarkable improvement in weather and climate
services and advisories received an overwhelming appreciation from user community on natural disasters
such as tropical cyclones and extreme rainfall events. These capabilities and skills of forecast are at par with
other major international centres.
5.15 During the Meeting of the Committee on 13
th February, 2017 the Ministry informed that efforts are
continuously made to optimize the level of efficiency and accuracy of the forecasting systems. Noticeable
improvements achieved in skills of Heavy Rainfall Forecast, lead time of warnings increased from 3 to 5
days in respect of Rainfall, Heat Wave, and Cold Wave etc. Noteworthy improvement in tracking intensity
forecast of the tropical cyclones has been achieved. Prediction of extreme heat forecast is made available on
IMD website. To understand the processes that drive the variability and predictability of the South Asian
Monsoon, a large scale India-UK Joint Observational Campaign was done in May-July, 2016.
5.16 The Committee while appreciating the achievements of the Ministry in the area of accuracy
in weather forecasting, observes that there is a lack of smooth dissemination of information regarding
predictions of extreme events to all the stakeholders. The track record of the Ministry has been
above par in the case of cyclone predictions which has been seen in the case of Hudhud and Vardah.
But in case of flash floods and floods caused due to heavy and incessant rainfalls, the information
does not reach fast enough to take pre-emptive actions on the ground zero. The Committee is given
to understand that the IMD collects the data, interpolates them to arrive at the predictions of flood
and transmit it to many agencies viz. Central Water Commission, NDMA and State Disaster
Management Authorities, State Governments etc. However, sometimes they fail to assess the severity
of the situation which is what happened in the case of Uttarakhand Tragedy in 2015. Therefore the
Committee recommends that the Ministry should develop a foolproof mechanism of disseminating
important data on the weather predictions to the last point so that damage to lives and livelihoods
can be minimised. The Committee would like to suggest that the Ministry may designate Director
General, IMD to hold a compulsory press conference in the case of prediction of severe rains which
will be in addition to the existing mechanism of dissemination.
6. OCEAN SERVICES, TECHNOLOGY OBSERV ATIONS, RESOURCES MODELLING AND
SCIENCE (O-STORMS)
6.1 The programme O-STORMS encompasses (i) Sustaining and Strengthening a suite of Ocean
Observational Networks for acquisition of time-series data from the seas around India. They help in improving
understanding of ocean dynamic, climate variability, ocean state forecast, sea level variations, ocean flux
studies, etc. (ii) provide a suite of Ocean Information Services, assessment of Marine Living Resources,
periodical monitoring of health of the coastal water of India, Management of Coastal Marine Area, Operational
Tsunami Warning System on 24X7 basis for issue of bulletins for India and to the countries of the Indian
Ocean Region, (iii) conducting surveys for harnessing the marine non-living resources in a sustainable way,
available in EEZ and deep sea region of the Indian Ocean. These include gas hydrates, poly metallic nodules,
hydrothermal sulfide minerals, cobalt crusts which contain valuable noble metals available along the mid

13
oceanic regions of the Indian Ocean (iv) acquisition and operation and maintenance of Ocean Research
Vessels for undertaking all activities (v) development of ocean technology for ocean energy, deep sea mining,
Coastal Environmental Engineering and Marine Instrumentation , sea front facility, offshore numerical tank,
development of unmanned submersible. The Remotely Operable Subsea In-situ Soil Tester (ROSIS) and
Submersible had been developed.
6.2 The Ministry through its background note apprised the Committee that following activities would be
undertaken by the Ministry during the 2017-18 under the O-STORMS Programme:
z Launch of Marine Observation System Along Indian Coast (MOSAIC) by obtaining the
administrative approval.
z Sustain Coastal ocean Advisories; including launch of species specific, location specific services
(PFZ, OSF, CBAS, etcs).
z Coastal Mission under National Action Plan for climate change jointly with MoEFCC-Coastal
Multi-Hazard Warning-Improve existing Tsunami Early Warning System: service level 3 products,
integration of GPS and SMA data in the warning system, generation of global scenarios, setup
of real-time inundation model along Indian coast, etc.
z Augment of Ocean Observational network by 15% (moored buoys, HF Radars, Tsunami buoys,
Tide Gauges, ADCPs, AWSs, WRBs, Argo, drifters and XBT lines).
z Advanced ocean modelling and Decision support Systems by developing a wide range of
couples ocean-atmospheric and high resolution models for coastal models and assimilation of
data.
z Development of Technology for harnessing of Marine Living Resources -A set of six fishery
oceanographic survey for in-situ data collection towards development of ecosystem modelling.
z Development Blue and Green infrastructure sustainable coastal development and protection -
Continue to monitor the water quality of coastal waters through revival of the existing monitoring
mechanism.
z Blue Economy-OTEC powered desalination: Site survey and detailed design of plant, Setting
up Ballast water treatment facility -obtaining Approval and initiating the design.
z BLUE Economy Technology development for mineral exploration and harvesting, ocean energy,
Optimization of nodule collection and crushing systems.
z Setting up of Multi-purpose sea front facility, and Offshore: Numerical Tank Engaging architect
for designing seafront facility; Offshore numerical tankBlue Economy-Initiation of preliminary
exploratory activities under polymetallic sulphides programme.
z Acquisition of 60,000 sq. km. of bathymetric data in Exclusive Economic Zone of India: Geo-
physical data acquisition under Extended Continental Shelf program.
z Replacement of Ocean Research V essels-Obtaining the approval for all the new research vessels,
Award of contract for Coastal Research Vessels.
z Setting up of Earth System Enterprise to commercialise technologies and services developed
by Institutes under the Ministry.

14
6.3 The details of BE, RE, Actual Expenditure incurred (upto 31.01.2017) of the above mentioned Scheme
in 2016-17 and BE for 2017-18 are given below:-
(` in cr.)
Sl. No. Scheme B E RE Actual as % B E
2016-17 2016-17  on Utilisation 2017-18
31.01.2017 2016-17
1. Ocean Services, 355.00 315.00 291.28 92.47 336.00
Technology, Observations,
Resources Modelling and
Science (O-STORMS)
6.4 The Committee desired to know the reason behind reduction of allocated amount during RE stage
(2016-17) from ` 355 cr. to ` 315 cr. in respect of Ocean Services, Technology Observations, Resources
Modelling and Science (O-STORMS) alongwith the actual utilization during 2016-17 under this scheme and
whether reduction hampered this scheme in any manner?
6.5 The Ministry informed that due to reprioritization exercise carried out to meet the cost of expenditure
for procurement of High Performance Computing System, a supplementary grant of ` 171.90 cr. was
sought at RE stage of 2016-17, which was found within available resources. Besides, there was a reduction
of allocation for the Ministry to a tune of ` 96 cr. at RE stage. This has resulted in reduction of budget of
` 40 cr. under O-STORMS Programme at RE stage. As a result, some of the programs like Acquisition of
Coastal Research Vessel, Development of Seafront facility, Deep Sea mining equipment including Manned
submersible, would be delayed including engagement of contractual staff. As on 31
st January 2017, the
percentage utilization of funds under the O-STORMS scheme was about 92% against RE of 2016-17.
6.6 The Committee is aware that O-STORMS is an important scheme of the Ministry as it
helps in improving understanding of ocean dynamic, climate variability, ocean and coastal state
forecast, sea level variations, ocean flux studies, etc. It is also responsible for operational Tsunami
Warning System on 24X7 basis for issue of bulletins for India and to the countries of the Indian
Ocean Region, besides, continuously exploring ocean resources, operation and maintenance of
Ocean Research Vessels and development of ocean technology for deep sea mining among others.
The Committee feels that O-STORMS scheme is an important scheme which does not deserve
any reduction of budget allocation at RE stage as it would definitely hamper the scientific work at
the ground level. Therefore, the Committee while acknowledging the fact that the Ministry could
not even spend the reduced allocation at RE stage, does not appreciate the budgetary reduction at
RE stage.
7. OPEN SEA  CAGE  CULTURE
7.1 The Ministry informed the Committee during its meeting held on 13
th February, 2017 that large scale
fish production through Mariculture is the viable alternative to cope up with the ever increasing demand for
fish proteins. Towards this an open sea cage culture mooring system was designed and developed for
commercially important marine finfishes in different sea conditions with the available marine engineering
and biological expertise. A 9 m diameter High Density Polyethylene Pipe (HDPE) cages with multipoint
mooring were deployed and tested in the North Bay (Andaman Islands), Olaikuda (Tamil Nadu) and

15
Kothachathram (Andhra Pradesh) representing fully protected, semi-protected and open sea environments,
respectively. The Ministry further informed the Committee that four number container-based laboratories
have been established for analysis related to cage culture, micro algal culture and ballast water treatment in
the seafront facility at Pamanji, Nellore.
7.2 The Committee feels that efforts of the Ministry would bring the qualitative changes in
livelihood of fishermen as fish production would increase through open sea cage culture. However,
the Committee observes that fish produced through open sea cage culture may be compromising on
omega 3 as not enough algae are available to the fish as their feed which is necessary for the mega
3 in the fish. And the fish will be rich in omega 6 which is not good for human consumption.
Therefore, the Committee urges the Ministry to do in-depth research of the Open Sea Cage Culture,
its impact on the fish, otherwise the entire purpose of providing protein rich food to people will be
defeated.
8. POLAR SCIENCES AND CRYOSPHERE RESEARCH (PACER)
8.1  This program is designed to study various aspects relating to Polar and Cryosphere with special
emphasis on the Antarctic, Arctic and Glaciers of Himalayas (i) establishment, sustenance and augmentation
of observing system (ii) Expeditions and related activities to the Arctic, Antarctic, Himalayas and
Southern Ocean (iii) Establishment/maintenance of Indian stations in the Arctic, Antarctic and Himalayas
and (iv) Acquisition/maintenance of Polar Research vessels.
8.2 The Committee was apprised about the major activities and achievements during 2016-17 relating to
Antarctic, Arctic and Himalayan region under this programme. The Committee was informed that the 35th
Indian Scientific expedition to Antarctica was executed with a total of 124 expedition members representing
29 different organizations with 34 projects covering upper atmosphere, astrophysics, geophysics, meteorology,
glaciology, geology, biology, environmental sciences, human physiology and medicine. Yoga was introduced
as part of a scientific programme. The 36
thexpedition members were sent in different batches, commencing
November 2016. Total 31 sub-projects/studies would cover (i) Atmospheric Science and Meteorology,
(ii) Biology and Environmental Sciences (iii) Earth Science and Glaciology with the overall theme being the
“Climate Change”.
8.3 The IX
th Southern Ocean Expedition was launched on-board Oceanographic Research V essel MV
Agulhas [South African vessel] from Port Louis, Mauritius during December, 2016. The observations will
be made upto Prydz Bay, the coastal waters of India’s third station in Antarctica “Bharati’. As regards
Himalayan Region , the Committee was informed that a high altitude research station was established in
Himalaya called HIMANSH (literally meaning, a slice of ice), situated above 13,500 ft (> 4000 m) at a
remote region in Spiti, Himachal Pradesh. This station is equipped with instruments such as Automatic
Weather Station, Water Level Recorder, Steam Drill, Snow/Ice Corer, Ground Penetrating Radar, Differential
Global positioning System, Snow Fork, Flow Tracker, Thermister string, Radiometer etc. Water Level
Recorders were installed at five locations along with a stretch of 130 km of Chandra River in Western
Himalaya for hydrological balance/modeling. Glaciers were monitored for mass balance, dynamics, energy
balance and hydrology. Field campaign in Himalayan glaciers with the major activities like: (a). stake
monitoring of the health of the glaciers in Sutri Dhaka, Batal, Samudra Tapu, Gepang Gath, Kunjam and
Bara Shigri glaciers; (b). data retrieval and maintenance of Automatic weather Station over Sutri Dhaka
base camp and glacier; (c). river discharge data from all four locations along the entire length of the
Chandra river.

16
8.4 The Committee was also informed by the Ministry about Arctic that under the Arctic observational
program, the Indian Arctic Mooring (IndARC-II) was retrieved on 26th July 2016, following which IndARC
III was re-deployed successfully on 27th July 2016. The Ambient Noise Measurement System with a single
hydrophone and a data acquisition system were deployed on IndARC-II. The IndARC-II collected more
than 116 parameters and worked continuously for 373 days in the Arctic waters. During the year, 17
projects covering different aspects oceanography, atmospheric sciences, geology and glaciology were
implemented at Ny-Alesund, Svalbard, Norway.
8.5 The details of BE, RE, Actual Expenditure incurred (upto 31.01.2017) of the above mentioned Scheme
in 2016-17 and BE for 2017-18 are given below:-
(
` in cr.)
Sl. No. Scheme B E RE Actual as % B E
2016-17 2016-17  on Utilisation 2017-18
31.01.2017 2016-17
1. Polar Science and 156.00 114.99 90.01 78.28 127.00
Cryosphere(PACER)
8.6 The Committee enquired from the Ministry about the reason in reduction of allocated amount during
RE stage 2016-17 (from ` 156 cr. to 114.99 cr.) in respect of Polar Sciences and Cryosphere (PACER)
alongwith the actual utilization during 2016-17 and whether reduction in allocation at RE stage had any
bearing on this scheme?
8.7 The Ministry informed the Committee that at RE stage, there was a reduction of allocation for the
Ministry to a tune of ` 96 cr. This has resulted in reduction of budget of ` 41 cr. under PACER Programme
at RE stage.  As a result, the procurement of Polar Research Vessel had to be postponed including engagement
of contractual staff. As on 31
st January 2017, the percentage utilization of funds under the PACER scheme
is about 78% against RE of  2016-17.
8.8 The Background note furnished by the Ministry, has inter alia outlined the following activities which
would be undertaken by the Ministry during the 2017-18 under the PACER Programme:
z Research and study of past climate and geology Expansion scientific activities in polar region
Monitoring and predicting the Polar Cryosphere system
z Launching of 11th scientific expedition to the Arctic
z Launching of 37th scientific expedition to Antarctica
z Launching of 10th multi-disciplinary, inter-Intuitional scientific expeditions to Southern Ocean
(SO) including the Tropical Indian Ocean (TIO)
z Assessment of Climate Change Impacts -Himalayan glaciers-Integrated mass balance and
hydrological monitoring of Chandra basin glaciers and river system in Himalaya
z Acquisition of Polar Research Vessel -Obtaining the approval for PRV Award of contract for
Polar Research Vessel
z International Collaboration on Earth Sciences -Complete the construction of the building for
International Training Centre for Operational Oceanography (ITCOocean); conduct short term
training programmes in operational oceanography

17
8.9 While deposing before the Committee the Ministry emphasized the need of acquiring Polar Research
Vehicle (ship) and informed that the Ministry has initiated floating fresh global tender for identification of
shipbuilder for construction and delivery of Polar Research Vessel. The technical specifications document
and tender document are being re-visited currently. The Project Monitoring and Coordination Committees
(PMCC) have been reconstituted to go through the technical specifications. The shipbuilding activities shall
be for 3 years after identifying the shipbuilder and considering the current flow of activities, the vessel is
expected to be delivered in the year 2020-21.
8.10 The Committee wanted to know the background of the proposed acquisition of the Polar Research
Vessel with a view to understand why this process has taken such a long time and still we are far away from
clinching it.
8.11 The Ministry informed the Committee that it decided to implement the programme entitled “Acquisition
of Polar Research Vessel (PRV)” during the XI Plan (2007-2012) period. National Centre for Antarctic and
Ocean Research (NCAOR), Goa was also identified as the implementing organization of this programme on
behalf of the Ministry. Ever since 1981, when the 1
st Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica was launched,
the Indian expeditions have been undertaken onboard ice-class vessels or ice-breakers chartered from the
international market. These vessels have largely been cargo ships capable of transporting men and material
to and back from Antarctica. With increased demand for cargo vessels and their dwindling availability, the
chartered charges of these vessels have been escalating over the years. Considering the sustained year-
round presence of Indian scientists and logistics personnel in Antarctica, it is imperative that expedition
vessels are sent without fail every summer. Non-availability of vessel, or for any reason, failure to hire a
suitable vessel during any particular Antarctic summer can not only seriously jeopardize the Antarctic
programme but also endanger the lives of the personnel manning the Antarctic station.
1. The requirement of PRV was conceptualized during November 2007 when invitation for
Expression of Interest for appointment of Consultants was made in newspapers and on website.
2. The initial cost requirement was projected to be ` 490 cr. in December 2009.
3. The current financial requirement for the vessel is ` 1051.13 cr. as per Administrative Order
issued in November 2014.
8.12 It further said that the tender processing for acquisition of new PRV was completed in March 2013
and identified the shipbuilding yard. The cost of acquisition of vessel as offered by L1 bidder was more than
the approved cost of the project and the requisite Revised Cost Estimates (RCE) approval was submitted. In
pursuance to the approval of RCE granted in November 2014 and LoI issued to L1 bidder, a draft contract
was finalized in May 2015. However, owing to the demand of L1 bidder for certain changes to the agreed
terms and conditions of the draft contract, and which are not acceptable, a decision was taken to cancel the
tender and float a fresh tender (re-tender). The tender document and technical specifications were updated
to meet the latest shipping regulations and technologies with the help of the same ship design consultants
who have originally developed the concept design and specifications for PRV . The process for floating fresh
global tender has been initiated. The technical specifications document and tender document are being re-
visited currently.
8.13 While justifying the procurement of own Vessel the Ministry informed the Committee that hiring on
rent a chartered vessel is the serious problem of its inability to serve as a research platform. Since these
vessels are mostly cargo liners, they are not equipped with such onboard research accessories A-frame,

18
hydrographic winch, fixtures to carry out sediment coring, deck space for sampling operations, wet-and
dry-laboratories, digital deep water echo-sounders, etc. Another major problem is their limited maneuverability.
Since 2004, when India embarked on its scientific endeavors in the Southern Ocean realm, we have had two
different vessels plying southwards every year – a chartered ice-class vessel for ferrying men and materials
to and from Antarctica, and an ice-class research vessel for carrying out scientific research in the ocean
domain. Not only has this had an effect on the costs involved, but also continues to be a difficult proposition
when it comes to the participant scientists. Either they cannot initiate any studies because they are on the
Antarctic bound cargo vessel or cannot extend their scientific studies to the fringes of Antarctica because
they are on a Southern Ocean research vessel with limited endurance and no helicopters onboard.
8.14 The Ministry further submitted that cost for acquiring the Polar Research Vehicle (ship) would be
about ` 1,200 cr. However, we need to procure it because, at present, we are hiring ships from different
countries to go to Antarctica. We cannot afford to lose our observations at Antarctica. So, every year, we
need to send some 120 people there.  Also, we are now finding some difficulty in hiring ships. So, unless we
procure it ourselves, this is not going to happen. Ministry would push it slowly, asking for ` 200 cr. at a
time. Ministry doesn’t need ` 1,200 cr. in one go. On referring to a query raised by a Member whether can
some of our shipyards build it? The Ministry replied in affirmative. However, the shipyard at Cochin or, any
shipyard for that matter, can build a normal ship, but this is an Ice Glass ship which has to break the ice at
sea. It has to be able to penetrate glacial waters. It is a difficult technology, but still, if we give the tender to
a new company, they could team up with some international company and develop the ship. The Ministry is
open to that. At present, Ministry has been instructed by the Government that as much as possible, we must
build a ship in India.
8.15 The Committee is fully aware of the importance of having our own research vessel for
carrying out research in the polar regions. It is also aware that China has already acquired two
research vessels for the icy continent and the RRS Sir David Attenborough, Britain’s new polar
research ship will be ready for sea trials in the summer of 2018. At the same time, the Committee
is given to understand that we have been trying since 2007 to acquire the Research Vessel, albeit
unsuccessfully.
8.16 The Committee is given to understand that there are very few players who manufacture Ice-
class research vessels with a technology to break ice at the sea. The previous experience tells us
that first the lowest amount was more than our budget, which made the Ministry to ask for more
money from the Government. Once this was satisfied and the tender was allotted, the bidder started
negotiating for certain changes to the agreed terms and conditions of the draft contract. Which was
obviously not acceptable and that is why we are back to square one. In this background the Committee
recommends that specifications for Ice-Class research ship should be made broad-based in order to
build competition across the ship builders which will also include indigenous ship making companies
to meet the requirement by having collaboration with foreign ship building companies. This will not
only facilitate servicing and maintenance by the Indian companies, but will also reduce the cost
substantially.
9. SEISMOLOGICAL AND GEOSCIENCE (SAGE) PROGRAMME
9.1 SAGE deals with (i) sustaining and strengthening of seismological observation systems to monitor
and provide information on earthquake and all related seismological information, microzonation; (ii) research
related to solid-earth and geoscience ;(iii) earthquakes inputs for earthquake disasters mitigation; (iii) Deep

19
bore holes investigation in Koyna, Warna region of Maharashtra ; (iv) Marine Geo scientific studies, study of
largest Geoid low, Deep-sea drilling in the Arabian Sea basin through the Integrated Ocean Drilling Programme
and related study for reconstruction of history and climate variations, rate of erosion; and (v) crustal
processes, natural resource management, coastal processes etc.
9.2 The details of BE, RE, Actual Expenditure incurred (upto 31.01.2017) of the above mentioned Scheme
in 2016-17 and BE for 2017-18 are given below:-
(
` in cr.)
Sl. No. Scheme B E RE Actual as % B E
2016-17 2016-17  on Utilisation 2017-18
31.01.2017 2016-17
1. Seismological and 150.00 60.01 26.25 43.74 76.70
Geoscience (SAGE)
9.3 The Committee desired to know the reason in reduction of allocated amount during RE stage 2016-17
from ` 150 cr. to ` 60.01 cr., a cut of whopping 60 per cent in respect of Seismological and Geoscience
(SAGE) alongwith the actual utilization during 2016-17 and whether reduction in allocation at RE stage had
any bearing on this scheme? In response, the Ministry informed the Committee that a reprioritization exercise
(mentioned earlier) coupled with a reduction of allocation for the Ministry to a tune of ` 96 cr. at RE stage
has resulted in reduction of budget of ` 90 cr. under SAGE Programme at RE stage. Because of reduction,
the establishment of National Geochronology facility at Delhi had to be postponed including engagement of
contractual staff. As on 31 st January 2017, the percentage utilization of funds under the SAGE scheme is
about 44% against RE 2016-17.
9.4 Through the Background note furnished by the Ministry, it was apprised to the Committee that
following activities would be undertaken by the Ministry during the 2017-18 under the SAGE Programme:
z Installation of 50 Seismological Observatories in the country including NW Himalaya and
generation of seismic hazard micro-zonation maps of five selected cities in Indo-Gangetic
plains.
z Installation of 25 seismological, GPS and other geophysical stations in the Garhwal-Kumaun
Himalaya for delineation of deep crustal structures and seismic coupling maps.
z Elucidating the processes responsible for mountain building and earthquake generation in the
Himalayan Collision, Indo-Burmese arc and Andaman Subduction Zone.
z Integrated studies of India’s continental margin for on-shore and off-shore tectonic linkages,
delineation of ocean-continent transition and its evolutionary history.
z Characterisation of intra-plate and inter-pate tectonic process.
z The Committee desired to know the status of the scientific deep drilling programme in Koyna-
Warna region of Maharashtra alongwith the main phase of the programme which is being
carried out by the Ministry.
z In response, the Ministry informed that a Borehole Geophysical Research Laboratory (BRGL)
was established in Karad, Maharashtra to carryout “Scientific Deep Drilling in the Koyna Intra-

20
plate Seismic zone”, to measure the in-situ physical properties of rocks, pore-fluid pressure,
hydrological parameters, temperature and other parameters of an intra-plate, active fault zone
in the near-field of earthquakes – before, during and after their occurrence. A set of 6 cores
have been drilled so far (to depths of 1522.5m (Rasati), 1196m (Udgiri), 1134m (Kundi),
1211.6 (Nayari), ~1500m (Panchgani) and ~1500m (Ukhalu) ) to identify site for the main
borehole. Significant results inferred from the above investigations/studies include absence of
sediments below the basalt cover; the thickness of the basalt column and its relation with the
surface elevation; and almost a flat topography of the basement. The temperature at the depth
of 5 km has been estimated to be around 130 to 150° C.
z The Committee was further informed that in main phase, it is planned to drill and instrument
the pilot borehole (s) (~3 km deep) at identified locations in the Koyna-Warna region in the next
one year, to be followed by detailed design and drilling of the deep borehole(s) of 5-7 km each.
First pilot borehole has been drilled upto 1031m depth and drilling is going on. In addition, core
samples are being analysed to take various studies, including petrological, mineralogical,
geochemical, paleomagnetic, rock magnetic, anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility etc. These
core samples have been shared for multi-disciplinary investigations (national participation). It
was also informed that currently, there is no plan to drill such large boreholes in other parts of
India.
9.5 The Committee is constrained to note that a huge cut at RE stage has forced the Ministry to
postpone the establishment of National Geochronology at Delhi and the allied work. Further the
Committee notes that there is a 50 per cent decline from the BE 2016-17 to the grant in BE 2017-18.
The Committee hopes that the Ministry will be able to complete the schemes already notified under
the SAGE programme within this allocation. However, if the allocation falls short of the requirement,
the Committee suggests that the Ministry should ask an additional garnt at teh RE stage.
9.6 The Committee notes that the activities in the main phase have been initiated by the Ministry
and hopes that the drilling process would be started. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
should complete the drilling process within the scheduled time period to enrich its prediction of the
regular occurrence of the earthquake in the region.
9.7  The Committee also notes that huge amount has already been spent on this project and
hopes that desired goal of getting near-field seismological, geophysical , physico-mechanical and
geological data for design of deep fault – zone observatory is achieved and expertises gained from it
would be useful in studying the phenomena of other areas where regular earthquake occurs. The
Committee further urges the Government to make National Centre for Seismology (NCS) an
interface in order to convert knowledge generated under the programme into an earthquake early
warning system.
10.  NATIONAL  CENTRE  FOR  SEISMOLOGY
10.1 The Committee desired to know about the status of National Centre for Seismology and the progress
achieved with regard to creation of manpower, posts, infrastructure etc. The Ministry informed that
National Centre for Seismology (NCS) has been set up by bringing together all Seismology related activities
of IMD (including those of EREC) under one umbrella. On creation of the NCS, all the ongoing activities
and projects of IMD related to Seismology (including those of EREC) shall continue to be operated/

21
implemented through the NCS. In addition, specific R&D activities will also be undertaken by NCS, using
the data sets generated by various seismic and GPS networks. The primary objective is to better
understanding of earthquake processes under different tectonic environments in the country, through
specific R&D related projects for better preparedness and mitigation of disastrous impacts of earthquakes.
Creation of 62 new posts (38 scientists and 24 administrative posts) has also been initiated and is under
consideration with Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. The work related to construction of
building is being initiated.
10.2 The Committee recalls that in its previous reports (Report Nos. 243, 260 & 284), it had
recommended for early creation of manpower, posts, infrastructure etc. for National Centre for
Seismology. The Committee, however, further reiterates that Ministry completes the task at the
earliest.
11. RESEARCH,  EDUCATION  AND  TRAINING  OUTREACH  (REACHOUT)
11.1 This programme deals with extending extra mural support to academic/research organisations in
various sectors of Earth System Sciences including technology development; (ii) Promoting focused
research in areas of national importance through integration of multi institutional and multi-disciplinary
scientific expertise; (iii) supporting establishment of national facilities; (iv) Capacity building including
chair professors, M. Tech courses, setting up ESTC cells, knowledge information system, economic
benefits, promoting indigenous capability; (iv) Advanced school of training for Earth System Science and
climate, oceanography, operational meteorology, training for BIMSTEC countries etc.; (v) International
cooperation and related joint activities; and (vi) Awareness and Outreach programs through participation
in fairs/exhibitions, celebrating specific days, promoting/supporting workshops/seminar/symposia in Earth
System Science related areas.
11.2 The details of BE, RE, Actual Expenditure incurred (upto 31.01.2017) of the above mentioned Scheme
in 2016-17 and BE for 2017-18 are given below:-
(
` in cr.)
Sl. No. Scheme B E RE Actual as % B E
2016-17 2016-17  on Utilisation 2017-18
31.01.2017 2016-17
1. Research, Education and ` 49.90 ` 40.00 ` 23.26 58.15 ` 44.00
Training Outreach
(REACHOUT)
11.3 The Committee desired to know reasons for reduction in budgetary allocation for the programme
from ` 49.90 cr. in B.E. 2015-16 to ` 40.00 cr. at RE in 2016-17. The Ministry informed that there was a
marginal decrease of ` 9 cr. under the program REACHOUT during the year 2016-17 at RE stage, which is
largely on account of re-prioritization exercise carried out by Ministry for procurement of HPC. As a result,
a release of funds to few extramural programs of the Ministry had to be postponed. However, there is no
immediate impact on the overall activities of the Ministry.
11.4 The Committee notes that although there has been a reduction in the budgetary allocation at
RE stage in 2016-17, the Ministry has not been able to utilize the allocated amount optimally and

22
much amount had remained unspent. The Committee observes that Ministry at the one hand striving
for more allocation for its various flagship programmes, on the other hand it is unable to utilize the
available funds at its disposal. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such underutilization
by the Ministry should be avoided and whatever amount is allocated should be utilized to the fullest
extent.
11.5 Through the Background note furnished by the Ministry, it was apprised to the Committee that
following activities would be undertaken by the Ministry during the 2017-18 under the REACHOUT
Programme:
z BIMSTEC Centre for Weather and Climate (BCWC): Development of NWP global/regional
model output for BIMSTEC with new model versions. Develop new applications for BIMSTEC
countries from higher resolution newer model, including EPS model output.
z Organisation of international conference and undertake training and capacity building for the
BIMSTEC countries in modeling and model output usage.
z Building programs for skilled and trained Manpower -Training in Operational Meteorology.
z Upgradation of Conference hall and Lecture halls. Installation of Smart Class rooms, Center
for Advanced Training (CAT-ESSC): Targeted Training.
z Building cutting-edge Science programs. Activity (TTA) for improving skill of MoES manpower
as well as country’s manpower in the Atmospheric/Earth Sciences.
z MoES Research Fellowship program: planning and implementation/ strategy design.
11.6 The Committee during its meeting held on 13 th February had observed that people of the
country including elected representatives are not aware of the excellent work in the field Earth
Sciences being done by the Ministry or much about the Ministry itself which may be beneficial for
a very big segment of the society like farmers, fishermen, students, research scholars etc. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should prepare a comprehensive awareness
programme with a calendar of events using social media platforms, radio, television etc. meant for
students and general public but most importantly for all the elected representatives right from
district level i.e. Members of Zila Panchayats, Legislative Assemblies and Councils and members of
Parliament. The Committee strongly feels that elected representatives can play an important role
in making their constituents aware of scientific development and ultimately developing scientific
temperament in the public at large.
12. SKILL  DEVELOPMENT
12.1 The Committee desired to know about the steps taken by the Ministry in the field of skill development
for generating employment opportunities to the educated youths of the country. The Ministry informed the
Committee that towards skill development in the field of earth sciences, the MoES has established three
training schools at ESSO-IITM, ESSO-INCOIS and ESSO-IMD with an aim to develop adequate training
modules with focus on operational and service-delivery oriented responsibilities. In addition to the in-house
training schools, MoES also established Chair Professors at academic centres/universities including National
Lab facilities. For the benefit of researchers, Centers of Excellence were opened at various Universities with
state-of-the-art research facilities and establishment of Earth Science and Technology Cells. Young scientists

23
from various services like Indian Air Force, Navy, coast guards, other Ministries etc. also come regularly to
get familiarized with modeling and data assimilation.
12.2 The Committee while appreciating the efforts of the Ministry in this matter, also observes
that much more is needed to be done for employment generation as there is thrust on this issue in
the 12
th Five Year Plan. The Committee is also of the view that Ministry should consider forging
linkage with Ministry of Agriculture in order to enhance and widen its contributions for Skill
Development in the country as Agriculture and Fisheries are broadly two major sectors getting
benefit by the services rendered by the MoES.
13. W ATER  DESALINATION  PLANTS
13.1 The Committee had visited the water desalination plant established by National Institute of Ocean
Technology (NIOT), Chennai, Ministry of Earth Sciences at Agatti, Lakshadweep in November, 2015 and
January, 2016. The Committee was informed that MoES-NIOT established the first LTTD plant in Kavaratti
during July, 2005 and after the initial maintenance and training for about one year, handed over the plant
to UT administration in 2006. Based on the functioning of the plant, Administration approached MoES-
NIOT to put up plants in other islands of the region. Desalination plants at Minicoy (April, 2011) and
Agatti (July 2011) have been completed in phase 1 and were handed over to the UT Administration during
August and October, 2012. All the three plants are being maintained by the Public Works Department of
UT Administration using the local manpower, to fulfill the needs of the 10,000 strong local communities
in each of these plants. The salinity of the fresh water produced at the plants was reduced from 35000
ppm for the seawater to about 180 ppm whereas the permissible limit for drinking water is 2000 ppm. It
was also informed that subsequent to the commencement of the plant water supply for drinking water
needs, have been significantly drop in the incidence of water borne diseases amongst the local people.
The Committee desired to know about the present status of establishment of other water desalination
plants in islands of Lakshadweep ( i.e. Amini, Chetlet, Kadamat, Kalpeni, Kiltan and Androth) which were
conceptualised in the year 2013.
13.2 The Ministry informed the Committee that after successful commission of 3 desalination plants, one
each at Kavaratti, Minicoy, and Agatti islands of the Union Territory of Lakshadweep, the Lakshadweep
Administration requested the MoES for setting up of similar Low Temperature Thermal Desalination Plants
(LTTD) of 1 lakh litre of potable water per day capacity in remaining six islands ( i.e. Amini, Chetlet,
Kadamat, Kalpeni, Kiltan and Androth). Accordingly, a detailed project report with a fund requirement of
` 280.01 cr. for setting up of 6 LTTD plants in six Lakshadweep Islands has been submitted to the
Lakshadweep Administration. Ministry of Drinking Water and Sanitation accorded in principle approval for
the proposal in Standing Finance Committee held on 13, July 2016 for three islands with population greater
than 5000. However, UT Administration is perusing the approval for all the six islands through Ministry of
Home Affairs and the proposal is under vetting by Ministry of Home Affairs before it is sent to MoDWS.
MoES-NIOT is closely coordinating with UT Administration, Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of
Drinking Water and Sanitation.
13.3 The Committee notes the positive impact of safe potable water being made available to the
residents of 3 Islands i.e. Kavaratti, Minicoy and Agatti through desalination plants. It now hopes
that other islands do get safe drinking water soon enough. The Committee in its 284
th Report had
recommended similar plants should be installed in remaining 6 islands with a view to provide safe
drinking water to them. It is sad to note that instead of proving the facilities in all the islands, the

24
Ministry of Drinking water and Sanitation has approved only three islands having population more
than 5000. The Committee while fully disagreeing with population criteria recommend that
Government should approve all the islands as every single citizen has the right to safe drinking
water. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should coordinate with all the concerned
Ministries/ Departments so that all procedural formalities for the establishment of the water
desalination plants at the six islands are completed at the earliest and the work on the projects
begins without any further delay.
13.4 The Committee also observes that existing desalination plants are being run on diesel which
is not considered as eco-friendly fuel. The Committee, therefore, suggests that while establishing
new desalination plants in islands of Lakshadweep and also for existing plants , technical feasibility
may be explored for running those plants on much cleaner fuel (like thermal energy) other than
diesel in order to preserve the fragile environment of the area.
14. AGRO-METEOROLOGICAL  SERVICES
14.1 The Committee was informed by the Ministry that measures are being taken by the Ministry to
enhance the dissemination of agro-advisories to farmers and in increasing the agro-met services. The
Ministry informed that at present, 20.5 million farmers are directly receiving the messages under Gramin
Krishi Mausam Seva (GKMS) in vernacular languages. Block level forecast for 37 districts (342 blocks)
has been initiated on pilot mode. The Ministry in association with Agro Met Field Units (AMFUs) is
disseminating agro-meteorological advisories to the farmers through different multichannel system
television and visual media communication through Newspaper and Internet, SMS and IVRS. In addition,
agro-meteorological advisories are also disseminated through Kisan Portal  launched by the Ministry of
Agriculture.
14.2 ESSO-IMD is taking continuous efforts to expand popularisation of the service among the farming
community and for this Farmers Awareness Programmes are being conducted in various parts of the country.
Besides these, details of more number of farmers are collected through Kisan Portal and along with the
experts from Agromet Field Units (AMFUs) located at State Agricultural Universities, institutes of Indian
Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR) and Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) participate in Kisan Melas,
Farmers’ Day etc to create awareness about the services so that more farmers get benefitted. Ministry is
planning to strengthen these services by providing block level Agromet Services through 660 district Centres
by 2019 .
14.3 The Ministry in the meeting held on 13
th February, 2017 informed the Committee that at present 30%
of farmers are being benefited from the agromet advisories issued twice in a week and the Ministry wanted
to improve it to 80% or 90%. On this, the Committee had advised the Ministry to undertake measures to
ensure awareness and publicity among farmers for such advisories.
14.4 The Committee observes that on paper the data on the number of farmers receiving agro-
meteorological advisories look very inspiring. However, in reality how many farmers are actually
benefitting from this service needs to be ascertained. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that efforts should be made in increasing the number of farmers benefiting from meteorological
advisories and enhancing dissemination through various media channels at the same time a nation
wide survey seeking the feedback must be conducted which will allow for further improvement in
the services.

25
15. Consultative Committee for MoES
15.1 The Government through Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs constitutes Consultative Committees for
every ministry. The Committee is headed by the Minister and MPs are the member. This Committee provides
a great opportunity to the elected representatives to discuss important matters directly with the Minister
concerned in a non-partisan environment. However, the Committee is shocked to know that there is no
Consultative Committee for the Ministry of Earth Sciences whereas there are 35 consultative committees
representing all the ministries. The Committee therefore, recommends that Ministry may take up the
issue with the Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs and start the process of constituting a Consultative
Committee for the Ministry of Earth Sciences.

RECOMMENDA TION/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A GLANCE
FINANCIAL  PERFORMANCE  OF  THE  MINISTRY  AND  BUDGETARY  ALLOCATIONS FOR
2017-18
The Committee notes that although there has been a reduction in the budgetary allocation
at RE stage during the last three financial years i.e. 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17, the Ministry
has not been able to utilise the allocated amount optimally and much amount had remained
unspent. The Ministry in its Background Note has tried to explain the reasons for
underutilisation/savings in the budget for the last three financial years. In most of the cases,
delay in finalisation of projects/schemes or deferment appears to be the main reason behind
the underutilisation of funds. In few cases saving has been recorded due to delay in approval
from the end of Internal Finance Division (IFD) of the Ministry. Interestingly in one case the
saving has been recorded due to reduction of oil prices towards use in vessels on expedition to
Antarctica. But The Committee finds it hard to believe the reason for underutilisation given by
the Ministry at many places that the saving was primarily due to reduction in the budget at the
RE stage, which is contradictory in itself, unless the proposed scheme was dropped completely
due to reduction. (Para 4.3)
The Committee during the meeting took the above position very seriously and many Members
articulated their unhappiness over the state of affairs. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that such underutilisation by the Ministry should be avoided by taking timely decisions towards
implementing the schemes as the Committee strongly feels that there could be a correlation between
the delay in the implementation by the Ministry and reduction in the budget at RE stage by the
Ministry of Finance. (Para 4.4)
While analysing the reason behind underutilisation/saving given by the Ministry, the
Committee has taken note of the fact that IFD has also been responsible in delaying the projects
which has resulted in the underutilisation. The Committee is unanimous over the idea that scientific
ministries should not be treated on par with other ministries headed by trained bureaucrats as far
as financial management is concerned. The Committee feels that scientific ministries headed by
reputed scientists should be allowed to pursue their visions for the country and the Financial Advisors
attached to these ministries should be sensitised to this fact. (Para 4.5)
The Committee while understanding that the budgetary allocation to the Scientific
Ministry/ Departments should not face any cuts or reduction at the R.E. stage during previous
years or in 2017-18, finds it difficult to endorse the idea as the facts during the previous
financial years clearly tell a different story which has been expressed by the Committee in
above paras 4.3 to 4.5. The Committee finds it further difficult to recommend an additional
grant of ````` 500 cr. as it is not sure about the utilisation of the allocated amount at the BE level
to the full. (Para 4.8)
The Committee is  aware of the fact that after doing away with the distinction of ‘Plan’
and ‘Non-Plan’ heads the ministries will be tempted to manipulate allocations sometimes
owing to exigencies and sometimes to ‘so-called’ priority areas. It is in this light that the
Committee recommends the Government to provide additional grants at the RE stage to
compensate fully the possible demand created on account of the 7
th Pay Commission
recommendations. (Para 4.9)
26

27
The Committee is also aware that the financial budget of 2017-18 is likely to be passed by the
Parliament before 31 st march which would mean that there would be no requirement of vote on
account and the ministries will be able to start withdrawing funds from Consolidated Fund of India
from the day one of the financial year 2017-18. Therefore, the Committee hopes that the Ministry
will be able to utilise the allocated funds in time and if that happens, the Committee would be glad
to recommend grant of additional funds of ````` 500 cr for the Ministry at RE stage in order to pursue
important programmes and activities in 2017-18 which had been deferred previously due to paucity
of funds. (Para 4.10)
ATMOSPHERE AND CLIMATE RESEARCH – MODELLING OBSERVING SYSTEMS & SERVICES
(ACROSS)
The Committee also recalled that it had been underlining the importance of high powered
computers since the year 2014, however, actualisation of it is still eluding. The Committee reiterates
that augmentation of High Performance computing to 10 peta flops will go a long way in achieving
the high level of accuracy in prediction relating to weather services. Hence, the Committee
recommends that sincere efforts be made for achieving it in time bound manner so that this project
is completed without further delay. (Para 5.10)
ACCURACY IN WEATHER FORECASTING
The Committee while appreciating the achievements of the Ministry in the area of accuracy
in weather forecasting, observes that there is a lack of smooth dissemination of information regarding
predictions of extreme events to all the stakeholders. The track record of the Ministry has been
above par in the case of cyclone predictions which has been seen in the case of Hudhud and Vardah.
But in case of flash floods and floods caused due to heavy and incessant rainfalls, the information
does not reach fast enough to take pre-emptive actions on the ground zero. The Committee is given
to understand that the IMD collects the data, interpolates them to arrive at the predictions of flood
and transmit it to many agencies viz. Central Water Commission, NDMA and State Disaster
Management Authorities, State Governments etc. However, sometimes they fail to assess the severity
of the situation which is what happened in the case of Uttarakhand Tragedy in 2015. Therefore the
Committee recommends that the Ministry should develop a foolproof mechanism of disseminating
important data on the weather predictions to the last point so that damage to lives and livelihoods
can be minimised. The Committee would like to suggest that the Ministry may designate Director
General, IMD to hold a compulsory press conference in the case of prediction of severe rains which
will be in addition to the existing mechanism of dissemination. (Para 5.16)
OCEAN SERVICES, TECHNOLOGY  OBSERV ATIONS,  RESOURCES  MODELLING  AND  SCIENCE
(O-STORMS)
The Committee is aware that O-STORMS is an important scheme of the Ministry as it
helps in improving understanding of ocean dynamic, climate variability, ocean and coastal state
forecast, sea level variations, ocean flux studies, etc. It is also responsible for operational Tsunami
Warning System on 24X7 basis for issue of bulletins for India and to the countries of the Indian
Ocean Region, besides, continuously exploring ocean resources, operation and maintenance of
Ocean Research Vessels and development of ocean technology for deep sea mining among others.
The Committee feels that O-STORMS scheme is an important scheme which does not deserve

28
any reduction of budget allocation at RE stage as it would definitely hamper the scientific work at
the ground level. Therefore, the Committee while acknowledging the fact that the Ministry could
not even spend the reduced allocation at RE stage, does not appreciate the budgetary reduction at
RE stage. (Para 6.6)
OPEN SEA  CAGE  CULTURE
The Committee feels that efforts of the Ministry would bring the qualitative changes in
livelihood of fishermen as fish production would increase through open sea cage culture. However,
the Committee observes that fish produced through open sea cage culture may be compromising on
omega 3 as not enough algae are available to the fish as their feed which is necessary for the mega
3 in the fish. And the fish will be rich in omega 6 which is not good for human consumption.
Therefore, the Committee urges the Ministry to do in-depth research of the Open Sea Cage Culture,
its impact on the fish, otherwise the entire purpose of providing protein rich food to people will be
defeated. (Para 7.2)
POLAR SCIENCES AND CRYOSPHERE RESEARCH (PACER)
The Committee is given to understand that there are very few players who manufacture Ice-
class research vessels with a technology to break ice at the sea. The previous experience tells us
that first the lowest amount was more than our budget, which made the Ministry to ask for more
money from the Government. Once this was satisfied and the tender was allotted, the bidder started
negotiating for certain changes to the agreed terms and conditions of the draft contract. Which was
obviously not acceptable and that is why we are back to square one. In this background the Committee
recommends that specifications for Ice-Class research ship should be made broad-based in order to
build competition across the ship builders which will also include indigenous ship making companies
to meet the requirement by having collaboration with foreign ship building companies. This will not
only facilitate servicing and maintenance by the Indian companies, but will also reduce the cost
substantially. (Para 8.16)
SEISOMOLGICAL  AND  GEOSCIENCE  (SAGE)  PROGRAMME
The Committee is constrained to note that a huge cut at RE stage has forced the Ministry to
postpone the establishment of National Geochronology at Delhi and the allied work. Further the
Committee notes that there is a 50 percent decline from the BE 2016-17 to the grant in BE 2017-18.
The Committee hopes that the Ministry will be able to complete the schemes already notified under
the SAGE programme within this allocation. However, if the allocation falls short of the requirement,
the Committee suggests that the Ministry should ask an additional garnt at teh RE stage.
(Para 9.5)
The Committee notes that the activities in the main phase have been initiated by the Ministry
and hopes that the drilling process would be started. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
should complete the drilling process within the scheduled time period to enrich its prediction of the
regular occurrence of the earthquake in the region. (Para 9.6)
The Committee also notes that huge amount has already been spent on this project and hopes
that desired goal of getting near-field seismological, geophysical , physico-mechanical & geological
data for design of deep fault – zone observatory is achieved and expertises gained from it would be

29
useful in studying the phenomena of other areas where regular earthquake occurs. The Committee
further urges the Government to make National Centre for Seismology (NCS) an interface in order
to convert knowledge generated under the programme into an earthquake early warning system.
(Para 9.7)
NATIONAL  CENTRE  FOR  SEISMOLOGY
The Committee recalls that in its previous reports (Report Nos. 243, 260 & 284), it had
recommended for early creation of manpower, posts, infrastructure etc. for National Centre for
Seismology. The Committee, however, further reiterates that Ministry completes the task at the
earliest. (Para 10.2)
RESEARCH,  EDUCATION  AND  TRAINING  OUTREACH  (REACHOUT)
The Committee notes that although there has been a reduction in the budgetary allocation
at RE stage in 2016-17, the Ministry has not been able to utilize the allocated amount optimally
and much amount had remained unspent. The Committee observes that Ministry at the one hand
striving for more allocation for its various flagship programmes, on the other hand it is unable to
utilise the available funds at its disposal. The Committee, therefore, recommends that such
underutilisation by the Ministry should be avoided and whatever amount is allocated should be
utilized to the fullest extent. (Para 11.4)
The Committee during its meeting held on 13
th February had observed that people of the
country including elected representatives are not aware of the excellent work in the field Earth
Sciences being done by the Ministry or much about the Ministry itself which may be beneficial for
a very big segment of the society like farmers, fishermen, students, research scholars etc. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should prepare a comprehensive awareness
programme with a calendar of events using social media platforms, radio, television etc. meant for
students and general public but most importantly for all the elected representatives right from
district level i.e. Members of Zila Panchayats, Legislative Assemblies and Councils and members of
Parliament. The Committee strongly feels that elected representatives can play an important role
in making their constituents aware of scientific development and ultimately developing scientific
temperament in the public at large. (Para 11.6)
SKILL  DEVELOPMENT
The Committee while appreciating the efforts of the Ministry in this matter, also observes
that much more is needed to be done for employment generation as there is thrust on this issue in
the 12
th Five Year Plan. The Committee is also of the view that Ministry should consider forging
linkage with Ministry of Agriculture in order to enhance and widen its contributions for Skill
Development in the country as Agriculture and Fisheries are broadly two major sectors getting
benefit by the services rendered by the MoES. (Para 12.2)
W ATER  DESALINATION  PLANTS
The Committee notes the positive impact of safe potable water being made available to the
residents of 3 Islands i.e. Kavaratti, Minicoy and Agatti through desalination plants. It now hopes
that other islands do get safe drinking water soon enough. The Committee in its 284
th Report had
recommended similar plants should be installed in remaining 6 islands with a view to provide safe

30
drinking water to them. It is sad to note that instead of proving the facilities in all the islands, the
Ministry of Drinking water and Sanitation has approved only three islands having population more
than 5000. The Committee while fully disagreeing with population criteria recommend that
Government should approve all the islands as every single citizen has the right to safe drinking
water. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should coordinate with all the concerned
Ministries/ Departments so that all procedural formalities for the establishment of the water
desalination plants at the six islands are completed at the earliest and the work on the projects
begins without any further delay. (Para 13.3)
The Committee also observes that existing desalination plants are being run on diesel which
is not considered as eco-friendly fuel. The Committee, therefore, suggests that while establishing
new desalination plants in islands of Lakshadweep and also for existing plants , technical feasibility
may be explored for running those plants on much cleaner fuel (like thermal energy) other than
diesel in order to preserve the fragile environment of the area. (Para 13.4)
AGRO-METEOROLOGICAL  SERVICES
The Committee observes that on paper the data on the number of farmers receiving agro-
meteorological advisories look very inspiring. However, in reality how many farmers are actually
benefitting from this service needs to be ascertained. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that efforts should be made in increasing the number of farmers benefiting from meteorological
advisories and enhancing dissemination through various media channels at the same time a nation
wide survey seeking the feedback must be conducted which will allow for further improvement in
the services. (Para 14.4)
CONSULTATIVE  COMMITTEE  FOR  MOES
The Committee therefore, recommends that Ministry may take up the issue with the Ministry
of Parliamentary Affairs and start the process of constituting a Consultative Committee for the
Ministry of Earth Sciences. (Para 15.1)

MINUTES

33
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 13 th February, 2017 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury  —  Chairperson
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
LOK  SABHA
3. Dr. K. Gopal
4. Shri Daddan Mishra
5. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
6. Shri Nagendra Singh
7. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. The following representatives of Ministry of Earth Sciences appeared before the Committee:
1. Dr. M. Rajeevan, Secretary
2. Smt. Anuradha Mitra, Additional Secretary & Financial Advisor
3. Shri Anand S. Khati, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Eddie L. Khwlhring, Controller of Accounts
5. Dr. R. Krishnan, Director, IITM, Pune
6. Dr. M. Ravichandran, Director, NCAOR, Goa
7. Dr. E.N. Rajagopal, Head, NCMRWF, Noida
8. Dr. T.N. Prakash, Director, NCESS, Thiruvanthapuram
9. Dr. M.V. Ramanamurthy, Director, ICMAM, Chennai
10. Dr. Vineet Kumar Gahalaut, Director, NCS
3. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the Secretary, Ministry
of Earth Sciences and his team of officers. The Chairperson informed the members that the meeting had
been convened to have a presentation on the Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Ministry of Earth
Sciences.
4. Initiating the discussion, the Chairperson asked the Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences to inform
the Committee about the budgetary allocations made and physical targets set for important programmes.
Thereafter, the Chairperson sought to know about the targets envisaged by the Ministry of Earth Sciences

34
for the XII Five Year Plan and to what extent the Ministry managed to achieve the targets, both physical as
well as financial. She also desired to know about the targets set for the next Financial Year i.e. 2017-18 by
the Ministry and the roadmap drawn in that regard. She further enquired about the major challenges faced
by the Ministry of Earth Sciences and the strategic policy measures intended by the Ministry to address
those challenges. The Chairperson also sought to know about the ‘Internal Monitoring Mechanism’ put in
place by the Ministry.
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Earth Sciences thanked the Committee for the opportunity given to present
the views of the Ministry with regard to the budgetary allocations made for the Twelfth Five Year plan period
as well as the financial year 2017- 18. Thereafter, a power point presentation was made before the Committee
highlighting the performance of Ministry of Earth Sciences as well as the budgetary allocations made for the
purpose during the XII
th Plan period. The Committee was also apprised about the physical as well as financial
achievements of the Ministry during the XII th Plan. However, the Committee was not impressed with the
financial performance of the Ministry during last few years and remarked that utilisation of budget needed to
be improved.
6. The Chairperson desired to know about the place for conducting Tsunami drills. In response thereto,
the Secretary informed that Tsunami drills were conducted in Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and other Coastal
states and Union Territories.
7. The Chairperson and Members also raised queries related to melting of glaciers in Himalayan
region as well as Antarctica, Climate Change, International collaborations, supercomputing, aviation
services, cloud seeding and Harmful Algal Blooms, recent oil spills in Chennai vis-a-vis loss of marine
lives, Open Sea Cage Culture; Co-ordination with other scientific Ministries/Departments; autonomy
given to various institutes of the Ministry vis-a-vis overlapping in their works, if any; acquisition of
Polar Research Vessel, etc. which were replied by the Secretary. The Secretary requested the Committee
to help them in getting an additional· alloction of  ` 500 crore so that they could have additional money
for their major activities.
8. The Committee then enquired about popularisation of technologies developed and new projects taken
up in 2017-18, etc. The Chairperson emphasised that the Ministry needed to further disseminate the ideas
and products developed by various Institutes of the Ministry.
9. The representatives of Ministry of Earth Sciences while presenting their views also responded to
some of the queries raised by the Chairperson and Members of the Committee. They also promised to
furnish written replies to some other queries/points raised by the Chairperson and Members of the Committee,
which could not be replied during the meeting.
10. The Committee, then, adjourned for lunch at 1.14 
P.M.
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
*** Relate to other matters.

35
*** Relate to other matters.
15. * * *
16. * * *
17. * * *
18. A Verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
19. The witness, then, withdrew and the Committee adjourned at 4.38 
P.M.

36
XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 29 th March, 2017 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury   —   Chairperson
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri Parimal Nathwani
4. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
5. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
6. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK  SABHA
7. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
8. Kumari Sushmita Dev
9. Shri Ninong Ering
10. Shri Laxman Giluwa
11. Shri Daddan Mishra
12. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
13. Shri Nana Patole
14. Shri Nagendra Singh
15. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. She informed
the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 294
th, 295th, 296th, 297th,
298th, 299th and 300th reports on Demands for Grants 2017-18 of the Ministries/Departments of Earth Sciences,
Biotechnology, Science & Technology, Scientific & Industrial Research, Space, Atomic Energy, and
Environment, Forest & Climate Change, respectively.
3. The Committee, after considering the recommendations made in the draft reports, adopted the draft
294th, 295th, 296th, 297th, 298th, 299th & 300th reports. The Committee also decided to present/lay the reports
to both the Houses of Parliament on 31 st March, 2017.
4. The Committee also decided to nominate the Chairperson and in her absence Ch. Sukhram Singh
Yadav to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Daddan Mishra and in his absence Shri Vikram Usendi
to lay the reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on 31 st March, 2017.

37
***Relate to other matters.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3.45 
P.M.