TWO HUNDRED THIRTIETH REPORT
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 30th August, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30th August, 2012)
Steps Taken by various Sectors of the
Indian Economy to Control Pollution
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2012/Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
230
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED THIRTIETH REPORT
Steps Taken by various Sectors of the
Indian Economy to Control Pollution
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 30th August, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 30th August, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2012/Bhadrapada, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—18
4. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 19—91

(i)
MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2011-12)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
*2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Anil H. Lad
4. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
5. Dr. Chandan Mitra
@6. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
7. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
@8. Shri A.V. Swamy
9. Dr. Barun Mukherji
10. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
11. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
12. Shri Ninong Ering
#13. Vacant
14. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
15. Shri Abdul Rahman
16. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
17. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
18. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
19. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
20. Shri Cosme Francisco Caitano Sardinha
21. Shri Shibu Soren
22. Dr. Rajan Sushant
23. Shri Pradeep Tamta
24. Shri Mansukhbhai Dhanjibhai Vasava
**25. V acant
26. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
***27. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
28. Vacant
29. Vacant
30. Vacant
31. Vacant
* Shri Janardan Dwivedi re-nominated w.e.f. 2 nd February, 2012.
@ Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra and Shri A.V. Swamy nominated w.e.f. 15th May, 2012.
# Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  3 rd  January, 2012 on his
resignation from the Membership of the Committee.
** Shri Akhilesh Yadav ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 2 nd May, 2012 on his resignation from the
Membership of the Lok Sabha.
*** Nominated w.e.f.  25 th November, 2011.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri  Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Thirtieth Report on Steps Taken by various sectors
of the Indian Economy to Control Pollution.
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests, decided to take up for consideration the subject ‘Steps Taken by various
sectors of the Indian Economy to Control Pollution’ and report thereon.
3. In this regard the Committee heard the views of the Secretaries, Ministries/Departments of
Environment and Forests, Coal, Mines, Steel, Power, Petroleum and Natural Gas, Heavy Industry,
Shipping (including Ports), Railways, Civil Aviation, Road Transport and Highways, Defence,
Defence Production, Health and Family Welfare, Agriculture, Urban Development, Chemicals and
Fertilizers (D/o Pharmaceuticals) and Tourism. The Committee, in all held 14 meetings and devoted
33.51 hours in the process of the consideration of the subject. The Committee also visited Mumbai,
Goa, Bengaluru, Visakhapatnam to get first hand information on the State of Pollution and measures
taken to mitigate it.
4. The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests and different Ministries/Departments, Government of India for replying to the clarifications
sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to
scrutinize the same.
5. In the meeting held on 30
th August, 2012 the Committee considered the draft report and
adopted the same.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
August 30, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests

1
REPORT
INTRODUCTION
Environment is a legacy which we have inherited from our predecessors and it is our
bounden duty to preserve and conserve it for future generations. Besides leaving a clean and
healthy environment to our posterity, we also need to tap full potential of growth and development
for betterment of present and future generations.
2. There was a time when environment was not considered as an integral component of
development process, but it is now being universally acknowledged that for development to be
sustainable, it must factor environmental concerns. Certain key sectors of the economy play critical
and crucial role in the growth and development of any country. These key sectors are National
Resources Sector which is driven by the Ministries of Coal and Mines; Transport Sector driven
by the Ministries of Road Transport and Highways, Railways, Civil Aviation and Shipping; Power
and Energy Sector driven by the Ministries of Power, Petroleum and Natural Gas and Heavy
Industries Sector driven by the Departments of Heavy Industry, Public Enterprises and Ministry of
Steel. Unfortunately, these are the Sectors which are also primarily responsible for environmental
pollution as well.
3. Keeping this in view, the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests
decided to review measures taken and being taken by the various sectors of the economy to
address the issues of environmental degradation, ecological imbalances and Climate change while
undertaking various developmental activities. The Committee held a series of meetings with the
Secretaries of the Ministries/Departments of Environment and Forest, Coal, Mines, Steel, Power,
Petroleum and Natural Gas, Heavy Industry, Shipping (including Ports), Railways, Civil Aviation,
Road Transport and Highways, Defence, Defence Production, Health and Family Welfare,
Agriculture, Urban Development, Civil Aviation, Tourism and Pharmaceuticals to apprise itself of the
roadmap drawn by them to ensure production of the requisite quantity of Natural Resources and
power needed by our growing economy without causing damage to environment or ecological
balance.
NATURAL RESOURCES SECTOR
4. Natural Resources play a dominant role in the development and progress of a country. In
India, Coal is the primary source of energy which at present meets about 55% of its industrial
requirements and contributes to about 70% of its total power generation.
Ministry of Coal
5. The Committee was given to understand that open cast coal mining was more damaging to
the forest cover than underground mining. The Committee was also informed that while, 65% of all
mining operations in the world were of underground nature, in India 70 to 80% of all mining
operations were over ground or open cast. When the Committee enquired from the Secretary, Coal
as to why underground mining was not preferred over open cast mining in India, it was clarified that
India’s geological deposits did not allow largescale underground mining. However, efforts were being
made to go for underground mining, wherever feasible and the biggest such project would come up
in a couple of years with a capacity of 2½ million tonnes. It was, however, emphasized that
underground mining was not a solution to the open cast mining because the quantity of coal extracted
by underground mining was very less, hardly exceeding 30 to 35 per cent and hence not viable. It

2
was, further, emphasized that in a country where the resource was so vital and so scarce, we could
not afford to lose 65 per cent of the coal resources in underground mining for protection of the
surface area. It was also added that open cast mining was much safer than underground mining.
6. Chairman, Coal India Limited (CIL), however, informed the Committee, that growing
demand for Coal was one of the reasons for focus on opencast coal production. He admitted that
they needed to focus on underground mining not only from environmental but technical point of
view also because through opencast mining they could go only up to 200 or 250 meters, and
beyond that, in any case they had to go for underground mining. He, further, added that only ten
per cent of total Coal production, as of today, was coming from underground mining. He however
stressed that for the Twelfth five year plan, an investment of Rs. 5,000 crores was earmarked for
acquiring underground mining equipments. Two-three underground mining projects had already
started in Dhanbad with a capacity of two million tonnes of production.
Recommendation
7. The Committee feels that it might be easier, cheaper and safe to use open cast
mining but protection of our forest reserves, wild life and tribal population is also of utmost
importance. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that there is a need to strike a fine
balance between exploitation of Natural resources and protection of our forests and wildlife.
8. The Committee also feels that the plea that underground mining of coal was not
viable and is too costly, etc. is, at best, superficial one. If underground mining of coal can
be successfully done in major coal producing countries like Australia and South Africa, the
Committee finds no convincing reasons why it can’t be successfully used in India. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should, as a matter of policy,
progressively switch over to underground mining wherever feasible so as to protect our flora
and fauna.
HEALTH IMPACT ON THE WORKERS IN THE COAL BELT
9. The Committee being concerned about the health of workers in the Coal belt area enquired
about the measures taken by the Ministry to take care of their health.
10. The Secretary, Coal informed the Committee that the Director General of Mine Safety
carries out periodic inspection in that regard and takes suitable remedial actions, where necessary.
Secretary, MoEF, however, stressed that there had been complaints about the health of workers in
coal mines and suggested that if the Committee so recommended, Indian Council of Medical
Research (ICMR) could be involved to conduct health studies in old mining areas like Singrauli and
other areas where there had been complaints.
Recommendation
11. The Committee feels that mine workers are continuously exposed to health hazards
and incidence of pulmonary diseases among the mine workers are on the high side
particularly in major collieries of the country and it requires urgent comprehensive medical
attention so that the occurrence of the disease could be controlled. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministries of Coal and Mines should extend all possible
medical facilities, set up at least one medical centres in each area for the workers and their
family members for regular check up and treatment. Further, the Ministry of Environment
and Forests should impress upon the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) to carry
out health studies on a regular basis and prepare a comprehensive database on diseases
afflicting workers in the coal mine areas.

3
Constraints being faced by the Ministry of Coal
12. Secretary, Coal also drew the attention of the Committee towards the problems being faced
by the Ministry of Coal in getting environment/forest clearances due to which coal companies could
not meet their production targets and ended up with zero growth. He stated that the average
pendency at the State level for stage-I clearance was 4½ years and at the Central Government
level, 1.95 years. On an average, the time taken for giving clearance was around 5½ to 6 years.
He further added that no objection from Gram Sabha with 50% Quorum requirement, was one of
the main reasons behind delay in clearances.
13. Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, clarifying his stand on the pendency or
delay in giving environment and forest clearances, stated that out of 354 proposals for Coal blocks
received during the last five years, 268 covering about 60 odd thousand hectares had been cleared.
One of the reasons for high average of pendency period with States was that even if a case was
returned for completion of data to Coal India Limited or to the Coal companies, it was shown
pending against the Forest Department. Such cases, as per law, were liable to be summarily
rejected. But to speed up clearances, the Ministry did not create a log jam because the cases which
were already 40 or 50 per cent complete would in the event of rejection, suddenly get pushed back
and needed to be restarted.
14. He further raised a point as to whether we needed to look at the Coal Production from the
‘area point of view’ or from the ‘production point of view’. He added that if seen from the
production point of view, clearances had been given for much more in terms of million tonnes per
annum but actual production was much less. He cited the case of Mahanadi Coalfield which had
been given clearance for about 143 tonnes per annum but the actual production was only about
100 tonnes. He further informed that delay in clearances was not the handiwork of the Ministry
nor of the State Governments. In 1992, guidelines involving the Central government were issued
to exercise some control on the release of high density forest area and concepts of stage-I and
stage-II clearances were introduced for forest areas of 140 hectares and above. Then in 2001,
Compensatory afforestation amount and Net Present value was also added by the Supreme Court.
Then there were a number of processes and the procedures involved and so many consultations
had to be done both at the State and the Central Government levels. Those were the reasons which
had made the process of clearance time taking.
Recommendation
15. The Committee feels that somehow an impression has been created that Ministry of
Environment and Forests is coming in the way of future growth and development by
delaying environment and forest clearances for the coal blocks, power projects, etc. and that
this misconception needs to be dispelled. The Committee understands that the delay is
caused partly due to involvement of a number of procedures and processes, however, it is
of the opinion that the delay to the extent of five to six years in taking decision on a
matter has its reflections on the efficiency and functioning of the Ministry. It, therefore,
recommends that Ministry of Environment and Forests must not keep any project pending
for so long and ensure speedy and expeditious decisions on environment and forest
clearances in the interest of the nation.
16. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests informed the Committee that to speed
up decision making in forestry clearances, a suggestion was made to involve the Ministry right at
the stage of allotment and auctioning of Coal blocks. But it had not been considered and even if
a Coal block involved very high quality forest, it was first auctioned out or allotted to private
companies and then left to them to follow all the guidelines stipulated by Ministry of Environment
and Forests. He, further, added that if his ministry was involved at the time the coal block was

4
mapped out for first allotment, they could straightaway say that please avoid those areas as it
would take too much time.
Recommendation
17. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Environment should be involved while
finalizing allocation of the coal blocks so they could guide which one is to be mined and
which one is not to be mined.
18. The Secretary, MoEF further briefed the Committee on each of the following issues:
Expansion of coal mines
19. The Secretary, MoEF informed the Committee that under Section 7 (2) of the 2006
Environmental Impact Assessment Notification, the Expert Appraisal Committee had the discretion
to decide whether public hearing should be done or not in case of issues which involved up to
25% expansion of Coal mines. In most of the cases they did not insist on public hearing unless
there was a public complaint against a particular mine.
Recommendation
20. The Committee notes that under section 7 (2) of the 2006 Environment Impact
Assessment Notification Environment Appraisal Committee has discretion to decide whether
public hearing should be done or not in case where up to 25% expansion of coal mines are
involved. The Committee feels that for expansion of coal mines up to 25 per cent public hearing
may not be insisted upon. The Committee, in this backdrop, recommends that the Ministry of
Environment and Forests should seriously consider this issue and may do away with the
provision for public hearing in case of proposals involving expansion of coal mines up to 25 per
cent.
MINISTRY OF MINES
21. The Committee asked the Secretary, Mines whether Hoda Committee recommendations, for
creation of sustainable development framework for Indian mining needs, had since been
implemented.
22. The Secretary informed that most of the recommendations of the Hoda Committee had been
included in the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011 which was already
with the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel for its examination. While making his presentation
on the guidelines followed by the Ministry for environment protection, the Secretary informed that
Mines were regulated through the Mineral Concession Development Rules (MCDR) and financial
penalties were levied if rules were not followed properly. He also drew the attention of the
Committee towards various sections of MCDR which dealt with penalties for violation of
environmental norms.
23. The Committee notes that despite provisions for imposition of penalties under Mineral
Concession Development Rules for violation of environmental norms, a large number of cases of
illegal mining spread over the length and breadth of the cou8ntry are continuing unabated. On being
enquired about the steps taken to control such illegal activities, the Secretary, Mines informed that
Hon’ble Supreme Court had suo motto intervened in the matter and imposed monetary fines to the
extent of 5 crores per hectares on the mines which violated the rules and regulations and had also
ordered closure of some of the mines to be auctioned later in order to bring transparency. Further,
the Ministry had developed a network in which all the miners had to register and fill up a monthly

5
format. Even stockiest, traders, exporters etc. who dealt with minerals had to register on the
system. The system had been designed in such a way that if any miner excavated more amount
of mineral than the permissible limit, he would be caught.
Recommendation
24. The Committee notes that despite provisions for imposition of penalties under
Mineral Concession Development Rules for violation of environmental norms, a large
number of cases of illegal mining spread over the length and breadth of the country are
continuing unabated. The Committee is of the view that the menace of illegal mining needs
to be checked at all costs. The Committee takes note of the fact that the Ministry of Mines
has developed a system to check illegal mining activities but feels that its effective
implementation is necessary to get the desired results.
Constraints being faced by the Mines Sector
25. The Secretary, Mines also drew the attention of the Committee towards the long pending
cases of environment/forest clearance, etc. The Committee asked the Secretary, MoEF to apprise
the Committee of factual position in this regard.
Views of MoEF
26. The representative of Ministry of Environment and Forests informed the Committee that
when the Ministry of Environment and Forests gave clearance to mining projects, emphasis was
given on the biodiversity of the area being mined. The biggest problem was the implementation
aspect of the Environment Management Plan as cleared by the IBM and finally approved by the
Ministry of Environment and Forests. SPCB was required to monitor the mining area from
environmental point of view but as those Boards did not get much support from the State
Government, they were not very effective in monitoring implementation of EMP. It was further
pointed out that in some of the past cases, specific instances had come to the notice of the
ministry regarding improper monitoring by SPCBs in mining areas leading to subsequent closure of
mines by the Ministry of Mines.
Recommendation
27. The Committee supports the efforts made by MoEF for protection of environment and
takes note of the problems being faced by them. It feels that pending clearances for mining
projects are hampering development of the country. The Committee recommends that the
MoEF must make an all out effort to expeditiously decide on various pending mining
projects and further streamline its processes and procedures for obtaining such clearances
so as to cut down delays and red tapism to the extent possible.
28. The Committee is perturbed to hear that State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) are
not performing their duties vigilantly. The Committee feels that if such an important
institution shies away from its responsibilities it could have devastating effects on our
environment. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment and
Forests must ensure proper and effective coordination between Central Pollution Control
Board and State Pollution Control Boards and take necessary steps to make state pollution
control boards functional and further ensure that they discharge their assigned duties
effectively and efficiently.

6
TRANSPORT SECTOR
29. Transport Sector, comprising of Road, Railways, Civil Aviation and Shipping, is considered
to be the veins and arteries of the Nation. Transport is a critical sector that accounts for a major
share of fuel consumption and Carbon emissions. Importance of this sector is evident from the fact
that studies have shown that about 23% of the total Green house gas emissions emanate from this
sector alone.
30. The Committee, therefore, felt the need to review the steps taken or being taken by Ministries
of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways, Civil Aviation and Railways to mitigate pollution.
Shipping
31. The Secretary, Ministry of Shipping informed the Committee that Shipping was the most
environment friendly mode of transport in terms of fuel consumption, as its consumption was only
45 per cent as compared to Railways and 15 per cent as compared to Road Transport.
32. The Secretary further stated that pollution was mainly caused due to the movement and
operation of ships and shipping being an international industry, it had to follow International
Conventions. The main convention in this regard, was the MARPOL, which was the International
Convention for prevention of pollution from ships such as oil leakages, noxious and harmful
substances, sewage, garbage, air pollution, etc. He also stated that India was in the process of
ratification of international conventions and incorporating them in its domestic law viz. ‘The
Merchant Shipping Act’.
33. On the issue of pollution in ports, the Secretary stated that the cargo containing Coal is the
most polluting of all cargos and several steps such as continuous water sprinkling, closed
mechanized conveyor systems, plantation in port areas, concretization of roads etc. had been taken
by the ports to manage it. To manage oil leakages, Coast Guard had been made the nodal agency.
The responsibility for combating the oil spillages up to 700 M.T. had been given to the ports, while
the Coast Guard had been made responsible for spillages between 700 to 10,000 metric tonnes.
Views of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
34. The Secretary, Environment and Forests stated that the main issue with the Ministry of
Shipping was the level of preparedness available with the ports to deal with oil slicks. He also
stated that there was lack of coordination among the agencies such as Central and State Pollution
Control Board, ONGC, Coast Guard, Ministries of Defence and Petroleum and Natural Gas, in
dealing with oil slicks. Besides, all the major and minor ports needed to be well equipped and
funded adequately to deal with this problem.
Recommendation
35. The Committee feels that the Ministry of Shipping while aggressively developing
ports and shipping industry to help the Indian economy should match the environmental
protection requirements with international standards. The Committee feels that major
source of oil pollution by the shipping industry in the sea water are cargo tanker washings
at sea, the dumping of bilge contents by ship, discharge of oily waster from tank washings
and accidental spillages. Pervasive and complex problems such oil spills mixed with urban
sewage, silt, plastics and ship breaking containing hazardous chemicals at places such as
Alang have also posed a threat to the environment.
36. The Committee feels that though the Ministry has taken a number of steps to
reduce pollution but in spite of that the condition of the ports needs much improvement.

7
This would also have positive impact on the health of the employees. The cases of oil slick
is on a rise and it has a devastating effect on the sea and sea creatures. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Shipping being the nodal ministry should
ensure optimum level of preparedness at the ports and equip ports with latest gadgets etc.
to ensure that damage to the ocean biodiversity due to oil slick is minimal. Moreover, a
dedicated task force well equipped with all the latest machines and equipments required for
dealing with case of oil slicks should be prepared and made available at the ports round the
clock to meet any eventuality.
37. The committee feels that since coast guards have been made the nodal agency for
combating the oil spills particularly between 700 to 10000 M.T. oil spills, the Ministry of
Shipping should develop an effective mechanism to coordinate the activities of ports and
coast guards so that the major challenge of oil spill management containing oil between 700
and 10000 M.T. is well and timely managed and any damage to biodiversity is avoided.
38. The Committee is happy to note that steps like continuous water sprinkling, trucks
covered with tarpaulin and closed mechanized conveyer system for carrying coal etc. have
been taken to handle the coal in an environment friendly way at ports. The Committee,
however, feels that steps taken to control pollution during loading and unloading of coal
from ports should be monitored regularly and strict compliance ensured.
ROAD TRANSPORT AND HIGHWAYS
Widening of Roads
39. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways informed that a number of projects after
award were held up for want of Environment and Forests clearance. Ministry of Road Transport
and Highways further informed the Committee that even the projects involving widening of existing
roads were considerably delayed because it took a long time to get environmental clearance and
forest clearance for such projects.
Recommendation
40. The Committee observes that widening of the roads would help in reducing the
pollution and adverse impact on environment as the dust emission by the plying of traffic
on such widened roads gets significantly reduced and, therefore, it should be encouraged.
The Committee therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
should be exempted from taking environmental clearance for widening of existing roads
provided that the total width of the road did not exceed a specified limit. The Committee
is further of the view that widening of roads by using polymer modified bitumen technology
should be encouraged to reduce pollution from plying of traffic on such roads.
Clubbing of Forest Clearance and Environment clearance
41. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways also informed the Committee that roads
were long linear projects in which only a small part might be affected by forests. Earlier, when
Environment and Forests clearances were given separately, the Ministry was able to execute the
work in the non-forests areas and in forests areas work started only after getting forests clearance.
By clubbing together the two clearances, the whole project gets stalled for a very small patch of
highway road. The Ministry also clarified that in either case, building road in the non-forest areas
did not become infructuous expenditure. Therefore, there was no need for clubbing the two
clearances together and the position as existed prior to the 2011 needed to be restored so that road
projects did not get stalled.

8
42. The Secretary, Environment and Forests informed the Committee that the Supreme Court
in the LAFARGE case had directed that environmental clearance and forest clearances must be
given together. Prior to that, the Committee was given to understand that the environmental and
forest clearances were being given separately.
43. The Secretary, Environment and Forests also informed the Committee that earlier when
environmental clearance and forest clearance were given separately, plea used to be that as the
environment clearance had been given by Ministry of Environment and Forests and that they had
already spent considerable amount of money on the project and, therefore, forest clearance should
also be given to them.
Recommendation
44. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment and Forests seek legal
opinion on the issue and unless it has specifically been directed by the Supreme Court in
the LAFARGE Case to give together forest clearance and environmental clearance for road
projects, the position, as existed prior to September, 2011 might be restored.
Plantation along highways
45. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways informed the Committee that recently
another difficulty had arisen because plantation along the highways on Right of way had been
declared as “Protected Forests” and provisions of Forests Right Act requiring approval of Gram
Sabha, made applicable. The Ministry was of the view that on such plantation, no one could have
any right as these were affecting the right of way on highways and, therefore, the applicability of
‘FRA’ for the plantation had to be removed. It was, therefore, pleaded that such plantation should
be kept outside the provisions of Forests Right Act.
Recommendation
46. The Committee after consideration of the matter, observes that bringing of such plantation
under the provisions of FRA hardly serves any useful purpose and recommends that Ministry of
Environment and Forests should examine the issue raised by the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways and consider if such plantation could be kept outside the provisions of ‘FRA’.
Procedural simplification
47. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways suggested that several procedural
simplifications were possible e.g. instead of seeking approval of Term of Reference (TOR) for
individual projects, the standard TOR could be developed for widening projects for finalising TORs
for obtaining Environment and Forest clearance.
Recommendation
48. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment and Forests should
examine the proposal of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and take a decision
expeditiously.
Approval of Gram Sabhas for Road Projects
49. The Secretary, Environment and Forest also clarified that though neither Forest
Conservation Act 1980 nor FRA 2006 had any mandatory requirement for obtaining approval of the
Gram Sabha for road projects, they were insisting on approval of the Gram Sabha only on the
basis of the guidelines issued by their Ministry.

9
Recommendation
50. The Committee, is of the view that since road projects, extremely essential for
development and growth of the area, are getting unduly delayed because of the requirement
of obtaining clearances from the Gram Panchayats and the restriction has not been imposed
because of any statutory requirement, as stated by the Secretary, Ministry of Environment
and Forests, the Committee recommends that MoEF should consider suitably amending its
guidelines to do away with the requirement of approval of Gram Panchayats so that road
projects are not delayed because of requirement of obtaining approvals from the concerned
Gram Panchayats.
MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
51. The Secretary, Civil Aviation informed that as per the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate
Change, aviation sector’s contribution to carbon emission was about two per cent but due to the
rapid growth in this sector the percentage contribution of carbon emission was likely to go up from
two per cent to three per cent by 2050. He further informed that the Civil Aviation Sector in the
country was growing at a rate of around 17 to 18 per cent on year-to-year basis, in both the
domestic and international sectors and more than 1.4 million aircraft were now crossing the Indian
airspace and thereby leaving behind their carbon footprints.
Environmental issues
52. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation further informed that the environmental issues in
the Civil Aviation sector could be classified broadly into two categories. Firstly, the local set of
environmental issues, which included aircraft related noise experienced in the vicinity of airport and
local air quality. Secondly, the environmental issues regulated by the international regulations laid
down by International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) which related to the carbon emissions that
was leading to adverse impact on climate change.
Noise pollution
53. The Secretary also informed that the Directorate General Civil Aviation (DGCA) had
completed the evolution of the regulatory framework, to contain the noise around airports. He
further informed that several other directives had been issued to the aircraft operators, which
included continuous descent approach, mixed mode operation of three runways, restrictions on use
of auxiliary power units, etc. The airport operator and the 76 airlines using the Delhi airport had
complied with the DGCA directives and the High Court had appreciated the steps taken by the
Ministry, DGCA and several other stakeholders in this regard. As regards noise reduction, the
Secretary stated that noise was being monitored at Delhi Airport on a 24-Hour basis and a Noise
Complaint Cell had also been established.
Carbon emissions
54. Carbon emission of the Aviation sector was only about 2 per cent of the total carbon
emission of the country and it was mainly due to the technical issues concerned with the aircraft
industry viz. design of aircraft, airframe, aero dynamics, etc. He also pointed out that the reduction
in the carbon emission could be attained through the fuel efficient processes and DGCA had,
therefore, directed all the airlines to ensure that only fuel efficient latest generation aircrafts were
used.

10
National Green House Inventory
55. Director-General of Civil Aviation informed the Committee that they were developing a
National Green House Inventory which would take into account the stock of noise footprints at
various airports. He further added that with the development of such inventory, the Carbon
footprints could be monitored by proper air-traffic management, tuning up of engines of aircraft,
etc.
Pollution in Aviation Turbine Fuel
56. The Secretary, Civil Aviation informed the Committee that ATF was produced with fractional
distillation of crude oil and standards had already been laid down to limit these pollutants. He
further added that the only thing that had not been laid down was the quantum of CO
2 that an
aircraft should produce as a result of combustion. He further informed the Committee that the
process was underway through which the specification of CO
2 emission from an aircraft from ATF
combustion would be determined.
Recommendation
57. The Committee is pleased to note that though the aviation sector’s contribution to
carbon emission was only about two per cent but still the Ministry of Civil Aviation has
taken a number of steps to mitigate pollution. The Committee is also happy to note that
to take the stock of noise footprints at various airports the DG, Civil Aviation is developing
a National Green House Inventory which would help them in observing the level of noise
pollution and taking suitable measures to combat it.
58. The Committee recommends that municipal solid waste management in airports,
particularly, in major international and domestic terminals should be regularly monitored
for strict compliance with environmental norms.
OTHER ISSUES
Corporate Environment Policy
59. CMD, Air India informed the Committee that, as a national carrier, they had formulated a
corporate environmental policy which laid down the norms and the responsibilities of each of the
Department so as to determine what they had to do under an environmental management system.
A team had been set up in the quality management group, which constantly monitored whether the
parameters laid down in the policy were being, actually, adhered to and complied with or not. The
team also coordinated with the Ministry of Civil Aviation as well as with the Airports to ensure that
standards laid down, were actually being observed.
Night curfew
60. The Secretary, further stated that some European countries had imposed ‘night curfews’ to
reduce the noise pollution at night, due to which, most of their flights came and terminated in our
country during night time and thereby caused noise and environment pollution. He further informed
that, our country had taken a stand that the night curfew system must end and they were dealing
with this issue at international level.

11
Views of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
61. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests also informed that a technical expert
Committee had also been formed for fixing of standards of noise pollution and the idea behind it
was not to have residential and commercial complexes near airports.
Recommendation
62. The Committee strongly feels that Night Curfew imposed by some of the European
countries of the World for reduction in the Noise Pollution has led to termination of a large
number of flights in India adding to already enhanced level of noise pollution at our
Airports. In that backdrop, the Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation
may either take up with the European Union for lifting of Night curfew or impose the Night
curfew at Indian Airports as well to reduce levels of noise pollution at our Airports.
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
Environmental Initiatives of the Railways
63. The Chairman, Railway Board informed the Committee that the Co
2 per tonne kilometer
emission by the railways was less by almost 60 per cent, as compared to any other mode of
transport. He also informed the Committee of the environment friendly measures viz. production of
3-phase regenerative locomotives and MMUs which consumed almost 30 to 35 per cent less
electricity as compared to a normal locomotive; reduction in carbon emissions in diesel
locomotives, up gradation of technology for improvement in fuel consumption and emissions etc,
use of environment friendly refrigerants in AC coaches besides generation of power through
windmills and solar energy and even afforestation had also been taken up. On the issue of more
efficient bio-digester and environmentfriendly toilets to reduce corrosion of railway lines, the
Chairman, Railway Board, informed that a decision had been taken to cover 2,500 coaches initially.
Regarding the use of biodiesel, CNG and LNG in the Indian Railways to combat the aspect of
pollution, the Committee was informed that the technology was still at a very nascent stage.
Other issues
Pending environmental and forest clearances of the Ministry of Railways
64. On being enquired about the construction of railway lines pending due to non-availability of
environmental and forest clearance, the Chairman, Railway Board stated that there were 25 projects
covering 2,500 kms, in which forest clearance was required and the issue had been taken up with
the Ministry of Environment and Forests and also at the State level.
Danger posed to wildlife due to Railway tracks
65. The Committee expressing its concern over the danger posed to the wild life by the Railway
tracks running through the National parks and forest corridors desired to know the steps taken by
railways to prevent it. The Chairman, Railway Board stated that they had constructed sighting
towers near railway lines so that herds of animals could be sighted well in advance and the
message could be passed on to the control office to ensure that an advisory was given to the loco-
pilots to stop the train and enable the herds to cross the railway line. Advisories were also issued
regularly to the loco pilots in areas which were known to be natural crossing locations of the
animal herds, to be vigilant while passing through these locations.
66. Environmental concerns as regards laying of tracks in forest areas were also raised by the
Committee. The Chairman Railway Board replied that an effort was being made to ensure that at

12
least 50-60 per cent of the new track alignment was carried out along the existing track, so that
the forest areas, farm lands etc. were not affected. However, in areas where railway lines had been
built to serve mining blocks, trains were run only during day time to ensure minimum disturbance
to the wild life.
Views of Ministry of Environment and Forests
67. The Ministry clarified that the Railway projects were not covered under the environmental
impact assessment notification of 2006 and only when the alignment passed through ecologically
sensitive areas like forests, wildlife sanctuaries and such other areas, there was a need to have
clearance under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. At present, only 17 such railway projects
were pending with the Ministry for forestry clearance. The Ministry also clarified that some of the
projects were pending with the State Governments and the rest had been rejected because of
serious environmental concerns.
Recommendation
68. The Committee, while appreciating the fact that the Ministry of Railways had taken
pro active steps like introduction of bio toilets on experimental basis, construction of
sighting towers, instructions to loco drivers etc, for protection of wildlife, recommends that
the Railways should introduce the bio-degradable toilet in a time bound manner in all the
trains and endeavour should be made to do away with manual cleaning of toilets in trains.
The Committee, further, recommends that apart from various measures already taken by
the Ministry for the protection of the wildlife, it should also carry out periodical checks to
see whether all its instructions/guidelines etc., are being adhered to.
ENERGY SECTOR
69. The Committee in the process of examination and identification of environmental impacts
due to emissions from Oil Industry in the country, both in the public and private sector and
assessment of mitigation measures taken by them to ensure eco-sustainable development, took
stock of the measures taken by the oil companies to check environmental degradation due to
emission from oil industry and to make our environment healthier and cleaner.
MINISTRY OF PETROLEUM AND NATURAL GAS
Environment friendly initiatives
70. The Secretary, apprised the Committee about various measures taken by oil PSUs in
upgrading the quality of fuel, steps taken by the Ministry to check adulteration especially in petrol
and diesel. It was stated that all the retail outlets were run on No automation No operation
principle. He further added that kerosene diversion was the main reason for adulteration, as even
if, five or ten percent kerosene was mixed, it was difficult to judge whether adulteration had taken
place or not. The Secretary, Petroleum and Natural Gas further informed that the Ministry was in
the process of introducing non-launderable marker system to check the adulteration of diesel.
Recommendation
71. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas is in the
process of introducing non-launderable marker system to check the adulteration of diesel.
The Committee recommends that the marker system should be introduced in a time bound
manner to check adulteration of diesel.

13
OTHER ISSUES
Efforts made by the Private players
72. The Committee was informed by the representatives of Essar Oil Ltd, CAIRN India Ltd. and
Reliance Industries Limited of the efforts made by them to minimize the air pollution. When
enquired about the area of green belt developed by RIL, RIL official informed the Committee that
RIL had 2,200 acres in Jamnagar and 200 acres in Gadimoga i.e. 2,400 acres earmarked for this
purpose.
Pollution Audit
73. On the issue of pollution audit by Private Sector Oil Refineries, it was stated that after use
of seawater for desalination by the refineries, the remaining seawater would have a slightly high
salt content due to concentration. It was also informed that the National Institute of Oceanography
conducted study for fifteen days on the performance of the flora and fauna annually and the report
was submitted to the Central/State Pollution Control board.
Recommendation
74. The Committee suggests the Ministry to go through Oil Pollution Act (OPA), 1990 of
USA which is said to have improved USA’s ability to prevent and respond to Oil spills and
examine if provisions of the Act could be of help in our context.
75. The Committee is further of the view that the Ministry of Petroleum must have a
task force to have better coordination between that Ministry and the Ministry of
Environment and Forests. The Committee further is of the view that the Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas should work in tandem with the Central Pollution Control Board
and the private sector enterprises to control pollution in oil sector.
GASOLINE EMISSIONS
76. On the issue of gasoline emissions by refineries, the Committee asked the Secretary,
Ministry of Environment and Forests to brief the Committee.
77. Responding on the point, he stated that they had set air quality parameters and ambient air
quality standards around refineries. Directions had also been issued to various refineries which
were not meeting the norms. Associating on the issue of installation of LONOX burner and Sulphur
Recovery Units in the refineries, Chairman, Indian Oil Corporation Limited informed the Committee
that LONOX burners and Sulphur Recovery Units had been installed in the refineries and air quality
was found to be within the approved parameters in and around all the refineries.
Recommendation
78. The Committee is happy to note that LONOX burners and Sulphur Recovery Units
have been installed in the refineries which will help in improving the quality of air. The
Committee hopes that the Ministry would take many more such measures towards cleansing
the air around oil refineries.
79. In the meeting held with the Secretaries of Ministries of Petroleum and Natural Gas and
Power, the following issues were also raised:–

14
Delay in laying of Gas Pipelines
80. CMD BPCL informed the Committee that they were trying to lay a pipeline from Mumbai
refinery to Uran to transport LPG to Uran so that LPG loading and dispatch cost from Mumbai
gets reduced. But, the project was held up as 1 km stretch of the pipeline required forests
clearance from Ministry of Environment and Forests. He further stated that clearance was pending
with the MoEF for the last 6 months.
81. The CMD, ONGC informed the Committee that the main problem was regarding the laying
of the pipeline, if it had to pass through a very small stretch of forest land even if the remaining
80-90 percent passes through the non-forest land. As per extant guidelines, forest clearance and
environment clearances were required together to start the project. Hence, the projects were often
held up. He further suggested that till the forest clearance was given by the MoEF, they might be
allowed to begin the work atleast in the non forest area. CMD, ONGC further drew the attention
of the Committee towards the linkage of resolution of Gram Sabha with the laying of the pipeline,
even for 100 mts of work. He also informed the Committee that for pipeline projects the resolution
of Gram Sabha was earlier not required but was added to by the subsequent notification.
82. Thereafter, CMD GAIL informed the Committee that they were laying 4000 Kms pipeline
in which seven States were involved. Of all the permissions required to pursue a project, to get
a forest clearance was the lengthiest, tedious and time consuming process.
83. On this issue, Secretary, M/o Environment informed the Committee that as per the guidelines
of the Ministry, the work could not be started, if any part of the project was linked with the forest
clearance. Even the Hon’ble Supreme Court in LAFARGE judgment had held that both the clearances
had to be given together. At this point, DG, Forest informed the Committee that in the above stated
judgment, the Hon’ble Supreme Court had held that fait accompli situation should not be created. As
far as road project was concerned they were going to relax the guidelines but for other projects like
pipeline it would not be possible as it becomes infructuous for want of connection.
84. In the meeting held with the Secretary, Environment and Forests, the Secretary deposed
before the Committee as under:–
“Actually, Sir, under the 1992 and 2003 guidelines of the Forest Conservation Act,
guidelines were to help users like power and Coal to follow the Forest Conservation Act.
In that, all this was exempted. There was only non-linear, mainly industry. They had to take
permission of the Aam Sabha. In those days, they used to call it Aam Sabha and not Gram
Sabha. Now, after FRA has come, we have given this condition that all the linear projects
must also get this clearance. But this is not really a requirement either under Forest
Rights Act or under Forests Conservation Act. It is not in the Act, but we have issued this
and we are now asking the Ministry of Tribal Welfare. They are the ones who are
implementing the Forests Rights Act. To clarify whether this kind of 50 per cent quorum
is required or not, especially for high value power transmission lines, we are not getting
any reply from them and if you can help...”
Observations and recommendations of the Committee in this regard are contained in para
No. 92.
POWER SECTOR
85. The power sector in India is currently ranked sixth among the leading sectors of the Indian
economy. In India, the government has taken up the development of power sectors on priority and
has adopted several policies and initiatives which have paid off well. The country needs to add
generation capacity of nearly 1.5 to 2 lakh MW over the Twelfth and Thirteenth Plan period to
sustain an annual growth rate of 9 per cent of the economy. But, different power generation

15
technologies have different environmental implications. Therefore, there is a need to strike a fine
balance between developmental projects and privation of environment.
86. As a part of its review programme on environment, the Committee also took stock of the
Power sector and examined the Environmental aspects involved in power generation.
Environment friendly initiatives
87. The Secretary, Power informed the Committee that Coal-fired power generation was going
to dominate the scene in the near future and his Ministry followed a low-carbon strategy based
on, three basic principles namely produce efficiently, transmit efficiently, and consume efficiently.
While referring to alternate sources of energy, he said that India was one of the largest producers
of wind-based energy and he did not see any difficulty in going forward in this field in the coming
years. On Solar energy, he added that it was a promising and beneficial area in the years to come.
Observation
88. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Power would encourage and extensively
use renewable sources of energy to put lesser burden on non-renewable sources of energy.
This would help the country in saving precious resources for future generations.
Pollution controlling initiatives and issue of clearances
89. The Secretary, Ministry of Power informed that they had cases pending with the Ministry
of Environment and Forests which they too pursued with them from time to time and in order to
resolve those cases, a Committee under the Chairmanship of Mr. B.K. Chaturvedi was set up. The
Chaturvedi Committee had given several recommendations and some had already been accepted. He
further informed that the other issue they had with the Ministry of Environment and Forests was
getting FRA clearance for transmission projects, which required passage of resolution by every
Gram Sabha, though the same was not stipulated under the Act. Since transmission projects did
not alienate people’s livelihood, they could consider such projects without mandatory FRA clearance
a position, which prevailed earlier.
Delay in laying of Transmission Lines
90. The Secretary, Ministry of Power, further, informed the Committee that the issue pending
with the Ministry of Environment and Forests related to getting environmental clearances for
transmission projects. As per guidelines of Ministry of Environment and Forests, FRA clearance
along with a resolution passed by the concerned Gram Sabha, was needed for Forests clearance
even though the same was not stipulated under the FRA. Moreover, to hold the meetings of Gram
Sabha, for the purpose, quorum required presence of minimum 50 percentages of members. Since
presence of 50 per cent members was needed to hold the meeting of Gram Sabha, and often it
was difficult to ensure presence of 50 per cent of members, it led to prolonged delays in getting
such resolution passed. He felt that the condition of Gram Sabha resolutions should not be
necessary as the same was not stipulated under the Act.
Views of Ministry of Environment of Forests
91. Secretary, MoEF informed the Committee that under the 1992 and 2003 guidelines of the
Forest Conservation Act, there was an exemption for this and resolution of Aam Sabha was
required only in the case of Industries. But after the enactment of Forest Rights Act (FRA), all
the linear projects had to get clearance. He further added that the resolution of Gram Sabha had
not been stipulated either under Forest Rights Act or under Forests Conservation Act. The

16
Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, further, informed the Committee that matter has
been taken up with the Ministry of Tribal Affairs but their response was awaited.
Recommendation
92. The Committee observes that as for as Transmission lines and Gas Pipelines were
concerned, as there was no statutory requirement of getting clearances from concerned
Gram Sabhas, Ministry of Environment and Forests should restore the position as existed
earlier when no such resolutions were needed for clearance of such projects. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry should examine the matter at the
earliest in the light of its observations so that important transmissions projects and gas
pipelines projects do not get held up.
93. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Petroleum should form a
task force to have better coordination between their Ministry and the Ministry of
Environment and Forests for early resolution of their pending issues.
INDUSTRIAL SECTOR
Environment friendly measures
94. The Secretary, Heavy Industries informed the Committee of the steps taken by various
industrial enterprises to address environmental concerns and the extent to which environmental
concerns had been factored into their developmental agenda. The Secretary highlighted eco-friendly
practices like adoption of Environmental Management Standard (EMS) ISO-14001 for better
pollution control and continual improvement followed by the enterprise and adherence to health and
safety norms and constraints faced in maintaining international standard emission norms and in
reducing Environmental Footprints. He further stated that all public and private sector companies
were governed by the rules and regulations of MoEF and Central/State Pollution Control Boards.
Environment friendly measures followed by DHI are Bharat III and IV norms, National Mission on
Electric Mobility, Inspection Centers managed by Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.
Environment friendly efforts made by BHEL
95. During the meeting with the Committee, the CMD, BHEL informed the Committee of the
Environment Improvement Projects and Sustainable Development Programmes of the BHEL which
inter alia includes plantation drives, installation of rain water harvesting plants, efficient water and
energy management, utilization of renewable energy sources, etc. He further informed that BHEL
had formulated its Sustainable Development Policy in November, 2011 and they had constituted a
Committee headed by an independent Director to oversee the implementation of Sustainable
Development Directives. He further stated that ferrous scrap generated from the units was sent to
the Central Foundry Forge Plant of the company at Haridwar where it was converted into usable
material for manufacturing of Castings and Forgings. He also informed that water and sewage
discharged from this process was treated at Effluent Treatment Plants/ Sewage Treatment Plants
and reused for horticulture. BHEL was working towards development of advanced technologies
where efforts would be made to reduce the carbon dioxide emissions by improving the level of
efficiency.
Observation
96. The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry has taken various measures to
mitigate pollution but, it is of the view that its proper monitoring at various levels should
be done effectively to get the desired results.

17
STEEL SECTOR
Environment friendly initiatives
97. The Secretary, Steel, apprised the Committee about various measures taken by his ministry
to reduce pollution. He added that his Ministry was involved in doing plantation in the premises of
the Steel plants on a very wide scale. For instance, in Visakhapatnam Steel Plant, about 4.7 million
trees had been planted over the years. Similarly plantations were done in Bhilai, Durgapur and Bokaro.
He further apprised that as per the studies of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Steel is the
fifth largest emitter of Co
2 gas. The first one is, Power, followed by Agriculture, Transport and
Cement. Steel had other emissions, which were of a different nature like gases and heat produced
in the Steel plants. Of late, new technologies have emerged which had actually enabled them to tap
the gases and emissions and to utilize them for power generation within the Steel plants itself. He,
further, pointed out, that over a period; the pollution levels in the Steel plants had been reduced.
Recycling and reuse of solid waste generated in steel plants was continuously increasing. Some plants
had already achieved 100 per cent target of recycling of Blast Furnace Slag and others were going
to achieve that target in the near future. There were, however, technological limitations for recycling
or reuse of steel making slag and industry was striving hard to find a solution, including import of
technologies for using slag produced in the steel making shop. He added that Steel Plants were
members of CREP recommendations Committee where they try to reduce pollution level even below
the prescribed mandatory indicators. Steps taken by the PSUs to mitigate pollution.
Steps taken by the PSUs to mitigate pollution
98. The PSUs under the Ministry provided the details of various steps undertaken for
minimizing pollution such as installation of electrostatic precipitators and dust collection system,
deployment of water sprinklers, installation of effluent treatment plants and providing larger green
cover in the surrounding areas to absorb pollution. Under 3-4 major schemes which PSUs were
operating to reduce the pollution levels, one such scheme was the ‘Clean Development Mechanism’,
under the Kyoto Protocol.
99. The Secretary also mentioned that during the year 2000, it was noted that 158 such
projects, amounting to a reduction of 103 million tonnes of Carbon dioxide, had been approved by
the National Clean Development Mechanism Authority. Energy-efficient-low-carbon technology in
steel re-rolling mills was being introduced in the country to bring down energy consumption into
productivity and cost competitiveness, together with a reduction in Green House Gases.
100. It was informed that under the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development
Organization (NEIDO) model project scheme, the Ministry of Steel was facilitating setting up of
energy efficient environment friendly projects known as ‘model projects’ in different steel plants
with financial assistance from Japan to be implemented by NEIDO, Japan. One model project for
Sinter Cooler Waste Heat Recovery at Vishakhapatnam steel plant of RINL was under progress.
Research and Development was also being promoted by the Ministry in the steel sector to improve
the productivity, quality and environment friendliness of the technology for bringing down the cost
of production of Steel.
Recommendation
101. The Committee is happy to note that recycling and reuse of solid waste generated in
steel plants was continuously increasing. Some plants had already achieved 100 per cent
target of recycling of Blast Furnace Slag and others were going to achieve that target in
the near future. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would ensure that all the plants
achieve 100 per cent target of recycling of Blast Furnace Slag within next two years.

18
102. The Committee is also happy to note that one model project for Sinter Cooler Waste
Heat Recovery at Vishakhapatnam steel plant of RINL was under progress and hopes that
it would soon become operational. The Committee appreciates the effort of the Ministry in
that regard.
Constraints being faced by the Ministry
Environment and Forest clearances
103. The Secretary, Steel apprised that under the National Action Plan for Climate Change, an
innovative market-based mechanism called Perform, Achieve and Trade (PAT) had been launched
for improvement of energy efficiency in eight sectors of the economy, including 76 RINL steel
units. Clearance of a project took three to five years in India which was going to hamper growth
in the long run, therefore, need of the hour was to find a foolproof mechanism quickly.
Additionally, there had to be a mechanism to ensure that the prescribed time limit of 90 days for
the first-stage forest clearance was adhered to.
Views of Ministry of Environments and Forests
104. The representative of Ministry of Environment and Forests explained that the Ministry had
in the recent past tried to streamline its procedures so that we can give environment and forest
clearances faster. While replying to the query made by the Chairman about time taken in
environmental clearances, the Secretary replied that it took about three to five years on an average
to get all clearances.
Observation
105. The Committee feels that delay in grant of environment and forest clearances are
eating precious time and taking a toll on the investment. In that backdrop, the Committee
suggests that the Ministry of Environment and Forests should hold one to one meeting with
the concerned Ministry frequently so that all the pending projects get decided quickly.
Corporate Social Responsibility
106. The Committee asked the CMD, Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) to explain as to
how things were taking shape in his sector. On the issue of Corporate Social Responsibility, the
CMD apprised that SAIL was incurring an expenditure of about Rs. 300 crores every year which
included direct allocation of projects of CSR, besides expenditure on various CSR activities which
relate to non-SAIL employees with statutory limit up to two per cent.
Recommendation
107. The Committee feels that such measures taken by the corporates would help in
reducing pollution and improving air quality. The Committee therefore recommends that all
the Ministries may be impressed upon to direct the PSUs falling under their respective
areas to earmark a minimum of 1% of their profits towards plantation, health and welfare
activities for the country and its people.

19
MINUTES

20

21
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 2 nd February, 2011 in Committee Room
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Dr. Chandan Mitra
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Shri Jabir Husain
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg
8. Shri D.V . Sadananda Gowda
9. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
10. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
11. Shri Jayaram Pangi
10. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
11. Shri Balakrishna K. Shukla
12. Dr. Rajan Sushant
13. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai
14. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director
Representatives from the Ministry of Power
1. Shri P. Uma Shankar, Secretary
2. Shri G.B. Pradhan, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Sudhir Kumar, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. M. Ravi Kanth, Joint Secretary
5. Shri I.C.P. Keshari, Joint Secretary
21

22
6. Shri Rajiv Kumar Gupta, Director
7. Shri Gurdial Singh, Chairperson, Central Electricity Authority
8. Shri S.M. Dhiman, Member, Central Electricity Authority
9. Shri A.S. Bakshi, Member, Central Electricity Authority
10. Shri B.P. Singh, Director, NTPC
11. Shri Sharad Anand, Executive Director, NTPC
12. Shri V .K. Gupta, Executive Director, NTPC
13. Shri A.B.L. Srivastava, CMD, NHPC
14. Shri S.K. Chaturvedi, CMD, Powergrid
15. Dr. J.M. Phatak, CMD, REC
16. Shri H.K. Sharma, CMD, SJVN Ltd.
17. Shri R.S.T. Sai, CMD, THDC
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the Secretary, Ministry of Power
alongwith his team of officials to the meeting of the Committee. He mentioned that for sustaining
our growth rate of 9%, we needed to add power generation capacity of nearly 1.5 to 2 lakh MW
over the Twelfth and Thirteenth Plan period and the bulk of this capacity addition was proposed
through hydro and thermal power plants. He further pointed out that both thermal and hydro power
plants had environmental implications and as such a fine balance was needed to be struck between
addition of power generation capacity and preservation of environment and forest. Thereafter, he
requested the Secretary to highlight the strategy proposed to be adopted by the Ministry of Power
for meeting the targets of additional power generation capacity and at the same time ensuring
preservation of environment and bio-diversity. He also desired to know from him the difficulties
being experienced by the Ministry in getting environment clearances owing mainly to the decision
of the Ministry of Environment and Forests that the coal blocks in ‘No Go Areas’ were not to be
considered at all for forest clearances. He also asked the Secretary about the measures that had
been adopted by the Ministry to identify the inadequacies in the existing system of obtaining forest
clearances and suggestions, if any to make decisions on such clearances more transparent and
faster. The Chairman also desired to know the steps taken by the Ministry of Power to mitigate
the environmental impacts of thermal and hydro power projects.
3. The Secretary, thereafter, made a power point presentation explaining in details the various
stages of getting environment and forest clearance for thermal and hydel power projects. He
informed that broadly four types of clearances environment; forests; wildlife and coastal zone were
required for a power project. It could be all or anyone of them. For these clearances the concerned
developer directly applied to the concerned authority and not through Ministry of Power. He further
informed that forests clearances were given in two stages. Stage-I involved in principle clearance
with certain conditions and when those conditions were complied with stage-II clearance i.e. final
clearance was given. It was further informed that environment and forests related clearances affect
all the three segments of power sector viz. generation, transmission and distribution. He also added
that thermal power projects were facing problems not only from the point of view of environment
but also from the point of view of forest clearance for the coal block that had been connected
to them. The demarcation of coalfields into ‘go’ and ‘no-go area’ in the middle of the year 2009
and its retrospective application was one of the main reasons which affected the power sector
most. With a large number of coalfields falling into the ‘no go’ area the domestic production
capacity would be seriously impaired and the gap between demand and supply would further widen.
The Secretary further informed the Committee that the recent circular from the Ministry of
Environment & Forests had further affected clearances for thermal power projects as it insisted
that for thermal power projects the source from which coal would be supplied had to be indicated

23
up front before the clearance was given. Earlier there was no such insistence. Although he
acknowledged the significance of preservation of environment and forest but he also emphasized
the need to encourage and promote the development of power projects to sustain the growth rate
of the country. He further added that the additional difficulty for Ministry of Power was application
of the Scheduled Tribes and other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Right) Act,
2006, which required that the concerned developer would get clearance from each Panchayat and
then bring it to the Ministry of Environment & Forests before the clearance was given.
4. The Secretary also mentioned that the total coal deposit basins approximately covered less
than 0.54% of the land mass of the country. Forest cover on this coal bearing land comes to only
about 0.16% with respect to India’s land mass. It was also stated that it was important to exploit
this resource in view of the fact that this 0.54% area provided 55% of country’s energy need and
70% of its power generation. Some of the members of the Committee, however, observed that
0.16% of the total land mass of the country must be a huge area and it might be consisting of
dense forest cover and habitat of vast bio-diversity.
5. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, M.P. queried whether the Ministry had taken any initiative to create
a prospective buffer area for forestation to compensate for the loss of forest land due to the
construction of power projects. In response to this, the Secretary submitted that the Ministry had
not taken any such initiative so far but in future they would think in this direction. The Secretary
was also asked to provide details of projects which had been hampered due to the coalfields falling
under the ‘No Go’ areas.
6. Responding to the query raised by the Chairman about the new measures taken by the
Ministry to efficiently utilize the fly ash being generated by thermal power plants to offset the
environmental degradation, the Secretary stated that as per the recent circular of the Ministry of
Environment & Forests, the fly ash was now needed to be disposed off in dry form rather than
in wet form. Most of the companies were getting involved with users of ash as a result of which
demand of land for power projects was going down.
7. Dr. Chandan Mitra, M.P. desired to know whether any technology had been developed to
reach coal mines through tunnels rather than disturbing the large forest area especially which fell
under the “No Go” areas. The Secretary replied that underground mining technology was available
to extract coal from the mines so as not to disturb forest area, however, it was quite expensive
and it increased the cost of project manifold as compared to open cast mining and thereby
increased the cost of power production. It was also observed that underground mining had its own
hazards like under ground firing in coal fields as had taken place in Jharia coal fields. Caving of
land was another drawback of underground mining practices.
8. While replying to the suggestion made by some Members to commission a study to establish
a cost analysis with the environmental cost added to it, the Secretary agreed to explore the idea.
The Secretary also felt that doubts were being created in the minds of people that
clearances given could be reviewed. Shri Jabir Husain, M.P. sought a clarification whether it had
been considered that how the projects would be affected if clearance was to be given without
completion of a comprehensive study. The Secretary replied that the point made by the member
was well taken, but the concerns of environment as well as development needed to be taken up
comprehensively as both were equally important and one alternative in such cases, could be that
once this study was completed, mitigation measure could be looked into.
The officials then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The Committee adjourned at 12.25 
P.M.

24
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 9 th May, 2011 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Ani! H. Lad
4. Dr. Chandan Mitra
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Shri Jabir Husain
8. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
LOK SABHA
9. Shri P.C. Chako
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi
12. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
13. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
14. Shri Jayaram Pangi
15. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
16. Shri Balakrishna K. Shukla
17. Dr. Rajan Sushant
18. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
19. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri P. Gopalakrishnan, Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director
Representatives from the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
1. Shri G.C. Chaturvedi, Secretary
2. Shri Sudhir Bharvaga, Additional Secretary
24

25
3. Shri D.N. Narashmiah Raju, Joint Secretary
4. Shri L.N. Gupta, Joint Secretary
5. Shri A.K. Hazarika, CMD, ONGC
6. Shri R.S. Butola, Chairman, IOCL
7. Shri B.C. Tripathi, CMD, GAIL
8. Shri S. Venkataraman, Director, GAIL
9. Shri K. Murali, Director, HPCL
10. Shri K.K. Gupta, Director, BPCL
11. Shri N.M. Borah, CMD, OIL
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the Secretary, Ministry of
Petroleum and Natural Gas along with his team of officials to the meeting of the Committee.
Thereafter, he informed that the Committee was scheduled to hear the views of Secretary, Ministry
of Petroleum and other officials on various aspects relating to ‘Steps taken to Control pollution by
Public Sector undertakings under the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas’. He asked the
Secretary to highlight various measures taken by Ministry, for providing a clear, pollution free
environment; cutting down the emission corning out from Oil refineries, etc. He also desired to
know the difficulties being faced by the Ministry in that regard.
3. The Secretary, thereafter, briefly apprised the Committee about various measures taken by
oil PSUs in upgrading the quality of fuel. Further, a power point presentation explaining in details
the steps taken to control pollution was made. Findings of Dr. R.A. Mashelkar Committee such as
the Bharat I to IV standards on the lines of Euro-norms, slides on City Gas Distribution (CGD),
infrastructure extension on LPG coverage, important schemes like Rajiv Gandhi Gramin LPG Vitran
Yojna, various treatment methods adopted for air and water pollution control, etc. figured in the
presentation.
4. The Chairman suggested the Secretary to go through Oil pollution Act (OP A), 1990 of USA
that improved USA’s ability to prevent and respond to Oil spills and see how the act could help
India. He also asked as to how much amount of budget they were spending towards Corporate
Social Responsibility.
5. When the Committee enquired about the achievement of target of spending two percent of
total profit for meeting corporate social responsibility, CMD, ONGC replied that they were spending
money in phases. The Secretary, however, assured the Committee that he would collect the
requisite information from all oil sector PSUs and furnish it to the Committee.
6. The Chairman enquired about the places where oil and gas exploration was going on. ONGC
representative apprised the Committee about the oil exploration activities all over India.
7. The Committee desired to know about the steps taken by the Ministry to check adulteration
especially in petrol and diesel and the action that had been taken in the last one-year and how
petroleum sector companies were addressing the environmental concerns of the country. It was
stated that all the retail outlets were run on No automation No operation principle. He further added
that kerosene diversion was the main reason for adulteration as even if five or ten percent kerosene
was mixed, it was difficult to judge whether adulteration had taken place or not. He assured that
Ministry was in the process of introducing non-launderable marker system to check the adulteration
of diesel.
8. The issue of organized gangs/oil mafia operating in the country and steps taken to control
their activities also came up during the discussions. Addressing this issue, the Ministry explained
that they had teams of oil marketing companies to carry out inspection at state level and for

26
registration of cases. If any outlet was found to be involved in adulteration, its license was
terminated. It was further informed that the Ministry had a proper institutional mechanism to
address the issue of adulteration and took deterrent action as and when required.
9. The Committee desired to know if any punitive action was taken by the Ministry against
those indulging in adulteration and the reasons for no-implementation of transportation of material
by retailers in their own vehicles. Chairman, IOCL, replied that they had a policy for punitive action
and a mechanism for retailers transporting oil in their vehicles. However, all retailers did not have
the financial capability to do that and some of them were disinterested. The Ministry of Petroleum
and Natural gas, therefore, as a matter of policy goes for open tenders to engage transporters.
10. Responding to the suggestion by the Chairman to exercise some control over the private
entrepreneurs involved in oil and gas exploration in matters relating to environment, Directorate
General of Hydrocarbons (DGH) and Secretary Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, stated that
the existing rules were uniformly applicable to the public as well as private sector companies and
that both of them were monitored by the Central and State Pollution Control Boards (CPCB/SPCB)
not by the Ministry. The Committee opined that Ministry should also have some control over the
Private Sector Enterprises so as to ensure their compliance with environmental norms.
11. CMD, Gas Authority of India Limited, subsequently, provided the  details of two percent
of profit spent on under the head of Corporate Social Responsibility in GAIL.
12. The Chairman asked questions related to pollution control measures in Visakhapatnam
refinery and various welfare measures like adoption of villages, etc. taken by them. The
representative of HPCL replied the questions. While replying to a suggestion made by the
Committee to use Carbon Credit, the Secretary replied that point made was well taken and pleaded
that the Ministry would collect the information and submit it to the Committee.
13. Chairman also enquired about ten point programme of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
Gas for reducing air pollution in the vicinity of the Taj Mahal and other national monuments in Agra
and setting up of a task force to monitor implementation. The representative of GAIL apprised the
Committee about measures taken to control pollution in Agra and Taj area under the orders of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court.
The officials then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
14. The Committee adjourned at 1.19 
P.M.

27
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 30 th May, 2011 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Shri Jabir Husain
7. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
LOK SABHA
8. Shri D.V . Sadananda Gowda
9. Shri Ninong Ering
10. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi
11. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
12. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
13. Shri Jayaram Pangi
14. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
15. Shri Pradeep Tamta
16. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai
17. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director
Representatives from the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
1. Shri G.C. Chaturvedi, Secretary
2. Shri Sudhir Bharvaga, Additional Secretary
3. Shri D.N. Narashmiah Raju, Joint Secretary
4. Shri L.N. Gupta, Joint Secretary
27

28
5. Shri Apurva Chandra, Joint Secretary
6. Shri P.K. Singh, Director
7. Shri Shriparakash, Director
Representatives of the Oil Public Sector Undertakings
1. Shri A.K. Hazarika, CMD, ONGC
2. Shri B. C. Tripathi, CMD, GAIL
3. Shri S. Venkataraman, Director, GAIL
4. Shri K. Murali, Director, HPCL
5. Shri K.K. Gupta, Director, BPCL
6. Shri N.M. Borah, CMD, OIL
7. Shri N.K. Khosla, Executive Director, IOCL
8. Shri B.P. Baliga, Executive director, IOCL
9. Shri Arun Kumar, Secretary, OIBD
10. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Director-General DGH
11. Shri Gautam Singh, Senior Advisor, DGH
Representatives from the Private Sector Oil Enterprises
1. Dr. R.K. Raju, Head, HSE, Petroleum, RIL
2. Shri M. Kannan, Head of Environment Department, RIL
3. Shri Narendra Vachharajani, CEO, Essar Investment Ltd.
4. Dr. Jayaraman Gopal, Head, HSEF, Essar Investment Ltd.
5. Shri Colin Macintyre, Director, Cairn India Ltd.
6. Shri K.V. Rajan, Vice-Chairman, Cairn India Ltd.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, the Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum
and Natural Gas along with his team of officials and the representatives of oil PSUs’ and private
sector companies to the meeting of the Committee. Thereafter, he informed that the Committee was
scheduled to hear the views of Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and Heads of
major Oil and Natural Gas Companies on ‘Steps taken to Control pollution by Public Sector
undertakings/Private Companies in the field of Petroleum and Natural Gas’. He asked the Secretary
to highlight various measures taken by the Ministry for providing a pollution free environment, the
extent to which environmental issues had been factored into Ministry’s developmental agenda and
the roadmap it had drawn for sustainable development in Oil and Natural Gas sector.
3. The Secretary, thereafter, briefly apprised the Committee on measures taken by Oil industry
to control pollution. He requested the Committee to first hear private sector oil companies and
measures taken by them followed by the representatives of the PSUs.
4. Afterward, a power point presentation explaining the steps taken by Essar Oil Limited to
control pollution was made by Head, HSEF, Essar Investment Limited. The Chairman suggested,
the CEO, Essar Investment Ltd. to increase the voluntary spending on Corporate Social
Responsibility. The CEO, assured to increase the scope and coverage of activities under CSR.
5. Thereafter, the Committee was apprised by the representative of Reliance Industries Limited
about efforts made by them to minimize the air pollution. The Chairman enquired about the area
of green belt developed by RIL. RIL official informed the Committee that RIL had 2,200 acres in
Jamnagar and 200 acres in Gadimoga i.e. 2,400 acres earmarked for this purpose. The Committee
desired to know from the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas about the status of ocean

29
acidification in the Gulf of Kutch, Gujarat coast and whether any study had been done in that
regard. The Secretary replied that he would get back to the Committee on this issue at the earliest.
6. The Committee also desired to know the status of pollution audit by Private Sector Oil
Refineries. It was stated that after use of seawater for desalination by the refineries, the remaining
seawater would have a slightly high salt content due to concentration. It was also informed that
the National Institute of oceanography-conducted study for fifteen days continuously on the
performance of the flora and fauna annually and the report was submitted to the Central/ State
Pollution Control board. Appreciating the presentation, the members of the Committee desired to
physically inspect the site.
7. Subsequently, on being asked by the Chairman, the CEO, CAIRN India limited introduced
the background of the company, refineries, its capacity, and measures taken to control pollution.
He also added that CAIRN India has a very strict environmental management system. The Chairman
enquired about existence of any task force on environment in Ministry of Petroleum and Natural
Gas. The Secretary replied that Ministry of Environment and Forests Ministry would be having
such a task force.
8. The Committee enquired about the problem of flash light installed around the oil well of
CAIRN INDIA LIMITED which keeps the surrounding area lighted throughout the night. This had
led to change in the behavior of animals in Barmer. The CEO, CAIRN replied that use of flashlights
was a standard practice followed around the world in all industrial facilities. According to him,
nothing unusual was happening there but he assured that he would certainly look into that problem.
9. The Chairman desired to have a comparative spending statement on Corporate Social
Responsibility in relation to all refineries under public and private sector. Additional Secretary
apprised the Committee that guidelines issued by Department of public enterprises were applicable
to the Public Sector Enterprises and environmental issues were monitored by Pollution Control
Board.
10. CMD, Gas authority of India limited, thereafter, provided the details of environment friendly
practices including two per cent spending on CSR in GAIL followed by his organisation. The
Chairman stated that though CSR was not legally binding but it was moral duty of every corporate
body to stick to two percent.
11. The Committee recommended that the Ministry of Petroleum must have a task force to have
coordination between the ministry and the Ministry of Environment and Chairman added that
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas must work in tandem with the Pollution Control Board and
the private sector enterprises.
12. The officials then withdrew.
13. The Committee thereafter decided to take a study visit to Mumbai, Jamnagar, Mount Abu
and Udaipur from 17
th to 22 nd July, 2011 to interact with the officials of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests and some public and private sector oil companies on pollution mitigation
measures taken by them. The Committee also decided to visit some of the prominent institutes/
centres falling within the administrative control of Ministries/ Departments which are within the
purview of the Committee to acquaint itself with the internal working and problems being faced
by them. The Committee directed the Secretariat to take necessary action accordingly.
A verbatim of the meeting was kept.
The Committee adjourned at 12.37 
P.M.

30
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 17 th June, 2011 in Main Committee ‘D’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Saman Pathak
4. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
5. Shri Jabir Husain
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Francisco Sardinha
7. Shri K.C. Singh Baba
8. Shri D.Y . Sadananda Gowda
9. Shri Ninong Ering
10. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi
11. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
12. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
13. Shri Balakrishna K. Shukla
14. Shri Jayaram Pangi
15. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
16. Shri Pradeep Tamta
17. Shrimati Kaisar Jahan
18. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai
19. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director
Representatives from the Department of Public Enterprises
1. Shri Bhaskar Chatterjee, Secretary
30

31
Representatives of the Department of Heavy Industry
1. Shri Ambuj Sharma, Joint Secretary
Representatives of Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion
1. Shri Talleen Kumar, Joint Secretary
Representatives of the Major Public and Private Sector Automobile Companies
1. Shri A.S. Nagaraja, MD, Bharat Heavy Plate and Vessels Ltd. (BHPV)
2. Dr. Pawan Goenka, President, Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers, (SIAM)
3. Shri B. Prasada Rao, CMD, (BHEL)
4. Shri R. Sethuraman, Senior Vice President, Hyundai Motor (India)
5. Shri Manoj Jha, MD, Hindustan Motor
6. Shri C.V . Raman, EO, Maruti Suzuki India
Representatives of the Major Public and Private Sector Cement Companies
1. Shri R.P. Tak, CMD, Cement Corporation of India (CCI)
2. Shri Ashwini Pahuja, DG, (NCCBM)
3. Shri Sandeep Shrivastava, Head, Environment, Mis Ambuja Cements Ltd.
4. Shri L. Rajasekar, Executive President, Mis Ultra Tech Cement Ltd.
5. Dr. K.C. Narang, Advisor, Mis Dalmia Cement (Bharat) Ltd.
6. Dr. S.K. Handoo, Advisor (Tech.), Cement Manufacturers' Association
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, the Secretary, Department of Public
Enterprises and his team of officials, representatives of Departments of Heavy Industry and
Industrial Policy and Promotion and representatives from major public and private sector companies
to the meeting of the Committee.
3. The Chairman informed that the Committee had been concerned about environmental
degradation and had been reviewing measures taken by various sectors of the economy to
contribute towards a clean, safe and healthy environment. He further added that the Committee had
already heard Secretaries, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, and Power. The Committee,
today, proposed to assess adequacy or otherwise, of industrial policy to effectively ensure operation
of industries without damaging environment. He also added that the Committee would also like to
examine the extent to which guidelines on Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) were facilitating
industries to contribute towards better and healthier environment. He also desired to know the steps
taken by major public and private sector enterprises to address environmental concerns and the
extent, to which they had been factored into their developmental agenda.
4. The representative of Ministry of Heavy Industry, thereafter, made a power point
presentation and briefly highlighted the existing regulatory mechanism in cement industry sector. It
was stated that cement industry was decontrolled from 1991 onwards and they did not have
administrative control over the sector as such. However, they participated in the working groups
set up by Planning Commission to coordinate policy inputs and through these groups, they tried
to address these concerns.
5. The Chairman desired to know whether there was monitoring of cement manufacturing
industries which were mostly in private sector. The representative of Department of Industrial
Policy and Promotion (DIPP) replied that for adherence to environmental norms they were in touch
with Ministry of Environment and Forests. The Cement Manufacturers’ Association (CMI) gave
them inputs on a regular basis as to the extent to which environmental standards were being

32
followed. As per the latest feedback, big and six small cement plants were not complying with the
environmental standards. He, further, added that the Ministry told them to follow the guidelines but
the DIPP was not able to exercise control over them because this sector was delicensed in 1991.
6. Thereafter, the Committee was apprised by the Secretary, Department of Public Enterprises
about CSR guidelines issued in April 2010 for monitoring performance of 246 Central Public Sector
Units. Details of Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) system were also spelt out. Proposals in
the pipeline including Annual confidential remarks, performance related pay, etc. were also briefly
touched upon by the Secretary.
7. Afterwards, a presentation on the environment protection measures taken by Bharat Heavy
Electricals Limited (BHEL) was made, followed by a summary of the performance of Bharat Heavy
Plate and Vessels Limited (BHPV) over the last decade.
8. The representative of Department of Heavy Industry apprised the Committee about the
efforts made by them in the field of environmental protection and CSR. It was stated that there
were 320 operating CPSEs’ out of which 17 were in profit and 14 were in loss and out of
fourteen, eight were in very sick condition requiring immediate revival strategies to be worked out
by the Department.
9. The Committee enquired about the manner in which Department of Heavy Industry (DHI)
was addressing the issues of environment. It was stated by the DHI representative that all public
and private sector companies were governed by the rules and regulations of MoEF and Central/
State Pollution Control Boards. Environment friendly measures followed by DHI, such as Bharat III
and IV norms, National Mission on Electric Mobility, Inspection Centers managed by Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways were briefly touched upon by the Secretary.
10. The Committee also desired to know from the representatives of Ministries present in the
meeting whether they were aware of 95
th report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Commerce submitted in February, 2011 on Cement Sector and if so, the specific
steps taken by the ministries with regard to the recommendations made by the Committee. It was
reported by the DPE representative that they were not only aware of the Committee report but had
also taken necessary action on every recommendation and submitted the same to the Secretariat.
Dissatisfied with the reply, the Committee desired that action be taken more seriously in future.
11. The issue of making Corporate Social Responsibility mandatory was debated at length. It
was mentioned by the Secretary, DPE that India was perhaps the only country in the world that
had a mandatory set of guidelines under CSR for public sector.
12. CMDs of private automobile companies, namely Mahindra and Hyundai group, Maruti
Suzuki, thereafter, briefly provided the details of activities taken by  them under CSR. Lastly, the
CMD of Cement Corporation of India (CCI) apprised the Committee about measures taken under
CSR.
13. The officials, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee adjourned at 12.48 
P.M.

33
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 30 th June, 2011 in Committee Room,
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil H. Lad
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Dr. Chandan Mitra
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Shri Jabir Husain
LOK SABHA
8. Shri K.C. Singh Baba
9. Shri P.C. Chacko
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi
12. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
13. Shri Jayaram Pangi
14. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
15. Shri Francisco Sardinha
16. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai
17. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Shri D.B. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Coal
1. Shri C. Balakrishnan, Secretary
2. Shri Alok Perti, Special Secretary
3. Shri R.K. Mahajan, Joint Secretary
33

34
4. Shri AK. Bhalla, Joint Secretary
5. Shrimati Anjali Anand, JS and FA
6. Shri D.N. Prasad, Director (Technical)
Representatives from the Coal India Limited and its subsidiaries
1. Shri N.C. Jha, CMD, Coal India Ltd.
2. Shri Kalyan Majumdar, GM (C), CIL
3. Shri A.K. Charanpahari, CGM, CIL
4. Shri T.K. Lahiry, CMD, Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. (BCCL)
5. Shri D.C. Garg, CMD, Western coalfields Ltd. (WCL)
6. Shri A.K. Singh, CMD, South Eastern Coalfields Ltd. (SECL)
7. Shri Gopal Singh, Director (Technical), SECL
8. Shri N. Kumar, Director (T), Eastern Coalfields Ltd.
9. Shri A.K. Debnath, Director (T), Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Ltd.
10. Shri T.K. Nag, Director (T), Central Coalfields Ltd.
11. Shri O.P. Mishra, Director (T), Northern Coalfields Ltd.
Representative of the Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd. (NLC)
1. Shri A,R. Ansari, CMD
Representative of the Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. (SCCL)
1. Shri Narsing Rao, CMD
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Coal together with his
team of officials, Chief Managing Directors of Coal India Ltd., Bharat Coking Coal Ltd., Western
and Eastern Coal fields Ltd.. South Eastern Coal Fields Ltd., Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd.,
Singareni Collieries Company Ltd. and other senior officials to the meeting of the Committee.
3. The Chairman informed that the Committee had been concerned about environmental
degradation and had been reviewing measures taken by various sectors of the economy to
contribute towards a clean, safe and healthy environment. He further added that the Committee had
already heard Secretaries, Ministries of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Power, Heavy Industry,
Department of Public Enterprises, etc. The Chairman emphasised upon the fact that while Coal
production has to be enhanced to meet our growing demands of energy, there were genuine
environmental concerns associated with Coal mining which need to be duly addressed. In this
background, the Chairman desired to know from the Secretary, Coal and CMDs as to the road map
drawn by them to ensure production of requisite quantity of Coal without causing damage to our
ecological balance as also the mitigation measures adopted by them to contribute towards a better
and healthier environment.
4. The Chairman, further, wanted to know the problems being faced by the Ministry of Coal
in complying with the guidelines issued by the Ministry of Environment and Forests. He also asked
the Secretary to inform the Committee about ‘Go’ and ‘No Go’ areas and the technology being
used in Australia, South Africa, Canada and other major Coal producing countries to protect the
environment.
5. The Secretary told the Committee that the concerns relating to environmental degradation
and mitigation measures had always been given priority by the Coal companies. Briefly dealing with
the issue of ‘Go’ and ‘No Go Areas’, he apprised the Committee that with a view to expedite the
clearance procedures, the Ministry of Coal had about two and a half years back identified the areas

35
which were dense forest or the ‘No Go’ areas so as not to propose exploitation of resources in
those areas and to concentrate on the remaining ‘Go’ areas which would be considered for forestry
and environmental clearances. The whole idea was that we would try to streamline the process but
what had actually happened was that last year, for the first time in history, Coal companies ended
up with a zero growth. The Secretary, however, clarified that environment and forests clearances
were not the only reason for not being able to step up production.
6. The Secretary, thereafter, added that in addition to this ‘Go’ and ‘No Go’ areas controversy
certain other steps taken by Ministry of Environment and Forests were creating problems.
7. Last year, a study of industrial clusters was conducted and a new measure called the
Comprehensive Environment Policy Index (CEPI) was worked out. It was decided that the areas
which had high CEPI scores would not be open for any project as a result of which neither
expansion of the existing projects could be taken up nor any new project proposals could be
initiated. Initially, this provision was meant for a limited duration but it got extended and the current
time limit was till September, 2011.
8. The Secretary further elaborated that there were two more circulars which had been
recently issued by Ministry of Environment and Forests. One of the circulars stipulated that
environment clearances could be considered only after forests clearances had been given. As a
result of this, those projects which did not involve much forest area and that forest area might
not be covered in the mining sequence in the initial stages, forest clearance would have to be taken
first and only then environment clearances could be considered. The other circular stipulated that
proposals for increase in production could be allowed without the mandatory public hearing
provided there was no increase or addition to the equipment, manpower or anything else. The
Secretary added that any step to increase production would certainly require at least a few
manpower and some machinery.
9. It was further added that Ministry of Environment and Forests was insisting that for giving
environment clearance, they wanted to be sure that the linkage to the power project was given with
specific details of the mines. Normally, linkage to a power project was given from a company
because it gave the company flexibility. In case there was any production problem in some area,
supply of coal could be made from neighbouring mines. But the Ministry of Environment and
Forests held the view that they needed to see the total environmental load so as to be clear about
what kind of transportation was envisaged and what was the kind of arrangement that would be
made in the long run. The Secretary summed up by saying that those were some of the burning
issues that he wanted to place before the Committee.
10. The Committee was further apprised that the country had a total Coal resource base of
around 285 billion tonnes, out of which, 95 billion tonnes fell under the forest areas which had
so far not been worked. So bulk of production plan that was likely to come up in future years
had to come from this areas with 95 billion tonnes of coal resource. When the issue of ‘Go’ and
‘No Go Area’ came up about 34 percent of the total coal blocks that were identified in the forest
areas fell under the ‘No Go Area’ and the remaining 66 percent fell under the ‘Go Area’. After
further discussions, this 34 percent area came down to 23 percent and the 66 per cent increased
to 77 percent. Still about 27 billion tones of Coal resource was blocked under the ‘No Go Area’.
The Committee was also informed that when the first exercise to identify ‘Go’ and ‘No Go Area’
was undertaken, the total number of blocks were 602, out of which, 396 fell in the go area and
the remaining under the ‘No Go Area’. After clustering and boundary modification, the current
position was that 36 per cent of the blocks were in the ‘no go area’ and the rest 64 per cent in
the’ go area’. But in terms of geological reserves, 29 per cent was in the ‘No Go area’ and the
71 per cent in the ‘Go area’.

36
11. The Committee was further informed that the entire process of getting environment and
forestry clearances took a lot of time. The average pendency at the state level for stage-I clearance
was 4½ years and at the Central Government level, it was 1.95 years. On an average, the time
taken in giving clearance was around 5½ to 6 years.
12. When the Committee enquired about the underground mining which was more popular
internationally, the Secretary clarified that our geological deposits did not allow large-scale
underground mining. However, efforts were being made to go for underground mining, wherever
feasible. The biggest such project would come up in a couple of years with a capacity of 2½
million tones. However, it was emphasized that underground mining was not a solution to the open
cast mining because the quantity of coal extracted was very less, hardly exceeding 30 to 35 per
cent. It was, further, emphasised that in a country where the resource was so vital and so scarce,
we could not afford to lose 65 per cent of the coal resources in underground for protection of
the surface area. It was also added that open cast mining was much safer than underground
mining. The Committee, however, emphasised on the need to strike a balance between exploitation
of our resources and also meeting our forests and wildlife concerns. The Committee was of the
view that it might be easier, cheaper and better to use open cast mining but protection of our wild
life and tribal population was equally important because these were irreplaceable. The Committee,
therefore, emphasized that in the ‘No Go area’ feasibility of underground mining may be explored.
13. The Committee enquired from the Secretary, Coal that the Ministry already had 2,00,000
hectares of land available with them for mining and that they were looking for another 6,50,000
hectares of land which could result in uprooting of trees, destruction of forests and also rendering
the tribal people destitute and hence, how did the Ministry justify this. The Secretary admitted that
they needed all that land as mining activity was planned in a sequential manner but that it was not
a major issue. Mining activity might be restricted to a smaller area, but other issues like creation
of dumps and actual closing and advancing, etc., required more land.
14. Thereafter, the issue of fires in the Coal fields of Jharia and Raniganj was raised by the
Committee. The Secretary provided the details of the measures taken to address the issue. CMD
of Bharat Coking Coal Ltd., (BCCL) also briefed the Committee about the measures taken to
control fire in those mines.
15. The Committee desired to know the exact area of forest destroyed and forest land
compensated by planting more trees. The Chairman desired to have a comprehensive report with
statistics of each company. CMD, CIL informed the Committee that they had planted seven crore
trees.
16. Afterwards, Committee desired to know about the afforestation activities undertaken by the
Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd. which was replied by the representative of the NLCL. Thereafter,
CMD of Neyveli Lignite Corporation Ltd. briefly apprised the Committee about the steps taken by
the company to protect the environment.
17. The Committee expressed its serious concern about inordinate delays by the state
governments in providing clearance to the projects. The Special Secretary, Ministry of Coal
apprised the Committee about the problems faced by Coal Sector and projections of the Ministry
for 12
th five year plan.
The officials, then, withdrew.
18. A verbatim record of the meeting was kept.
The Committee adjourned at 1.10 P.M.

37
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 28 th July, 2011 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Jabir Husain
6. Dr. Barun Mukherji
7. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
8. Shri P.C. Chacko
9. Shri A. Ganeshamurthi
10. Shri D.V . Sadananda Gowda
11. Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal
12. Shri Jayaram Pangi
13. Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai
14. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Shipping
1. Shri K. Mohan Das, Secretary
2. Shri Rakesh Srivastava, Joint Secretary (Ports)
3. Shri Ashwani Kumar, Director
4. Shri G.J. Rao, Chairman Paradip Port Trust
5. Shri G.V.L. Satya Kumar, Deputy Chairman, Vishkhapatanam Port Trust
6. Shri P. Mara Pandian, Chairman, Mormugao Port Trust
7. Shri M.A. Bhaskarachar, Deputy Chairman, Kandla Port Trust
37

38
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. Nalini Bhatt, Advisor
2. Dr. A. Senthilvel, Director
3. Shri H.C. Choudhary, AIG (FC)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping; Advisor, Ministry
of Environment and Forests and the Chairmen of the Paradip Port Trust; Mormugao Port Trust
and Deputy Chairmen, Vishakapatnam Port Trust. Kandla Port Trust and other senior officers to
the meeting of the Committee.
3. The Chairman informed that the Committee had been concerned about environmental
degradation and had been reviewing measures taken by establishments in various sectors of the
economy to contribute towards a clean, safe and healthy environment. He further added that the
Committee had already heard Secretaries, Ministries of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Power, Coal,
Department of Public Enterprises and Heavy Industry, etc. in this regard.
4. The Chairman highlighted the importance of Maritime transport in the Socio-economic
development of our country, which had witnessed a significant growth in the recent past. However,
there were genuine environmental concerns such as oil spills, idling of ship engines etc. associated
with the port and other projects. In this background he desired to know from the Secretary,
Ministry of Shipping and the Chairmen of the Port Trusts, the road map drawn by them to ensure
that the shipping industry grows without causing ecological imbalances and the mitigation measures
adopted by them to contribute towards a better and healthier environment. He also desired that the
Committee be apprised of the problems being faced by the Ministry of Shipping in seeking
environmental and CRZ clearances for its ports and shipping projects and their possible solutions.
He specifically pointed out the problem of air pollution in Vishakhapatnam caused due to
transportation of iron ore from Karnataka and Orissa and desired to know the remedial steps being
taken in this regard.
5. The Chairman of the Committee also enquired from the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping
whether they were experiencing any delay in getting clearances for their projects due to multiplicity
of agencies. The Secretary, Ministry of Shipping informed that the Ministry had worked out a plan
for implementation of ‘green ports’ to address environmental issues and had also brought out a
10-year vision document called the ‘Maritime Agenda 2020’. He also informed that shipping being
a global activity, directions and stipulations were laid down by the International Maritime
Organization (IMO). The IMO had approved a series of measures which would come into effect
from 2013 and would help reduce emissions substantially. The Committee was also informed that
since only one per cent of the global tonnage is controlled by India, contribution of our shipping
sector to environmental pollution was minimal. The Secretary further informed that the country had
the capacity to build green ships and our shipyards were even executing orders from many of the
European countries. 6. The Secretary,’ Ministry of Shipping thereafter stated that mainly two
problems were being faced by the Shipping projects as regards the environment clearance
processes viz. the multiplicity of clearances and the delays in obtaining the clearances. The
Committee was further informed that, the process of clearance involved several agencies including
the Ministry of Environment and Forests and the clearances at the State Government level which
included the Costal Regulation Zone and the State Pollution Control Board. The multiplicity of these
agencies, was creating practical difficulties in the implementation of projects. The Secretary, further
referred to the absence of any provisions for deemed clearance in case the time-limits were not
adhered to and stressed upon the need for deemed approvals to make the process easier and
simpler and to expedite port projects with huge investments. He also suggested that once the
master plan for a port was approved, the need for a detailed and time-consuming appraisal of
individual projects should be dispensed with.

39
7. On the issue of oil spills, the Committee was informed that all ports had prepared plans for
dealing with the Tier-I oil spills where the quantity spilled was below 700 tonnes. For oil spills
above 700 tonnes, the coast guard was an empowered agency to tackle such emergencies. The
Secretary further informed that Ship-breaking was done by private industry and came under the
purview of the Ministry of Steel. On being asked as to whether the Ministry of Shipping had any
control on them, it was informed that the industry was controlled through environmental
regulations.
8. On the issue of pollution in Vishakhapatnam Port, the Secretary, informed that the matter
was reviewed in the Ministry and measures for pollution mitigation had already been initiated which
included mechanization of cargo handling, reorganisation of the stock yards and insulation of the
cold stock yards with a high rise wall, etc.
9. The Committee was also informed that air pollution at Vishakhapatnam city was caused
mainly due to trucks with iron ore coming from Orissa to Vishakhapatnam. Movement of ore by
trucks was mainly due to the lack of sufficient number of wagons provided by the railways and
the fact that transportation by trucks was more profitable as compared to trains. However, to
reduce the air pollution, a truck parking terminal had been developed, trucks were stopped at the
periphery of the port itself and came into stacking areas in a regulated manner and sprinkling and
watering was done extensively to settle the dust particles. Further, a project for fully mechanized
handling of iron ore was likely to be executed within the next 18 months.
10. The Committee also queried the Secretary regarding the impact of the ports on the fishing
community and the rehabilitation measures taken by each of the ports. The Secretary informed that
for every project, the rehabilitation of fishermen and other local communities, formed a part of the
environment clearance orders and was therefore a part of the whole project implementation.
However, rehabilitation had been few in number as most of the projects were taken up within the
existing harbours and the need for rehabilitation mostly did not arise.
11. When the Committee enquired about a ship wreckage on one of the beaches at Goa for the
last over 10 years due to which the beach had almost been destroyed, the Chairman, Mormugao
Port Trust stated that the resources for the work of dismantling the ship had been received and
the work of dismantling was almost complete.
12. The Committee, thereafter desired to know about the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)
and its implementation by various ports. The Ministry of Environment and Forests clarified that
when environment clearance letters were issued for major industries and projects, it was stipulated
that at least two per cent of the profit should be earmarked for CSR. The Secretary, Ministry of
Shipping also informed that as far as ports were concerned the spending on CSR, had not been
mandated by any law, but over the years, most of the ports had been spending substantially on
CSR activities viz. health, education, tree plantation, electrification to the slum areas, water supply,
etc.
13. On a query from a member regarding deemed clearance of port projects, the Secretary
informed that in the earlier EIA notification, there was a provision that in case the State Pollution
Control Board did not complete the public hearing, the regulatory authority shall engage another
public agency to complete the process within a period of 45 days. Though it was not really deemed
clearance, however an alternate mechanism existed, if the clearance for a proposal was delayed.
The Secretary also informed that there were other legislations where deemed clearance had been
provided for, to avoid undue delays. In this context the Ministry of Environment and Forests stated
that the deemed clearance clause had not been found to be feasible. He also stated that after the
receipt of complete details from the State Government, forest clearance and time taken for appraisal
at the Central Government level took a minimum of 90 days.

40
14. The Chairman of the Committee, thereafter, desired to know the spending by
Vishakhapatnam port on Corporate Social Responsibility. The Deputy Chairman, Vishakhapatnam
Port Trust informed that a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) had been entered into with the
Municipal Corporation wherein 51 per cent of the taxes would be paid to the corporation on
socially desirable projects viz. recouping the coastline near the port, construction of a sports
complex with multiple facilities, opening of four schools where 80 per cent of the students were
from Visakhapatnam, besides construction of drains, roads, etc.
15. The Chairman of the Committee also pointed out that as per the International Maritime
Organization, 10 per cent reduction in the speed of a ship across the global fleet would reduce
emission of Nitrogen Oxide and Sulphur Dioxide by 23 per cent and he desired to know whether
India was following it. The Secretary, Ministry of Shipping informed that the industry had been
adopting various means to reduce the expenditure on fuel particularly during the last two to three
years including reduction in speed. He however pointed out that the Indian tonnage is just over one
percent of the global tonnage and therefore the contribution towards environmental pollution was
not significant.
The officials, then, withdrew.
16. The Committee then adjourned at 12.55 
P.M. to reassemble at 3.00 P.M. to hear the views of
the Chairman, Railway Board; Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Environment and
Forests and other representatives from the Civil Aviation industry.
Representatives of the Ministry of Railways
1. Shri Vinay Mittal, Chairman, Railway Board
2. Shri A.P. Mishra, Member Engineering, Railway Board
3. Shri Jagdip Rai, Executive Director (Land and Amenities)
4. Shri H.D. Gujarati, Executive Director Traffic Trans. (S)
5. Shri Sudheer Kumar, Executive Director Elect. Engg. (Dev.)
6. Shri R.N. Lal, Addl. Member (Electric)
7. Shri Sanjiv Handa, Member
8. Shri S.K. Saxena, ED (Energy Management)
Representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
1. Dr. Nasim Zaidi, Secretary
2. Shri Prashant Sukul, Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Subha Thakur, Director
4. Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan, Director General, DGCA
5. Shri Lalit Gupta, DDG, -do-
6. Shri Arvind Jadhav, CMD, Air India Limited (AIL)
7. Shri V .P. Agrawal, Chairman, Airports Authority of India (AAI)
8. Shri V . Somasundaram, Member, -do-
9. Shri I.P. Rao, CEO, Delihi International Airport (P) Limited (DIAL)
10. Shri Peter W. Noyce, Chief Operating Officer, -do-
11. Dr. M. Muthukrishnan, Head-Environment Compliances, -do-
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. Nalini Bhatt, Advisor
2. Dr. A. Senthilvel, Director
3. Shri H.C. Choudhary, AIG (FC)

41
17. The Committee reassembled at 3.00 P.M. At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee
welcomed the Chairman, Railway Board; Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation; Advisor, Ministry of
Environment and Forests; Director-General, Directorate General of Civil Aviation; Chairman and
Managing Director, Air India; Chairman, Airports Authority of India; Chief Operating Officer, Delhi
International Airport Private Limited and other senior officers to the meeting of the Committee.
18. The Chairman informed that the Committee had been reviewing measures taken by various
sectors of the economy to mitigate environmental concerns and to contribute towards a clean, safe
and healthy environment. The Chairman also informed that the Committee heard the Secretary,
Ministry of Shipping on environmental issues in the Shipping sector in the forenoon session and
proposed to take up the Railways and the Civil Aviation sectors now. He also pointed out that
studies had shown that about 23 per cent of the total Green house gas emissions emanated from
the transport sector alone. Since Railways and Civil Aviation sectors were growing rapidly in India,
there were genuine environmental concerns that this growth would result in environmental
degradation. He desired to know from the Chairman, Railway Board and Secretary, Ministry of Civil
Aviation, the road map drawn by them to ensure growth in their respective sectors without causing
damage to ecological balance and the problems faced by them in securing environmental clearances
for their projects and possible solutions thereof.
19. The Chairman, Railway Board informed that the Railway was the most fuel efficient mode
of transport and the Railway was committed to making efforts to improve energy efficiency and
also adopt environmental friendly technologies in manufacture, maintenance and operation of the
system. It also made efforts towards reducing electricity charges and ensuring better fuel
management in respect of diesel locomotives which was considered more polluting than its
electrical counterpart. He further informed that on the freight side, the Railway was found to be
approximately five times more energy efficient than road transport and on the passenger side, it
was about two times more energy efficient. Among the initiatives that the Railways had taken to
improve energy efficiency included containing of carbon emission in respect of diesel locomotives
by two methods viz. improving energy consumption and developing substitution of high speed
diesel with 10 per cent bio diesel.
20. The Chairman, Railway Board also informed that Indian Railways had created a Clean
Development Mechanism (CDM) cell in 2006 to explore possibility of developing energy efficient
initiatives. The Railways had also carried out successful trials with CNG substitution of bio-diesel
on Diesel Electrical Multiple Units (DEMUs) and also planned to substitute LNG for industrial fuel
in its workshops and factories and was exploring possibilities for use of LNG in DEMUs and diesel
locomotives. He also stated that new trains had been introduced in Mumbai sub-urban section
equipped with regenerative braking features which save energy. Further, the plants for
manufacturing of green field locomotives and rolling stock, would only have new technology of
regeneration and of saving fuels and therefore the plants of the future would produce high power
locomotives with regeneration.
21. The Committee was also informed that Dedicated Freight Corridors in the eastern and
western sectors, were being established, which would result in migration of road traffic to the
Railways and would be a step in the direction of providing an energy efficient transportation system
in the country. Besides the Railways is encouraging wind and solar energy to meet its energy
requirements.
22. The Chairman also raised the issue of solid waste management and cleanliness of station
premises/trains and wanted to know whether any comprehensive plan had been prepared involving
latest technological options. He desired to know the details of the MoU that had been signed with
the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) in March, 2010, for joint
development of technology for railway coach passenger toilets based on bio-digester developed by

42
DRDO. He also wanted to know the status of rag pickers who were actively involved in picking
wastes in railway stations.
23. The representative from the Railway Board informed that a technology for bio-degradable
toilets had been indigenously developed with the help of DRDO and had been adopted by the Indian
Railways. He also pointed out that Indian Railways was targeting a total of 500 environmental-
friendly toilets and 150 such toilets had already been installed in various trains. Another technology
which the railways was pursuing was the Retention and Evacuation Technology, highly suited for
short distance premier trains and for which trials were also in the offing. The Controlled Discharge
Toilet System, wherein the waste was retained in a tank and the discharge took place in an open-
controlled manner outside the station premises, was also being selectively installed in coaches. The
Committee noted that the Railways should introduce the bio-degradable toilet technology in a phased
manner in all the trains and efforts should be made to do away with manual cleaning toilets in
trains.
24. The Chairman of the Committee also noted that 23 projects of the railways were pending
with the Ministry of Environment and Forests for want of environmental clearance and desired to
know the reasons for this. The Ministry clarified that the Railway projects were not covered under
the environmental impact assessment notification of 2006 and only when the alignment passed
through ecologically sensitive areas like forests, wildlife sanctuaries and such other areas, there was
a need to have clearance under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. At present, only 17 such
railway projects were pending with the Ministry for forestry clearance. The Ministry also clarified
that some of the projects were pending with the State Governments and the rest had been rejected
because of serious environmental concerns.
25. The Chairman of the Committee thereafter asked the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation
to express his views on environmental issues in Civil Aviation Sector. The Secretary, Ministry of
Civil Aviation stated that the Ministry was making every possible efforts in close cooperation and
collaboration with the International Organisations, the Ministries of Environment and Forests and
External Affairs as regards the task of environmental protection to make a balance between growth
and environmental impact. He informed that as per the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate
Change, aviation sector’s contribution to carbon emission was about two per cent but due to the
global growth in this sector the percentage contribution of carbon emission was likely to go up
from two per cent to three per cent by 2050. He further informed that the Civil Aviation Sector
in the country was growing at a rate of around 17 to 18 per cent on year-to-year basis, in both
the domestic and international sectors and more than 1.4 million aircraft were now crossing the
Indian airspace and thereby leaving behind their carbon footprints.
26. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation further informed that the environmental issues in
the Civil Aviation sector could be classified broadly into two categories. Firstly, the local set of
environmental issues, which included aircraft related noise, experienced in the vicinity of airport
and local air quality. Secondly, the environmental issues regulated by the international regulations
laid down by International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) which related to the carbon emissions
that was leading to adverse impact on climate change. He also mentioned that some European
countries had imposed ‘night curfews’ to reduce the noise pollution at night, due to which, most
of their flights came and terminated in our country during night time and thereby caused noise and
environment pollution. He further informed that, our country had taken a stand that the night
curfew system must end and we were dealing with this issue at international level.
27. The Secretary also informed that the Directorate General Civil Aviation (DGCA) had
completed the evolution of the regulatory framework, to contain the noise around airports. He
further informed that several other directives had been issued to the aircraft operators, which
included continuous descent approach, mixed mode operation of three runways, restrictions on use

43
of auxiliary power units, etc. The airport operator and the 76 airlines using the Delhi airport had
complied with the DGCA directives and the High Court had appreciated the steps taken by the
Ministry, DGCA and several other stakeholders in this regard.
28. As regards noise reduction, the Secretary stated that noise was being monitored at Delhi
Airport on a 24-Hour basis and a Noise Complaint Cell had also been established. He pointed out
that land use planning had also been taken up with the local authorities to restrict the setting up
of colonies near the airports. for regulating the air quality, the Secretary stated that a timeframe
was being evolved to lay down the regulatory framework for improvement of local air quality.
29. The Secretary, also pointed out that the carbon emission in the country was only about 2
per cent of the total carbon emission of the world and was mainly due to the technical issues
concerned with the aircraft industry viz. design of aircraft, airframe, aero dynamics, etc. He also
pointed out that the reduction in the carbon emission could be attained through the fuel efficient
processes and DGCA had therefore directed all the airlines to ensure that only fuel efficient latest
generation aircrafts were used. He also informed the Committee that majority of the fleet in the
country was new and fuel efficient both in terms of airframe as well as engine. Besides, operational
methods were also being used to reduce the Carbon emission.
30. The Secretary also mentioned that another market based measure of carbon emission and
trading scheme proposed to be introduced early next year, was also causing concern and the matter
was being taken at diplomatic levels with European Union.
31. The Secretary inter-alia also mentioned that Airports Authority of India had been asked to
develop a national map of airports and Director-General of Civil Aviation was developing a National
Green House Inventory which would take into account the stock of noise footprints at various
airports. He further added that with the development of such inventory, the Carbon footprints could
be monitored by proper air-traffic management, tuning up of engines of aircraft, etc. He further
added that DGCA was having the most transparent website which contained the latest actions taken
by DGCA in the field of environmental protection.
32. In response to a query from the Chairman regarding the presence of pollutants in Aviation
Turbine Fuel, the Secretary, Civil Aviation responded that ATF was produced, with fractional
distillation of crude oil and standards had already been laid down to limit these pollutants. He
further added that the only thing that had not been laid down was the quantum of CO
2 that an
aircraft should produce as a result of combustion. He further informed the Committee that the
process was underway through which the specification of CO
2 emission from an aircraft from ATF
combustion would be determined.
The officials, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The meeting adjourned at 4.30 
P.M.

44
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 11.15 A.M. on Tuesday, the 27 th September, 2011 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
4. Shri Jabir Husain
5. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ninong Ering
7. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
8. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
9. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
10. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
11. Dr. Rajan Sushant
12. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. T. Chatterjee, Secretary
2. Dr. P.J. Dilip Kumar, Director General of Forests and Special Secretary
3. Shri A.K. Bansal, ADG (FC)
4. Prof. S.P. Gautam, Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board
5. Shri J.S. Kamyota, Member Secretary
6. Shri Rajneesh Dube, Joint Secretary
7. Dr. (Mrs.) Nalini Bhatt, Advisor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members to the first meeting of the re-
constituted Committee and added that he was happy to note that all the ten Members from Rajya
44

45
Sabha and 9 Members of Lok Sabha in the earlier Committee have been re-nominated to the present
Committee. Thereafter he welcomed the newly nominated Members from Lok Sabha to the
Committee. He also give a brief outline of the Ministries and Departments falling within the mandate
of the Committee and some of the important reports presented so far.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman informed that “The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011”
has been referred to the Committee by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, for examination and
report within three months. The Committee then decided issue a Press Release on the bill inviting
Memoranda containing views/suggestions from individuals/organisations interested in the subject
matter of the Bill. The Chairman also proposed to form a two member committee consisting of
Prof. M.S. Swaminathan and Shri Jabir Hussain to suggest the nitty-gritty of Nuclear Safety
Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011 and the names of the experts, etc. to the Committee within two
weeks. The Committee agreed to the proposal. Members of the Committee, thereafter, introduced
themselves one by one.
4. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests and
his team of officials to the meeting of the Committee. The Secretary was, then, asked to apprise
the Committee of the functioning of Central and State Pollution Control Boards and the extent to
which Pollution Control Boards had been able to achieve their objectives. The Secretary was also
asked to apprise the Committee on environmental concerns relating to the Land Acquisition,
Rehabilitation and Resettlements Bill, 2011.
6. Thereafter, a power point presentation on the functioning of Central and State Pollution
Control Boards was made, which invited a number of questions and observations from the
Members.
7. The Secretary informed the Committee about functioning of CPCB, namely: Research and
Development functions, waste minimisation and co-pressing of hazardous waste. The Chairman
CPCB apprised the Committee about the site inspections done and action taken by them against
the grossly polluting industries. One of the Committee Members suggested that creation of more
and more authorities would not serve any purpose and suggested decentralisation, social
engineering and inclusion of social scientists to look after the societal concerns as the way out.
Emphasis was also put on ecological mining and additional protection measures for nuclear power
plants such as mangrove bio-shield by the Committee. The Secretary replied to the points raised
by the Member.
8. The increased pollution level in the Ganga was also discussed at length. One of the
Members raised concerns about the success of Ganga Action Plan and desired to know the results
of Ganga Action Plan before and after implementation of pollution control project. The Secretary
agreed that the Ministry was aware of loopholes of the plan and had, therefore, set up a new body
National Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA) to deal with the challenges. He also added that in
the new authority sixty locations were identified on the banks of Ganga to check pollution. World
Bank had also provided one billion U.S. dollars for this seven years long programme.
9. Responding to a query on the status of State Pollution Control Boards, the Chairman, CPCB,
said that it had meagre resources and limited control over the SPCBs’ and its role was merely
supervisory. He further added that permissions for different projects in States were granted by
SPCBs’. He added that pollution in a State was monitored by the Ministry of Environment and
Forests and the State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs).
10. The Committee also desired to know in the manner in which the Ministry of Environment
and Forests was guiding and coordinating with the CPCB and SPCBs’ regarding the enforcement
of the present system, on the functioning of Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and its control
over SPCBs’, availability of funds and infrastructure, etc.

46
11. The Chairman also asked the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests to apprise the
Committee as to how the Ministry coordinating with CPCB and SPCBs in pollution control.
12. The Committee enquired whether the Ministry had taken note of violation of environmental
norms by major companies in different parts of the country viz. Singrauli, Chamba, Solan (H.P.)
and Patliputra (Bihar). In response it was said that IIT, Roorkee was assigned the task of
conducting a study in that regard and its recommendations were being put in practice.
13. The Chairman asked the Secretary send a detailed report on the measures taken to control
pollution. The Chairman, CPCB apprised that the meetings of CPCB took place at the gap of three
months. The Committee desired that CPCB meetings should take place at least within a month. In
addition, both officials and non-officials should be given more power and responsibility to
undertake measures for environmental surveillance of industrial units on random basis to check
operational status and effectiveness of the adopted pollution control measures in meeting the
prescribed standards, in order to submit its observations report to Ministry.
The officials, then, withdrew.
14. The Committee, thereafter, decided to take a study visit to Mumbai, Bengaluru and
Vishakhapatnam from 16
th to 22 nd October, 2011 to interact with the officials of the Ministry of
Environment & Forests, and some public sector oil companies on pollution mitigation measures
taken by them. The Committee also decided to visit the ISRO Satellite Centre and headquarter of
Department of Space along with some of the prominent institutes/centers falling within the
administrative control of Ministries/ Departments which are within the purview of the Committee
to acquaint itself with the internal working and problems being faced by them. The Committee
directed the Secretariat to take necessary action accordingly.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee adjourned at 01.24 
P.M.

47
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 14 th October, 2011 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Dr. Chandan Mitra
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Shri Jabir Husain
8. Dr. Barun Mukherji
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Ninong Ering
10. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
11. Shri Abdul Rahman
12. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
13. Shri Pradeep Tamta
14. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
15. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Representatives of Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. T. Chatterjee, Secretary
2. Dr. P.J. Dilip Kumar, Director General of Forests and Special Secretary
3. Shri Harish C. Chaudhary, AIGF (FC)
4. Shri A.K. Bansal, ADGF (FC)
5. Shri A.K. Srivastava, IGF (FC)
6. Dr. (Mrs.) Nalini Bhatt, Advisor
47

48
Representatives of Ministry of Coal and Coal PSUs
1. Shri Alok Perti, Special Secretary
2. Shrimati Anjali Anand Srivastava, JS and FA
3. Shri A.K. Bhalla, Joint Secretary (Coal)
4. Shri D.N. Prasad, Director (Technical)
5. Shri N.C. Jha, Chairman, Coal India Limited (CIL)
6. Shri R.K. Saha, CMD, Central Coalfields Limited (CCL)
7. Shri A.R. Ansari, CMD, Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited (NLC)
8. Shri A.K. Sinha, CMD, South Eastern Coalfields Limited (SECL)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretaries, Ministries of Environment and
Forests and Coal along with their team of officials to the meeting of the Committee.
3. The Chairman emphasised that environment was both a source and sink for developmental
activity, hence development could not be seen in isolation from the environment. He also, underlined
that attempting development only by increasing mineral production devoid of concerns of
environment and human well being could have undesirable social and ecological consequences. He
observed that Coal was the main source of energy in most of the developing countries including
India and to meet the increasing energy needs of our country, its production had to be significantly
increased. On the other hand, there were genuine ecological concerns associated with coal mining,
which needed to be duly addressed to avoid any conflict between meeting our developmental needs
and ecology. The need of the hour, therefore, was to strike a harmonious and delicate balance
between environment and the process of development.
4. He further added that somehow an impression was being created that Ministry of
Environment and Forests was the major stumbling block in the path of future growth and
development by delaying or withholding environment and forests clearances for the Coal blocks,
power projects, road and rail network, etc. on the pretext of maintaining ecological balance and
that this misconception needed to be dispelled.
5. He further observed that previously the Committee had heard Ministries of Environment and
Forests and Coal separately. But today the Committee was hearing the views of both the Ministries
together and with both the Secretaries sitting together, it was hoped that the confusion would be
cleared and it would lead to a better understanding between the two Ministries. He reminded that
in the last meeting, the Secretary Coal had underlined some of the issues including some recent
circulars issued by the Ministry of Environments and Forests which were causing undue delay in
giving clearances to the coal blocks.
6. He therefore, asked the Secretary, Coal first to highlight problems being faced by the
Ministry in complying with those guidelines and also apprise the Committee of various steps taken
by the Ministry of Coal to ensure exploitation of requisite quantity of Coal without causing damage
to ecological balance. The Secretary was also asked to explain as to why underground mining was
not a viable option for coal mining in most of the coal blocks. The Chairman also asked the
Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests to suggest solutions to the concerns expressed by
the Secretary, Coal, and steps taken by Ministry of Environment and Forests to expedite clearances.
He also wanted the Committee to be specifically informed about the reasons behind undue delays
in giving environmental and forestry clearances.
7. The Chairman took a very serious note of some of key officers of the Ministries not
attending the Committee meetings and emphasised that, in future, it must be ensured that all the
concerned officials appeared before the Committee. In exceptional cases, however, when official

49
was out of the country or was scheduled to attend another Parliamentary Standing Committee
meeting, he or she must take prior permission from the Chairman of the Committee.
8. Thereafter, a power point presentation on the problems being faced by coal sector was
made by Chairman, Coal India Limited.
9. The Chairman desired to know from CMD, Coal India Limited as to how much time the
State Governments and the Ministry of Environment and Forests normally took to give clearances.
The CMD replied that out of 125 forestry proposals involving forest land of 15,355 hectares, 103
proposals were pending with different State Governments. He further added that average pendency
period for stage-I clearance per project was 3.5 years at the State level and 22 projects cleared
by State Governments were pending with the Central Government with an average pendency period
of 2.42 years per project. For stage-II clearance, out of 53 projects, 31 were pending with an
average pendency period of 3.7 years per project with the State Governments and 22 at the Central
Government with average pendency period of 2.15 years. He summed up by saying that it took
12 years, on an average, to get a project cleared.
10. When the Committee desired to know the circumstances leading to that kind of pendency
in according clearance by State Governments, the CMD, CIL apprised the Committee that whenever
a proposal for forestry clearance was submitted to the district forest officer, an NOC was required
from the District Collector to get the proposal registered. There was a lot of delay in giving that.
In the past, proposals were admitted even without an NOC. But now unless NOC was given by
the District Collector, Ministry of Environment and Forests would not give any permission for even
in-principle clearance, i.e. Stage-I clearance.
11. The Secretary, Coal added that no objection from Gram Sabha with 50 per cent quorum
was one of the main reasons behind delay in clearances. Gram Sabha was called several times but
the condition of 50 per cent quorum was not met. He, further, added that the matter had been
brought to the notice of Group of Ministers which had asked the Ministries of Coal and Tribal
Affairs to directly interact and find a solution.
12. The chairman enquired whether the Supreme Court Judgment modifying the process of
environmental clearances, prescribed under Environmental Impact Assessment would help reduce
the time taken in giving clearances. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests affirmed
that it would help them crunch about a year of delay. Because, earlier forests clearance was to
come first and only then Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for that project started. But now
both would go simultaneously,
13. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, clarifying his stand on the pendency
or delay in giving environment and forest clearances, stated that out of 354 proposals for Coal
blocks received during the last five years, 268 covering about 60 odd thousand hectares had been
cleared. One of the reasons for high average of pendency period with States was that even if a
case was returned for completion of data to Coal India Limited or to the Coal companies, it was
shown pending against the Forest Department. Such cases, however, as per law were liable to be
summarily rejected. But to speed up clearances the Ministry did not create a log jam because the
cases which were already 40 or 50 per cent complete would suddenly get pushed back and needed
to be restarted. He further raised a point as to whether we needed to look at the Coal Production
from the area point of view or from the production point of view. If seen from the production
point of view, clearances had been given for much more in terms of million tonnes per annum but
actual production was much less. He cited the case of Mahanadi Coalfield which had been given
clearance for about 143 tonnes per annum but the actual production was about 100 tonnes. He
further informed that delay in clearances was not the handiwork of the Ministry nor of the State
Governments. In 1992, guidelines involving the Central Government were issued to exercise some
control on the release of high density forest area and stage-I and stage-II clearances were
introduced for forest areas of 140 hectares and above. Then in 2001, Compensatory afforestation

50
amount and Net Present value was also added by the Supreme Court. Those were the reasons
which had made the process of clearance time taking.
14. He further added that the new underground mining technologies like long wall and
Continuous Mines had not been used in our country. He emphasised that if that was done, the
speed for clearance would definitely go up. But the Ministry of Coal always insisted on Open Strip
Mining and Open Cast Mining which destroyed the forest.
15. The Secretary, Coal submitted that the total coal-bearing area in the country was about 16
per cent of the total land mass while the forest area was about 22-23 per cent. He further
submitted that the total forest area affected by Coal mining was about 13,000 hectares, so far. In
all, Ministry of Coal had reclaimed around 28,000 hectares which was more than two times the
area of the forest land used. He suggested that application for clearance might be taken online so
that it was accepted only if minimum requirement was fed into it. He also underlined that
environmental clearance was given with a validity of one year whereas the forest clearance took
about four to five years. He, therefore, submitted that the validity period of environment clearances
needed to be extended for some more time.
16. Responding to the points raised by the Secretary, Coal, the Secretary, Environment and
Forests stated that the online submission of application for clearance was a good idea and that the
Ministry was open to that. The only issue was that of survey of India maps which had to come
right from the District Forest officer level showing exactly the blocks which were being mined.
Those maps on 1:4000 scale which was very, very high resolution cadastral scale to be sent
electronically was a problem and that was the reason why online process had not taken off.
17. On the issues of Coal bearing area being very small percentage of the total land mass of
the country, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests submitted that there was no
denying the fact that the area was small in terms of quantity but it was of the highest quality forest
with a canopy of above 70 per cent and that was why the Ministry found it difficult to hand it
over immediately. On the validity period of environment and forest clearances, he clarified that both
these clearances were now made co-terminus with the lease period so it was no more an issue.
Even if it was an issue, he assured that it would be sorted out and that the Ministry could easily
change the validity period to coincide it with the lease period.
18. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests informed the Committee that to speed
up decision making in forestry clearances, a suggestion was made to involve the Ministry in
allotment and auctioning of Coal blocks. But it had not been considered and even if a Coal block
involved very high quality forest, it was first auctioned out or allotted to private companies and
then left to them to follow all the guidelines stipulated by Ministry of Environment and Forests.
He, further, added that if his Ministry was involved at the time the coal block was mapped out
for first allotment, they could straightaway say that please avoid those areas as it would take too
much time. The Committee appreciated the point and took a note of the fact that environment
ministry must  be involved while finalizing the coal blocks so they could guide which area was to
be touched and which not to be touched.
19. Responding to the claim of biological reclamation of 2.16 hectares of degraded  forest land
for every hectare of forest damaged, by coal companies, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment
and Forests, stated that the pristine forest with high level of biodiversity was being lost while the
forest that was being created was more in the nature of plantations. He, however, acknowledged
that at certain places restoration done by Ministry of Coal was of high quality.
20. When the Committee enquired about the status of categorization of ‘go’ and ‘no go’ areas,
which was referred to the Group of Ministers, the Secretary, Coal replied that the Group of

51
Ministers had not finalized it. However, an agreement had been reached that the categorization
would be done away with and each case would be taken up on its merit.
21. Summing up, the Chairman observed that Ministry of Environment and Forests was
committed to conserve forests and wanted underground mining to be done. In a huge forest area
where it was very important to preserve, only a small area could be identified for mining and after
that the forest could be grown in the course of time. For that, the MoEF could consider relaxation
so that concerns of both the sides were addressed. An understanding of each other’s concerns
would help both sides.
22. Complimenting both the secretaries, the Chairman observed that the Committee wanted them
to focus on preservation of environment, avoiding lack of coordination and red tapism. The
Committee also desired that Ministry of Environment and Forests should ensure that the forest map
of the country was not mutilated.
The officials, then, withdrew.
23. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee adjourned at 12.53 
P.M.

52
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 16 th November, 2011 in Main
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Dr. Chandan Mitra
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Dr. Barun Mukherji
7. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Prataprao Ganpatrao Jadhav
9. Shri Abdul Rahman
10. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
11. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
12. Shri Francisco Sardinha
13. Dr. Rajan Sushant
14. Shri Pradeep Tamta
15. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
16. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
** *
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
52
*** Relates to other matter.

53
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. The Committee then adjourned at 12.52 
P.M. to reassemble at 2.30 P.M. to hear the views
of the Secretaries of the Ministries/Departments of Road Transport and Highways, Defence
Production, Environment and Forests and representatives from the PSUs of the aforesaid Ministries/
Departments.
Representatives of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (RT&H)
1. Shri A.K. Upadhyay, Secretary
2. Shri R.P. Indoria, DG (RD) and SS
3. Shri Sanjay Bandopadhyaya, JS
4. Shri Rajiv Yadav, Member (A), NHAI
5. Shri V .K. Sharma, CGM (LA), NHAI
6. Shri S. Manivasagam, Manager (IT), NHAI
Representatives of the Department of Defence Production and PSUs
1. Shri Shekhar Agarwal, Secretary
2. Shri V . Somasundaran, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Manoj Saunik, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Satyajeet Rajan, Joint Secretary
5. Shrimati Rashmi Verma, Joint Secretary
6. Shri P.K. Mishra, Joint Secretary
7. Shri Gyanesh Kumar, Joint Secretary
8. Shri B.B. Kaura, Joint Secretary
9. Shri P.V. Deshmukh, Offg. Chairman, HAL
10. Shri Anil Kumar, CMD, BEL
11. Shri A.K. Verma, CMD, GRSE
12. Shri Vineet Bakshi, CMD, GSL
13. Shri N.K. Mishra, CMD, HSL
14. Shri H.S. Malhi, CMD, MDL
15. Shri Ravi Khetarpal, CMD, BDL
16. Shri V .R.S. Natarajan, CMD, BEML Ltd.
17. Shri S.D. Dimri, Chairman and DGOF
*** Relates to other matter.

54
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. T. Chatterjee, Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Bansal, ADG (FC)
3. Dr. (Mrs.) P.L. Ahuja Rai, Director
4. Shri Harish C. Choudhry, AIG (FC)
5. Shri Dalip Kumar, DGF
13. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretaries, Ministries/Departments of Road
Transport and Highways, Defence Production, Environment and Forests and their team of officials
to the meeting of the Committee.
14. Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways briefed the Committee. He stated that
highway construction projects in road sector directly benefit the people by providing access to
market, education and health care. Further as highway is a linear project with a very narrow width,
therefore displacement of people is meager. Secondly, so far, all the highways development has
taken place on existing roads, hence, it did not involve huge land acquisition.
15. The Secretary emphasized that environmental clearance in roadways sector should be fast
tracked and he also informed that pollution aspects arising from vehicles emission and plastic
construction of roads, are subject matters of the Department of Heavy Industry. He, while stating
that period upto 1 to 2 years for environmental clearance of transport sector project is a long one
and it should be expedited
16. One of the Members of NHAI mentioned before the Committee that as FC has been made
a part of EC and no EC is given, unless there is a simultaneous Forest Clearance for the project.
While supporting this observation, Secretary, MoEF emphasized that EC would be useless if a road
is going through a forest and no FC has been given for the project.
17. Elaborating further, Secretary, MoEF cited Supreme Court judgment in two cases, one is
Godavarman case and other in Lafarge case wherein the Hon’ble Court has observed that FC and
EC should be linked so that EC is not issued unless the FC is finally cleared. He further argued
that in the light of the Supreme Court judgment, the twin clearance of forest and environment are
being taken up together before a road project gets clearance from his Ministry.
18. The Chairman of the Committee stated that the Committee takes a serious exception to in
ordinate delay in granting EC. He emphasized that EC should be given only if project satisfied all
aspect that it needs to get EC as MoEF cannot encourage pollution but the process needs to be
expedited.
19. Secretary, Road Transport and Highways, deposed before the Committee by saying that
generally where no large displacement of population takes place due to construction of roads,
Ministry complies with the direction of Forest authority and resumes road construction work after
it gets NOC from the forest authorities.
20. While emphasizing the fact that controlling pollution is also the concern of the Ministry of
Surface Transport, the Chairman emphasized that in case of the thick forest, the construction of
roads through such areas either should be avoided or should be of reduced width as far as
possible. The Secretary then requested the Committee that this observation of the Chairman should
come as recommendation for implementation by the Ministry.
21. Chairman further mentioned that in case of National Highway sector, all projects are
purely in the form of public projects while in case of industry, private projects are also being
cleared. The main spirit of the Supreme Court judgement is to curb the undue advantage being

55
taken by selfish industrialists and same is not the scenario in road sector. He further emphasized
that proper construction of road is necessary to control pollution specially dust pollution. He felt
that NHAI should delink clearance of road projects from normal procedure and regional offices
in different States should be given powers for giving clearance to road projects. At this stage,
member NHAI raised one point that while clearing road projects running through tribal areas,
NOC from Gram Sabha under Forest Rights Act, 2006 is also required, but where roads were
passing through non-tribal areas, the same procedure was being followed which was causing
delays.
22. He therefore, emphasized that in non-tribal areas, District Magistrate in consultation with
District Forest Officer can give NOC for road projects for early clearance. While appreciating this
argument, Chairman enquired for a reply in this regard from Secretary, MoEF and Secretary
clarified that Forest Rights Act include the word “Tribal and other Forest dwellers” and by the dint
of the inclusion of the words “other forest dwellers”, NOC from Gram Sabha is being insisted for
clearing road projects in non-tribal areas also.
23. The member, NHAI, therefore mentioned that a written request about this observation of the
Committee in this regard will be made to the Ministry of Tribal Welfare as Forest Rights Act is
being implemented by them. The member, NHAI, further, argued that for clearing road project in
protected forest areas, the time being taken for clearance process could be cut down if the full
authority for clearance was delegated completely to the Regional Officer of the MoEF and which
should be done at the field level to avoid delay in the entire process.
24. The issue of weak infrastructure available with the MoEF was also highlighted by the
Chairman which he cited as the main cause for delay in clearance of projects. ADO, Forest
highlighted before the Committee that delay was mainly due to the fact that 90% clearance cases
of road sector were being handled by the Regional Office alone. Supreme Court has, therefore,
observed that number of Regional Offices in each State should be increased to minimum 10 for
easing out the situation. ADG further highlighted that 70 cases of road sector have been cleared
and 9 cases are still pending which will be processed soon. He also mentioned that road project
clearance are taken up by FAC always on priority basis.
25. The Chairman of the Committee then mentioned that delay in clearance should be minimized
for enabling quicker construction of roads for controlling pollution and the Committee may be
informed about the steps taken in this regard. The Ministry while pointing out the aspect of delays
in wildlife clearance for road projects, also suggested that the clearance for maintenance,
resurfacing and widening of already existing roads should not be treated as a new project,
otherwise the requisite clearances gets delayed.
26. The Committee pointed out that during road construction in the hilly areas, slope
stabilization is not being done simultaneously, which results in permanent damage to the slopes. It
was, therefore, suggested that there was an urgent need to adopt the methodology of slope
stabilization and road construction concurrently. The Ministry clarified that long tunnels are being
dug by using advanced technology, which reduces damage to the slopes. The Ministry also pointed
out that crumb rubber modified bitumen technology has been developed to get rid of the waste
rubber and plastics, which increases the average life span of an bitumen overlay by two to three
years. Similarly, soil stabilizing and warm mix technology was being used, to reduce the carbon
footprints in road construction.
27. In response to a query from the Chairman, as to whether bitumen built roads are more
efficient from the environment point of view than polymer quoted bitumen built roads; the Ministry
informed that polymer modified bitumen overlay, increases the life of overlay by two to three years
and ultimately, increases the longevity of roads.

56
28. The Committee thereafter took up the issue of environmental pollution posed by the Defence
Production sector. The Secretary of the Department stated that the department during the course
of production of defence equipments, followed environmentally friendly policies and were fulfilling
statutory obligations of the Central and State Pollution Control Boards. The Committee was also
informed that in ammunition and explosives group of factories where chemicals and explosives
were used, each plant had got a dedicated in-built effluent treatment plant where samples were
regularly drawn by the Pollution Control Boards before clearances were granted. Further,
equipments had been installed in the chimneys to control air pollution. The Committee was also
informed that in the last year, ordnance factories have planted one lakh trees in various States, in
association with the various Forest Departments, which has resulted in a decrease of temperature
around the factories besides ensuring a clean and healthy environment. The Bharat Earth Movers
Limited (BEML) informed that it has planted 20 lakh trees over a period of six to seven years.
29. The Committee was also informed that the Hospitals for the employees have environment
friendly systems such as solar heaters, rainwater harvesting etc. In reply to a query the Committee
was informed that the environmental friendly frigates and warships were being built by using
technologies such as use of non-CFC based air-conditioning systems, non-tar based paints for
painting of hull and other equipments.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The Committee adjourned at 4.27 
P.M.

57
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 17 th November, 2011 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Dr. Chandan Mitra
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Dr. Barun Mukherji
8. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
9. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Shri Abdul Rahman
12. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
13. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
14. Shri Jagdish Singh Rana
15. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
16. Shri Francisco Sardinha
17. Dr. Rajan Sushant
18. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
19. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Ministry of Power
1. Shri P. Uma Shankar, Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Lavasa, Additional Secretary
3. Shri Sudhir Kumar, Joint Secretary
57

58
Representative of the Ministry of Steel
Shri P. K. Mishra, Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Ms. Meera Maharishi, Additional Secretary
2. Dr. P. J. Dilip Kumar, Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretaries, Ministries of Power and Steel;
Additional Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests and the heads of various PSUs,
Autonomous Bodies and Statutory Bodies and other senior officers to the meeting of the
Committee.
3. The Chairman informed that the Committee had been concerned about environmental
degradation and had been reviewing measures taken by establishments in various sectors of the
economy to contribute towards a clean, safe and healthy environment. He further added that the
Committee had already heard Secretaries, Ministries of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Power, Coal,
Department of Public Enterprises and Heavy Industry, etc. in that regard and the Committee heard
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, the previous day.
4. The Chairman underlined the fact that Fossil fuels, the main source of energy were,
unfortunately, the major contributors to environmental pollution. In the meeting with the Secretary,
Power, held on 2nd February, 2011 the previous committee had discussed at length the difficulties
faced by the Ministry of Power in complying with the guidelines issued by the Ministry of
Environment and Forests. In that context, the Committee desired from the Secretary, Power to
apprise the Committee about the policies, procedures evolved and concrete measures taken by the
Ministry to contain environmental pollution, to promote integration of environmental concerns in its
developmental projects.
5. While pointing out that in the previous meeting, the Committee was informed by NTPC,
SAIL and others that they were spending two per cent of their profit earned on Corporate Social
Responsibility, the Chairman expressed hope that the CSR would also be used in controlling
pollution. The Committee also felt that air pollution was alarmingly increasing in Visakhapatnam
city. In response, a suggestion was made for taking a massive plantation drive to control pollution.
6. The Chairman suggested that the Corporate Social Responsibility was a welcome move to
control the pollution of the environment and plantation of trees helped in reducing the presence of
CO
2 in the atmosphere and thereby leading to better health and better sanitary conditions for the
population in those areas. He suggested the Secretaries and CMDs to spend on pollution control
measures from their funds allocated for Corporate Social Responsibility, and undertake plantation
in the area surrounding Steel plants.
7. Thereafter, the Chair requested the Secretary, Ministry of Steel, to explain as to how he
was going ahead in that regard. He emphasised that as per scientific data, one of the major sources
to control pollution is plantation but much needed to be done on that front around the Steel plants.
The Chairman of the Committee enquired from both the Secretaries to provide the details of the
projects pending with the Ministry of Environment and Forests for clearance and difficulties faced
by their Ministries in complying with the environmental norms. The representative of Ministry of
Environment and Forests was asked to inform the Committee about the reasons for in ordinate
delay in expeditious clearance of projects pending with his Ministry.
8. The Secretary, Steel, thereafter, briefly apprised the Committee about various measures
taken by his ministry to reduce pollution. He added that his ministry was involved in doing
plantation in the premises of the Steel plants on  a very wide scale. For instance, in Visakhapatnam

59
Steel Plant, about 4.7 million trees had been planted over the years. Similarly plantations were done
in Bhilai, Durgapur and Bokaro. He further apprised that Steel is the fifth largest producer of CO 2
gas as per the studies of the Ministry of Environment. The first one is, Power, followed by
Agriculture, Transport and Cement. Steel had other emissions, which were of a different nature like
gases and heat produced in the Steel plants. Of late, new technologies have emerged which had
actually enabled them to tap the gases and emissions and to utilize them better for power generation
within the Steel plants.
9. He, further, pointed out, that over a period, the pollution levels in the Steel plants had been
reduced. Recycling and reuse of solid waste generated in steel plants was continuously increasing.
Some plants had already achieved 100 per cent target of recycling of Blast Furnace Slag and others
were going to achieve that target in the near future. There were, however, technological limitations
for recycling or reuse of steel making slag and industry was striving hard to find a solution,
including import of technologies for using slag produced in the steel making shop. He added that
Steel Plants were members of CREP recommendations Committee where they try to reduce
pollution level even below the prescribed mandatory indicators.
10. At this stage, the PSUs under the Ministry provided the details of various steps undertaken
for minimizing pollution such as installation of electrostatic precipitators and dust collection system,
deployment of water sprinklers, installation of effluent treatment plants and providing larger green
cover in the surrounding areas to absorb pollution. Under 3-4 major schemes which PSUs were
operating to reduce the pollution levels. One such scheme was under the Clean Development
Mechanism, under the Kyoto Protocol.
11. The Secretary also mentioned that during the year 2000, it was noted that 158 such
projects, amounting to a reduction of 103 million tonnes of Carbon dioxide, had been approved by
the National Clean Development Mechanism Authority. Energy- efficient-low-carbon technology in
steel re-rolling mills was being introduced in the country to bring down energy consumption into
productivity and cost competitiveness, together with a reduction in Green House Gases.
12. It was informed that under the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development
Organisation (NEIDO) model project scheme, the Ministry of Steel was facilitating setting up of
energy efficient environment friendly projects known as ‘model projects’ in different steel plants
with financial assistance from Japan to be implemented by NEIDO, Japan. One model project for
Sinter Cooler Waste Heat Recovery at Vishakhapatnam steel plant of RINL was under progress.
Research and Development was also being promoted by the Ministry in the steel sector to improve
the productivity, quality and environment friendliness of the technology for bringing down the cost
of production of steel.
13. The Secretary apprised that under the National Action Plan for Climate Change, an
innovative market-based mechanism called Perform, Achieve and Trade (PAT) had been launched
for improvement of energy efficiency in eight sectors of the economy, including 76 RINL steel
units. Clearance of a project took three to five years in India which was going to hamper growth
in the long run, therefore, need of the hour was to find a foolproof mechanism quickly.
Additionally, there had to be a mechanism to ensure that the prescribed time limit of 90 days for
the first-stage forest clearance was adhered to.
14. It was informed by the Secretary that pollution mitigation measures adopted by the Ministry
of Steel, whether in the public sector or in the private sector, had already provided in detail to the
Committee in the form of a write-up note and it was hoped that there would be some forward
movement on the issue, which would help them to resolve these problems. At this stage, the
representative of Ministry of Environment and Forests explained that the ministry had in the recent
past tried to streamline its procedures so that we can give environment and forest clearances faster.

60
15. While replying to the query made by the Chairman about time taken in environmental
clearances, the Secretary replied that it took about three to five years on an average to get all
clearances.
16. The Chairman, thereafter, asked CMD, Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) to explain as
to how things were taking shape in his sector which was replied to by him. On the issue of
Corporate Social Responsibility, the CMD apprised that SAIL was making an expenditure of about
Rs.300 crores every year which included direct allocation of projects of CSR, besides expenditure
on various CSR activities which relate to non-SAIL employees with statutory limit up to two per cent.
17. One of the Members of the Committee desired to know the number of mines owned by
the Ministry of Steel. The Secretary replied that SAIL had 15 captive mines of two types one is
iron ore and other one is cooking coal.
18. The Secretary, Power, thereafter, elaborated on the issues raised by the Committee namely
transportation, private operators, problem of pollution from sponge iron Sector, co-ordination from
the nodal body like IMG and reforestation of Barbil and Saranda.
19. The representative of Ministry of Environment and Forests emphasised upon the need to
strengthen the State Pollution Control Boards and the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB).
Regarding the coordination mechanism, she added that the idea of Environment Appraisal Committee
was being actively considered in the Ministry. The Chairman, NMDC, thereafter, briefly apprised
the Committee about various efforts made in the fields of environmental protection and Corporate
Social Responsibility.
20. The Chairman, thereafter, requested the Secretary, Power to apprise the Committee on
environmental issues. The Secretary apprised that there were four points in the power sector. One,
how we are controlling the environmental system two, social welfare activities, thirdly leakages in
the transmission and distribution of power lines and its effect on environment system and lastly
delay in clearances of power projects.
21. The Chairman urged the Ministry to expedite the clearance and said that the Committee was
prepared to support the modification of the environment clearance stages of various steel projects,
in order to meet Steel Ministry’s target for completion of the projects. For power projects also,
the system of clearance being followed needs to be suitably modified to increase electricity
generation in the country and at the same time keeping environmental concerns in prime
perspective. The Secretary replied that the point made by the Chairman was well taken as far as
production of power and steel was concerned. He further mentioned that coal-fired power
generation was going to dominate the scene in the near future and his Ministry follows a low-
carbon strategy for ensuring growth of the power sector and this strategy was based on, three
basic principles namely produce efficiently, transmit efficiently, and consume efficiently.
22. Delays in the Hydro energy projects was also discussed at length. The Secretary replied to
the questions asked. While referring to alternate source of energy, he said that India is one of the
largest producers of wind-based energy and he did not see any difficulty for going forward in this
field in the coming years. On Solar energy he added that it was a promising area in the years to
come and so far the energy production from Solar Energy Sector had proved to be beneficial.
Thereafter, he touched upon transmission and consumption aspects. At this stage a note was also
submitted for the consideration of the Committee.
23. One of the Members of the Committee also desired to know about the pollution created by
the fly ash especially in NTPC plants CMD, NTPC replied to the query.
24. Some Members of the committee desired to hear the views of representatives of both public
and private sector power industries about the pollution mitigation measures taken by them to have

61
a balanced view on the issue. The Chair agreed to the suggestion. The Chairman highlighted the
fact that the Committee was more concerned with the environment and pollution control and
environmental protection.
25. While responding to some of the queries raised by the members, Secretary, Power
elaborated that Government was to create land banks where afforestation can take place in
anticipation of a project where forest land would be used. About the issue on “go” and “no-go”
areas, he pointed out that matter has already been closed. “Go” and “no-go” area concept,
introduced retrospectively, created a lot of difficulties. He expressed his pleasure that the Ministry
of Environment and Forests had accepted some of the suggestions.
26. While responding to the Chairman’s query on delay in clearances, the representative of
MoEF submitted that there were a number of villages and they were required to take NOC from
each Gram Sabha. The Secretary, Power further added that they had brought the issue to the
notice of both Ministries of Tribal Affairs and Environment and Forests to exempt transmission
lines from the application of FRA (Forest Rights Act).
The Chairman thanked all the participants for valuable deliberations and assured the
Members that private sector industries in power sector would be called in some other meeting.
The officials, then, withdraw.
A verbatim record of the meeting was kept.
The Committee then adjourned at 1.47 
P.M. to reassemble at 2.30 P.M. to hear the views
of the Secretaries, Ministry of Civil Aviation; Ministries of Mines and Environment and Forests and
other representatives from the aforementioned Ministries and PSUs.
Representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviatiion
1. Dr. Nasim Zaidi, Secretary
2. Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan, DG, DGCA
3. Shri Prashant Sukul, Joint Secretary
4. Shrimati Shubha Thakur, Director
5. Shri V .P. Agarwal, Chairman, Airports Authority of India (AAI)
6. Shri Rohit Nandan, CMD, Air India Ltd.
7. Shri R.K. Tyagi, CMD, Pawan Hans Ltd.
8. Shri Lalit Gupta, DDG, DGCA
9. Shri V . Somasundaram, Member (ANS), AAI
10. Air Marshal V .K. Verma (Retd.), Director, Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Udan Academy
Representatives of the Ministry of Mines
1. Shri S. Vijay Kumar, Secretary
2. Shri Ranjan Sahai, Controller of Mines, IBM
3. Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. H.S.M. Prakash, Director (Tech.)
27. The Committee reassembled at 2.30 
P.M. At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee
welcomed the Secretaries, Ministry of Civil Aviation, and Ministry of Mines; representatives of
Ministry of Environment and Forests; and other officers present at the meeting of the Committee.
28. The Chairman addressed the witnesses and the Committee members with the observation
that the rapid growth and industrialisation over the past few decades has created unacceptable level

62
of pollution in the country. He expressed concern over degrading environmental situation and in the
process of examining such degradation; he referred to the Committee’s hearing of the Secretaries,
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and Department of Defence Production on the previous
day and prior to that of Coal.
29. He recalled that earlier on 28
th July, 2011 the Committee heard the Secretary, Ministry of
Civil Aviation on two major issues namely noise pollution at airports and carbon emission from
aircrafts. He, therefore, while referring to the second appearance of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil
Aviation before the Committee mentioned that the Committee would now like to hear from the
Secretary about the short and long term plans to tackle the problem of pollution in the aviation
Sector including the progress made in the field of National Green House Inventory, afforestation
programme to compensate for deforestation arising from the expansion of the existing airports and
creation of new airports in the country.
30. In his speech while referring to the appearance of Secretary, Ministry of Mines the
Chairman mentioned that the Committee would like to know about the steps taken by the Mines
Ministry to make mining operations sustainable in the long run. Inter-alia , he expressed the desire
of the Committee to appraise itself of the monitoring mechanism adopted by the Ministry for
monitoring reclamation of degraded forest land for ensuring compliance with the statutory
provisions and conditions imposed by the Ministry of Environment and Forests while granting
environmental clearances.
31. In tandem, the Committee first heard the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation. He submitted
before the Committee that, as already mentioned by the Chairman, earlier, he had apprised the
Committee about the noise level at airports being created by the running aircrafts and the issue of
ambient air quality at airports on account of movements of vehicles, aircrafts, auxiliary power units
and ground power units, the climate change on account of Carbon emission from various air
operations and use of alternative fuels.
32. He further mentioned that the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme was going to be
implemented from 1
st January, 2012, which meant, Indian aircraft flying to and fro Europe will
have to buy extra carbon allowances in order to be able to fly to Europe. He also recalled that
in the meeting of 28
th July, 2011, he had mentioned about the opposition of India against global
imposition of night curfew at airports because it would have adverse impact on operation of
aircrafts in India as it would create congestion at airports as most of the flights would get
bunched. Accordingly, the matter was taken up with the ICAO requesting them to conduct a study
through their technical committees to examine the impact of night curfew outside India on the
operations, economic aspects, noise levels etc. He further mentioned that ICAO had accepted
India’s request with its TOR aspect and ICAO would take further action in the matter. It was
further informed that action on the part of the India would be decided only after study done by
ICAO in the field was released.
33. Regarding the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme, the Secretary mentioned that
India convened a meeting of 25 countries mainly composed of non ED members of ICAO on
29
th and 30 th September, 2011 which was attended by 70 delegates and which adopted a joint
declaration opposing EUs plan to include all flights by non-ED carriers to and from an airport into
the territory of an ED member State. He, further, clarified that the Ministry has sent a demarche
to the ED requesting them not to resort to emission trading scheme unless mutually agreed to.
India’s permanent representative in ICAO in Montreal also utilized the said joint declaration for
obtaining signatures of 26 members out of 36 of ICAO council.
34. Referring to the long term plan on Carbon emission, the Secretary mentioned that he would
submit a detailed note on the proposed action plan on the issue later. Inter-alia he mentioned that

63
management of Green House Gases in aviation sector is co-coordinated by ICAO under the
umbrella of UNFCCC and Kyoto Protocol. He further mentioned that developing countries are not
in favour of having binding targets on Carbon emission, though as far as Civil Aviation Sector was
concerned, India had agreed on 2 per cent improvement in fuel efficiency to counter pollution. He
also informed the Committee that so far as the National Green House Inventory was concerned,
the same had been completed and till now only three proposals were pending with the Ministry of
Environment and Forests.
35. The Chairman of the Committee, while referring to the twin issues of Green Field Airport
and expansion, mentioned the name of Visakhapatnam airport where public money had been spent
for making it an international airport but unfortunately no international operations have been started
from here. Calling it as a waste of money, the Chairman of the Committee demanded explanation
in that regard. In response to that, CMD, Air India assured the Committee that Air India would
undertake commercial feasibility of introduction of more domestic/international flights from
Vishakhapatnam airport and report back to the Committee within 30 days.
36. DGCA mentioned about the noise pollution at Delhi Airport in which case litigation was
already pending with the Delhi High Court. He further mentioned that various steps had been taken
for 24 hours noise monitoring near New Delhi airport at five locations, restriction on use of
auxiliary power unit, setting up noise cell at airports, phasing out of old, noisy aircrafts, dedicated
runway for the older Russian defence aircrafts, etc. Instructions had also been issued to the local
authorities on proper land use planning and various other measures.
37. CPCB had also constituted an expert Committee to deal with the aspect of aviation emission
reduction. Regarding use of Bio-fuel, studies were also going on to counter pollution. Apart from
this, aircraft pilots had been asked to take smooth curve turn before landing at the airport with
a view to save fuel and they were also being instructed to use more optimal route after the landing
at the airport. Uniform speed maintenance was also done to economise with fuel consumption. Air
traffic pro management system combined with a satellite based navigation system were also being
used to reduce CO
2 and CO 3 emissions in aviation. So far as recycling of water at airport was
concerned, the chairman AAI informed the Committee that the water was correctly recycled and
waste disposal was being controlled effectively at the airports to control pollution. He intimated that
independent waste management cell had been set up to look after toilet and plastic waste at
big airports, gradually taking it to the smaller airports and waste soil was being used as manure
also.
38. The Chairman, AAI further informed the Committee that aerobridges were being used to
reduce vehicular movements at airports. Apart from that, under the Ground Handling Policy, they
were going in for such ground handler that emits lesser carbon.
39. CMD, Air India mentioned that as a national carrier  they had formulated a corporate
environmental policy which lays down the norms and the responsibilities of each of the Department
as to determine what they have to do under an environmental management system. A team had been
set up in the quality management group, which constantly monitors whether the parameters laid
down in the policy are being, actually, adhered to and complied with or not. The team also
coordinated with the Ministry of Civil Aviation as well as with the Airports to ensure that standards
laid down, were actually being observed. Apart from that, he further apprised the committee that
aircrafts were traveling on such routes which consumed less fuel and with gradual induction of
787 Boeing Planes in Air India fleet which are considered to be about 40 per cent more efficient
so far as fuel consumption was concerned, would further reduce aviation emission. Air India was
embarking upon controlling fuel emission in aviation sector. Use of less paper had also made Air
India an indirect harbinger of saver of forest and arrester of degradation of forest.

64
40. The Chairman, thereafter, turned to Secretary, Mines for apprising the Committee of the
road map drawn in the mining sector to tackle the problem of fugitive emission and pollution in
the Mining Sector. While explaining the entire mechanism, the Secretary, Mines informed the
Committee that as per the Mines and Minerals Development Regulation Act, 1957, minerals were
the property of the State, who can enter into leases with the Mining lessee for undertaking mining
activity. Since the aforesaid act regulates how the States could dispose of the mineral resources,
the leases define the conditions under which the mining is done by the lessees.
41. He further briefed the Committee that basic mechanism by which the Ministry addressed
the problem of pollution is through twin environmental management plans. One environment
management plan made by the lessee when he submits a mining plan to the Indian Bureau of Mines
(IBM). The IBM scrutinises mining plans and approves them with the intention that all mining
activities are carried out in accordance with the mining plan. The mining plan is for the entire life
of the mine. Thereafter, the plan goes to the Ministry of Environment and Forests for an
environmental impact assessment. Based on that assessment, another environmental management
plan is prepared meaning there were two EMP one administered by the Indian Bureau of Mines and
the other by the Ministry of Environment and Forests, mainly through the State Pollution Control
Boards.
42. The problem that occurs was that the environmental management plan, prepared and
approved by the Indian Bureau of Mines was, basically, in relation to only the lease areas. The
environmental management plan that was prepared for the Ministry of Environment, actually, takes
into account a large buffer area outside the lease area where the Indian Bureau of Mines has no
jurisdiction and accordingly was contributing to a situation where the lessee is sometimes not held
properly accountable for his mining activities.
43. At this stage, the Chairman of the Committee wanted to know in the detail about the steps
taken by the Ministry to tackle pollution, time taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests
in clearing the Mining projects and afforestation measures being practiced by the Ministry. The
Secretary replied that purity of the water level to be maintained at the mining sites were monitored
by the IBM and IBM was solely responsible that Mining practices did not violate any of the
provisions of the air, water and noise pollution act.
44. At this point the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests pointed out that
when the Ministry of Environment and Forests gives clearance to mining projects, emphasis is given
on the biodiversity condition of the area being mined. As per her opinion, the biggest problem was
the implementation aspect of the EMP as cleared by the IBM and finally got approved by the Ministry
of Environment and Forests. Further, SPCB had to monitor the mining area and as they were not
strong enough since they did not get much support from the State Government to monitor the mining
area from Environment point of view. She further pointed out that in some of the past cases, specific
instances had come to the notice of the ministry regarding improper monitoring by SPCBs in mining
areas leading to subsequent closure of mines by the Ministry of Mines.
45. Inspector General of Forests, at that stage, drew the attention of the Committee in
connection with mining issues in protected forest areas and in wildlife sanctuaries to a Supreme
Court order which says that no mining can take place within the National Park and sanctuaries
falling within one kilometer of a National Park or sanctuary. The Supreme Court Order further says
that if any project which requires environmental clearance falls within 10 kilometers of a sanctuary,
it would be placed before the Standing Committee of the National Board for Wildlife for their
approval.
46. After that, the Hoda Committee, on the preparations of EMP, was also discussed and
Controller of Mines IBM appraised the Committee that the Environment Management Plan that was

65
prepared and implemented by the State Pollution Control Board was under a different enactment,
and Mines and Mineral Development Regulation Act Bill, will not supersede the Environment
Protection Act. Therefore, the environmental impact assessment and management plan under that
Act will continue. He also appraised the Committee that a new policy in that regard was also being
given the shape of a legislation and the bill would soon be introduced in the Parliament for
formation of a single EMP.
47. Apart from that, the issue of illegal mining was also discussed.
The officials, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The meeting adjourned at 4.29 
P.M.

66
XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 11 th July, 2012 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy
4. Dr. Chandan Mitra
5. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
6. Shri A.V . Swamy
7. Dr. Barun Mukherji
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ninong Ering
9. Shri Abdul Rahman
10. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
11. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
12. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
13. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
14. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
Representatives of Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. T. Chatterjee, Secretary
2. Dr. P.J. Dilip Kumar, DGF and SS
3. Shri Rajiv Gauba, Joint Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava, IGF (FC)
5. Shri Ajay Tyagi, Joint Secretary (CP), and others
Representatives of the Ministry of Coal
1. Shri S.K. Srivastava, Secretary
2. Shri A.K. Bhalla, Joint Secretary
66

67
3. Shri Kailashpati, Economic Advisor
4. Shri S. Narsing Rao, Chairman, Coal India Ltd.
5. Shri N. Kumar, Director, CIL, and others
Representatives of Ministry of Mines
1. Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary
2. Shri G. Srinivas, Joint Secretary
3. Shri G.S. Jaggi, Director (Technical) and others
Representatives of Ministry of Power
1. Shri P. Uma Shankar, Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Lavasa, Addl. Secretary
3. Shrimati Jyoti Arora, Joint Secretary
4. Shrimati Rita Achary, Joint Secretary and others
5. Shri Arup Roy Choudhury, CMD, NTPC
6. Shri R.N. Nayak, CMD, Powergrid
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee, Dr. T. Chatterjee, Secretary,
Ministry of Environment and Forests; Shri S.K. Srivastava, Secretary, Ministry of Coal;
Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Secretary, Ministry of Mines; Shri P. Uma Shankar, Secretary, Ministry of
Power and other officers of the Ministries present in the meeting. Thereafter, the Chairman
underlined the fact that development, devoid of genuine, legitimate environmental concerns could
never be sustainable and often led to serious social and ecological problems. He further emphasised
on the need to strike a balance between environmental concerns and developmental objectives,
especially while formulating major development projects so as to minimize, if not completely
eliminate the adverse impact on environment. He further added that keeping in view these concerns;
the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests had been regularly reviewing
measures taken by various sectors of the economy to address the issues of environmental
degradation, ecological imbalances and climate change. He also referred to a number of steps taken
by the Ministry of Environment and Forests to expedite environment and forests clearances while
preserving environment and conserving forests. He, however, asked the Secretary, Ministry of
Environment and Forests to apprise the Committee of the latest developments, if any, in this regard.
Secretary, Ministry of Coal was requested to inform the Committee about the latest underground
mining technologies being adopted by them to minimize the damage to the environment. He
requested all the Secretaries present in the meeting to inform the Committee about the roadmap
drawn by them to ensure production of the requisite quantity of coal, mineral wealth and power
without causing much damage to the environment and ecological balance.
3. Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests informed the Committee that his Ministry
was now having more frequent coordination meetings at the Secretary or below that level with the
Ministries of Power, Coal, etc. and had been able to resolve quite a few issues. There were only
2 or 3 outstanding environment related issues mainly with Power and Mining sector which had to
be addressed. However, on the forestry side, there were 402 items, as on date, pending in the
Ministry, mainly, for collecting more and more data on the requirements of the mines. Out of 42
cases pending, 13 related to coalmines, 43 of other mines and 99 related to road and highways.
POWERS OF THE REGIONAL OFFICES
4. Intervening in the discussion, Chairman asked the Secretary, Environment and Forests about
the figures in hectares upto, which regional offices of the Ministry were empowered to deal with

68
and since when this limit was prevailing. The Secretary informed the Committee that regional
offices could clear cases up to 5 hectares on their own level without coming to the Ministry and
also that this limit was there since 1992. He further added that the Ministry was having an appraisal
committee at the regional level which would consider cases upto 40 hectares and send it to the
Ministry for final approval of the Secretary and the Minister. When the Committee asked if there
was a need to extend the limit from 5 to 40 hectares, the Secretary replied in the negative. He
stated that at the regional office level, there was only one officer, i.e., regional officer and an
officer of the level of the Chief Conservator of Forest to assist him and if they had to decide on
such an important matter, he was not sure whether it should go beyond 5 hectares limit. The
Committee further desired to know as to what had been the experience of the working of this 5
hectare limit since 1992 and whether there had been significant delays because of this limit, the
Secretary replied that the Ministry did not have any problem at all. He further informed that 0 to
1 per cent cases pertaining to drinking water, pipeline, etc. constituted 48 per cent of the total
clearances and 1 to 5 hectares constituted almost 26 per cent of the total cases. 5 to 20 hectares
formed 12 per cent; 20 to 40 hectares 5 per cent; 40 hectares and above 1 per cent, 50 to 100
hectares 3 per cent and 100 to 200 hectares it was 2 per cent. Thus, he concluded by saying that
almost 75 per cent of all forest clearances were covered under 1 to 5 hectares, so 5 hectare limit
was an important and convenient limit. The Chairman however, remarked that the population of the
country had increased enormously from the year 1992 to 2012, hence the change in limit to cope
with the pace of development, needs to be given serious attention.
5. Chairman, Coal India Ltd. (CIL) was asked as to how much time was taken in obtaining
clearances from the Ministry of Environment and Forests. He informed that much time was not
taken in the Ministry of Environment and Forests but there were various state level clearances
involved and the delay was on account of consultations/public hearings. Secretary, Coal submitted
that the entire issue of clearances could be divided into two categories - operation issue and the
policy issue. Because of the processes and the procedures involved and so many consultations
which had to be done both at the State and the Central Government level, there was a long delay
and it was very difficult to go into the issues as to why and at what level the delay had occurred
as it varied on case to case basis. Moreover, Ministry of Environment and Forests, to a large
extent, had been very proactive and responsive in tackling the operational issues. Nevertheless at
the State Government level, we had certain limitations and constraints. He emphasised that policy
was the main issue. One such issue was with regard to borehole density which needed to be
resolved urgently to go in for auction or competitive biding which required a detailed exploration
of coal reserves to fix floor or reserve price. The second issue was 25 per cent capacity expansion
of existing coalmines for which public hearing had been done by Coal India Ltd. in 2003, but the
Ministry of Environment and Forests had taken a policy decision that dividing line would be 2006
and that public hearing was required once again. The third issue was ‘go’ or ‘no go’ issue, now
known as ‘inviolate areas’. But the inviolate areas needed to be identified and identification had to
be done in as calibrated a scientific manner as possible because the overlapping of forest areas with
the coal bearing areas was highly intense. The fourth issue was the Comprehensive Environmental
Pollution Index which became very high in case of coal bearing areas as they were in clusters.
Therefore, resolution of this issue needed to be expedited.
PUBLIC HEARING FOR EXPANSION OF COAL MINES
6. On being asked about the requirement of public hearing for capacity expansion of coal
mines, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests replied that under Section 7 (2) of the
2006 Notification, the Expert Appraisal Committee had the discretion to decide whether public
hearing should be done or not. In most of the cases they did not insist on public hearing unless
there was a public complaint against a particular mine. But the problem was that Ministry of Coal

69
did not want to come to the Ministry of Environment and Forests for 25% capacity expansion at
all. The Secretary further informed the Committee that 65% of all mining operations in the world
were of underground nature but here in India 70 to 80 % of all mining operations were over
ground or open cast and expansion of open cast mining by 25 per cent without any standards or
control could be disruptive for the top soil and for the forest as nobody would tell them if it was
25, 30 or 40 per cent. He, further informed the Committee that before granting permission for
expansion of mines they sought the Opinion of the third party for compliance of the conditions
and after getting certificate from the State Government and State Pollution Control Board, the
Ministry did not insist for public hearing. Responding on the issues of boreholes, Secretary, MoEF
clarified that as per the extant rule a maximum of two boreholes per square km. was permitted
to find out the coals seams. But the Ministry of Coal wanted 20 boreholes per square km. The
group of Ministers had also directed that permission could not be given for more than two
boreholes. However a report on that issue was awaited from Indian Bureau of Mines (IBM).
HEALTH IMPACT ON THE WORKERS IN THE COAL BELT
7. One of the Members of the Committee desired to know the health impact on the workers
in the coal belt areas. The Secretary, Coal replied that the Director General of Mine Safety carried
out periodic inspection in this regard and took suitable actions, if found necessary. However,
Secretary, MoEF submitted that if the Committee so recommended, Indian Council of Medical
Research (lCMR) should be involved to conduct health studies in old mining areas like Singrauli
and other areas where there had been complaints.
UNDERGROUND MINING VS OVER CAST MINING
8. The Committee observed that the only way to ensure protection of biodiversity, forest and
wildlife was to move for underground mining and the plea that it was not viable, it was too costly,
etc. was only a superficial one. The Committee, therefore, felt that Government should, as a matter
of policy, decide to go for underground mining. Responding on this issue, Chairman, Coal India
Limited (CIL) clarified that growing demand for Coal was one of the reasons for focus on
opencast coal production. He admitted that they needed to focus on underground mining not only
from environmental but technical point of view also because through opencast they could go only
up to 200 or 250 meters, and beyond that, in any case they had to go for underground mining.
He further added that only ten per cent of total coal production, as of today, was coming  from
underground mining. For the Twelfth five year plan an investment of Rs. 5,000 crores was
earmarked for acquiring underground mining equipments. Two-three underground mining projects
had already started in Dhanbad with a capacity of two million tonnes of production.
9. The Chairman then requested the Secretary, Ministry of Power to make his presentation
broadly on measures taken by the Ministry in controlling pollution and the issues pending with the
Ministry of Environment and Forests. The Secretary, Ministry of Power submitted that they had
cases pending with the Ministry of Environment and Forests which they too pursued with them
from time to time and in order to resolve those cases a Committee under the Chairmanship of
Mr. D.K. Chaturvedi was set up. The Chaturvedi Committee had given several recommendations
and some had already been accepted. He further informed that the other issue they had with the
Ministry of Environment and Forests was getting FRA clearance for transmission projects, which
required passage of resolution by every Gram Sabha, though the same was not stipulated under the
Act. Since transmission projects did not alienate people’s livelihood, they could consider such
projects without mandatory FRA clearance a position, which prevailed earlier.
DELAY IN LAYING OF TRANSMISSION LINES AND GAS PIPELINES
10. The Secretary, Ministry of Power, further, informed the Committee that the issue pending

70
with the Ministry of Environment and Forests relates to getting environmental clearances for
transmission projects. As per guidelines of Ministry of Environment and Forests, FRA clearance
along with a resolution passed by the concerned Gram Sabhas, is needed for Forests clearance
even though the same was not stipulated under the FRA. Moreover, to hold the meetings of Gram
Sabha, for the purpose, quorum required presence of minimum 50 percentage of members. Since
presence of 50 per cent members is needed to hold the meeting of Gram Sabha, and often it is
difficult to ensure presence of 50 per cent of members, it leads to prolonged delays in getting such
resolution passed. He felt that the condition of Gram Sabha resolutions should not be necessary
as the same was not stipulated under the Act.
11. Secretary, MoEF informed the Committee that under the 1992 and 2003 guidelines of the Forest
Conservation Act, there was an exemption for this and resolution of Aam Sabha was required only
in the case of Industries. But after the enactment of Forest Rights Act (FRA), all the linear projects
had to get clearance. He further added that the resolution of Gram Sabha had not been stipulated
either under Forest Rights Act or under Forests Conservation Act. The Secretary, Ministry of
Environment and Forests, further, informed the Committee that matter has been taken up with the
Ministry of Tribal Affairs but their response is awaited.
GAS PIPELINE
12. CMD BPCL informed the Committee that they were trying to lay a pipeline from Mumbai
refinery to Uran to transport LPG to Uran so that LPG loading and dispatch cost from Mumbai
gets reduced. But, the project was held up as 1 Km stretch of the pipeline required forests
clearance from Ministry of Environment and Forests. He further stated that clearance was pending
with the MoEF for the last 6 months.
13. The CMD, ONGC informed the Committee that the main problem was regarding the laying
of the pipeline, if it had to pass through a very small stretch of forest land even if the remaining
80-90 percent passes through the non-forest land. As per extant guidelines, forest clearance and
environment clearances were required together to start the project. Hence, the project often are
held up. He further suggested that till the forest clearance was given by the MoEF, they may be
allowed to begin the work atleast in the non forest area. CMD, ONGC further drew the attention
of the Committee towards the linkage of resolution of Gram Sabha with the laying of the pipeline,
even for 100 mts. of work. He also informed the Committee that for pipeline projects the resolution
of Gram Sabha was earlier not required but was added to by the subsequent notification.
14. Thereafter, CMD GAIL informed the Committee that they were laying 4000 kms. pipeline
in which seven States were involved. Of all the permissions required to pursue a project, to get
a forest clearance was the lengthiest, tedious and time consuming process.
15. On this issue, Secretary, M/o  Environment informed the Committee that as per the
guidelines of the Ministry, the work could not be started, if any part of the project was linked with
the forest clearance. Even the Hon’ble Supreme Court in LAFAROE judgment had held that both
the clearances had to be given together. At this point, DG, Forest informed the Committee that in
the above stated judgment, the Hon’ble Supreme Court had held that fait accompli situation should
not be created. As far as road project was concerned they were going to relax the guidelines but
for other projects like pipeline it would not be possible as it becomes in fructuous for want of
connection.
16. The Chairman observed that three stages were involved i.e. stipulated in the Act, Supreme
Court Judgment and directions of the Minister in getting forest clearances. Out of these three, only
directions given by the Minister could be modified and the issue involved might be of the third
category i.e. direction by the Minister. Hence, all of you should sit together and get it resolved.
This bureaucratic red-tapism had to be removed.

71
17. The Committee observed that as for as Transmission lines and Gas Pipelines were
concerned, as there was no statutory requirement of getting clearances from concerned
Gram Sabhas, Ministry of Environment and Forests should restore the position as existed
earlier when no such resolutions were needed for clearance of transmission line projects.
The Committee, accordingly, directed the Ministry to examine the matter at the earliest in
the light of its observations so that important transmissions projects and gas pipelines do
not get held up.
CARBON EMISSIONS
18. Replying to a query made by one of the Members about carbon emissions from thermal
power plants particularly in private sector which polluted the air, the Secretary replied that the
standards stipulated by the Ministry of Environment and Forests were followed by all the power
plants irrespective of whether they were in private or public sector.
ISSUES RELATED TO MINES SECTOR
19. Thereafter, the Chairman requested the Secretary, Ministry of Mines to make his presentation
in the light of the Hoda Committee recommendations for creation of sustainable development
framework for Indian mining needs and desired to know whether those recommendations were
implemented. The Secretary replied that most of the recommendations of the Hoda Committee had
been laid down in the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Bill, 2011 which was already
with the Standing Committee on Coal and Steel. While making his presentation on the guidelines
followed by the Ministry towards environment protection, the Secretary informed that Mines were
regulated through the Mineral Concession Development Rules (MCDR) and they levied financial
penalties if they were not properly followed. He also drew the attention of the Committee towards
various Sections of MCDR which dealt with penalties for violation of environmental norms. On the
issue of environmental clearance, he drew the attention of the Committee to Deepak Kumar Judgment
which stipulated that environmental clearance was required even in the case of lease far below 5
hectares and that it had become a huge problem for small miners.
ISSUES RELATED TO SAND QUARRIES
20. On the issue of river sand mining, the Secretary, Mines replied that the sand quarries were
auctioned or leased out by the State Government, District Collectors and others. He further clarified
that in the light of Deepak Kumar Judgment Ministry of Mines had been directed to formulate
model rule and circulate it to the State Governments. He further stated that in another two months
or so, these rules would be formulated and notified by the State Governments.
21. Some Members enquired about various scams in the field of mines and measures taken by
the Ministry to check the same. The Secretary informed that Hon’ble Supreme Court had suo motto
intervened in the matter and imposed monetary fines to the extent of 5 crores per hectares on the
mines which had violated the rules and regulations and had also ordered closure of some other mines
to be auctioned later in order to bring transparency. The Secretary further stated that in order to
check all these illegal mining activities, the Ministry had developed a network in which all the miners
had to register and fill up a monthly format. Even stockiests, traders, exporters etc. who dealt with
minerals had to register on the system. The system had been designed in such a way that if any
miner excavated more amount of mineral than the permissible limit, he would be caught.
The officials, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The meeting then adjourned at 1.26 
P.M. and met again at 2.30 P.M.

72
Representatives of Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. T. Chatterjee, Secretary
2. Dr. P.J. Dilip Kumar, DGF and SS
3. Shri Rajiv Gauba, Joint Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Srivastava, IGF (FC)
5. Shri Ajay Tyagi, Joint Secretary (CP), and others
Representatives of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
1. Shri G.C. Chaturvedi, Secretary
2. Shri Neeraj Mittal, Joint Secretary (Marketing)
3. Shri P.K. Singh, Director (Supply, Pricing and Refining
4. Shri Sudhir Vasudeva, CMD, ONGC
5. Shri S.K. Srivastava, CMD, Oil India Limited
6. Shri V .C. Tripathi, CMD, GAIL
7. Shri R.S. Butola, Chairman, OIC Ltd.
8. Shri R.K. Singh, CMD, BPCL
9. Shri K. Murali, Director (Refineries) HPCL
Representatives of the Department of Heavy Industry
1. Shri S. Sundareshan, Secretary
2. Shri Harbhajan Singh, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ambuj Sharma, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Shashank Goel, Joint Secretary
5. Shri R.P. Tak, CMD, (CCI)
6. Shri B.P. Rao, CMD, (BHEL)
7. Shri P.V. Sridharan, Director, (HR) (BHPV)
8. Shri Vishnu Mathur, D.G., SIAM
9. Shri I.V. Rao, Chief Operation Director, Maruti Suzuki India Ltd.
22. Chairman welcomed the Secretaries, Ministries of Petroleum and Natural Gas, Heavy
Industry, Environment and Forests and other Officers present. He observed that rapid growth and
industrialization over few decades had generated unacceptable level of pollution in the country. He
expressed his concern about the pollution emitted from the refineries, leading to higher percentage
of Green House Gas emissions which had adversely affected the environment. He requested the
Secretary to apprise the Committee on the progress made with regard to introduction of non
launderable marker system, installation of GPS in oil tankers to check adulteration of diesel, status
of ocean acidification caused due to discharge from oil refineries, amount spent on Corporate
Social Responsibility by oil sector companies, etc. He also requested Secretary, Department of
Heavy Industry to apprise the Committee about the progress made in operationalisation of the
National Mission on Electric Mobility to manufacture battery operated vehicles and also about the
interaction with Auto Sector and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas regading introduction of
Bharat V norms. Secretary, Environment and Forests was asked to apprise the Committee about
environmental concerns relating to industrial sector in general and Petroleum and Natural Gas and
Heavy Industry in particular.

73
FUNCTIONING OF BHEL
23. First of all Chairman and Managing Director, BHEL giving a brief outline of the activities
of the company apprised the Committee that during the Eleventh Five Year Plan period, BHEL had
enhanced its capacity of manufacturing a power plant equipment from 6000 MW to 20000 MW.
He also informed the Committee that all the major units of BHEL had been awarded ISO-14001
certification for environmental management system and OHSAS-18001 certification for occupational
health and safety management systems. Environment Improvement Projects and Sustainable
Development Programmes of the BHEL included plantation drives, installation of rain water
harvesting plants, efficient water and energy management, utilization of renewable energy sources,
etc. He further informed that BHEL formulated its Sustainable Development Policy in November,
2011 and they had constituted a Committee headed by an independent Director to oversee the
implementation of Sustainable Development Directives. He further stated that ferrous scrap
generated from the units was sent to the Central Foundry Forge Plant of the company at Haridwar
where it was converted into usable material for manufacturing of Castings and Forgings. He also
informed that water and sewage discharged from this process was treated at Effluent Treatment
Plants/ Sewage Treatment Plants and reused for horticulture. BHEL was working towards
development of advanced technologies where efforts would be made to reduce the carbon dioxide
emissions by improving the level of efficiency.
INTRODUCTION OF HYBRID VEHICLES
24. Thereafter, Joint Secretary, Department of Heavy Industry informed the Committee that
after a very detailed exercise they were in the process of finalizing the National Electric Mobility
Mission Plan 2020 and the same would be released within a month or so. The Plan anticipated that
by 2020 India would have a market for about 5-7 million electric and hybrid vehicles, three forth
of which would be two wheelers. He also informed that this shift of transportation from fossil fuel
to hybrid and electric vehicles would help in saving nearly Rs. 28,000/-  crores worth of import
of crude oil. The Chairman, in view of the aforesaid shift in policy of the Department wanted to
know if there was any action plan to phase out the old vehicles. The Secretary replied that there
was no such law in the country. He however, suggested that Commercial Vehicles should be phased
out after 15 years and private vehicles after 20 years.
POLLUTION IN CEMENT INDUSTRIES
25. The Committee expressing its concern over emission and pollution released by Cement
Industries, particularly located in the city areas and its effect on the public health, desired to know
the steps taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests to deal with the problem. The
Secretary informed that compared to other industries cement had been a better performer, in
general. However, directions for compliance with environmental norms had been issued by CPCB
to 20 cement units in the country.
VEHICULAR POLLUTION AND ITS IMPACT
26. One of the Members of the Committee wanted to know the level of vehicular pollution in
cities and its impact on the public health. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests
informed that 13 Metros ‘which were highly polluted had been identified where Bharat Standards-IV
norms of fuel had been made available from April, 2012. He further explained that they wanted to
expand it to some more cities but for that purpose upgradation of refineries would be required. But
the cost of upgradation was so high that it would not be possible for them to expand its supply.
27. Chairman enquired from the Secretary, Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas about the
latest position of the proposal to constitute an Inter-Ministerial Committee consisting of various
Ministries for evolving a roadmap for controlling pollution, improvement of fuel quality, etc. The

74
Secretary apprised that all the concerned Ministries had been requested to nominate their
representative to the Inter-Ministerial group so as to gather their feedback and come out with
concrete results which could be implemented.
GASOLINE EMISSIONS
28. Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests, responding on the point of notification of
guidelines for gasoline emissions by refineries stated that they had set air quality parameters and
ambient air quality standards around refineries. Directions had also been issued to various refineries
which were not meeting the norms. Associating on the issue of installation of LONOX burner and
Sulpher Recovery Units in the refineries, Chairman, Indian Oil Corporation Limited informed the
Committee that LONOX burners and Sulpher Recovery Units had been installed in the refineries and
air quality was found to be within the approved parameters in and around all the refineries.
VISHAKHAPATNAM - POLLUTION AND FOUL SMELL
29. Concerned about the state of pollution in Vishakhapatnam and the problem of foul smell
faced by the people, the Chairman asked the CMD, HPCL to brief the Committee on the steps taken
by the company to combat pollution and the plantation drive initiated by the company. He clarified
that they were meeting the emissions norms. Regarding CSR, he commented that Rs. 22 crores
had been spent by them at Vizag and Mumbai. He further added that they had planted thousands
of trees in the city area of Vizag.
OIL SLICK
30. The Secretary, MOEF drew the attention of the Committee on the issue of oil and grease
standard being not maintained by the refineries especially on the western coast around Mumbai. On
this issue, the Secretary, Coal informed the Committee that ports did not have the capacity to
handle oil slick or oil and grease effluents from refineries. Since the Committee would be
interacting with the shipping ministry the very next day, he suggested that the committee might
impress upon them to provide training and equipments to the ports to handle this sea pollution.
31. On being enquired about any instance of oil spill management in the recent past Secretary,
Petroleum and Natural Gas informed the Committee that there existed an oil spill management group
consisting of Members from Port Trusts, Oil Refineries and they dealt with on oil spill caused due
to collision of two ships.
32. After some discussion on certain issues, Chairman thanked the representatives of  the
various Ministries, Organizations, PSUs for coming together on the major issue of mitigating
pollution and taking various initiatives.
The officials, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The meeting adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.

75
XVIII
EIGHTYTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 12 th July, 2012 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Dr. Chandan Mitra
4. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Shri A.V . Swamy
7. Dr. Barun Mukherji
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Abdul Rahman
9. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
10. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
11. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
12. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
13. Shri Kristapa Nimmala
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. T. Chatterjee, Secretary
2. Dr. P.J. Dilip Kumar, DGF&SS
3. Shri Rajiv Gauba, Joint Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Bansal, ADG (FC)
5. Shri A.K. Srivastava, IGF (FC)
6. Shri Ajay Tyagi, Joint Secretary (CP)
7. Shri J.S. Kamyotra, Member Secretary (CPCB)
75

76
Representatives of Ministry of Shipping
1. Shri Pradeep Kumar Sinha, Secretary
2. Shri Vijay Chhibber, SS and FA
3. Shri N. Muruganandam, Joint Secretary (P)
4. Shri M.C. Jauhari, Joint Secretary (S)
5. Shri B. Poiyaamozhi, DA (P)
6. Shri C.B. Singh, Advisor
7. Shri Deepak Shetty, DG (S)
8. Capt. A.M. Surej, DG (LL)
9. Smt. Bhupinder Prasad, Chairperson, IWAI
10. Shri Manish Jain, Chairman, KoPT
11. Shri S.A.C. Bose, Chairman, PPT
12. Shri G. Satya Kumar, Deputy Chairman, VPT
Representatives of Ministry of Railways
1. Shri Vinay Mittal, Chairman, Railway Board
2. Shri Keshav Chandra, Member Mechanical
3. Shri Kul Bhushan, Member Electrical
4. Shri A.K. Saraf, Additional Member (Planning)
5. Shri D. Marandi, Managing Director, Burn Standard Ltd.
6. Shri S.K. Rishi, MD, Braithwaite and Co. Ltd.
7. Shri Krishan Lal, MD, Bharat Works Engineering Ltd.
Representatives of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
1. Shri A.K. Upadhyay, Secretary
2. Shri C. Kandasamy, DG (RD and SS)
3. Shri R.P. Singh, Chairman, NHAI
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, Secretaries of the
Ministries of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways and Environment and Forests and Chairman,
Railway Board. He informed the Committee that these Ministries had already been examined earlier
on the environmental issues in their respective sectors and the Committee proposed to further
review the measures taken by them since the holding of the last meeting.
3. The Chairman, in the first instance, took up the environmental issues in the  Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways. These issues are discussed below.
Widening of Roads
The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways informed that a number of projects after
award are held up for want of Environment and Forests clearance. Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways further informed the Committee that even the projects involving widening of existing
roads were considerably delayed because it took a long time to get environmental clearance and
forest clearance for such projects. It was observed that widening of the roads would help in
reducing the pollution and adverse impact on environment as the dust emission by the plying of
traffic on such widened roads gets significantly reduced and, therefore, it should be encouraged.
The Committee, therefore, strongly felt that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should
be exempted from taking environmental clearance for widening of existing roads provided that the

77
total width of the road did not exceed a specified limit and advised the Ministry of Environment
and Forests to consider it. The Committee was further of the view that widening of roads by using
polymer modified bitumen technology should be adopted at the earliest.
Clubbing of Forest Clearance and Environment clearance
The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways also informed the Committee that roads
were long linear projects in which only a small part might be affected by forests. Earlier, when
Environment and Forests clearances were given separately, the Ministry was able to execute the
work in the non-forests areas and in forests areas work started only after getting forests clearance.
By clubbing together the two clearances, the whole project got stalled for a very small patch of
highway road. The Ministry also clarified that in either case, building road in the non- forest areas
did not become infructuous expenditure. Therefore, there was no need for clubbing the two
clearances together and the position that existed prior to the 2011 needed to be restored so that
road projects did not get stalled.
The Secretary, Environment and Forests informed the Committee that the Supreme Court
in the LAFARGE case has directed that environmental clearance and forest clearances must be
given together. Prior to that, the Committee was given to understand that the environmental and
forest clearances were being given separately.
The Secretary, Environment and Forests also informed the Committee that earlier when
environmental clearance and forest clearance were given separately, plea used to be that as the
environment clearance had been given by Ministry of Environment and Forests, they have already
spent the considerable amount of money on the project and, therefore, forest clearance have to be
given to them.
The Committee advised the Ministry of Environment and Forests to seek legal opinion on
the issue and observed that unless it had specifically been directed by the Supreme Court in the
LAFARGE Case to only give together forest clearance and environmental clearance for road
projects, the position, as existed prior to September, 2011 should be restored.
Plantation along highways
The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways informed the Committee that recently
another difficulty had arisen because plantation along the highways on Right of way had been
declared as “Protected Forests” and provisions of Forests Right Act (FRA) requiring approval of
Gram Sabha, had been made applicable. The Ministry was of the view that on such plantation, no
one could have any right as these were affecting the right of way on highways and, therefore, the
applicability of ‘FRA’ for the plantation had to be removed. It was, therefore, pleaded that such
plantation should be kept outside the provisions of Forests Right Act. The Committee was strongly
of the view that inclusion of such provisions under FRA hardly served any useful purpose and
advised Ministry of Environment and Forests to examine the issue raised by the Ministry of Road
and Highways and consider if such provisions could be kept outside ‘FRA’ and apprise the
Committee of the results of such an exercise.
Procedural simplification
The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways suggested that several procedural
simplifications were possible e.g. instead of seeking approval of Term of Reference (ToR) for
individual projects, the standard ToR could be developed for widening projects for finalising TORs
for obtaining Environment and Forest clearance. The Committee directed the Ministry of
Environment and Forests to examine the proposal of the Ministry and appraise the Committee of
the outcome of the examination within two weeks.

78
Approval of Gram Sabhas for Road Projects
The Secretary, Environment and Forest also clarified that though neither Forest
Conservation Act 1980 nor FRA 2006 had any mandatory requirement for obtaining approval of the
Gram Sabha for road projects, they were insisting on approval of the Gram Sabha only on the
basis of the guidelines issued by their Ministry. The Committee, was of the view that since road
projects, extremely essential for development and growth of the area, were getting unduly delayed
because of the requirement of obtaining clearances from the Gram Panchayats and the restriction
has not been imposed because of any statutory requirement, as stated by the Secretary, Ministry
of Environment and Forests, that Ministry might consider suitably amending its guidelines to do
away with the requirement of approval of Gram Panchayats so that road projects were not delayed
because of requirement of obtaining approvals from the concerned Gram Panchayats.
4. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways also requested that since the issue of
relaxation for road widening was already under the consideration of the Ministry of Environment
and Forests, it should not impose any additional conditions such as laying of roads only up to the
nearest market place, while granting clearances.
Projects of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways pending Environment and Forest
Clearances
5. On being enquired about the proposals which were pending with the Ministry, the Secretary,
Road Transport and Highways stated that presently 22 projects were pending, out of which 12
projects were pending for about three months, 8 projects were pending for about three to six
months and 2 projects were pending for more than 12 months. It was also informed that all the
projects had been recommended by the Environmental Appraisal Committee, but because of the
linkage between the forest and the environment clearances, they were pending.
Other Issues
6. While replying to a query about the Compensatory Afforestation, the Ministry of
Environment and Forests stated that mutation for land use was first carried out for the place in
which Compensatory Afforestation had to be carried out and the area was declared as a forest land.
Thereafter, the Stage-I approval was given only when the State Government had complied with the
conditions mentioned therein. The Stage-II approval was given only after the Ministry had verified
as to whether the condition of mutation had been carried out. The Ministry also mentioned that
the funds which were lying unutilized in the ‘Compensatory Afforestation Fund’ were now being
released, after the intervention of the Supreme Court.
7. While replying to another query regarding the formulation of the Comprehensive Auto Fuel
Policy covering the aspects of pollution and availability of appropriate auto fuel mix throughout the
country, the Secretary, Road Transport and Highways, stated that BS-IV norm of fuel had already
been made available in 13 major cities and 50 other cities would be covered by 2015. Sharing their
concern for the road pollution, the Committee desired to have a full-fledged discussion on the issue
alongwith the representatives of the Central and State Pollution Control Boards, Ministry of
Environment and Forests, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways.
8. The Committee thereafter took up the environmental issues III the Railways  sector, which
were as follows:
Environmental Initiatives of the Railways
The Chairman, Railway Board informed the Committee that the CO
2 per tonne kilometer

79
emission by the railways was less by almost 60 per cent, as compared to any other mode of
transport. He also informed the Committee of the environment friendly measures viz. production
of 3-phase regenerative locomotives and MMUs which consume almost 30 to 35 per cent less
electricity as compared to a normal locomotive; reduction in carbon emissions in diesel
locomotives, upgradation of technology for improvement in fuel consumption and emissions, etc.,
use of environment friendly refrigerants in AC coaches besides generation of power through
windmills and solar energy and even afforestation had also been taken up. On the issue of more
efficient bio-disgester and environment-friendly toilets to reduce corrosion of railway lines, the
Chairman, Railway Board, informed that a decision had been taken to cover 2,500 coaches initially.
Regarding the use of bio-diesel, CNG and LNG in the Indian Railways to combat the aspect of
pollution, the Committee was informed that the technology was still at a very nascent stage.
Projects of the Ministry of Railways pending environmental and forest clearances
9. On being enquired about the projects relating to construction of railway lines pending due
to non-availability of environmental and forest clearance, the Chairman, Railway Board stated that
there were 25 projects pending covering 2,500 kms, in which forest clearance was required and
the issue had been taken up with the Ministry of Environment and Forests and also at the State
level with the Forest Board.
Danger posed to wildlife due to Railway tracks
10. The Committee expressed its concern over the danger posed to the wild life in forest areas
where the Railway tracks run through the National parks and forest corridors and desired to know
the steps taken by railways to prevent it. The Chairman, Railway Board stated that they had
constructed sighting towers near railway lines so that the herds of animals could be sighted well
in advance and message could be passed on to the control office to ensure that an advisory might
be given to the loco pilots to stop the train and enable the herds to cross the railway line.
Advisories were also issued regularly to the loco pilots in areas, which were known to be natural
crossing locations of the animal herds, to be vigilant while passing through those locations.
11. Environmental concerns as regards laying of tracks in forest areas was also raised by the
Committee. The Chairman Railway Board replied that an effort was being made to ensure that at
least 50-60 per cent of the new track alignment was carried out along the existing track, so that
forest areas, farm lands etc. were not affected. However, in areas where railway lines had been
built to serve mining blocks, trains were run only during day time to ensure minimum disturbance
to the wild life. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests also submitted that the
railways during its operations had taken extremely progressive steps as compared to other sectors
to ensure and minimize its effect on the environment.
12. The Committee thereafter, took up the environment concerns in the shipping  sector, which
were as follows:
Environmental Initiatives of the Ministry of Shipping
The Secretary, Ministry of Shipping stated that pollution was mainly caused due to the
movement and operation of ships and Shipping being an international industry, it had to follow
International Conventions. The main convention was the MARPOL, which was the International
Convention for prevention of pollution from ships such as oil leakages, noxious and harmful
substances, sewage, garbage, air pollution, etc. He also stated that India was in the process of
ratification of international conventions and incorporating them in its domestic law viz. ‘The
Merchant Shipping Act’. Coming to the issue of pollution in ports, the Secretary stated that the

80
cargo containing Coal is the most polluting of all cargos and several steps had been taken by the
ports to manage it such as continuous water sprinkling, closed mechanized conveyor systems,
plantation in port areas, concretization of roads, etc. To manage oil leakages, Coast Guard had been
made the nodal agency. The responsibility for combating the oil spillages up to 700 M.T. had been
given to the ports, while the Coast Guard had been made responsible for spillages between 700
to 10,000 metric tonnes.
13. Replying to a query regarding the plantation of one-lakh saplings by the Visakhapatnam Port
Trust (VPT), the Chairman, VPT stated that around 28,800 saplings had already been planted and
efforts would be made to plant the remaining saplings as well. He however reiterated that VPT is
finding it difficult to allocate the land to plant the remaining saplings. Referring to the CSR guidelines
he also stated that they are permitted to plant only 20, 000 saplings in the city. The Chairman of
the Committee directed that the plantation work should be expedited and completed as per schedule.
14. Representatives from the Ministry of Shipping also added that Shipping was the most
environment friendly mode of transport in terms of fuel consumption, as its consumption was only
45 per cent as compared to Railways and 15 per cent as compared to Road Transport. Hence the
best method for reducing pollution in the transport sector would be to shift from railways/road
transport to water transportation i.e. shipping. Further due to advancement of technology, ships
were becoming fuel efficient and less polluting and hence shipping is becoming both economically
viable and environment friendly.
Projects of the Ministry of Shipping pending environmental and forest clearances
15. The Secretary, Ministry of Shipping stated that only a few projects were pending with the
Ministry of Environment and Forests for clearance. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment and
Forests agreed to this and stated that there were no major environmental issues with the Ministry
of Shipping.
Other Issues
16. The Secretary, Environment and Forests stated that the main issue with the Ministry of
Shipping was the level of preparedness available with the ports to deal with oil slicks. He also
stated that there was lack of coordination among the agencies such as Central and State Pollution
Control Boards, ONGC, Coast Guard, Ministries of Defence and Petroleum and Natural Gas, in
dealing with oil slicks. Besides, all the major and minor ports needed to be well equipped and
funded to deal with this problem.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
17. The Committee then adjourned at l.30 
P.M. and reassembled at 2.30 P.M. to hear the views
of the Secretaries of Ministries of Defence and Defence Production, Health and Family Welfare,
Agriculture and Environment and Forests.
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. T. Chatterjee, Secretary
2. Dr. P.J. Dilip Kumar, DGF and SS
3. Shri Rajiv Gauba, Joint Secretary
4. Shri A.K. Bansal, ADG (FC)
5. Shri A.K. Srivastava, IGF (FC)
6. Shri Ajay Tyagi, Joint Secretary (CP)
7. Shri J.S. Kamyotra, Member Secretary (CPCB)

81
Representatives of Ministry of Defence and Defence Production
1. Shri Shashi Kant Sharma, Defence Secretary
2. Shri Shekhar Agarwal, Secretary (Defence Production)
3. Shri A.K. Gupta, Addl. Secretary -do-
4. Shri Satyajeet Rajan, Joint Secretary (ES)
5. Shri P.K. Mishra, Joint Secretary (MS)
6. Shri Gyanesh Kumar, Joint Secretary (NS)
7. Shri Deepak Anurag, Joint Secretary (C&W)
8. Shri M. Narayana Rao, CMD, MIDHANI
9. Shri Anil Kumar, CMD, BEL
10. R. Adm. (Retd.) A.K. Verma, CMD, GRSE
11. R. Adm. (Retd.) Vineet Bakshi, CMD, GSL
12. R. Adm. (Retd.) N.K. Mishra, CMD, HSL
13. R. Adm. R.K. Shrawat, CMD, MDL
14. Shri P. Dwarakanath Offg. CMD, BEML
15. Shri S.K. Jha, Offg. CMD, HAL
16. Shri S.K. Beri, Chairman and DGOF, OFB
17. Shri S.D. Paul, Director (ParI.)
Representatives of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
1. Shri P.K. Pradhan, Secretary
2. Shri Keshav Desiraju, Special Secretary
3. Shri Jagdish Prasad, Director General Health Schemes
4. Dr. R.C. Deka, Director, AIIMS
5. Dr. D.K. Sharma, Medical Superintendent AIIMS
6. Shri Vineet Chaudhary, DDA, AIIMS
7. Shri B.S. Anand, Sub Divisional Engr., AIIMS
8. Dr. B.D. Athani, Medical Superintendent, Safdarjung Hospital
9. Dr. K.B. Bowmik, Addi. Medical Superintendent Safdarjung Hospital
10. Dr. Sunita Single, C.M.O. Safdarjung
11. Dr. T.S. Siddhu, Medical Superintendent, Dr. RML Hospital
12. Dr. Atul Murari, Director, LHMC and Associated Hosp.
13. Prof. M.S. Gupta, Medical Superintendent, PGIMER, Chandigarh
14. Ms. Gyatri Mishra, Director
15. Shri A.J. Kurien, Secy. (H), GNCT, Delhi
16. Shri Sanjiv Kumar, Chairman, Delhi Pollution Control Committee
17. Shri Sandeep Mishra, Member Secretary, Delhi Pollution Control Committee
Representatives of Ministry of Agriculture
1. Shri Ashish Bahuguna, Secretary
2. Shri E.K. Manjh, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Narendra Bhooshan, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Mukesh Khullar, Joint Secretary
5. Shri Rakesh Bhushan Sinha, Joint Secretary

82
18. The Committee took up the environmental concerns in the Defence and Defence Production
sector, which were as follows:
Environmental issues in the Defence and Defence Production sector and initiatives taken
by the Ministry
The Chairman specifically spelt out the environmental impact of operations of the armed
forces in geographically and ecologically sensitive regions of the country and desired to know steps
taken by the Ministry to minimise the impact. In reply the Secretary, Ministry of Defence stated
that in all military stations/cantonments all possible measures had been taken to ensure solid waste
management including collection, segregation and decomposing of bio-degradable waste. The Navy
was also following the MARPOL convention, which was an International Convention for combating
marine pollution. Besides ships and naval dockyards had been adequately equipped to combat
marine pollution. The Indian Coast Guard always played the role of the first responder in case of
oil spills and had set up pollution response teams at Mumbai, Chennai and Port Blair to deal with
such disasters. The Department of Defence Production which was concerned with the
manufacturing of various products for the armed forces viz. ammunitions, tanks fighter aircrafts,
warships, etc. through its nine public sectors undertakings and 39 ordnance factories was also
fulfilling all statutory requirements of the Central and State Pollution Control Boards. Besides,
various public sectors units had undertaken environment friendly measures like, installation of wind
energy plants, afforestation, treatment of effluents, designing of fuel efficient vessels etc.
19. The Chairman of the Committee also raised the issue of plantation of saplings in
Visakhapatnam, which was assured by the various public sector units including Hindustan Shipyard
Limited (HSL) (under the Ministry of Defence). He stated that while the other PSUs had taken up
afforestation in a big way, the HSL had not initiated the work. Further, there was an indication that
since HSL was not a profit-making unit, it could not invest or afford the afforestation work. The
Secretary, Defence Production clarified that under the DPE guidelines, the loss making units were
not bound by guidelines of the Corporate Social Responsibility. The Chairman, however, stated that
since the Defence sector had received the maximum budget, for the year, therefore, the plea of
the HSL was not justified and therefore, the work of afforestation at Visakhapatnam, which was
a social obligation towards pollution control, should not be stopped.
Projects of the Ministry of Defence pending environmental and forest clearances
20. As regard the issue of pending Defence projects, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment
and Forests stated that one project pertaining to the location of firing ranges and a few projects
of the Border Roads Organisation under the Ministry of Defence was pending for want of
clearances. The main reason for the pendancy was the delay in receipt of information from the
proponents. The Chairman of the Committee desired that there should be a proper coordination
among the Ministries to expedite such cases.
21. The Committee thereafter, took up the environmental issues in the health sector, which were
as follows:
Initiatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
The Chairman specifically enquired about the initiatives of the Ministry as regards the Bio-
medical Waste Management (BMW). The Secretary, Ministry of Health clarified that the BMW
management was guided by the existing Biomedical waste (Management And Handling) Rules, 1998
and covered all health facilities right from primary health centre to community health centres,
district hospitals, medical colleges, etc. However, health being a State subject the primary
responsibility was of the State governments. As regards the Central Government Institutions, the
responsibility would be with the Central Government. He also stated that through the National Rural

83
Health Mission (NHRM), a number of measures had been taken for providing a framework of
operational guidelines in the field of Biomedical Waste Management, which also included infection
and environment management plan, for the public health facilities. The same had been circulated
to all the States and was in public domain. To supplement the funds of the respective State
Governments, funds were also being provided to the State Governments through the NHRM for
the purpose of BMW management.
22. The Secretary, Health and Family Welfare also stated that at the district hospitals and sub-
divisional hospitals where sizeable quantity of waste was generated, BMW disposal had become a
problem and therefore scientific disposal, having proper common waste treatment plant was a
prime requirement and required to be further developed. He also added that, to facilitate the creation
of an institutional mechanism for this purpose, the assistance of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests and the State Pollution Control Boards were required.
23. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests stated that the concept of biomedical
waste management through centralised segregation for recyclable, infectious and incinerable waste
was started in Andhra Pradesh in 1997-98 and the whole idea was to make the waste facility
revenue generating and a good business proposition. Now even the private nursing homes, hospitals
and the primary health centres were coming forward to use this facility. He also added that the
State Pollution Control Boards needed to act more proactively, to ensure that more private and the
Government hospitals were attached to a private common waste disposal facility.
24. The Committee thereafter took up the environmental issues in the Agricultural  sector, which
were as follows:
Initiatives of the Ministry of Agriculture
The Secretary, Ministry of agriculture informed that Agriculture was, probably, the only
sector in which the Greenhouse Gas Emissions had come down over the years. As regards the
effect of excessive application of both fertilizers and pesticides, on groundwater and thereby on
human, animal health and the environment, India remained one of the lowest consumers in per
hectare or per capita consumption of both fertilizers and pesticides. He also stated that though both
fertilizers and pesticides were extremely important to maintain productivity and to meet the
increasing demand for food and food products, efforts would be made to improve the way in
which fertilizers and pesticides would be used and also by improving the plant varieties, so that
the fertilizer use in-take and the fertilizer use-efficiency of the plants by themselves improve.
25. As far as pesticides were concerned, the Secretary stated that the actual usage of technical
ingredient, which was the fundamental core of the pesticides, had actually come down. In addition
to this, the use of bio-fertilizers, bio-pesticides, customised fertilizers were being promoted, to
prevent excessive use of other kinds of fertilizers. Fertilizers were being tailor-made to suit soil
type conditions of each area. Besides, development of seeds through R&D which would reduce the
need for more chemical fertilizers, was being encouraged.
The officials then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
26. The Committee then adjourned at 4.08 
P.M.

84
XX
TWENTEETH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the 6 th August, 2012 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
3. Dr. Chandan Mitra
4. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
5. Shri A.V . Swamy
6. Dr. Barun Mukherji
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
9. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
10. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
11. Shri Francisco Sardinha
12. Shri Pradeep Tamta
13. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
14. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
15. Shri Kristappa Nimmala
SECRETARIAT
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
Representatives of Ministry of Urban Development
1. Dr. Sudhir Krishna, Secretary
2. Dr. Ashok Singhvi, Joint Secretary
3. Shrimati Veena Kumari, Director (LSG)
4. Dr. M. Dhindayalan, DA (PHE)
Representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation, PSUs, Autonomous and Statutory Bodies
1. Shri K.N. Shrivastava, Secretary
84

85
2. Shri G. Asok Kumar, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Arun Mishra, DO, DGCA
4. Shri Alok Sinha, Joint Secretary, MOCA
5. Shri Rohit Nandan, CMD, AI
6. Shri V .P. Agrawal, Chairman, AAI
7. Shri V . Somasundaram, Member, AAI
8. Shri Anil Srivastava, CMD, PHHL
9. Shri Alok Shekhar, Director, MOCA
10. Dr. Balmiki Prasad, Director, -do-
11. Shri Deepak Brara, Director Commercial, AI
Representatives of Department of Pharmaceuticals, PSUs, Autonomous and Statutory
Bodies
1. Shri Dilsher Singh Kalha, Secretary
2. Dr. Raja Sekhar Vundru, Joint Secretary (ParI.)
3. Shri S.C. Sharma, Director, (NIPER, R&D and Environment)
4. Shri Praveen Kumar, CMD, IDPL
5. Shri B.K. Singh, Director
6. Shri A.S. Vaidya, Director (FIN.) HAL
7. Shri M.K. Nagendra, MD, BCPL
8. Shri S.L. Barua, Director (Fin.), BCPL
9. Shri S. Kundu, MD, PCPL
10. Shri K.M. Parsad, GM (Works) KAPL
11. Shri C.B. Mehta, GM (EHS and Projects) IDMA
12. Dr. JVN Reddy, Associate-Vice President-EHS Department-M/s Aurobindo Pharma Ltd.
13. Shri A. Krishna Reddy, Executive Director (BDMA)
Representatives of Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. T. Chatterjee, Secretary
2. Dr. P.J. Dilip Kumar, DGF and SS
3. Shrimati Meera Mehrishi, Addl. Secretary
4. Shri Rajiv Gauba, Joint Secretary
5. Shri A.K. Bansal, ADG
6. Shri A.K. Srivastava, IGF (FC)
7. Shri Ajay Tyagi, Joint Secretary
8. Shri J.S. Kamyotra, MS (CPCB)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee, Secretaries, of the
Ministries of Urban Development, Civil Aviation, Environment and Forests, CMDs of various PSUs
and senior officers present in the meeting. He informed the Committee that the aforesaid Ministries
had been examined earlier on the environmental issues in their respective sectors and the Committee
further proposed to review the progress of the measures taken by them. Since holding of the last
meeting.
3. Taking up the environmental issues pertaining to the Ministry of Civil Aviation, first
Chairman asked the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation to inform the Committee about the long

86
term action plan of the Ministry to arrest noise pollution and carbon emission by aircrafts. In reply
the Secretary, stated that the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) had issued several ‘Civil
Aviation Requirements’ (CAR) for certification of aircraft engine emissions and aircraft noise. Given
the developmental potential of India and its International role, the comprehensive long term
environmental policy for Indian aviation was being prepared to deal with climate change, local air
quality, natural environment, environmental management systems and training. Besides proactive
steps had been taken by various airlines, aerodrome operators and air navigation service providers
such as, reduction in aviation emission. and creation of aviation environmental cells. The air
operators had adopted improved ground infrastructure and implementation of operational measures
at airports to carry out its activities. Efforts were also being made to segregate bio-degradable and
non bio-degradable waste at the airports, through adoption of a two-bin dustbin waste collection
system.
4. The Secretary, also informed the Committee that the carbon foot print of the India Civil
Aviation Sector was approximately one per cent of the country’s total carbon emission and was
significantly lower than the global average of two per cent. To minimize noise pollution at airports
the International Civil Aviation Organisation (lCAO) had also been requested to impose night curfew,
whereby during the late hours and early morning hours aircraft operations would not take place.
This procedure had already been successfully adopted in the European countries. The aircraft
manufactures had also upgraded the technology to reduce noise pollution and besides the pilots had
also been trained in noise abatement procedures. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment and
Forests also informed that a technical expert Committee had also been formed for fixing of
standards of noise pollution and the idea behind it was to avoid having residential and commercial
complexes near airports.
5. Responding on environmental issues in the Ministry of Urban Development Secretary informed
the Committee that as far the constitution of India, water supply and sanitation were state subjects.
However, the Ministry of Urban Development was the nodal Ministry for formulating policy
guidelines and programmes and accordingly provided necessary technical assistance and guidance
to State governments. He further pointed out the multiplicity of Ministries viz. Ministries of Urban
Development, Water Resources, Environment and Forests and Rural Development for management
of solid waste in the cities was although a minus point, but on the positive side, it resulted in
receiving more financial resources from various sources. He also informed that in the urban areas
unsafe disposal of solid waste was to the extent of 70 per cent and, therefore, there was an urgent
need of basic infrastructure both in terms of capacity and financial resources, and this needed to
be planned for. In this regard public private partnership mode had also been envisaged.
6. The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development further informed that the national urban
sanitation policy was launched in the year 2008, wherein each city was required to prepare a city
sanitation plan and the states had to prepare a state sanitation strategy, for the entire state. So far
11 States had prepared the state sanitation strategy and 124 cities from the states had been
provided financial support to prepare city sanitation plans.
7. The Secretary Ministry of Urban Development also informed that there were two main
under infrastructure related programmes with the Ministry viz. Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban
Renewal Mission (JNNURM) and the Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme (UIDS) for the
satellite towns. Under the JNNURM, 112 sewerage treatment plans had been approved with a cost
of about Rs.15,000 crores while, under the UIDS 808 projects had been approved for small towns
at a cost of Rs.14021 crores. Under the JNNURM in major cities, water supply sewerage and
drainage accounted for about 75 to 80 per cent of the total fund sanctioned which underlined the
importance given to the waste disposal schemes under JNNURM. Besides the funding part,
JNNURM had been linked to certain conditions to make the sanitation activities sustainable viz.

87
making rain water harvesting mandatory in municipal by laws which would ensure that all the
States amend their municipal by laws to provide for rainwater harvesting.
8. In reply to a query about phase -II of the JNNURM programme, the Secretary, informed
that a detailed cabinet note had been prepared and sent for inter-ministerial consultations. The
programme would be started as soon as the cabinet approval was received. He also informed that
phase-II would mainly cover small cities and would get a higher percentage of the funds received
from the Central Government. As regards the proposal of disposal of human waste specially in
slum areas, the Secretary suggested was of modern techniques for the purpose. The Secretary also
stated that under the JNNURM, 50 per cent of the waste collected was converted into manure and
sold through fertilizer companies; while about 30 to 40 per cent was being converted into fuel
cakes for use in factories and the remaining was the non-degradable construction and e-waste.
Secretary also stated that sanitation ratings were also being given to cities to encourage urban
sanitation viz. cities scoring more than 90 per cent fell under the green category, those between
60 to 90 per cent fell under the blue category, while the rest fell under the black and red
categories.
9. Raising the issue of pollution in the major rivers of the country including the Ganga river
due to discharge of sewerage into those rivers the Committee desired to know whether the Ministry
had undertaken any visit to the affected cities, to be apprised of the actual situation. The Secretary
informed that the officers of the Central Public Health and Environmental Engineering Organisation
under the Ministry undertook such visits to various cities of the country. The CPCB under the
Ministry of Environment and Forests also monitored the all the sewage treatment plants set up for
river pollution abatement, in class I and II cities. The Committee desired that proper coordination
among all the concerned Ministries and other agencies should be ensured to address the problem
of sanitation.
The officials, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The meeting then adjourned at 12.47 
P.M. to meet again at 3.00 P.M.
Representatives of Ministry of Tourism
1. Shri R.H. Khwaja, Secretary
2. Shrimati Usha Sharma, ADG (T)
3. Dr. Lalit K. Panwar, VC and MD, ITDC
4. Dr. N.S. Bhuie, Consultant (Studies), NCHMCT
5. Dr. Manjula Chaudhary, Director, IITTM
Representatives of Ministry of Steel, PSUs Autonomous and Statutory Bodies
1. Shri D.R.S. Chudhary, Secretary
2. Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan, AS and FA
3. Dr. Dalip Singh, Joint Secretary
4. Shri Upendra Prasad Singh, Joint Secretary
5. Shri J.P. Shukla, Joint Secretary
6. Shri C.S. Verma, Chairman, SAIL
7. Shri S.S. Mohanty, Director, -do-
8. Shri A.K. Pandey, Director, -do-
9. Shri A.P. Choudhary, CMD, RINL

88
10. Shri Umesh Chandra, Director, -do-
11. Shri Malay Chatterjee, CMD, KIOCL
12. Shri K. Subba Rao, Director, -do-
13. Maj. Gen. (Dr.) O.P. Soni, VSM, Director (COMM.), -do-
14. Shri N.K. Nanda, Director (Tech.), NMDC
15. Shri K.J. Singh, CMD, MOIL
16. Shri G.P. Kundargi, Dirctor, MOIL
17. Dr. Satish Chandra, MD, Bird Group of Companies
Representatives of Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. T. Chatterjee, Secretary
2. Dr. P.J. Dilip Kumar, DGF and SS
3. Shrimati Meera Mehrishi, Addl. Secretary
4. Shri Rajiv Gauba, Joint Secretary
5. Shri A.K. Bansal, ADG
6. Shri A.K. Srivastava, IGF (FC)
7. Shri Ajay Tyagi, Joint Secretary
8. Shri J.S. Kamyotra, MS (CPCB)
10. The Chairman welcomed the Secretaries of the Department of Pharmaceuticals, Ministries
of Steet Tourism and Environment and Forests, CMDs of various PSUs and other senior officers
of the Ministries/ Departments/PSUs presents in the meeting.
11. The Committee, thereafter, took up the environmental concerns in the Pharmaceutical
sector. The Secretary of the Department stated that all the Pharmaceutical industries, before
commencing production, were required to comply with the Schedule ‘M’, which included pollution
norms given in five environment-related legislations. He further added that Schedule ‘M’ compliance
was insured by the Drug Controller General of India which come under the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, whereas the enforcement of the environmental laws and rules was under the State
Pollution Control Board and therefore Department of Pharmaceuticals was not directly involved. He
also informed the Committee that the Pharmaceutical Companies were becoming proactive in their
approach to environmental concerns and approximately eight to ten per cent of the operational
costs of the companies were being spent on it.
12. In reply to a query regarding safe disposal of expired medicines, the Secretary, replied that
the expired drugs were collected and incinerated in common incineration facility. Recently CPCB
had given permission to incinerate the expired medicines in cement kilns, which resulted in better
incineration of expired medicines and also provided an alternate fuel for the cement industry,
thereby resulting in better environment control.
13. The Committee then took up the environmental concerns in Steel sector. The Secretary
stated that the main reason for pollution by Steel industry was that most of the plants are quite
old. He further mentioned that presently efforts were being made to use bigger sized blast furnaces
so that the total number of furnaces could be reduced, thereby, reducing pollution. Efforts were
also being made to convert the Coal based sponge iron plants, which were a major source of
pollution to environment friendly gas based plants, though, there was a shortage of availability of
gas in the country. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests also suggested that the
State Pollution Control Boards should insist upon the installation of lock-in system for pollution
reducing equipments in the steel plants for reducing air pollution during their operation.

89
14. In reply to a query regarding steel projects pending environment clearance the Secretary,
Ministry of Environment and Forests stated that one of the main issues was mining in a proposed
elephant corridors. He also stated that mining in the elephant corridors had been stopped recently
by the Standing Committee of National Board for Wildlife to protect the elephants, though it was
allowed earlier as elephants rarely passed through this area and this stoppage had led to problems
for the steel sector. The Secretary Ministry of Environment and Forests assured that wild life
experts would be sent to the elephant corridors to look into the problem faced by the steel sector.
The Committee was also apprised of the efforts made by Visakhapatnam Steel Plant towards tree
plantation at Visakhapatnam.
15. The Committee thereafter, took up the environmental concerns in the tourism sector. With
reference to a query regarding commercialization of ecotourism destinations like national parks and
sanctuaries, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests stated that the guidelines of
ecotourism in tiger reserves and national parks had already been finalized in coordination with the
Ministry of Tourism. Though the guidelines were quite restrictive, in so far as the area of the
reserve being open to the tourist was concerned, however, a total ban on ecotourism would raise
issues of livelihood of the people living nearby who depended on tourists. An issue regarding
operation of industries outsided the core areas in eco-sensitive zones was also raised by the
Committee to which the Ministry of Environment and Forests clarified that such an industry could
function only if they get themselves regularized or get their Environment Management Plan cleared.
16. The Secretary, Ministry of tourism further pointed out that the environmental concerns at
the tourist spots mainly related to the problem of municipal solid waste management, water and
lack of hygiene caused due to influx of tourists and an attempt was being made to persuade the
tourism industry to adopt environment friendly technologies such as biodegradable toilets, water
recycling and energy conservation systems, use of local building material etc. to create a
sustainable tourism policy.
17. The Secretary, also pointed out that the Ministry was working in close coordination with
the Ministry of Environment and Forests on aspects relating to wild life areas and eco tourism to
ensure that sustaibable tourism was promoted. In this regard guidelines for tour operators and
tourism accommodation sector were in the process of being finalised. He also pointed out two
major concerns of the tourism industry viz. relaxation of the zoning as regards coastal regulation
zones for the tourism sector and ban on tourism in the core area of tiger reserves as per a
Supreme Court directive. The Secretary, also informed that the tourism bodies had decided to
submit their views to the Supreme Court to which the Ministry of Environment and Forests had
to submit a reply. In this regard Ministry of Tourism requested the Ministry of Environment and
Forests to take its views into account while making its submissions to the Supreme Court.
The officials, then, withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
The meeting adjourned at 4.55 
P.M.

90
XXI
TWENTY FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 30 h August, 2012 in Committee Room
‘C’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Chandan Mitra
3. Shri A.V . Swamy
4. Dr. Barun Mukherji
5. Prof. M.S. Swaminathan
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ninong Ering
7. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
8. Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi
9. Shri S.S. Ramasubbu
10. Dr. Anup Kumar Saha
11. Shri Francisco Sardinha
12. Shri Pradeep Tamta
13. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
14. Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Committee Officer
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed Members of the Committee and informed them that
the meeting was convened to consider and adopt the draft 229
th report on ‘Regional Centre for
Biotechnology Bill, 2011 and the 230 th Report on ‘Steps taken by various Sectors of Indian
economy to control pollution’ thereafter, Chairman invited the views/suggestions from the Members
on the two draft reports.
3. After some discussions, the Committee adopted both the draft reports with minor changes/
modifications.
90

91
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided to present/lay the two Reports on the table of both the
Houses of Parliament on the very same day i.e. 30 th August, 2012. The Committee authorised
Dr. T. Subbrami Reddy and in his absence Dr. Barun Mukherji to present the reports in Rajya
Sabha and Shri Francisco Sardina and in his absence Shri Ninong Ering to lay the reports on the
Table of the Lok Sabha.
The Committee, then, adjourned at 10.30 A.M.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.