PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
SCIENCE  AND  TECHNOLOGY,   ENVIRONMENT  AND  FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY SEVENTH REPORT
The Compensatory Afforestation Fund
Bill, 2015
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
Ferbruary, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)
277
REPORT NO.
%i d f t h b h i f t h C

Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING  COMMITTEE  ON
SCIENCE  AND  TECHNOLOGY,  ENVIRONMENT  AND  FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY SEVENTH REPORT
The Compensatory Afforestation Fund
Bill, 2015
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 26th February, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
Ferbruary, 2016/Phalguna, 1937 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(iv)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (vi)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-12
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE.................................................... 13-17
6. M INUTES  ............................................................................................................. 19-37
7. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 39-169

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1 st September, 2014)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anu Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri Bhupinder Singh
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK  SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Beig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
16. Kurn. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
22. Shri Nana Patole
23. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
24. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
25. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
27. Shri Nagendra Singh
(i)

(ii)
28. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati Vasanthi  M.
*31. Shri Chirag Paswan
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas,  Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
*Nominated  w.e.f.  25th  March,  2015.

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2015-16)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2015)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
9. Shri Bhupinder Singh
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakraborty
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nana Patole

(iv)
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
30. Shri Vikram Usendi
31. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Two Hundred and Seventy-seventh Report on "The Compensatory Afforestation
Fund Bill, 2015".
2. The Committee in its deliberations heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Environment,
Forest & Climate Change on the Bill in its meeting held on 24
th June, 2015. It also sought the views/
comments of the State Governments /Union Territory Administrations on the provisions of the Bill. The
Committee in its study visits to Udhagamandalam (Ooty), Shimla, Kochi, Nagpur, Pench, Bengaluru and
Goa heard the views of respective State Governments and views of some experts/NGOs in its meetings
held during the study visits and also on 17
th September, 2015; 14 th January and 17 th February, 2016 in
Delhi. Thereafter, the Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the said Bill on 18 th February,
2016.
3. The Committee appreciates the assistance provided by the Officers of the Central Government,
State Governments and valuable inputs and frank views expressed by Experts/NGOs to the Committee.
4. In the meeting held on 18 th February, 2016 the Committee considered the draft report and adopted
the same.
   N EW D ELHI; ASHWANI  KUMAR
18 February, 2016 Chairman,
Magha 29, 1937 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
C&AG : Comptroller and Auditor General
CA : Compensatory Afforestation
CAMPA : Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning
Authority
CEC : Central Empowered Committee
FCA : Forest Conservation Act.
MoEF&CC : Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
NCAF : National Compensatory Afforestation Fund
NPV : Net Present Value
NREGA : National Rural Employment Guarantee Act
SCAFs : State Compensatory Afforestation Funds
(vi)

REPORT
The Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha, referred* "The
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015" (Annexure-I) as introduced in Lok Sabha on 8th May, 2015
and pending therein, to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests for examination and report.
2. The Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of funds under the public accounts of India and
the public accounts of each State and crediting thereto the monies received from the user agencies
towards compensatory afforestation, additional compensatory afforestation, penal compensatory
afforestation, net present value and all other amounts recovered from such agencies under the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980; constitution of an authority at national level and at each of the State and Union
territory Administration for administration of the funds and to utilise the monies so collected for undertaking
artificial regeneration (plantations), assisted natural regeneration, protection of forests, forest related
infrastructure development, Green India Programme, wildlife protection and other related activities and
for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
3. The Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change through a background note on the 'The
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015' submitted to the Committee gave an outline for the need
of the Bill, summary of which is as follows:
(a) The principal objective of "Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015" is the establishment
of the National Compensatory Afforestation Fund (NCAF) and the State Compensatory
Afforestation Fund (SCAFs) to credit amounts collected by State Governments and Union
territory administrations to compensate loss of forest land diverted for non-forest purpose.
The bill also provides for constitution of a National Authority and a state Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Management & Planning Authority in each State and Union Territory to
manage and utilize the amounts credited to the National Compensatory Afforestation Fund
and State Compensatory Afforestation Funds respectively. The Bill also establishes a
Monitoring Group to assist the National Authority in Monitoring and Evaluation of activities
undertaken from amounts released from NCAF and SCAFs.
(b) Under Section-2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, the Central Government accorded
approval to the State Government for realizing funds from the user agency for creation and
maintenance of the Compensatory Afforestation to mitigate impact of diversion/dereservation
of forest land for non-forest purpose.
(c) Observing the considerably slow and poor progress in some of the states for raising money
for compensatory afforestation, Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change placed
the same before the Supreme Court of India in the form of a statement. The Supreme Court
treated the statement as an I.A. No. 566 and issued notices to the defaulting states. The
*Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, dated 21 st May, 2015.

2
Supreme Court in its order, further stated that large sums of money were realized by various
states but the utilization of the money for reforestation represents only about 83 per cent
of the funds (shortfall is of nearly Rs. 200 crores) actually realized by the State Governments.
The Supreme Court in its order stated that the Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate
Change should formulate a scheme to ensure that if the permission granted for use of forest
land for non-forest purposes has the condition for compensatory afforestation, then the
responsibility for the same should be of user agency to set apart a sum of money for doing
the needful and the scheme formulated by the Ministry should have no shortfall in respect
thereto. Further, the State Governments concerned will have to provide or make available
land on which reforestation can take place and this land may have to be made available
either at the expense of the user agency or of the State Governments as the State Governments
may decide.
(d) The Supreme Court, for implementation of the orders, constituted the Central Empowered
Committee (CEC) which placed a Report regarding Compensatory Afforestation. The Report
stated that:-
(i) Funds in the states of Chhattisgarh, M.P., Uttrakhand (erstwhile Uttaranchal) and
Uttar Pradesh for the compensatory afforestation is readily available as the money is
directly deposited by the user agency with the forest Departments as 'Forest Deposit'
and do not form a part of consolidated funds.
(ii) In the other states, the funds received from the user agencies for compensatory
afforestation are deposited as revenue receipts with the State Government which are
made available to the forest Department only through budgetary provisions because
of which all the states, except Karnataka, are facing problems in the timely release
of funds for compensatory afforestation and until the present system of release of
funds through budgetary provisions is changed, the pace of quality of compensatory
afforestation cannot be increased significantly.
(iii) The practice of artificial regeneration which is envisaged by the present compensatory
afforestation scheme does not adequately compensates the loss of forest cover and
should be replaced by assisted natural regeneration as per the general consensus
among the States/UTs. Also, as per the unanimity of views the assisted natural
regeneration and other forests conservation and development activities in addition to
plantations should be a site specific plan wherein assisted natural regeneration should
be given due importance.
(iv) At present, net present value for forest land being diverted for non-forest use is being
recovered from the user agency in the states of M.P., Chattisgarh and Bihar. It is
desirable that such norms for recovering money from the user agency which could
be utilized for undertaking specific activities may be laid down for all the states.

3
(e) The Central Empowered Committee, after considering the views of State Governments as
well as Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, was of the view that the
present system of compensatory afforestation is neither being implemented effectively nor
does it adequately compensate the loss of natural forests.
(f) The Central Empowered Committee recommended that a 'Compensatory Afforestation Fund'
should be created in which all the monies received from the user-agencies is deposited
subsequently released directly to the implementing agencies as and when required. The
rules, procedure and composition of the body for management of the CAF shall be finalized
by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change with the concurrence of Central
Empowered Committee within one month. The Committee also recommended that funds
received or yet to be received from user agencies and amount received on account of
compensatory afforestation but not spent or any balance amount lying with the States/Union
Territories shall also be deposited in this Funds.
(g) In response to the Report of the CEC, the Union of India field an affidavit in the Supreme
Court of India. In the affidavit, the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
accepted the recommendations of the Central Empowered Committee in principle and mentioned
that major institutional reorganization of the present mechanism needs to be done. The
affidavit proposed framing of comprehensive rules which will inter-alia also relate to the
procedure and compensation and a body for the management of the Compensatory
Afforestation Funds.
(h) The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change vide Notification dated 23rd April,
2004 constituted Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority
(CAMPA) as an authority under sub-section (3) of section 3 of the Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986. Supreme Court in their judgment dated 26.09.2005 suggested certain amendments
in the CAMPA notification dated 23.04.2004 issued by the Ministry of Environment Forests.
The MoEF vide notification dated 13.03.2007 incorporated these amendments in the CAMPA
notification dated 23.04.2004. The Supreme Court in their order dated 05.05.2006 took note
that the CAMPA had not become operational and directed for constitution of an ad-hoc body
consisting of Director General of Forests and Special Secretary, MoEF as Chairman and
Inspector General of Forests (FC), a representative of the Comptroller and Auditor General
and a nominee of the Chairman of the CEC, as members, till CAMPA becomes operational.
Consequent to the said order dated 5th May, 2006 passed by the Supreme Court, the ad-
hoc CAMPA became operational and the funds have, since the year 2006, started flowing
into the State wise accounts operated by this body.
(i) The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008 was introduced in the Parliament in 2008.
It was passed by the Lok Sabha on 23rd December, 2008. However, the Bill, taken up for
discussion in Rajya Sabha, could not be passed and lapsed on dissolution of the 14th Lok
Sabha.

4
(j) After the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008 lapsed, there were persistent requests
from Members of Parliament, Chief Ministers, Forest Ministers and Chief Secretaries for
release of funds to the States/UTs from Ad-hoc CAMPA for carrying out compensatory
afforestation activities urgently. Accordingly, Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate
Change formulated guidelines dated 2.7.2009 for State-CAMPA and placed before the Supreme
Court for approval on which the Supreme Court gave the following directions, vide their
order dated 10.07.2009:-
(i) The guidelines and structure of the State CAMPA may be notified/implemented and
all previous orders of the Supreme Court would stand modified to the extent necessary
for implementation of state CAMPA.
(ii) Funds received by the Ad-hoc CAMPA would be released not all at one time but the
sum of about Rs.1000 crore per year, for the next 5 years in proportion of 10% of
the principal amount pertaining to the respective State/UT provided that the details of
the bank account opened are intimated to the Ad-hoc CAMPA and the schemes for
which amount is released towards NPV and protected areas would be reviewed by
the State Level Executive Committee and the Annual Plan of Operation is approved
by the Steering Committee of the State CAMPA. Also, the site specific works for
which amount may be released towards the compensatory afforestation, additional
compensatory afforestation, PCA and the Catchment Area Treatment Plan must be
approved by MoEF&CC while granting prior approval under the FCA, 1980.
(iii) 5% of the amount released would be utilized by the National CAMPA Advisory
Council whether directly or through the Ad-hoc CAMPA for monitoring, evaluation
and implementation of various schemes. Recommendation from time to time would
be made for the release of funds seeing the progress of state CAMPA and the
effectiveness of the accounting, monitoring and evaluation systems.
(iv) Till an alternative system is put in place (after obtaining permission from this Court)
the money towards CA, NPV and Protected Areas (National Parks, Wildlife Sanctuaries)
shall continue to be deposited in the Ad hoc CAMPA and its release will continue to
be made as per the existing orders of this Court. Also, the funds would be utilized
by the work as per the broad guidelines adopted by the NREGA and work if possible
may be allotted mostly to the unemployed rural people.
Following the order, State CAMPAs were constituted in each State/Union Territory
and funds limited to Rs.1000 crore p.a. were released to various State CAMPAs
during 2009 to 2014. Supreme Court in their judgment dated 12th March 2014
permitted the Ad-hoc CAMPA to release annual amount equal to 10% of the principal
amount lying to the credit of each State/Union Territory, out of the interest receivable
by it with effect from financial year 2014-15 onwards.

5
(k) The Comptroller and Auditor General (C&AG) in their report entitled "Compensatory
Afforestation in India (21 of 2013)" recommended that the Ministry needed to review the
existing paradigm of CAMPA by approaching the Supreme Court, where considered necessary
and in a way that enhances transparency, bringing CAMPA within the broader focus of both
Parliament and State legislatures and in greater public view so as to ensure the largest
possible stakeholders participation. The C&AG further recommended that the amounts lying
in Ad-hoc CAMPA are to be transferred into the Public Account of India as per compensatory
Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008 and transfers to individual states could be made transparent
which would ensure that budgetary financial and performance related indicators/information
on CAMPA are suitably reflected in public documents at the Centre and State level for
income and outflows from CAMPA.
Earlier, the C&AG in his D.O. No.13-CAG/ Rep (C)/CAMPA/13 dated March 4, 2013
requested the Hon'ble Finance Minister to examine the entire issue of maintaining a fund
outside Government Accounting System and also suggested to move to the Supreme Court
for reviewing its decision to transfer the Ad-hoc CAMPA fund into Public Account of India.
(l) The MoEF&CC in consultation with the concerned Ministries formulated the draft CAMPA
order 2014 with a view to utilize unspent amounts to provide for constitution of an
Authority, as provided in sub-section (3) of the section-3 of the Environment (Protection)
Act, 1986 in the Union of India and in each State and the UT to be known as National
CAMPA and the State CAMPA respectively and to provide for establishment of a non-
lapsable, non-alienable, dedicated, interest bearing fund under the Public Accounts of Union
of India and of states to be managed by the National CAMPA and the concerned state
CAMPA respectively.
The cabinet in its meeting held on March 27, 2014 approved the proposal of draft CAMPA
order, 2014 and the MoEF filed I.A. No. 3797 of 2014 in the writ Petition (Civil) No. 202
of 1995 in the matter of T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad vs. Union of India before the
Supreme Court that the MoEF may be allowed to publish the said order in the official
gazette and to implement the draft CAMPA order, 2014 as per modifications to be made by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court. The said I.A. was listed before the Green Bench of the
Supreme Court several times and the last time on 16th January, 2015.
The learned Attorney General for India in his D.O. letter dated 22nd January, 2015 informed
the Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Environment, Forest & Climate Change that
the Attorney General before Hon'ble Supreme Court pleaded that the matter needs to be
heard at the earliest since more than Rs.37,000 crores is available in the said fund and also
advised that the Government of India may consider introducing a new Bill in line with the
CAMPA Draft Order, 2014 in the Parliament and the bill would have to address the judgment
of the Supreme Court dated 26/9/2015 wherein the Supreme Court had stated that the
CAMPA fund do not come within the fold of Article 266 or Article 283 of the constitution

6
and therefore the Court had not allowed transfer of these funds to the Consolidated Fund
of India or the Public Account of India due to two reasons i.e. (i) The fund is for
regeneration of forests and maintenance of ecology and will not fall in constitutional provisions,
and (ii) It is a 'fee' and not a 'tax'.
However, according to the Attorney General, the reasons are not tenable as the funds come
well within the constitutional provisions and would at least be public revenue and therefore
amounts could be spent. According to him, if the judgement of the Supreme Court could
not be reversed by introducing a legislation, its effect could be nullified by removing the
basis of the judgment. The Bill therefore, must address itself to the judgement of the
Supreme Court dated 26/9/2005 and it would be in the nature of a validation Act which
would state that law is being enacted not withstanding anything contained in any judgment
or order of any court. It is informed that in pursuance to advice of the learned Attorney
General for India, The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015 had been introduced in
the Parliament.
4. The Committee held a preliminary discussion on the Bill and heard the views of Secretary, Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change on 24th June, 2015. Considering the significance of the Bill,
the Committee directed to issue a Press Release, in national dailies and other regional newspapers on 27th
June, 2015 inviting memoranda from the public, experts, organizations etc on the Bill. In response the
Committee received a number of memoranda. The said memoranda are at ANNEXURE-II. The Committee
sought the comments of the Ministry on the memoranda received from various experts/organizations.
5. The Committee also wrote to States/Union Territory Governments/administrations for seeking their
views/comments on the provisions of the Bill and also undertook study visits to Udhagamandalam (Ooty),
Shimla, Kochi, Nagpur, Pench, Bengaluru and Goa to hear the views of concerned State Governments.
The views of the State Governments on the Bill received by the Committee are at Annexure III. The
Committee also heard the views of some experts/NGOs in its meetings held during the study visits and
also on 17th September, 2015 and on 14th January, 2016 in Delhi.
6. The Committee held detailed deliberations on views/suggestions of experts, NGOs and State
Governments on various provisions of the Bill and took up clause by clause consideration of the Bill in
its next meeting. After taking into account the suggestions received on various clauses, the comments/
recommendations of the Committee are as follows in seriatim:-
6.1 Long Title
Plantations of indigenous/native species needs to be encouraged since it has long term impact on
environment. Further, Green India Programme is a separate programme of Government and has its own
budgetary allocation. The funds under Compensatory Afforestation are not meant to finance Green India
Programme.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that in Para 1, line 8, the words particularly of
native species, may be added after the word 'plantations' and in line 9, the words "Green India
Programme" may be deleted.

7
6.2 Clause 1
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.3 Clause 2(a) to (d) and (f) to (k)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.4 Clause 2(e)
An indicative list of 'environmental services' has been given in this clause which is not exhaustive.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words "environmental services means" may be
substituted by the words "environmental services includes".
6.5 Clause 2(e) (iv)
Pollination & Seed Dispersal are critical ecosystem services for forest regeneration and must find
their place in any definition of environmental services.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that
the words "including pollination and seed dispersal" may be added at the end of the clause.
6.6 Clause 2(l)
As this Bill contains many provisions for making rules which have a bearing on States/Union
Territories, it is advisable that views of States are taken on board before rules are framed. The Committee
therefore recommends that this Clause may be amended as under:-
"Prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government in consultation
with the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations under this Act.
6.7 Clause 2(m) to 2 (o)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.8 Clause 3(1) to (3)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.9 Clause 3(4)
Most of the State Governments have stated that crediting 10 percent of the funds to National
Authority is on the higher side and were of the view that it must be reduced. The Committee feels that
the National Authority as envisaged under the Bill would not be requiring funds to the tune of ` 4,000/
- crore (which is ten per cent of the accumulated funds) for its establishment and functioning and
therefore there is a case for reducing the share of Central Government/National Authority from the
proposed "ten per cent".
The Committee, therefore, recommends that in line 2, the words "ten per cent" may be
replaced by the words "five per cent".

8
6.10 Clause 3(5) to 3 (7)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.11 Clause 4 (1) to 4 (3)(ii)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.12 Clause 4 (3) (iii)
For the sake of uniformity, the Committee recommends that:
In line 1, the words "receipt of all monies", may be substituted by the words "all monies
realized".
6.13 Clause 4 (3) (iv)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.14 Clause 4 (4) (i), (ii) and (iii)
The Committee feels that since "State Authority" has been defined in clause 2, therefore,
the words "constituted in such State" in each sub-clause, may be deleted, being redundant.
6.15 Clause 4 (5) and 4 (6)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.16 Clause 5 (a) and 5 (b)
Most of the State Governments have stated that crediting 10 percent of the funds to National
Authority is on the higher side and were of the view that it must be reduced. The Committee feels that
the Central Government/National Authority will be requiring much less funds/resources than what comes
out to be as "ten per cent".
The Committee therefore recommends that in line 1 of Clause 5 (a), the words "ninety
per cent" may be substituted by the words "ninety-five per cent" and in line 1 of Clause 5 (b),
the words "ten per cent" may be substituted by the words "five per cent".
6.17 Clause 6(a)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.18 Clause 6(b)
The Committee feels that the phrase "infrastructure development, supply of wood and
other forest produce saving devices and other allied activities" needs to be elaborated and clearly
defined to avoid any ambiguity and to ensure that money is used only for activities related to
forest restoration, protection and management.
The Committee recommends that the word "money" may be substituted by the word
"monies" and the words "particularly of native species" may be added after the words "artificial
regeneration (plantation)".

9
6.19 Clause 6(c)
In line 2, the word 'Administrations' may be read as 'Administrations'.
6.20 Clause 6(d)
There is a need to facilitate relocation of people residing in critical wildlife habitats to achieve
long term conservation goals.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that in line 5, the words "including facilitating
voluntary relocation from and" may be added after the word "activities".
6.21 Clause 6(e)
In line 1, the words "ten per cent" may be substituted by the words "five per cent".
6.22 Clause 6(f)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.23 Clause 6(g)
In line 3, the word 'Sate' may be read as 'State'.
6.24 Clause 6 (h)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.25 Clause 7
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.26 Clause 8 (1) to 8(3)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.27 Clause 8 (4) (ii)
The Committee feels that since nomenclature of ministries are changed quite often and
sometimes ministries are merged/bifurcated therefore, in line 1, the word "of" may be substituted
by the words "dealing with". Further, the Committee is of the view that ministries of Space and
Earth Sciences have important role to play in forest mapping including remote sensing, satellite
imagery and monitoring forest cover etc., therefore, in line 4, words "Space; Earth Sciences"
may be added after the word "technology".
6.28 Clause 8 (4) (ix)
The Committee recommends that clause 8(4) (ix) may be deleted.
6.29 Clause 8 (4) (x)
The Committee feels that governing Body of the National Authority needs to be expanded and one

10
expert each of the fields mentioned in this sub clause should be included . Accordingly, it recommends
that Clause 8 (4) (x) may be amended as under:
"Five experts including an environmentalist, conservationist, scientist, economist and social
scientist appointed by the Central Government for a period of two years subject to not more than
two consecutive terms — Members.
6.30 Clause 8 (5)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.31 Clause 9 (1)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.32 Clause 9 (2) (ix)
The Committee is of the view of that an expert on tribal matters or a representative of
tribal community may be co-opted in the Executive Committee and therefore recommends
accordingly.
6.33 Clause 9 (3) to 9 (5)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.34 Clause 10(1) to (4)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.35 Clause 10(5)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.36 Clause 10(6) to (7)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.37 Clause 11 (1) to (2)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.38 Clause 11(3)
The Committee feels that an expert on tribal matters or a representative of tribal community
may be co-opted in the Steering Committee and recommends accordingly.
6.39 Clause 11(4) to 11 (5)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.40 Clause 12
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.

11
6.41 Clause 13
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.42 Clause 14(1) to 14 (3)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.43 Clause 15(1)
The Committee recommends that to ensure approval of the Annual Plan Operations
submitted by the State Authorities within a definite time frame, Clause 15 (1) (i) be amended
as under:-
"approve, within 3 months from the date of receipt, the annual plan of operations of the
State Authorities";
6.44 Clause 15 (2)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.45 Clause 16 1(i)
The Committee feels that monitoring and evaluation should be based on the use of scientific
methods and therefore recommends that the words "including remote sensing" may be added at
the end.
6.46 Clause 16 (2)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.47 Clause 17(1) to 17 (3)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.48 Clause 18
The Committee recommends that Clause (18) (2) as under may be added:-
"The Steering Committee of a State Authority shall meet at least once in every three
months."
6.49 Clause 19 (1) (i)
The Committee is of the view that since the Steering Committee of the State Authority is already
proposed to send the Approved Annual Plan of Operations to the Executive Committee of the National
Authority for final approval and, therefore, recommends that Clause 19 (1) (i) may be amended as
under:-
"Formulate and submit Annual Plan of Operations to the Steering Committee of the State
Authority for its concurrence".

12
6.50 Clause 19(2)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification.
6.51 Clauses 20 to 32
The Committee adopts the Clauses without any modification.
6.52 Clause 33(1) to 33 (3)
The Committee feels that there is an overlapping in the provisions of sub-clause (1) and
(2). Therefore, it recommends that these clauses may be amended as under:
(1) The Central Government may, if it finds necessary or expedient in public interest,
issue such policy directives to the National Authority or any State Authority, in writing and such
policy directives shall be binding upon the National Authority or the State Authority, as the case
may be.
Sub-clause (3) may be renumbered as sub-clause (2).
7. In its report of September 2013 on Compensatory Afforestation, the CAG has put forth some
startling facts. It computes that between 2006 and 2012, the State environmental departments were to
get 103,382 hectares of non-forest land for afforestation from revenue departments. Instead, all they got
was 28,086 hectares out of which afforestation was carried out on "an abysmal 7280.84 hectare
constituting seven per cent of the land which ought to have been received". Both the CAG and the
Government have noted that it is difficult to procure land for Compensatory Afforestation. The 'land for
land' requirement as stipulated by the FCA 1980 is difficult to satisfy as land is a limited resource.
Further, several issues arise with regard to the purchase of land such as lack of clear land titles, difficulty
in complying with procedures for land use etc. Also, land for compensatory afforestation cannot be
acquired under the Land Acquisition Act 2013. In 2014, a High Level Committee reviewing environmental
laws noted that while forest and tree cover has increased, the quality of this cover has significantly
decreased. The High Level Committee observed that one of the reasons behind this decline is the poor
quality of Compensatory Afforestation plantations. The Supreme Court in its order dated 26.9.2005
directed collection of these funds because States had utilized only 83% of the funds collected. The
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015 seeks to unlock these funds that are currently under "Judicial"
Overview and create a structure so as to place them under "Parliamentary/Legislative" oversight.
8. The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to meet the situation where enough
land is not available for Afforestation, specific provisions should be made in the bill for encouraging
densification and revitalization of available forests closest to areas where deforestation is considered
unavoidable on account of critically important national projects. Thus the bill should contain
provisions emphasizing the same.
9. Consequential changes wherever necessary may also be made.

13
RECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERVATIONS–AT A GLANCE
Long Title
Therefore, the Committee recommends that in Para l, line 8, the words particularly of native
species, may be added after the word ‘plantations’ and in line 9, the words “Green India Programme”
may be deleted. (Para 6.1)
Clause l
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.2)
Clause 2(a) to (d) and (f) to (k)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.3)
Clause 2(e)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words “environmental services means” may be
substituted by the words “environmental services includes”. (Para 6.4)
Clause (2e) (iv)
Therefore, the Committee recommends that the words “including pollination and seed dispersal”
may be added at the end of the clause. (Para 6.5)
Clause 2(1)
The Committee therefore recommends that this Clause may be amended as under:-
“Prescribed”   means   prescribed   by   rules   made   by   the   Central   Government  in consultation
with the State Governments/Union Territory Administrations under this Act. (Para 6.6)
Clause 2(m) to 2 (o)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.7)
Clause 3(1) to (3)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.8)
Ciause 3(4)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that in line 2, the words “ten per cent” may be replaced by
the words “five per cent”. (Para 6.9)
Clause 3(5) to 3 (7)
The Committee adopts the Ciause without any modification. (Para 6.10)
Clause 4 m to 4 (3)(ii)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.11)
13

14
Clause 4 (3) (iii)
For the sake of uniformity, the Committee recommends that:
In line l, the words “receipt of all monies”, may be substituted by the words “all monies realized”.
(Para 6.12)
Clause 4 (3) (iv)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.13)
Clause 4 (4) (i), (ii) and (iii)
The Committee feels that since “State Authority” has been defined in clause 2, therefore, the words
“constituted in such State” in each sub-clause, may be deleted, being redundant. (6.14)
Clause 4 (5) and 4 (6)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.15)
Clause 5 (a) and 5 (b)
The Committee therefore recommends that in line l of Clause 5 (a), the words “ninety per cent”
may be substituted by the words “ninety- five per cent” and in line l of Clause 5 (b), the words “ten
per cent” may be substituted by the words “five per cent”. (Para 6.16)
Clause 6 (a)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.17)
Clause 6(b)
The Committee feels that the phrase “infrastructure development, supply of wood and other forest
produce saving devices and other allied activities” needs to be elaborated and clearly defined to
avoid any ambiguity and to ensure that money is used only for activities related to forest restoration,
protection and management.
The Committee recommends that the word “money” may be substituted by the word “monies” and
the words “particularly of native species” may be added after the words “artificial regeneration
(plantation)” . (Para 6.18)
Clause 6(c)
In line 2, the word ‘Admionistrations’ may be read as ‘Administrations’. (Para 6.19)
Clause 6(d)
Therefore, the Committee recommends that in line 5, the words “including facilitating voluntary
relocation from and” may be added after the word “activities”. (Para 6.20)
Clause 6(e)
In line l, the words “ten per cent” may be substituted by the words “five per cent”. (Para 6.21)
Clause 6(f)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.22)

15
Clause 6(g)
In line 3, the word ‘Sate’ may be read as ‘State’. (Para 6.23)
Clause 6 (h)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.24)
Clause 7
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.25)
Clause 8 (1) to 8(3)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.26)
Clause 8 (4) (ii)
The Committee feels that since nomenclature of ministries are changed quite often and sometimes
ministries are merged/bifurcated therefore, in line l, the word “of may be substituted by the words
“dealing with”. Further, the Committee is of the view that ministries of Space and Earth Sciences
have important role to play in forest mapping including remote sensing, satellite imagery and
monitoring forest cover ete., therefore, in line 4, words “Space; Earth Sciences” may be added after
the word “technology”. (Para 6.27)
Clause 8 (4) (ix)
The Committee recommends that clause 8(4) (ix) may be deleted. (Para 6.28)
Clause 8 (4) (x)
Accordingly, it recommends that Clause 8 (4) (x) may be amended as under:-
“Five experts including an environmentalist, conservationist, scientist, economist and social scientist
appointed by the Central Government for a period of two years subject to not more than two
consecutive terms — Members”. (Para 6.29)
Clause 8 (5)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.30)
Clause 9(1)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.31)
Clause 9 (2) (ix)
The Committee is of the view of that an expert on tribal matters or a representative of tribal
community may be co-opted in the Executive Committee and therefore recommends accordingly.
(Para 6.32)
Clause 9 (3)109(5)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.33)
Clause 10(1) to (4)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.34)

16
Clause 10(5)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.35)
Clause 10(6) (7)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.36)
Clause 11 (l) to (2)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.37)
Clause 11(3)
The Committee feels that an expert on tribal matters or a representative of tribal community may
be co-opted in the Steering Committee and recommends accordingly. (Para 6.38)
Clause ll(4) to 11 (5)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.39)
Clause 12
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.40)
Clause 13
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.41)
Clause 14(1) to 14(3)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.42)
Clause 15(1)
The Committee recommends that to ensure approval of the Annual Plan Operations submitted by
the State Authorities within a definite time frame, Clause 15 (1) (i) be amended as under:-
“approve, within 3 months from the date of receipt, the annual plan of Operations of the State
Authorities”; (Para 6.43)
Clause 15(2)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para  6.44)
Clause 16 (1)(i)
The Committee feels that monitoring and evaluation should be based on the use of scientific methods
and therefore recommends that the words “including remote sensing” may be added at the end.
(Para 6.45)
Clause 16(2).
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.46)
Clause 17(l)  to 17(3)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.47)

17
Clause 18
The Committee recommends that Clause (18) (2) as under may be added:-” The Steering Committee
of a State Authority shall meet at least once in every three months. (Para 6.48)
Clause (19) (1) (i)
The Committee is of the view that since the Steering Committee of the State Authority is already proposed
to send the Approved Annual Plan of Operations to the Executive Committee of the National Authority
for final approval and, therefore, recommends that Clause 19 (1) (i) may be amended as under:-
“Formulate and submit Annual Plan of Operations to the Steering Committee of the State Authority
for its concurrence”. (Para 6.49)
Clause 19(2)
The Committee adopts the Clause without any modification. (Para 6.50)
Clauses 20 to 32
The Committee adopts the Clauses without any modification. (Para 6.51)
Clause 33 (1) to 33 (3)
The Committee feels that there is an overlapping in the provisions of sub-clause (1) and (2). Therefore,
it recommends that these clauses may be amended as under:
(1) The Central Government may, if it finds necessary or expedient in public interest, issue such
policy directives to the National Authority or any State Authority, in writing and such policy directives
shall be binding upon the National Authority or the State Authority, as the case may be.
Sub-clause (3) may be renumbered as sub-clause (2). (Para 6.52)
The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to meet the situation where enough land is
not available for Afforestation, specific provisions should be made in the bill for encouraging
densification and revitalization of available forests closest to areas where deforestation is considered
unavoidable on account of critically important national projects. Thus the bill should contain provisions
emphasizing the same. (Para 8)
Consequential changes wherever necessary may also be made. (Para 9)

MINUTES

XVII
SEVENTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 24th June 2015 in Room No. 139, First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prem Ghand Gupta
3. Shri C.P. Narayanan
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
5. Shri Bhupinder Singh
6. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
7. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
9. Kum. Sushmita Dev
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Shri Laxman Giluwa
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
14. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
15. Shri Nagendra Singh
16. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
21

22
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
1. Shri Ashok Lavasa, Secretary
2. Shri S.S. Garbyal, Director-General (Forests) & Special Secretary
3. Dr. S.S. Negi, Additional Director-General (FC)
4. Shri M.S. Negi, Inspector-General Forest (FC)
5. Shri B.K. Singh, Director
6. Shri H.C. Chaudhary, Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, Secretary, Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change and other senior officials present in the meeting of the Committee
and asked him to apprise the Committee of the salient features and implications of the various provisions
of the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015, the reasons for bringing the Bill and the main
objectives which the Bill proposed to achieve. He also asked the Secretary to inform the Committee as
to how the proposed establishment of funds and constitution of authorities at national and state level will
be utilized for undertaking artificial regeneration (Plantations), assisted natural regeneration, protection of
forests, forests related infrastructure development, Green India Programme, wildlife protection and other
related activities and matters connected therewith. He also asked the Secretary to explain how the present
Bill-addresses the issues flagged by this Committee in its 194th report on the Compensatory Afforestation
Fund Bill, 2008.
3. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate Change briefly apprised the Committee
of the salient features of the Bill. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change made a power point presentation giving the background of the various developments
which necessitated the proposed legislation, the institutional arrangements proposed, establishment of
funds and the purposes for which these funds can be utilized, the monitoring and evaluation provisions
and the accountability of authorities under the Bill to the Parliament and to the State Legislatures.
4. Elaborating the provisions, he informed the Committee that the Forest Conservation Act, 1980, laid
down the manner in which the forests land can be diverted for non-forest purposes if at all necessary.
He stated that one of the essential components of the permission to divert forest land for non-forest
purposes has been the stipulation that compensatory afforestation should be undertaken wherever forest
land is diverted. He stated that there 'had been various interventions by the courts on the CAMPA Funds
as a result of which ` 6000 crore had been released to the States for undertaking compensatory
afforestation and a huge sum of ` 38000 crore was lying unutilized. At present, the utilization of CAMPA
funds was being done under the directions of Supreme Court.
5. Thereafter, the Chairman observed that it took very long for a peepal/neem/chinar tree to attain
maturity and how felling that tree could be compensated by plantation. The Chairman further desired to
know whether afforestation will be an adequate compensation for felling either in terms of environmental/
ecological loss or loss of flora and fauna or biodiversity. The Special Secretary informed that the

23
calculation of Net Present Value involved the calculation of value of forest and not of the individual tree
and the Ministry was in the process of revising the Net Present Value. In response to a further query
on the subject, the Secretary stated that there were various kinds of natural resources and the public
policy has to weigh the consequences of utilizing one natural resource versus the loss that it might lead
in other resource. He stressed that countries must make choices regarding utilization of natural resources.
Some other Members of the Committee expressed the need for a balance between compensatory afforestation
and infrastructure development. One of the Members highlighted that inspire of a having 83% forest area,
Arunachal Pradesh was a backward state and did not have industries. He stressed that some projects
should be allowed to be operationalised there instead of putting restrictions since they were giving clean
energy. Another Member pointed out that the compensatory amount to be paid by the states for getting
forest clearance was so huge that the State Governments cannot pay it.
6. The Chairman then observed that unauthorized felling of trees was done with the knowledge of
forest officials at the state level. He further stated that with ever single passing day, the relative urgency
of environmental and ecological preservation was becoming acute. He further referred to the Lancet
Report, which while bringing out a direct correlation between climate change and human health, stated
that all the development gains of last fifty years have been negatively impacted.
7. A Member of the Committee then enquired about the comparison of the present Bill with that of
2008. In response, the Secretary, informed the Committee that the elements contained in the present bill
were quite similar to the Bill of 2008 and that they had tried to address the concerns on 2008 Bill raised
by different people and different states. The Secretary further informed that the order on CAMPA Bill
had been approved by the Cabinet in March 2014. The same was submitted to the Supreme Court and
the matter was pending.
8. Thereafter, the Chairman suggested that since the matter was before the Supreme Court, the
Ministry should get its nod for the Bill in principle, so that it is not struck down after the Parliament
passes the Bill. He pointed out that the Supreme Court had, in one of its judgments, made an observation
that the Compensatory Afforestation money can't be categorized as money which should be deposited
in the public account or the consolidated fund of India. The Secretary replied that the Attorney General
had advised that the Government will have to introduce a validation clause which will meet or remove
the basis of that judgment. They had also been advised by the Ministry of Law that the validation clause
(clause 32) in the bill was adequate. He also informed that when the Bill was presented to the Cabinet,
in 2014, it had considered the matter. The Ministry of Finance had endorsed the proposal of Ministry
of Environment Forest & Climate Change and they were satisfied with the provisions made by the
Ministry for putting the money in public accounts.
9. A Member of the Committee then observed that the scope of the Bill has now been widened and
that the Fund could now be used for manifold purposes. The Secretary stated that the fund was
proposed to be utilised either for undertaking compensatory afforestation or for undertaking forest
conservation activities or eco-development activities including wildlife, which were in conformity with
the Forest Conservation Act.

24
10. One of the Members observed that the provisions of the Bill may be unfair to the States which
have a large forest area. The Secretary clarified that 90% of the proceeds of the total amount will go
back to the states on a year to year basis and only 10 per cent will remain with the National Authority
for undertaking various activities.
11. *   * *
12. *   * *
13. The officials, then, withdrew.
14. *   * *
15. *   * *
16. *   * *
17. *   * *
18. *   * *
19. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
20. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 12.45 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

25
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 17th September, 2015 in Committee Room 'A',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
3. Shri C.P. Narayanan
4. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
6. Shri Bhupinder Singh
7. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapshinh Chauhan
9. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
10. Shri Laxman Giluwa
11. Dr. K. Gopal
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Nana Patole
14. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
15. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
16. Shri Nagendra Singh
17. Shri Vikram Usendi
18. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
25

26
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. Thereafter, the following witnesses appeared before the Committee:
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
1. Dr. S. S. Negi, Director General (Forest) & Special Secretary
2. Shri M.S. Negi, Inspector General (Forest)
3. Shri H.C. Chaudhary, Director
Representatives of NGOs
1. Dr. J.V. Sharma, Senior Fellow, The Energy and Resources Institute
2. Dr. Pia Sethi, Fellow, The Energy and Resources Institute
3. Shri Ravi Singh, Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India
4. Dr. Anupam Mishra, Member, Gandhi Peace Foundation - Environment Cell
9. The Chairman welcomed the representatives of NGOs and Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change and asked the representatives of NGOs to share their views on 'The Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015' clearly expressing the implications of the various provisions of the Bill,
their reservations, if any, on any of the provisions of the Bill, its impact on forest resources of the
country in general and the tribal and forest dwelling communities in particular, and how provisions of
the Bill propose to achieve its objectives and where it needs improvement.
10. Senior Fellow, The Energy and Resources Institute stated that besides artificial regeneration,
priority should be given to natural regeneration. Research and development should also be given importance
in the Bill. He also stressed on the need for institutional strengthening and strengthening of the capacity
of human resources involved in protecting and managing the forest. He also emphasized that social
element should be taken into consideration. The problem of forest degradation lies outside the forest
sector, particularly the livelihood of the people who harvested unsustainably to generate their day-to-day
livelihood and sustenance needs.
11. Fellow, The Energy and Resources Institute stated that since the Bill pertained to compensatory
afforestation for diversion of forest land, some figures or proportion of funds should be allocated for
***Relate to other matters.

27
protection of existing forest, forest blocks to prevent fragmentation and assisted natural regeneration. She
also stressed upon the need for protection of existing rootstocks and assisted natural regeneration. She
referred to Clause 8(4)(x) of Chapter III of the Bill and stated that the number of environmentalist or
conservationists or scientists or economists or social scientists in the governing body of the National
Authority should be increased from two to five and at least two scientists should be appreciated since
the success of afforestation, restoration etc. are contingent upon the application of good science, in
terms of site and species selection, understanding of ecological and forestry issues etc.
12. Secretary General & CEO, WWF-India stated that the terms 'infrastructure development' and
'supply of wood and other forest produce saving devices and other allied activities' in Clause 6 of Chapter
2 were not clearly defined in the Bill and needed clear explanation, so that these are not misused in future.
He also suggested that more money should be allocated for infrastructure and it should be clearly defined.
Regarding Clause 6 (b) about utilisation of money received through net present value, he was of the view
that it should be expanded to include establishing habitat connectivity between protected areas and for
management of man-animal conflicts. He also stated that Clause 6(d) should be so expanded that the
income therefrom shall be used exclusively for undertaking protection and conservation activities with
focus on more vulnerable and endangered species within and outside protected area of a State and Union
Territory. He stated that there are 21 endangered and vulnerable species in the country and if they were
not properly protected, they will go into extinction. He stated that a large number of forest species which
were found in areas which are outside protected areas, should also receive some amount of protection
and benefit. He appreciated the Clause 6(g) of the Bill on trans-boundary reparation within States. He
also suggested a greater transparency in placing the number and location of each reforestation, afforestation
and conservation activity in the public domain and stated that the proposed National Authority should
undertake this activity within a stipulated timeframe. He also stated that the CAMPA Funds should not
be afforestation-centric but also aim for holistic conservation.
13. Member. Gandhi Peace Foundation - Environment Cell stressed on the need for provision of
revenue generation in the Bill as also the need for saving the forests from fires. He also emphasized upon
the measures to encourage afforestation on private lands.
14. Thereafter, the Chainman thanked the representatives of the NGOs for their useful suggestions and
asked them to submit their written submission if they wish to on the provisions of the Bill, to the
Committee.
15. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
16. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.20 
P.M.

28
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Thursday, the 14th January, 2016 in Committee Room ‘A’ ,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar – Chairman
RAJYA  SABHA
2. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
3. Shri C.P. Narayanan
4. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
5. Shri Bhupinder Singh
6. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
8. Kurn. Sushmita Dev
9. Shri Ninong Ering
10. Shri Laxman Giluwa
11. Dr. K. Gopal
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
14. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
15. Shri Nagendra Singh
16. Shri Vikram Usendi
17. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas,  Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
28

29
** *
2. ** *
3. ** *
4. ** *
5. ** *
6. ** *
7. ** *
8. The   witnesses   then   withdrew  and   the   following   appeared   before  the Committee:
Non-official witnesses
(i) Shri A.K. Mukherjee, former Director General (Forests) & Special Secretary, Ministry of Environrnent
& Forests
(ii)     Shri Ramesh Rawal, Executive Vice-President, BAIF Development Research Foundation
(iii)    Shri   Sharad  Gaur,  Programme  Director,   Centre  for Environrnent Education
Representative of Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
1.        Shri H. C. Chaudhary, Director
9. The Chairman welcomed the non-official witnesses present in the meeting and informed that the
Committee was considering the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015, and wanted to have the benefit
of their views on various aspects of the said Bill.
10. The representative of BAIF Development Research Foundation stated that livelihood should also be
mentioned in the Bill which would be useful for tribal and forest dependant members.   Further, some more
funds may be allocated from Section 5(a) which will be useful for innovation and new approaches that may
help in new compensatory afforestation. Agro-forestry and silvi-pasture development programme should
also be included in the bill. He also stated that two more representatives from the Government Departments
i.e. Water Conservation and Rural Development and some outside experts on environment and climate
change and tribal and forests should be added to the Governing Authority.
11. Shri A.K. Mukherjee was of the view that the Bill, if passed, would be a great help for the rejuvenation
of degrading forests of India; for meeting the supply-demand gap of fuel, fodder, timber in the country; and
for reviving the ecological health of forests, water and soil conservation. He suggested that under clause
8(3) regarding constitution of committees, at least two prominent national-level NGOs, one dealing with
forestry and the other with wildlife, should be included in the Central governing council. He also stated that
the States should have the flexibility of using the NPV funds. He also stated that the country had 1.10 lakh
village forest development committees and joint forest management committees and these committees should
be utilized for implementation of the schemes.
***Relate to other matters.

30
12. The representative of Centre for Environment Education stated that in Clause 2(e), there was a
mention of ‘environmental services’  and under this, tourism is also included.  He was of the view that
environment education and eco-tourism should only be included in this and rest of the tourism which  had
commercial overtones should be dealt with caution. He was also of the view that there should be wide-scale
publicity among the civil society with regard to the implementation of the bill.
13. Thereafter, the Chairman thanked the non-official  witnesses for having presented their views on the
bill before the Committee.
14. The witnesses then withdrew.
15. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
16. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.

31
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 17th February, 2016 in Main Committee Room,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
3. Shri C.P. Narayanan
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
5. Shri Bhupider Singh
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Shri Laxman Giluwa
9. Shri Nana Patole
10. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
11. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
12. Shri Nagendra Singh
13. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Raiiv Saxena, Assistant Director
Representatives of Government of Maharashtra
1. Shri Vikas Kharge, Secretary (Forests), Revenue & Forests Department
2. Shri Shree Bhagwan, Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife), Nagpur
3. Dr. S.C. Gairola, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wild Life), Nagpur
4. Shri S.H. Patil, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wild Life), Nagpur
31

32
5. Shri Rambabu, Additional Chief Conservation of Forests (Admn.) (Wild Life), Nagpur
6. Dr. P. Anbalgan, Member Secretary, Maharashtra Pollution Control Board.
Representative of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Dr. Rashid Hasan, Advisor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, representatives of Government
of Maharashtra and Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change. He informed that the Committee
was examining the various aspects of the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015. The Committee had
already heard the views of some State Governments and was scheduled to hear the views of the Government
of Maharashtra on the Bill in the meeting. He asked the Secretary (Forests), Government of Maharashtra to
present the views of Government of Maharashtra on the Bill.
3. Secretary (Forests), Government of Maharashtra stated that there was a dire need to have an Act on
the management of funds under CAMPA. He stated that they were in agreement that 10 per cent of the entire
deposit will be given to the National Fund. Regarding the State Authority and its governing body, he stated
that the Minister for Forests should be the co-Chairman of the Committee. Further, CEO or the APCC of
CAMPA, who is looking after the subject, should be the Member-Secretary of the Committee. Departments
like Agriculture Department, Revenue Department, etc. need not be permanent members of the Committee.
He also proposed that the meetings of the Steering Committee should be held at least once in a year. He also
proposed that the investment of the surplus funds should be in scheduled banks and that it should not be
invested in other market forces.
4. The Chairman stated that the Committee had received representations from almost all State Governments
that the amount to be retained by the National Authority should be less than 10 per cent. A view had also been
expressed that instead of the Chief Minister, the Minister of Forests should be Chairman of the State Committee.
However, he felt that the Chief Minister is proposed to be the Chairman because if the Chief Minister is
there, all the inter-departmental issues will be resolved.
5. ** *
6. ** *
7. ** *
8. ** *
9. The witnesses then withdrew and the following representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice and
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change appeared before the Committee:
Ministry of Law and Justice (Legal Department):
1. Shri Dr. N.R. Battu, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri Diwakar Singh, Addl. Legislative Counsel
***Relate to other matters.

33
Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change:
l.       Dr. Rashid Hasan, Advisor
10. The Chairman informed that the Committee has examined the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill,
2015 in the light of the representations received by the Committee during its study visits.   The Committee
proposed to recommend some amendments in the Bill which were to be circulated to the Members of the
Committee and the representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice and Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change that day so that they all could also be aware of the Committee’s proposed recommendations
on the Bill.  He asked them to study the proposals of the Committee and come prepared in the meeting of the
Committee to be held the next day to discuss the issue.
11. ** *
12 ** *
13. ** *
14. ** *
15. ** *
16. ** * s
17. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
18. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5.35 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

34
IX
NINTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 18th February, 2016 in Committee Room 'B',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
3. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
4. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
6. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
7. Shri Laxman Giluwa
8. Shri Daddan Mishra
9. Shri Nana Patole
10. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
11. Shri Nagendra Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
Representatives of Government of Maharashtra
1. Shri Vikas Kharge, Secretary (Forests), Revenue & Forests Department
2. Dr. S.C. Gairola, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wild Life), Nagpur
3. Shri S.H. Patil, Additional Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Wild Life), Nagpur
4. Shri Rambabu, Additional Chief Conservation of Forests (Admn.) (Wild Life), Nagpur
34

35
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
1. Dr. S.S. Negi, Director General (Forests)
2. Shri H.C. Chaudhary, Director
2. *   * *
3. *   * *
4. *   * *
5. *   * *
6. *   * *
7. *   * *
8. Thereafter, the Committee took up clause by clause consideration of the Bill. The following
officers of the Ministries of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Law and Justice appeared
before the Committee:
Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change
1. Shri Ashok Lavasa, Secretary
2. Dr. S.S. Negi, Director General (Forest) & Special Secretary
3. Shri H.C. Chaudhary, Director
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Dr. N.R. Battu, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
Representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs)
1. Shri G.S. Yadav, Joint Secretary
9. The Committee deliberated on the main issues of Bill and views of state Governments and experts
thereon. The Committee then first took up the long title of the Bill and felt that plantations of indigenous/
native species needed to be encouraged since it has long term impact on environment. Further. Green
India Programme being a separate programme of Government and had its own budgetary allocation and
need not be part of the afforestation under the Bill. The Committee decided to recommend the inclusion
of the words particularly of native species after the word 'plantations' and deletion of the words "Green
India Programme" from the Long Title.
10. The Committee then considered Clause 2(e) and was of the view that the indicative list of
'environmental services' given in the Clause was not exhaustive. The Committee, therefore, decided to
recommend that the words "environmental services means" may be substituted by the words "environmental
services includes" in the Clause.
***Relate to other matters.

36
11. As regards Clause 2(e)(iv), the Committee felt that Pollination & Seed Dispersal, (III) being
ecosystem services for forest regeneration, must find their place in any definition of I environmental
services. The Committee decided that the words "including pollination and seed dispersal" may be added
at the end of the clause.
12. As regards Clause 2(1), the Committee observed that the Bill contained many provisions for
making rules which will have a bearing on States/Union Territories and that the views of States should
be taken on board before rules are framed. The Committee therefore decided that "Prescribed" appearing
in the Clause should mean rules made by the Central Government in consultation with the State Governments/
Union Territory Administrations under the Act.
13. The Committee then considered Clause 3(4) and formed the view that most of the State Governments
were of the view that crediting 10 percent of the funds to National Authority is on the higher side and
it must be lowered. The Committee therefore decided to recommend the reduction of the share of the
National Authority to five per cent instead of ten per cent proposed in this Clause. The Committee also
decided to recommend the share of the Central Government and Stale Governments/Union Territories to
five per cent and ninety-five per cent respectively, as envisaged in Clauses 5(a) and 5(b).
14. As regards Clause 4(3)(iii), the Committee felt that the words "receipt of all monies", may be
substituted by the words "all monies realized" for the sake of uniformity. Further, the Committee
observed that since "State Authority" was defined in clause 2, the words "constituted in such State"
appearing in sub-clause 4 (4) (i), (ii) and (iii) were redundant and may thus be deleted.
15. The Committee then took up Clause 6(b) and was of the view that the phrase "infrastructure
development, supply of wood and other forest produce saving devices and other allied activities" needed
to be elaborated and clearly defined to avoid any ambiguity and to ensure that money is used only for
activities related to forest restoration, protection and management. Further, the Committee felt that the
word "money" may be substituted by the word "monies" and the words "particularly of native species"
be added after the words "artificial regeneration (plantation)".
16. The Committee found that the words Administrations' and 'Sate' appearing in Clause 6(c) and 6(g)
respectively have been spelled wrongly may therefore be read as Administrations' and 'State'.
17. As regards Clause 6(d), the Committee was of the view that there was a need to facilitate
relocation of people residing in critical wildlife habitats to achieve long term conservation goals. Accordingly,
the Committee decided that in Clause 6(d), the words "including facilitating voluntary relocation from
and" may be added after the word "activities".
18. On clause 8, the Committee was of the view that the nomenclature of ministries are changed quite
often and sometimes ministries are merged/bifurcated and therefore the word "of in line 1 of-Clause
8(4)(ii) may be substituted by the words "dealing with". Further, Ministries of Space and Earth Sciences
have important role to play in forest mapping including remote sensing, satellite imagery and monitoring
forest cover etc. and decided to recommend the inclusion of the these Ministries in the Governing Body
of the National Authority.

37
19. The Committee then considered Clause 8(4)(x) and was of the view that the Governing Body of
the National Authority needed to be expanded and one expert each of the fields mentioned in the sub
clause should be included and decided to recommend accordingly.
20. As-regards Clauses 9 (2) (ix) and 11(3), the Committee was of the view that an expert on tribal
matters or a representative of tribal community should be co-opted in the Executive Committee of the
National Authority and the Steering Committee of the State Authority and decided to recommend accordingly.
21. The Committee then considered Clause 15(1) and was of the view that the approval of Annual Plan
Operations of the State Authorities by the National Authority should be within a definite time frame.
Accordingly, the Committee decided to recommend that the National Authority should approve Annual
Plan Operations submitted by the State Authorities within three months from the date of receipt.
22. As regards Clause 16(1)(i), the Committee felt that monitoring and evaluation of the works
implemented in the States and Union Territories by the monitoring should be based on the use of scientific
methods and recommended that the words "including remote sensing" may be added at the end.
23. The Committee also felt that no periodicity of the meetings of the steering Committee of the State
Authority had been mentioned in the Bill and decided to recommend that a clause stating that the Steering
Committee of a State Authority shall meet at least once in every three months be added as Clause(18)(2).
24. The Committee then considered Clause 19(1)(i) and observed that the Steering Committee of the
State Authority was proposed to send the Approved Annual Plan of Operations to the Executive Committee
of the National Authority for final approval in Clause 18(i) and, therefore, decided to recommend that
the Executive Committee of the State Authority may formulate and submit Annual Plan of Operations to
the Steering Committee of the State Authority for its concurrence.
25. As regards Clause 33(1) to 33 (3), the Committee felt that there was an overlapping in the
provisions of sub-clause (1) and (2) and decided to amend the two Clauses as under:
(1) The Central Government may, if it finds necessary or expedient in public interest, issue such
policy directives to the National Authority or any State Authority, in writing, and such policy
directives shall be binding upon the National Authority or the State Authority, as the case may be.
Further, the Committee recommended that sub-clause (3) may be renumbered as sub-elause (2).
26. The Committee then adopted the draft 277th Report of the Committee on 'The Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015", with the above amendments.
27. The Committee also decided to present/lay its *** 277th Report on 'The Compensatory Afforestation
Fund Bill, 2015' to both the Houses of Parliament on 26th February, 2016. The Committee also decided
to lay a copy of the evidence tendered before the Committee in relation to its 277th Report in both the
Houses of Parliament.
28. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
29. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5.29 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.

ANNEXURES

AS I NTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 153 of 2015
THE COMPENSA TORY AFFORESTATION FUND BILL, 2015
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, extent and commencement.
2. Definitions.
CHAPTER II
ESTABLISHMENT, M ANAGEMENT AND U TILISA TION OF N ATIONAL C OMPENSATORY A FFORESTATION
FUND AND S TATE C OMPENSATORY A FFORESTA TION F UNDS
3. Establishment of National Fund.
4. Establishment of State Fund.
5. Disbursement and utilisation of National Fund.
6. Disbursement and utilisation of State Fund.
7. Accounting procedure.
CHAPTER III
C
ONSTITUTION OF N ATIONAL A UTHORITY AND S TATE A UTHORITIES
8. Constitution of National Authority
9. Executive committee and monitoring group of National Authority.
10. Constitution of State Authority.
11. Steering committee and executive committee of State Authority.
12. Term of office and conditions of service of members.
13. Disqualifications.
CHAPTER IV
P
OWERS AND F UNCTIONS OF N ATIONAL A UTHORITY AND S TATE A UTHORITIES
14. Powers and functions of National Authority.
15. Powers and functions of executive committee of National Authority.
41

42
16. Functions of monitoring group.
17. Powers and functions of State Authority.
18. Powers and functions of steering committee of State Authority.
19. Functions and powers of executive committee of State Authority.
CHAPTER V
F
INANCE, A CCOUNTS, A UDIT AND A NNUAL R EPORT
20. Budget of National Authority.
21. Investment of funds by National Authority.
22. Accounts and audit of National Authority.
23. Annual report of National Authority.
24. Annual report and audit report of National Authority to be laid before Parliament.
25. Budget of State Authority.
26. Investment of funds by State Authority.
27. Accounts and audit of State Authority.
28. Annual report of State Authority.
29. Annual report and audit report of State Authority to be laid before State Legislature.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
30. Power to make rules.
31. Transfer of assets liabilities etc.
32. Validation.
33. Power of Central Government to issue directions.

43
AS I NTRODUCED IN L OK S ABHA
Bill No. 153 of 2015
THE COMPENSA TORY AFFORESTATION FUND BILL, 2015
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of funds under the public accounts
of India and the public accounts of each State and crediting
thereto the monies received from the user agencies towards
compensatory afforestation, additional compensatory afforestation,
penal compensatory afforestation, net present value and all other
amounts recovered from such agencies under the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980; constitution of an authority at national
level and at each of the State and Union territory Administration
for administration of the funds and to utilise the monies so collected
for undertaking artificial regeneration (plantations), assisted natural
regeneration, protection of forests, forest related infrastructure
development, Green India Programme, wildlife protection and other
related activities and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
43

44
Where as the Supreme Court in its order in T.N. Godavarman
Thirumulpad vs. Union of India and Others [Writ Petition (Civil)
No. 202 of 1995], dated the 30th October, 2002, observed that
a Compensatory Afforestation Fund be created in which all the
monies received from the user agencies towards compensatory
afforestation, additional compensatory afforestation, penal
compensatory afforestation, net present value of the diverted forest
land or catchment area treatment plan shall be deposited;
And whereas it had also been observed that the money received
from the user agencies in cases where forest land diverted falls
within protected areas, that is, the areas notified under the Wild
Life (Protection) Act, 1972 for undertaking activities related to
protection of biodiversity or wildlife shall also be deposited in the
Fund;
And whereas the Supreme Court has directed that, besides artificial
regeneration (Plantations), the Fund shall also be utilised for
undertaking assisted natural regeneration, protection of forests,
infrastructure development, wildlife protection, -and other related
activities and an independent system of concurrent monitoring
and evaluation should be evolved and implemented through the
Compensatory Afforestation Fund to ensure effective and proper
utilisation of funds;"
And whereas the Supreme Court in its judgment dated 26th
September, 2005 in the said Writ Petition observed that the Fund
generated for protecting ecology and providing regeneration should
not be treated as a Fund under article 266 and article 283 of the
Constitution;
And whereas in its direction dated the 5th May, 2006, the Supreme
Court had directed that since the Government has not constituted
a Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning
Authority (hereinafter referred to as Authority), an ad hoc Authority
should be constituted till the Compensatory Afforestation Fund
Management and Planning Authority becomes operational and
directed to centrally pool the money recovered on behalf of the
said Authority lying in the States and Union territories into the ad
35 of 1972

45
hoc Compensatory Afforestation Fund-Management and Planning
Authority;
And whereas Central Government formulated guidelines dated the
2nd July, 2009 on the subject of State Authority for utilisation of
funds lying with the adhoc Authority.
And whereas in its direction dated the 10th July, 2009, the Supreme
Court had directed that the guidelines and structure of the State
Authority prepared by the Central Government may be notified
and implemented;
And whereas in its directions dated the 10th July, 2009, the
Supreme Court further directed that till an alternative system is
put in place, after obtaining, permission from the Supreme Court,
the money towards compensatory afforestation, net present value
and protected areas (national parks, wildlife sanctuaries) shall
continue to be deposited in the ad hoc Authority;
And whereas in compliance of the directions of the Supreme
Court including its order dated the 5th May, 2006, over rupees
thirty eight thousand crores as collected by the State Governments
and Union territory Administrations have been placed under the ad
hoc Authority, and deposited in the nationalised banks;
And whereas absence of permanent institutional mechanism for
utilisation of funds collected by the State Governments and Union
territory Administrations is the main reason for accumulation of
huge unspent funds in the ad hoc Authority;
Now, therefore, based on the above orders, directions and
observations of the Supreme Court to ensure safety, security and
expeditious utilisation in a transparent manner of funds accumulated
with the ad hoc Authority and the funds to be collected by the
State Governments and Union territory Administrations, it is
proposed to create a National Compensatory Afforestation Fund
and a National Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management
and Planning Authority at the national level, and a State
Compensatory Afforestation Fund and a State Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority in each
State and Union territory, by an Act of Parliament.

46
Be it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-sixth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
CHAPTER 1
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Compensatory Afforestation
Fund Act, 2015.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of
Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come
into force on such date as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "ad hoc Authority" means the ad hoc Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority constituted
under the order dated the 5th May, 2006 of the Supreme Court
in T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad vs. Union of India and Others,
[Writ Petition (Civil) No. 202 of 1995];
(b) "Chairperson, National Authority" means the Chairperson
of the National Authority;
(c) "Chairperson, State Authority" means the Chairperson
of the State Authority;
(d) "compensatory afforestation" means afforestation done
in lieu of the diversion of forest land for non-forestry use under
the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980;
(e) "environmental services" means—
(i) provision of goods such as wood, non-timber
forest products, fuel, fodder, water and provision of services
such as grazing, tourism, wildlife protection and life support;
(ii) regulating services such as climate regulation,
disease control, flood moderation, detoxification, carbon
sequestration and health of soil, air and water regimes;
(iii) non-material benefits obtained from ecosystems,
spiritual, recreational, aesthetic, inspirational, educational and
symbolic;
Short title,
extent and
commencement
Definition
69 of 1980

47
(iv) supporting such other services necessary for the
production of ecosystem services, biodiversity, nutrient
cycling and primary production;
(f) "Head of the regional office" means the senior-most
officer appointed by the Central Government at regional office to
deal with the forest conservation matters under the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980;
(g) "monitoring group" means a group of experts to monitor
the activities undertaken from amounts released from the National
Fund and State Fund constituted under sub-section (J) of
section 9;
(h) "National Authority" means National Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority constituted
under section 8;
(i) "National Fund" means the National Compensatory
Afforestation Fund established under sub-section (J) of section 3;
(J) "net present value" means the quantification of the
environmental services provided for the forest area diverted for
non-forestry uses, as may be determined by an expert committee
appointed by the Central Government from timeto time in this
regard;
(k) "penal compensatory afforestation" means afforestation
work to be undertaken over and above the specified compensatory
afforestation specified in the guidelines issued under the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980, in lieu of the extent of area over which
non-forestry activities have been carried out without obtaining
prior approval of the competent authority under the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980;
(l) "prescribed" means prescribed by rules made by the
Central Government under this Act:
(m) "State Authority" means the State Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority constituted
under section 10,
(n) "State Fund" means the State Compensatory
Afforestation Fund established by each State under sub-section
(1) of section 4;
69 of 1980
69 of 1980

48
(o) "user agency" means any person, organisation or
company or department of the Central Government or State
Government making a request for diversion or de-notification of
forest land for non-forest purpose or using forest land for non-
forest purpose in accordance with the provisions contained in the
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and the rules made and guidelines
issued, thereunder.
CHAPTER II
E
STABLISHMENT, M ANAGEMENT AND U TILISA TION OF N ATIONAL
COMPENSATORY A FFORESTATION F UND AND S TATE
COMPENSATORY A FFORESTATION F UNDS
3. (1) With effect from such date as the Central Government
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf,
there shall be established for the purposes of this " Act, a special
Fund to be called the "National Compensatory Afforestation Fund"
under the public account of India.
(2) The National Fund shall be under the control of the
Central Government and managed by the National Authority in
such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) On the date of establishment of the National Fund, all
monies collected by the State Governments and Union territory
Administrations which has been placed under the ad hoc Authority
and deposited in the nationalised banks shall be transferred to the
National Fund.
(4) There shall also be credited into the National Fund, by
each State on yearly basis, ten per cent, of the funds realised
from the user agencies in respect of the forest land diverted in
their favour, which have been credited directly into the State
Fund.
(5) There shall also be credited to the National Fund—
(a) grants-in-aid received, if any, by the National
Authority;
(b) any loan taken or any borrowings made by the
National Authority;
(c) any other sums received by the "National Authority
by way of benefaction, gift or donations.
69 of 1980
Establishment
of National
Fund

49
(6) The monies received in the National Fund shall be an
interest bearing fund under public accounts of India.
(7) The balance in the National Fund shall be non-lapsable
and get interest as per the rate declared by the Central Government
on year to year basis.
4. (1) With effect from such date as each State
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of this
Act, a special Fund to be called the "State Compensatory
Afforestation Fund-.........(name of State)" under public accounts
of such State.
(2) The State Fund in each State shall be under the control
of the State Government of such State and managed by the State
Authority of such State, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) There shall be credited into the State Fund established
under public accounts of a State—
(i) the unspent balance of all monies which has been
transferred by ad hoc Authority to the State Compensatory
Afforestation Compensatory Afforestation Funds Management
and Planning Authority constituted in such State in compliance
of guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009;
(ii) all monies transferable from the National Fund
under clause (a) of section 5;
(iii) receipt of all monies from user agencies by such
State towards compensatory afforestation, additional
compensatory afforestation, penal compensatory afforestation,
net present value, catchment area treatment plan or any
money for compliance of conditions stipulated by the Central
Government while according approval under the provisions
of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980; and
(iv) the funds recoverable from user agencies by such
State in cases where forest land diverted falls within the
protected areas, that is, areas notified under sections 18, 26
A or 35 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 for
undertaking activities relating to the protection of biodiversity
and wildlife.
Establishment of
State Fund
69 of 1980
53 of 1972

50
(4) A State Government may also credit to the State Fund
constituted by it—
(i) grants-in-aid received, if any, by the State Authority
constituted in such State;
(ii) any loan taken or any borrowings made by the
State Authority constituted in such State;
(iii) any other sums received by the State Authority
constituted in such State by way of benefaction, gift or
donations.
(5) The monies received in the State Fund shall be an
interest bearing fund under public accounts of such State.
(6) The balance in each State Fund shall be non-lapsable
and get interest as per the rate declared by the Central Government
on year to year basis.
5. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the monies
available in the National Fund shall be disbursed and utilised in the
following manner, namely:—
(a) ninety percent, of the all monies collected by a
State, which has been placed under the ad hoc Authority and
the interest accrued thereon, shall be transferred to 'the State
Fund established in such state under sub-section (1) of
section 4;
(b) the balance ten per cent, of all monies collected
by the States and Union territory Administrations, which has
been placed under the ad hoc Authority and the interest
accrued thereon, and all fresh accrual to the National Fund,
as provided in sub-section (4) of section 3, and the interest
accrued thereon, shall be utilised for meeting—
(i) the non-recurring and recurring expenditure
for the management of the National Authority including
the salary and allowances payable to its officers and
other employees;
(ii) the expenditure incurred on monitoring and
evaluation of works executed by the National Authority
and each State Authority;
Disbursement of
utilisation of
National Fund

51
(iii) the expenditure incurred on specific schemes
approved by governing body of the National Authority.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "scheme"
includes any institute, society, centre of excellence in the field of
forest and wildlife, pilot schemes, standardisation of codes and
guidelines and such other related activities for the forestry and
wildlife sector.
6. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the monies available
in a State Fund shall be disbursed and utilised in the following
manner, namely:—
(a) the money received for compensatory afforestation,
additional compensatory afforestation, penal compensatory
afforestation, catchment area treatment plan and for any
other site specific scheme may be used as per site-specific
schemes submitted by the State along with the approved
proposals for diversion of forest land under the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980;
(b) the money received towards net present value and
penal net present value shall be used for artificial regeneration
(plantation), assisted natural regeneration, forest management,
forest protection, infrastructure development, wildlife
protection and management, supply of wood and other forest
produce saving devices and other allied activities in the
manner as may be prescribed;
(c) the interest accrued on funds available in a State
Fund and the interest accrued on all monies collected by the
State Governments and Union territory Administrations, which
has been placed under the ad hoc Authority and deposited in
the nationalised banks, in compliance of the directions of the
Supreme Court dated the 5th May, 2006, shall be used for
conservation and development of forest and wildlife in the
manner as may be prescribed;
(d) all monies realised from the user agencies in
accordance with the decision taken by the Standing Committee
of the National Board for Wild Life constituted under section
5 A-of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 or the orders
ofthe Supreme Court involving cases of diversion of forest
Disbursement and
utilisation of State
Fund.
69 of 1980
35 of 1972

52
land in protected areas shall form the corpus and the income
therefrom shall be used exclusively for undertaking protection
and conservation activities in protected areas of the States
and the Union territory Administrations and in exceptional
circumstance, a part of the corpus may also be used subject
to prior approval of the National Authority;
(e) ten per cent, of amount realised from the user
agencies, which has been credited directly into the State
Fund in a year shall be transferred to the National Fund to
meet expenditure as provided in clause (b) of section 5;
(f) the non-recurring and recurring expenditure for the
management of a State Authority including the salary and
allowances payable to its officers and other employees may
be met from a part of the interest accrued on the amounts
available in the State Fund, in the manner as may be
prescribed;
(g) in case of trans-boundary forestry or
environmental implication of diversion of forest land for non-
forest purposes in a particular State or Union territory, if
found expedient and necessary by the National Authority, it
may, in consultation with the concerned Sate Authorities
order that such sum as may be justified for reparation of the
trans-boundary effects, be transferred to State Fund of such
State or States;
(h) State Authority shall release monies to agencies
identified for execution of activities in pre-determined
installments as per the annual plan of operation finalised by
steering committee of such State Authority and executive
committee of the National Authority.
7. The accounting procedure to regulate the manner of
crediting the monies to the National Fund and State Fund in a
year shall be in such manner as may be prescribed.
CHAPTER III
C
ONSTITUTION OF N ATIONAL A UTHORITY AND S TATE A UTHORITIES
8. (1) With effect from such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
Accounting
procedure
Constitution of
National
Authority

53
in this behalf there shall be constituted a National Authority to be
called the "National Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management
and Planning Authority".
(2) The National Authority shall manage and utilise the
National Fund for the purposes of this Act.
(3) The National Authority shall consist of a governing
body and shall be assisted by an executive committee, monitoring
group and administrative support mechanism.
(4) The governing body of the National Authority shall
consist of the following, namely:—
(i) Minister for Environment, Forest and Climate
Change, Government of India— Chairperson, ex officio;
(ii) Secretaries of Ministries of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change; Finance (Department of Expenditure);
Rural Development (Department of Rural Development and
Land Resources) Agriculture; Panchayati Raj; Tribal
Development; Science and Technology and Chief Executive
Officer, National Institution for Transforming India Aayog,
Government of India—Members, ex officio;
(iii) Director General of Forests and Special Secretary,
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
Government of India—Member, ex officio;
(iv) Additional Director General of Forests (Forest
Conservation), Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate
Change, Government of India—Member, ex officio;
(v) Additional Director General of Forests (Wildlife),
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
Government of India—Member, ex officio;
(vi) Mission Director, National Mission for a Green
India, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
Government of India—Member, ex officio;
(vii) Financial Adviser, Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change, Government of India—Member, ex
officio;
(viii) five Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, not
more than one from each of the ten regions, to be nominated

54
by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
Government of India on rotation basis for a period of two
years, at a time— Members, ex officio;
(ix) Inspector General of Forests (Forest
Conservation), Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change, Government of India—Member, ex officio;
(x) two environmentalists or conservationists or
scientists or economists or social scientists appointed by the
Central Government for a period of two years subject to not
more than two consecutive terms— Members.
(5) The Central Government may appoint an officer of the
rank of an Additional Director General of Forests as the Chief
Executive Officer of the National Authority who shall be the
Member- Secretary of the governing body and the executive
committee of the National Authority.
9. (1) The governing body of the National Authority shall,
in performance, of its functions and powers under the Act, be
assisted by the executive committee and the monitoring group.
(2) The executive committee of the National Authority shall
consist of the following, namely:—
(i) Director General of Forests and Special Secretary,
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
Government of India—Chairperson, ex officio;
(ii) Additional Director General of Forests (Forest
Conservation), Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change, Government of India—Member, ex officio;
(iii) Additional Director General of Forests (Wildlife),
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
Government of India—Member, ex officio;
(iv) Mission Director, National Mission for a Green
India, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change,
Government of India—Member, ex officio;
(v) Financial Adviser, Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change, Government of India—Member,
ex officio;
Executive
Committee and
monitoring group
of National
Authority

55
(vi) Head of all regional offices of the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Government of
India—Members, ex officio;
(vii) Inspector General of Forests (Forest
Conservation), Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change, Government of India—Member, ex officio;
(viii) a professional ecologist, not being from the Central
Government, to be appointed by the Central Government—
Member;
(ix) two experts, one each in the fields of forestry and
forest economy development, not being from the Central
Government, to be appointed by the Central Government—
Members;
(x) Chief Executive Officer of the National Authority—
Member-Secretary;
(3) The monitoring group shall consist of six experts in the
field of environment, economics, wildlife, forest, remote sensing
and geographical information system and social sector and the
Director General, Forest Survey of India, Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change, Government of India.
(4) The following officers shall be appointed by the National
Authority for a period not exceeding five years, to assist the
executive committee in performance of its functions and powers
under the Act, namely:—
(i) Joint Chief Executive Officer of the rank of
Inspector General of Forests;
(ii) Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer of
the rank of Director in the Government of India; and
(iii) Deputy Chief Executive Officers of the rank of
Deputy Inspector General of Forests.
(5) The governing body of the National Authority may with
the prior concurrence of the Central Government create posts in
the National Authority at the level of Assistant Inspector General
of Forests and other officials to assist the executive committee
and monitoring group in performance of its functions under the
Act.

56
10. (1) With effect from such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
in this behalf, there shall be constituted a State Authority to be
called the "State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management
and Planning Authority" in each State and Union territory.
(2) The Central Government may, if so desires, appoint
different dates for constitution of State Authority in each of the
States and Union territories.
(3) The State Authority constituted in a State shall be
responsible for the management of the State Fund established
under public account of such State and its utilisation for the
purposes of the Act.
(4) The State Authority shall consist of a governing body
and shall be assisted by a steering committee and an executive
committee.
(5) The governing body of a State Authority shall consist
of the following, namely:—
(i) Chief Minister—Chairperson, ex officio;
(ii) Minister of Forests—Member, ex officio;
(iii) Chief Secretary—Member, ex officio;
(iv) Principal Secretaries, Departments of Environment,
Finance, Planning, Rural Development, Revenue, Agriculture,
Tribal Development, Panchayati Raj, Science and
Technology—Members, ex officio;
(v) Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Head of
Forest Force)—Member, ex officio;
(vi) Chief Wildlife W arden—Member, ex officio;
(6) Principal Secretary in-charge of the Forest Department
in a State or the Union territory shall be Member Secretary of the
State Authority in such State or Union territory.
(7) The State Government or Union territory Administration
shall appoint an officer of the rank not below the rank of a Chief
Conservator of Forests as the Chief Executive Officer of the
State Authority who shall be the Member- Secretary of the steering
committee and the executive committee of the State Authority.
Constitution of
State Authority

57
11. (1) The governing body of the State Authority shall,
in performance of its functions and powers under the Act, be
assisted by the steering committee and the executive committee.
(2) The steering committee of a State Authority shall consist
of the following, namely:—
(i) Chief Secretary—Chairperson, ex officio;
(ii) Principal Secretaries, Departments of Forests,
Environment, Finance, Planning, Rural Development,
Revenue, Agriculture, Tribal Development, Panchayati Raj,
Science and T echnology—Members, ex officio;
(iii) Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Head of
Forest Force)- Member, ex officio;
(iv) Chief Wildlife W arden—Member, ex officio;
(v) Nodal Officer, the Forest (Conservation) Act,
1980—Member, ex officio;
(vi) Head of the concerned regional office of the
Ministry of Environment, Forest and climate change—
Member, ex officio;
(vii) Nodal Officer, State Forest Development Agency—
Member, ex officio;
(viii) Chief Executive Officer, State Authority—Member-
Secretary.
(3) The executive committee of a State Authority shall consist
of the following, namely:—
(i) Principal Chief Conservator of Forests (Head of
Forest Force)—Chairperson, ex officio;
(ii) Chief Wildlife Warden- Member, ex officio;
(iii) Chief Conservator of Forests (Plan/Schemes)—
Member, ex officio;
(iv) Principal Chief Conservator of Forests or Additional
Principal Chief Conservator of Forest (Research)- Member,
ex officio;
(v) Nodal Officer, State Forest Development Agency—
Member, ex officio
Steering committee
and executive
committee of State
Authority
69 of 1980

58
(vi) a representative each of the Departments of
Environment, Finance, Planning, Rural Development,
Revenue, Agriculture, Tribal Development, Panchayati Raj,
Science and T echnology—Members, ex officio;
(vii) Financial Controller or Financial Adviser, to be
nominated by the Finance Department—Member, ex officio;
(viii) two eminent non- government organisations to be
appointed by the State Government—Members;
(ix) two representatives of district level Panchayati Raj
Institutions to be appointed by the State Government—
Members;
(x) Chief Executive Officer, State Authority—Member
Secretary.
(4) The State Authority may appoint the following officers
for a period net exceeding five years, to assist the steering
committee and executive committee in performance of its functions
under the Act, namely:—
(i) Joint Chief Executive Officer of the rank not below
the rank of a Conservator of Forests;
(ii) Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer of
the rank not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary in the
State Government;
(iii) Deputy Chief Executive Officer of the rank not
below the rank of a Deputy Conservator of Forests.
(5) The governing body of the State Authority may with
the prior concurrence of the State Government create posts in the
State Authority at the level of Assistant Conservator of Forests
and other officials to assist the steering committee and executive
committee in performance of its functions under the Act.
12. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the terms of office
and other conditions of the service of the members of the National
Authority, executive committee, monitoring group, Chief Executive
Officer and officials appointed by the National Authority, members
of State Authority, steering committee and executive committee
of each State Authority shall be such "as may be prescribed.
Term of office
and conditions of
service of
members.

59
13. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a member
of the National Authority, executive committee of the National
Authority, a State Authority, steering committee and executive
committee of a State Authority, monitoring group, if he—
(i) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment
for an offence which, in the opinion of the Central
Government, involves moral turpitude; or
(ii) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(iii) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by the
competent court; or
(iv) has been removed or dismissed from the service
of the Government or organisation or undertaking owned by
the Government; or
(v) has, in the opinion of the Central Government,
such financiar or other interest in the National Authority or
the concerned State Authority as is likely to affect the duties
discharged by him of his function as a member.
CHAPTER IV
P
OWERS AND F UNCTIONS OF N A TIONAL A UTHORITY AND S TATE
AUTHORITIES
14. (1) The governing body of the National Authority
shall—
(i) formulate broad policy framework for functioning
of the National Authority and State Authorities as may be
notified by the Central Government;
(ii) approve the annual report and audited accounts of
the National Authority;
(iii) review reports on decision taken by executive
committee and monitoring group of the National Authority
including investment decisions;
(iv) approve the proposal for the schemes specified in
sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of section 5;
(v) approve the proposals for creation of posts in the
National Authority, subject to prior permission of the Central
Government;
Disqualification
Powers and
Functions of
National
Authority

60
(vi) provide a mechanism to State Authorities to resolve
issues of inter-State or Centre-State character;
(vii) formulate such procedures for delegation of
financial and administrative powers to the National Authority
and State Authorities as may be notified by the Central
Government;
(2) The governing body of the National Authority shall meet
at least once in six months.
(3) The governing body and executive committee of the
National Authority and the monitoring group of the National
Authority shall meet at such places and shall observe such rules
and procedures in regard to transaction of business at its meeting,
including the quorum thereat, as may be prescribed.
15. (1) The executive committee of the National Authority
shall—
(i) approve annual plan of operations of the State
Authorities;
(ii) formulate proposals for schemes specified in sub-
clause (iii) of clause (b) of section 5;
(iii) execute schemes specified in sub-clause (iii) of
clause (b) of section 5;
(iv) deploy staff on contract or on deputation basis to
the posts in the National Authority;
(v) formulate proposals for creation of posts in the
National Authority at the level of Assistant Inspector General
of Forests and other officers;
(vi) invest surplus amounts available in the National
Fund;
(vii) execute other day-to-day work in respect of receipt
of amounts in the National Fund;
(viii) maintain books of account and such other records;
(ix) facilitate scientific, technological and other
assistance that may be required by State Authorities;
Powers and
functions of
executive
committee of
National Authority

61
(x) present its decisions to the governing body of the
National Authority for information;
(xi) maintain and update a public information system
on the National Authority and present all information on its
transaction in the public domain;
(xii) undertake any other work as may be assigned by
the governing body of the National Authority or the Central
Government, from time to time.
(2) The executive committee of the National Authority shall
meet at least once in every three months.
16. (1) The monitoring group shall—
(i) evolve independent system for concurrent
monitoring and evaluation of the works implemented in the
States and Union territories utilising the funds released by
the National Authority and State Authorities to ensure effective
and proper utilisation of funds by utilising the services of the
regional offices, of the Central Government in the Ministry
of Environment, Forest and Climate Change:
Provided that the Central Government may also
undertake third party monitoring and evaluation of the works
implemented in the States and Union territories utilising the
funds released by the National Authority and State Authorities
through individual and institutional experts;
(ii) inspect and undertake financial audit of works
executed by utilising the funds released by the National
Authority and State Authorities in the State and Union
territories;
(iii) devise measures for transparency and
accountability.
(2) The monitoring group shall meet at least once in three
months.
17. (1) The governing body of a State Authority shall—
(i) lay down the broad policy framework for the
functioning of such State Authority within the overall
Functions of
monitoring
group
Powers and
functions of
State Authority

62
framework notified by the Central Government on the
recommendations of the National Authority;
(ii) review the working of the State Authority from
time to time.
(2) The governing body of a State Authority shall meet at
least once in six months.
(3) The governing body, steering committee and executive
committee of a State Authority shall meet at such places and shall
observe such rules and procedures in regards to transaction of
business at its meeting, including the quorum thereat, as may be
prescribed.
18. The steering committee of a State Authority shall—
(i) scrutinise and approve the annual plan of operations
prepared by the executive committee of such State Authority
and send the same to the executive committee of the National
Authority for final approval;
(ii) monitor the progress of the utilisation of funds
released from the State Fund;
(iii) review reports on decision taken by executive
committee including investment decisions;
(iv) approve, subject to prior concurrence of the State
Government, proposals formulated by the executive
committee for creation of posts in the State Authority;
(v) approve annual report of the State Authority and
send the same to the State Government to lay it, each year,
in each House of the State Legislature;
(vi) ensure inter-departmental coordination.
19. (1) The executive committee of a State Authority
shall—
(i) formulate and submit annual plan of operations to
the executive committee of the National Authority after
obtaining concurrence of the steering committee of the State
Authority;
(ii) undertake qualitative and quantitative supervision,
Powers and
functions of
steering committee
of State Authority
Functions and
powers of
executive
committee of State
Authority.

63
monitoring and evaluation of the works being implemented
from amounts available in the State Fund;
(iii) invest surplus amounts available in the State Fund
under public accounts of such State;
(iv) maintain books of accounts and other records;
(v) submit reports to the steering committee of the
State Authority;
(vi) prepare annual report of the State Authority;
(vii) deploy staff on contractual basis or on deputation
to the posts in the State Authority;
(viii) formulate proposals for creation of posts in the
State Authority;
(ix) be responsible for delegation of financial or
administrative powers;
(x) be responsible for other day-to-day working in
respect of the State Authority;
(xi) maintain and update public information system on
the State Authority and present all information on its
transaction in the public domain;
(xii) undertake any other work as may be assigned by
the governing body or steering committee of the State Authority
or the State Government, from time to time.
(2) The executive committee of a State Authority shall meet
at least once in every three months.
CHAPTER V
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND ANNUAL REPORT
20. (1) The National Authority shall prepare its budget for
the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and
expenditure of the National Authority and forward the same to the
Central Government, in such form and at such time in each
financial year as may be prescribed.
(2) The National Authority, shall adopt financial regulation
and procedures, in particular the procedure for drawing up and
Budget of
National
Authority.

64
implementing the budget of the National Authority as may be
prescribed.
21. The National Authority may invest its funds, including
any reserve fund, in the securities of the Central Government and
in scheduled banks in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that the grants received from the Central Government
shall not be invested and shall be utilised for the purposes and in
the manner attached to it.
22. (1) The National Authority shall-maintain proper
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual
statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed in
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the National Authority shall be audited
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals
as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in
connection with such audit shall be payable by the National
Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor General and any other
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the
accounts of the National Authority shall have the same right and
privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with
the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall
have the right to demand the production of books, accounts,
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect
the office of the National Authority.
(4) The accounts of the National Authority as certified by
the Comptroller and Auditor-General or any other person appointed
by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon, shall
be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the National
Authority.
(5) The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall, within a
period of six months from the date of commencement of the Act,
audit the accounts of the all monies collected by the State
Governments and Union territory Administrations, which has been
placed under the ad hoc Authority and deposited in the nationalised
banks and submit the report to the Central Government under this
section.
Investment of
funds by National
Authority.
Accounts and
audit of National
Authority.

65
(6) The Central Government shall have the power to conduct
the special auditor performance audit of the National Fund and of
the National Authority through the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
23. (1) The National Authority shall prepare, its annual
report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous
financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central
Government, in such form and at such time, for each financial
year, as may be prescribed.
(2) The annual report shall, inter alia, provide for—
(i) the summary of monitoring and evaluation of
activities undertaken from amounts released from the National
Fund and State Funds during the year;
(ii) the summary of specific schemes specified in sub-
clause (iii) of clause (b) of section 5 executed during the
year;
(iii) the amount of money received and expended.
24. The Central Government shall cause the annual report
and audit report together with a memorandum of action taken on
the recommendations contained therein to be laid as soon as may
be after the reports are received before each House of Parliament.
25. (1) Each State Authority shall prepare its budget for
the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and
expenditure of the State Authority and forward the same to the
State Government, in such form and at such time, in each financial
year, as may be prescribed.
(2) Each State Authority shall adopt financial regulation and
procedures, in particular the procedure for drawing up and
implementing the budget of the State Authority as may be
prescribed.
26. State Authority may invest funds available in the State
Fund under public accounts of such State in the securities of the
Central Government and in scheduled banks in such manner as
may be prescribed:
Provided that the grants received from the State Government
shall not be invested and shall be utilised for the purpose and in
the manner prescribed.
Annual report
of National
Authority.
Annual report and
audit report
of National
Authority to be
laid before
Parliament.
Budget of State
Authority.
Investment of
funds by State
Authority.

66
27. (1) Each State Authority shall maintain proper accounts
and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of
accounts in such form as may be prescribed in consultation with
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of each State Authority shall be audited
by the Comptroller and Auditor-General at such intervals as may
be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection
with such audit shall be payable by the State Authority to the
Comptroller and Auditor-General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any other
person appointed by him in connection with the audit of the
accounts of the State Authority shall have the same right and
privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the
Comptroller and Auditor-General generally has in connection with
the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall
have the right to demand the production of books, accounts,
connected vouchers, other documents and papers and to inspect
the office of the State Authority.
(4) The Accounts of the State Authority as certified by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General or any other person appointed
by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon, shall
be forwarded annually to the State Government by the State
Authority.
(5) The Comptroller and Auditor-General shall, within a
period of six months from the date of commencement of the Act,
audit the accounts of all the monies which have been transferred
by the ad hoc Authority to the State Compensatory Afforestation
Fund Management and Planning Authorities constituted in the States
in compliance of guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009 and submit
the report to the State Government under this section.
(6) The Central Government and the State Government
concerned shall have the power to conduct the special audit or
performance audit of the State Fund and of the State Authority
through the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
28. (1) Each State Authority shall prepare its annual report,
giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial
year and forward a copy thereof to the concerned State
Accounts and
audit of State
Authority.
Annual report of
State Authority.

67
Government, in such form and at such time, for each financial
year, as may be prescribed.
(2) The annual report of a State Authority shall, inter alia,
provide for—
(i) the number and location of each reforestation,
afforestation and conservation activity subject to the
requirement of this section;
(ii) the amount and location of lands in hectares,
cleared, conserved and planted in connection with the activity;
and
(iii) the amount of afforestation money collected and
expended.
29. The State Government shall cause the annual report
and the audit report together with a memorandum of action taken
on the recommendations contained therein to be laid as soon as
may be after the reports are received before each House of the
State Legislature.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
30. (1)  The Central Government may, after previous
publication, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of
the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any ofthe
following matters, namely:—
(a) the management of the National Fund by the
National Authority under sub-section (2) of section 3;
(b) the management of State Fund by the State
Authorities under sub-section (2) of section 4;
(c) the manner of using the money for purposes
specified in clause (b) of section 6;
(d) the manner of utilising the money for purposes
specified in clause (c) of section 6;
(e) the manner of payment of the salary and allowances
payable to the officers and other employees of the State
Authority under clause (f) of section 6;
Annual report and
audit report of
State Authority to
be laid before
State Legislature.
Power to
make rules.

68
(j) the accounting procedure regulating the manner
of crediting the monies to the National Fund and State Funds
under section 7;
(g) the terms of office and other conditions of the
service of the members of the National Authority, executive
committee, monitoring group, Chief Executive Officer and
officials appointed by the National Authority, members of
State Authority, steering committee and executive committee
of each State Authority under section 12;
(h) the rules and procedures in respect of the
transaction of business of the governing body and executive
committee of the National Authority and monitoring group of
the National Authority and the place of meeting, including
the quorum under sub-section (J) of section 14;
(i) the rules and procedures in respect of the
transaction of business of the governing body, steering
committee and executive committee of a State Authority and
the place of meeting, including the quorum under sub-section
(j) of section 17;
(j) the preparation ofthe budget of the National
Authority under sub-section (1) of section 20;
(k) the financial regulation and procedures, in particular
the procedure for drawing up and implementing the budget
of the National Authority under sub-section (2) of section
20;
(l) the investment of the funds of the National
Authority under section 21;
(m) the maintenance of the accounts and other relevant
records and preparation of an annual statement of accounts
by the National Authority under sub-section (l) of section
22;
(n) the preparation of the annual report by the National
Authority under sub-section (1) of section 23;
(o) the preparation of the budget of the State Authority
under sub-section (1) of section 25;

69
(p) the financial regulation and procedures, in particular
the procedure for drawing up and implementing the budget
of the State Authorities under sub-section (2) of section 25;
(q) the investment of funds by the State Authorities
under section 26;
(r) the maintenance of the accounts and other relevant
records and preparation of annual statement of accounts by
each State Authority under sub-section (l) of section 27;
(s) the preparation of the annual report by the State
Authorities under sub-section (l) of section 28; and
(t) any other matter which is required to be, or may
be prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree
in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that
the rule should not be made, the rule shall, thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may
be; so; however, that any such modification or annulment shall be
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
31. (1) On and from the date of constitution of the National
Authority—
(i) all the assets and liabilities of the ad hoc Authority
shall stand transferred to, and vested in, the National
Authority;
Explanation.—The assets of the ad hoc Authority shall
be deemed to include all rights and powers, all properties,
whether movable or immovable, including in particular, cash
balances, deposits, and all other interests and rights in, or
arising of, such properties as may be in the possession of
the ad hoc Authority and all books of account and other
documents relating to the same, and liabilities shall include all
debts, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind;
Transfer of
assets,
liabilities etc.

70
(ii) without prejudice to the provisions of clause (l),
all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts
entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done
by, with or for the ad hoc Authority immediately before
constitution of the National Authority, for or in connection
with the purpose of the ad hoc Authority, shall be deemed
to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be done
by, with or for, the National Authority;
(iii) all sums of money due to the ad hoc Authority
immediately before constitution of the National Authority shall
be due to the National Authority;
(iv) all suits and legal proceedings instituted or which
could have been instituted by or against the ad hoc Authority
may be continued or may be instituted by or against the
National Compensatory Authority.
(2) On and from the date of constitution of a State
Authority—
(i) all the assets and liabilities of the State
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning
Authority constituted in such State in compliance of guidelines
dated the 2nd July, 2009 shall stand transferred to, and
vested in, the State Authority;
Explanation.—The assets of the State Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority
constituted in such State in compliance of guidelines dated
the 2nd July, 2009 shall be deemed to include all rights and
powers, all properties, whether movable or immovable,
including in particular, cash balances, deposits, and all other
interests and rights in, or arising of, such properties as may
be in the possession of the State Compensatory Afforestation
Fund Management and Planning Authority constituted in such
State in compliance of guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009
and all books of account and other documents relating to the
same, and liabilities shall include all debts, liabilities and
obligations of whatever kind;
(ii) without prejudice to the provisions of clause (i),
all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts

71
entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done
by, with or for the State Compensatory Afforestation Fund
Management and Planning Authority constituted in such State
in compliance of guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009 before
this Act came into force, for or in connection with the
purpose of the State Compensatory Afforestation Fund
Management and Planning Authority constituted in such State
in compliance of guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009, shall
be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to
be done by, with or for, the State Authority;
(iii) all sums of money due to the State Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority
constituted in such State in compliance of guidelines dated
the 2nd July, 2009 before constitution of the State Authority
shall be due to the State Authority;
(iv) all suits and legal proceedings instituted or which
could have been instituted by or against the State
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning
Authority constituted in such State in compliance of guidelines
dated the 2nd July, 2009 may be continued or may be instituted
by or against the State Authority.
32. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any
judgment, decree or order of any court, the amount credited to
the National Fund shall be deemed to be credited and shall always
be deemed to have been credited to the public account of India
within the meaning of articles 266 and 283 of the Constitution,
and it shall be regulated by law made by Parliament in this behalf.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment or
order of any court, all the monies collected by the State
Governments and the Union territory Administrations which has
been placed under the ad hoc Authority and deposited in the
nationalised banks and the interest accrued thereon shall stand
transferred to the National Fund.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment or
any order of any court, the amount credited to the State Fund
shall be deemed to be credited and shall always be deemed to
have been credited to the public account of the State within the
Validation.

72
meaning of articles 266: and 283 of the Constitution, and it shall
be regulated by law made by the State Legislature in this behalf.
33. (1) The Central Government may, from time to time,
by writing give such directions to the National Authority and each
State Authority, as it may think necessary.
(2) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this
Act, the Central Government may, if it finds necessary or expedient
in the public interest, issue such policy directives to the National
Authority or each State Authority, in writing, in exercise of its
powers or the performance of its functions under this Act, and
such policy directives shall be binding upon the National Authority,
or as the case may be, the State Authority.
(3) The decision of the Central Government, whether a
question is one of policy or not, shall be final.
Power of Central
Government to
issue directions

73
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
As the diversion of forest land for non-forestry purposes was causing loss to the valuable forests,
the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 was enacted to maintain a rational balance between the objectives
of conservation and development. The Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 makes provision for conservation
of forest and provide for the basic framework for regulating indiscriminate diversion or use of forest
for the developmental needs of a State. It intends to harmonize development with that of conservation
of forests and forest eco system. The compensatory afforestation envisages additional plantation activities
by utilising the money deposited by the user agency for the purpose.
2. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in its order in TN. Godavarman Thirumulpad V . Union of India
[Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995], dated 30th October, 2002, observed that a Compensatory Afforestation
Fund may be created in which all the monies received from the user agencies shall be deposited. The
Court directed that the Fund shall be utilised for plantations, protection of forests, wildlife protection and
other related activities. Presently, in compliance with the direction of the Supreme Court, all monies
collected under the scheme has been placed under an ad hoc Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management
and Planning Authority (CAMPA) and deposited in the nationalised banks.
3. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in its Judgment dated the 26th September 2005 in the aforesaid
case observed that the fund generated for protecting ecology and providing regeneration should not be
treated as a fund under article 266, article 283 or article 284 of the Constitution. Funds are therefore;
kept outside the Consolidated Fund of India or Public Account of India. In the absence of proper
institutional mechanism with adequate statutory backup amount of unspent funds has increased to more
than rupees thirty eight thousand crorers.
4. The Comptroller and Auditor General in its report on Compensatory afforestation in India (21
of 2013) observed that given the substantial amounts of funds being collected under the compensatory
afforestation, the expenditure therefrom, the overall objectives of conservation, protection, regeneration
and management of forests, conservation, protection and management of wild life and its habitats and
compensatory afforestation; the clear public purpose involved in the work relating to CAMPA, there is
need to review the existing paradigm of CAMPA. The Comptroller and Auditor General recommended
that this should be done in a way that enhances transparency, brings CAMPA within the broader focus
of both Parliament and State Legislatures and in greater public view so as to ensure the largest possible
stakeholders' participation. Towards this end it would be appropriate if the amounts lying in ad hoc
CAMPA are transferred into the Public Account. The Comptroller and Auditor General has also observed
that the receipts accruing into the ad hoc CAMPA are essentially payments being made for the acquisition
of public assets, namely, forest land for non-forest purposes by user agencies. The receipts, so arising,
in essence are non-tax revenue, as are forest receipts.
5. Accordingly, to ensure safety, security and expeditious utilisation in a transparent manner of
funds accumulated with the ad hoc CAMPA and the funds to be collected by the State Governments and
Union territory Administrations it is proposed to enact a legislation, namely, the Compensatory Afforestation
Fund Bill, 2015 to provide for the establishment of a Statutory Fund and a Management Authority at the
National level and at each State and Union territory.
73

74
6. The Bill will provide the required legal backing for setting up of required institutional mechanism
both at the Government of India and in each State and Union territory for expeditiously, and utilisation,
in a transparent manner, of amounts realised in lieu of forest land diverted for non-forest purpose.
7. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
PRAKASH JA V ADEKAR
 N
EW D ELHI;
The 3rd May, 2015.
PRESIDENT'S RECOMMENDATION UNDER ARTICLE 117 OF
THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA
[Copy of letter No. 11 -100/2015-FC dated 5 May, 2015 from Shri Prakash Javadekar,
Minister of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to
the Secretary General, Lok Sabha]
The President, having been informed of the subject matter of the Compensatory Afforestation Fund
Bill, 2015 recommends under clauses (1) and (3) of article 117 ofthe Constitution of India, the introduction
in and consideration by Lok Sabha, of the Bill.

75
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
1. Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the National Compensatory
Afforestation Fund under the public accounts of India. Sub-clause (3) of the said clause provides that
all monies collected by the State Governments and Union territory Administration, which have been
placed under the ad hoc Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (Authority)
and deposited in the nationalised banks shall be transferred to the National Compensatory Afforestation
Fund. Sub-clause (4) and sub-clause (5) of the said clause provide for the details of the receipts of
monies credited into the National Compensatory Afforestation Fund.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 4 of the Bill provides for establishment of a State Compensatory
Afforestation Fund under public account of each State. Sub-clause (3) and sub-clause (4) of the said
clause provide for the details of the receipts of monies credited into the State Compensatory Afforestation
Fund.
3. Clause 5 of the Bill provides for the details of the disbursement and utilisation of monies
available in the National Compensatory Afforestation Fund. Clause 6 of the Bill provides for the details
of the disbursement and utilisation of monies available in a State Compensatory Afforestation Fund.
4. Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 of the Bill provides for constitution of the National Authority and
sub-clause (3) thereof provides that the National Authority shall be assisted by an executive committee,
a monitoring group and administrative support mechanism. Sub-clause (5) provides for appointment of
an officer of the rank of Additional Director General of Forests as the Chief Executive Officer of the
National Authority who shall be the Member-Secretary of the Governing Body and the Executive Committee.
5. Sub-clause (4) of clause 9 provides for the appointment of a Joint Chief Executive Officer
of the rank of Inspector General of Forests, a Financial Adviser and Chief Accounts Officer of the rank
of Director in the Government of India and Deputy Chief Executive Officers of the rank of Deputy
Inspector General of Forests to assist the Executive Committee in performance of its functions and
powers for a period not exceeding five years. Sub-clause (5) of said clause provides for creation, with
prior concurrence of the Central Government, of posts in National Authority at the level of Assistant
Inspector General of Forests and other officials to assist the executive committee-and monitoring group
in performance of its functions.
6. Sub-clause (1) of clause 10 of the Bill provides for constitution of a State Authority in each
State and Union territory and sub-clause (4) thereof provides that the State Authority shall be assisted
by a steering committee and an executive committee. Sub-clause (7) provides for appointment of an
officer not below the rank of a Chief Conservator of Forests as the Chief Executive Officer of a State
Authority who shall be the Member- Secretary of the steering committee and the executive committee.
7. Sub-clause (4) of clause 11 provides for the appointment of Joint Chief Executive Officer not
below the rank of a Conservator of Forests, a Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer not below
the rank of a Deputy Secretary in the State Government and Deputy Chief Executive Officer not below
the rank of a Deputy Conservator of Forests to assist the steering committee and the executive committee
75

of a State Authority in performance of its functions for a period not exceeding five years. Sub-clause
(5) of the said clause provides for creation, with prior concurrence of the State Government, of posts
in State Authority at the level of Assistant Conservator of Forests and other officials to assist the steering
committee and executive committee in performance of its functions.
8. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, would not involve any expenditure from
Consolidated Fund of India or Consolidated Fund of any of the States. It would however, involve from
the National Fund and State Funds a recurring expenditure of approximately rupees 75 crore per annum
and a non-recurring expenditure of approximately rupees 6,000 crore per annum.

MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 empowers the Central Government to establish the National Compensatory
Afforestation Fund by notification in the official Gazette. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause empowers
the Central Government to make rules to manage the National Fund.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 4 empowers the State Government to establish the State Compensatory
Afforestation Fund for each State by notification in the official Gazette. Sub-clause (2) of the said clause
empowers the Central Government to make rules to manage the State Fund.
3. Sub-clause (b) of clause 6 empowers the Central Government to make rules for disbursement
and utilisation of net present vaiue. Sub- clause (c) of the said clause empowers the Central Government
to make rules for utilisation of the interest accrued on the fund available in State Fund and interest
accrued on all monies placed under the ad hoc Authority for conservation and development of forest and
wildlife Sub-clause (f) of the said clause empowers the Central Government to make rules to meet non-
recurring and recurring expenditure for the management of a State Authority including the salary and
allowances payable to its officers and other employees from a part of the interest accrued on the amounts
available in the State Fund.
4. Clause 7 empowers the Central Government to make rules for regulating the manner of
crediting the monies to the National Fund and State Fund.
5. Sub-clause (1) of clause 8 empowers the Central Government to constitute the National
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority by notification in the official
Gazette.
6. Sub-clause (1) of clause 10 empowers the Central Government to constitute the State
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority in each State and Union territory
by notification in the official Gazette.
7. Clause 12 empowers the Central Government to make rules for providing the terms of office
and other conditions of the service of the members of the National Authority, executive committee,
monitoring group, Chief Executive Officer and officials appointed by the National Authority, members
of State Authority, steering committee and executive committee of each State Authority.
8. Sub-clause (5) of clause 14 empowers the Central Government to make rules for the observing
such rules and procedures in regard to transaction of business of the meetings of the National Authority
including the quorum.
9. Sub-clause (i) of clause 17 empowers the Central Government to make rules for the observing
such rules and procedures in regard to transaction of business of the meetings of the State Authority
including the quorum.
10. Sub-clause (1) of clause 20 empowers the Centra! Government to make rules for preparation
of the budget for the next financial year showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the National
77

78
Authority and forwarding the same to the Central Government. Sub-cause (2) of the said clause empowers
the Central Government to make rules for financial regulation and procedures for drawing up and
implementing the budget of the National Authority.
11. Clause 21 empowers the Central Government to make rules for investments of funds by the
National Authority.
12. Sub-clause (1) of clause 22 empowers the Central Government to make rules in consultation
with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India to stipulate the form in which National Authority shall
maintain its accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts.
13. Sub-clause (1) of clause 23 empowers the Central Government to make rules for preparation
of Annual Report by the National Authority.
14. Sub-clause (1) of clause 25 empowers the Central Government to make rules for preparation
of the budget for the next financial year showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the State
Authority and forwarding the same to the State Government. Sub-cause (2) of the said clause empowers
the Central Government to make rules for financial regulation and procedures for drawing up and
implementing the budget of the State Authority.
15. Clause 26 empowers the Central Government to make rules for investments of funds available
in the State funds.
16. Sub-clause (1) of clause 27 empowers the Central Government to make rules regarding the
manner in which each State Authority shall main proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare
annual statement of accounts by in consultation with Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
17. Sub-clause (1) of clause 28 empowers the Central Government to make rules regarding the
manner in which each State Authority shall prepare its annual report giving full account of its activities
during the previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the concerned State Government.
18. Sub-clause (1) of clause 33 empowers the Central Government to give directions to the
National Authority and each state authority as it thinks necessary.
19. The rules made and the notification issued, under the proposed legislation shall be laid, as soon
as may be, after they are made, or as the case may be, issued be laid before each House of Parliament.
20. The matters in respect of which rules are to be made and notifications to be issued - are
matters of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them in the
proposed legislation itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character.

79
NOTES ON CLAUSES
Clause 1.—This clause provides for the short title, extent and commencement of the proposed
legislation.
Clause 2.—This clause p roposed to define various expressions used in the Bill.
Clause 3.—This clause seeks to provide for establishment of a non-lapsable, interest bearing
National Compensatory Afforestation Fund under public account of India. It seeks to provide that the
National Fund shall be under control of the Central Government, to be managed by the National Authority.
It further seeks to provide for transfer of funds placed under the ad hoc Compensatory Afforestation
Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) to the National Fund. It also seeks to provide for
transfer on yearly basis to the National Compensatory Afforestation Fund by each State ten percent of
amounts realised from the user agencies in respect of the forest land diverted in their favour, which have
been credited directly into the State Compensatory Afforestation Fund under public account of such
State. It also seeks to provide for crediting into the National Fund other miscellaneous amounts received
by the National Authority.
Clause 4.—This clause seeks to provide for establishment of non-lapsable, interest bearing State
Compensatory Afforestation Fund under public account of each State. It further seeks to provide that
the State Fund shall be under the control of the concerned State Government, to be managed by the State
Authority of such State. Sub-clause (3) seeks to provide for transfer of unspent balance of all monies
which has been transferred by ad hoc CAMPA to the State CAMPA constituted in such State in
compliance of the guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009. It also seeks to provide for transfer of ninety per
cent, of all the monies collected by a State, which has been placed under the ad hoc CAMPA and the
interest accrued thereon, to State Fund of such State. It also provides for crediting into the State Fund
receipt of all monies from user agencies by such State for compliance of conditions stipulated by the
Central Government while according approval under the provisions of the Forest (Conservation) Act,
1980.
Clause 5.—This clause seeks to provide for the manner of disbursement and utilisation of monies
available in the National Fund.
Clause 6.—This clause seeks to provide for the manner of disbursement, and utilisation of monies
available in a State Fund.
Clause 7.— This clause seeks to provide for the accounting procedure to regulate the manner of
crediting the monies to the National Fund and State Fund in a year.
Clause 8.—This clause seeks to provide for the constitution of a National Authority to be called the
"National Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority" consisting of a governing
body to be assisted by an executive committee, monitoring group and administrative support mechanism
for management and utilisation of the National Fund. It further seeks to provide for composition of
governing body of the National Authority. It also seeks to provide for the appointment of an officer of
79

80
the rank of an Additional Director General of Forests as the Chief Executive Officer of the National
Authority.
Clause 9.—This clause seeks to provide for the composition of the executive committee and
monitoring group of the National Authority. It further seek to provide for appointment of other officials
by the National Authority.
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to provide for the constitution, in each State and Union territory, a
State Authority to be called the "State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning
Authority" consisting of a governing body to be assisted by an executive committee, steering committee
and administrative support mechanism for management and utilisation of the State Fund. It further seeks
to provide for the composition of governing body of the State Authority. It also seeks to provide for the
appointment of an officer not below the rank of a Chief Conservator of Forests as the Chief Executive
Officer of the State Authority.
Clause 11.—This clause seeks to provide for the composition of the steering committee and
executive committee of a State Authority. It further seek to provide for the appointment of other officials
by the National Authority.
Clause 12.— This clause seeks to provide that the terms of office and other conditions of the service
of the members of the National Authority, executive committee, monitoring group, Chief Executive
Officer and officials appointed by the National Authority, members of State Authority, steering committee
and executive committee of each State Authority shall be such as may be provided by rules made by
the Central Government under the proposed legislation.
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to provide for the reasons for disqualification of a person from being
appointed as a member of the National Authority, executive committee of the National Authority, a State
Authority, steering committee and executive committee of a State Authority, and monitoring group.
Clause 14.—This clause seeks to provide for powers and functions of the governing body of the
National Authority. It further seeks to provide that the governing body of the National Authority shall meet
at least once in six months. It also seeks to provide that the governing body and executive committee
of the National Authority and the monitoring group of the National Authority shall meet at such places
and shall observe such rules and procedures in regard to transaction of business at its meeting, including
the quorum thereat, as may be provided by rules made by the Central Government under the proposed
legislation.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to provide for the powers and functions of the executive committee
of the National Authority. It further seeks to provide that the executive committee of the National
Authority shall meet at least once in every three months.
Clause 16.—This clause seeks to provide for the functioning of monitoring group. This clause
provides that monitoring group shall evolve independent system for concurrent monitoring and evaluation
of the works implemented in the States and Union territories utilising the funds released by the National

81
Authority and State Authorities to ensure effective and proper utilisation of funds by utilising the services
of the regional offices, of the Central Government in the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change. This clause also provides that the monitoring group shall inspect and undertake financial audit
of works executed by utilising the funds released by the National Authority and State Authorities in the
State and Union territories. It further provides that monitoring group shall meet at least once in three
months.
Clause 17.—This clause seeks to provide for the powers and functions of the governing body of
the State Authority. It further seeks to provide that the governing body of a State Authority shall meet
at least once in six months. It also seeks to provide that the governing body, steering committee and
executive committee of a State Authority shall meet at such places and shall observe such rules and
procedures in regards to transaction of business at its meeting, including the quorum there at, as may
be provided by rules made by the Central Government under the proposed legislation.
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to provide for the powers and functions of steering committee of
the State Authority.
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to provide for the functions and powers of the executive committee
of State Authority. It further seeks to provide that the executive committee of a State Authority shall meet
at least once in every three months.
Clause 20.—This clause seeks to provide for the preparation of budget for the next financial year,
showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the National Authority and forwarding the same to the
Central Government, in such form and at such time in each financial year as may be provided by rules
made by the Central Government under the proposed legislation. It also seeks to provide that the National
Authority shall adopt financial regulation and procedures, in particular the procedure for drawing up and
implementing the budget of the National Authority as may be provided by rules made by the Central
Government under the proposed legislation.
Clause 21.—This clause seeks to provide that the National Authority may invest its funds, including
any reserve fund, in the securities of the Central Government and in scheduled banks in such manner
as may be provided by rules made by the Central Government under the proposed legislation.
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to provide for maintenance of accounts and audit of the National
Authority. It further provides that the National Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be provided by rules made
by the Central Government under the proposed legislation in consultation with the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India. It also provides that the accounts of the National Authority shall be audited by
the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the National Authority to the
Comptroller and Auditor-General. It also seeks to provide that the Comptroller and Auditor-General shall,
within a period of six months from the date of commencement of the proposed legislation, audit the
accounts of all the monies collected by the State Governments and Union territory Administrations, which
has been placed under the ad hoc authority and submit the report to the Central Government.

82
Clause 23.—This clause seeks to provide for preparation and forwarding of a copy to the Central
Government, of the annual report of the National Authority, giving a full account of its activities during
the previous financial year.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to provide for laying of a copy of annual report and audit report of
the National Authority together with a memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained
therein before each House of Parliament.
Clause 25.—This clause seeks to provide for preparation of budget for the next financial year,
showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of a State Authority and forwarding the same to the
concerned State Government, in such form and at such time in each financial year as may be provided
by rules made by the Central-Government under the proposed legislation. It further seeks to provide that
State Authority shall adopt financial regulation and procedures, in particular the procedure for drawing
up and implementing the budget of the State Authority as may be provided by rules made by the Central
Government under the proposed legislation.
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to provide that State Authority may invest funds available in the State
Fund under public accounts of such State in the securities of the Central Government and in scheduled
banks in such manner as may be provided by rules made by the Central Government under the proposed
legislation.
Clause 27.—This clause seeks to provide for the maintenance of accounts and audit of State
Authority. It further provides that the State Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be provided by rules made
by the Central Government under the proposed legislation in consultation with the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India. It also provides that the accounts of the State Authority shall be audited by
the Comptroller and Auditor General of India at such intervals as may be specified by him and any
expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the State Authority to the
Comptroller and Auditor-General. It also seeks to provide that the Comptroller and Auditor-General shall,
within a period of six months from the date of commencement of the proposed legislation, audit the
accounts of all the monies which have been transferred by the ad hoc Authority to the State Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authorities constituted in the States in compliance of the
guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009 and submit the report to the State Government.
Clause 28.— This clause seeks to provide for the preparation and forwarding of a copy to the
concerned State Government of annual report ofthe State Authority giving a full account of its activities
during the previous financial year.
Clause 29.—This clause seeks to provide for laying a copy of the annual report and audit report
of the State Authority together with a memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained
therein before each House of the State Legislature.
Clause 30.—This clause seeks to provide for making of rules, after previous publication, by the
Central Government for carrying out the purposes of the proposed legislation. It further provides that

83
every rule made under the proposed legislation shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall, thereafter have effect
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so; however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule.
Clause 31.—This clause seeks to provide for the transfer and vesting of all the assets and liabilities
of the ad hoc Authority in the National Authority. This clause also provides for the transfer and vesting
of all the assets and liabilities of the State Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning
Authority constituted in such State in compliance of guidelines dated the 2nd July, 2009 in the State
Authority of the concerned State.
Clause 32.—This clause seeks to provide that notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment,
decree or order of any court, the amount credited to the National Fund shall be deemed to be credited
and shall always be deemed to have been credited to the public account of India with in the meaning
of articles 266 and 283 of the Constitution, and it shall be regulated by law made by Parliament in this
behalf. It further seeks to provides that notwithstanding anything contained in any judgment or order of
any court, all the monies collected by the State Governments and the Union territory Administrations
which has been placed under the ad hoc Authority and deposited in the nationalised banks and the interest
accrued thereon shall stand transferred to the National Fund. It also seeks to provide that notwithstanding
anything contained in any judgment or any order of a court, the amount credited to the State Fund shall
be deemed to be credited and shall always be deemed to have been credited to the public account of
the State within the meaning of articles 266 and 283 of the Constitution, and it shall be regulated by law
made by the State Legislature in this behalf.
Clause 33.—This clause seeks to provide for the power of the Central Government to issue
directions to the National Authority and each State Authority. It further seeks to provide that the Central
Government may, if it finds necessary or expedient in the public interest, issue such policy directives
to the National Authority or each State Authority, in writing, in exercise of its powers or the performance
of its functions under the proposed legislation, and such policy directives shall be binding upon the
National Authority, or as the case may be, the State Authority. It also seeks to provide that the decision
of the Central Government, whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be final.

84
LOK SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of funds under the public accounts of India and the public accounts
of each State and crediting thereto the monies received from the user agencies towards compensatory
afforestation, additional compensatory afforestation, penal compensatory afforestation, net present value
and all other amounts recovered from such agencies under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980; constitution
of an authority at national level and at each of the State and Union territory Administration for administration
of the funds and to utilise the monies so collected for undertaking artificial regeneration (plantations),
assisted natural regeneration, protection of forests, forest related infrastructure development, Green India
Programme, wildlife protection and other related activities and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
(Shri Prakash Javadekar, Minister of Environment, Forest and Climate Change)
GMGIPMRND—891LS—6-5-2015.
84

85
ANNEXURE-II
Memoranda received from Shri Deepankar Dutta
It may be a welcome move by the Government to establish an authority both at the National level
and at the State / UT level which will administer & monitor fund created out of monies / amounts
received from User Agencies on account of compensatory afforestation; additional compensatory
afforestation; penal compensatory afforestation; net present value & such other. Section 2 of Forest
Conservation Act, 1980 makes it mandatory that on the part of the project proponent to pay the Net
present Value along with compensatory afforestation cost and also offer equivalent & suitable lands
which are contiguous to existing forest in the event of their proposal is accepted for diversion of forest
land for non forest activity. The monies accruing to the Government on account of such diversions of
forest land is a definitely a huge sum which needs proper utilization & monitoring creation of compensatory
fund will go a long way in undertaking plantation, increasing green cover, protecting existing forests,
improving forest related infrastructure and sustaining wild life within forest area.
However, before the Committee embarks upon creation of such a fund and nominate persons who
are in - charge of administrating the fund so created, it should ensure that the fund is of adequate size
and persons managing it are committed & people of integrity. They should ensure that all amounts
accruing to the fund are fair & adequate in relation to the forest land proposed to be diverted. It should
see that the User Agency is offering suitable CA land on which forestation can be raised within the
existing framework & resources of the Department. Accepting any kind of land from the User Agency
should be avoided to the extent possible as compensatory afforestation cost deposited in the proposed
fund may not be sufficient to raise meaningful forestation. The officers who would be in charge of
maintaining & allocating the fund should be directly involved in the process of accepting suitable CA land,
preparation of CA scheme commensurate to area offered, determining NPV and development of forest
related infrastructure which is required to develop the green cover which otherwise is being diverted for
non forestal activity. Otherwise there would be a total disconnect between the authority which approves
the diversion of forest land and the authority which will restore the loss of forestation by investing into
fresh plantation & regeneration process.
Further, the compensatory fund so proposed should be utilized only for development of new forest
or protection of existing forest or for augmenting forest related infrastructure. It should not be spent
for any other activity whatsoever. No salaries or pension to any officials / ex-officials are to be paid out
of this fund and all type of expenditure incurred should be audited by an independent agency at regular
activities and can be made available for public scrutiny. Audit of the fund should not only be limited to
monetary sums spent on various heads but it should also include physical verification of ground realities,
whereby actual plantation undertaken with survival ratio or any forest protection measure initiated or any
new infrastructure created for forest purpose are also evaluated along with. If the activities undertaken
are not commensurate with amount of expenditure incurred from the fund then strictures should be
passed against erring officials and explanations from them should be called for. Any deviation from
accepted norms should be viewed strictly and suitable actions ought to be taken in such matters.
85

86
The composition of trustees managing the fund should include experts in line of plantation, wild life, bio-
diversity, climate change, sustainable ecosystems & well known forest protectors and financial analysts.
Any development of new forest should be consultative in nature, a committee under the said fund can
be constituted which shall include the local forest officials, enviromentalist of the region & representatives
from the User Agency / agencies who are making the contribution towards the fund. This will enhance
the scope of the stake holders who are managing the funds and collectively they can accomplish the
purpose i for which the fund has been created.

87
Memorandum received from S/Sh. Praveen Bhargav and Shekar Dattatri
PLANTING TREES IS NO ANTIDOTE TO FOREST LOSS
"The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill 2015, which is pending approval in Parliament,
is anchored on the flawed and unscientific premise that loss of natural forests due to development
projects can be 'compensated' by planting trees elsewhere."
While vigorously pursuing a slew of reforms to ease forest clearances, the Prime Minister and his
Environment Minister have repeatedly averred that development will not be pursued at the cost of India's
last remaining forests. Welcome as these statements are, there is cause for apprehension in the form of
the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015 (CAF Bill), which was introduced in the Lok Sabha on
8th May, 2015.
'Compensatory Afforestation' is a convenient Indian concept that has been in place since 1980.
Whenever development projects seek land inside a Reserved Forest, or a Protected Area (PA), such as
a Sanctuary or a National Park, certain levies are imposed on the project proponent. This money is to
be utilized to plant trees elsewhere, ostensibly to compensate for the loss of forest.
Over the last 10 years, a staggering corpus of 35,000 crore rupees has accrued from such levies
in a fund called Compensatory Afforestation Management Planning Authority (CAMPA). The Central
Government now wants to release 90 per cent of this money to States for carrying out afforestation
projects. On the face of it, this might seem like a progressive step. But given that the Bill is anchored
on a flawed and un-scientific premise, it is only likely to provide a 'fig leaf' for covering up the increasing
diversion of forests in the name of development.
Fragmentation, the greatest threat
When ill-planned development projects are thrust into the heart of PAs, the result is fragmentation,
ie., the breaking up of large forest blocks into smaller and more vulnerable patches. Peer reviewed
scientific research has clearly established that fragmentation is one of the most serious threats to long-
term biodiversity conservation, causing several devastating impacts; among other things, it disrupts
landscape connectivity, affecting dispersal of animals, and creates new edges that expose forests to
exploitation and severe degradation. Sadly, instead of addressing this critical issue, successive Governments
have been pursuing the flawed idea of trying to 'compensate' for forest loss and fragmentation by raising
artificial plantations elsewhere.
Here is just one example of how the compensatory afforestation approach ends up not just being
a 'greenwash', but an ecological disaster as well. From 1980 to 2005, the Kudremukh Iron Ore Company
Limited (KIOCL) strip-mined hill slopes clothed in virgin rainforests in the heart of Karnataka's Kudremukh
National Park. Besides this horrendous damage to the fragile ecosystem, over 150 million tonnes of
tailings - the waste mud left over after extraction of low grade ore - were dumped into a pristine, 100
metre deep, forested valley. To 'compensate' for this loss of natural habitats, KIOCL went on a massive
compensatory afforestation spree, planting millions of trees. The problem with this was twofold: the trees
87

88
were non-native species with zero biodiversity value; and they were planted on adjoining areas of natural
grassland, which are an extremely important component of the Bhadra River's watershed. Thus, apart
from the forested hill slopes and the valley that were destroyed by mining activities, a third natural
habitat, in the form of ecologically important grasslands, was destroyed through mindless tree planting.
To add insult to injury, governments and project proponents alike proclaim such travesties-as achievements
towards a 'Green India'.
The CAF Bill 2015, if approved in its current form, would end up repeating such colossal mistakes
all over the country. In order to provide real benefits, the Bill must be modified to allow a major
percentage of CAMPA funds to be utilised for consolidating the remaining large blocks of natural old-
growth forests. This will involve strategic land acquisitions, extinguishment of old leased lands in thickly
forested areas, voluntary resettlement of people from PAs, creation of wildlife corridors and facilitating
natural regeneration of degraded forests.
Missing the woods and the trees
Despite the investment of more than 4600 crores during the last three decades, from international
aid agencies like the World -Bank, USAID, European Economic Commission, Overseas Development
Agency and others, there is ample evidence of the extremely poor results of past afforestation efforts.
In Karnataka, where more than 1500 crore rupees have been spent on afforestation projects over the past
thirty years, data from the Forest Survey of India shows that dense and moderately dense forest cover
in the State went down by 2898 sq kms between 1997 and 2011. In Maharashtra, a recent official
evaluation of ten-year old plantations (2004-2014) in all 11 forest circles has shown that 74% of them
have failed while 13% are partially successful and only 13% successful.
Under the 12th Plan, an allocation of 2500 crores was made for the National Afforestation
Programme, but with little to show on the ground. The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
& Technology and Environment & Forests in 2015 has recorded that despite massive budgetary provisions,
40% of forests in the country are still degraded. Currently, Japan International Co-operation Agency
(JICA) has committed 15,000 crores for 22 forestry projects in 13 States. Ignoring all this, the Ministry
of Environment is pushing forward with a poorly conceived CAF Bill that will only trigger massive
corruption in the forestry sector, without providing any ecological benefits to the country.
There is further justification for a review of the CAF Bill. CAMPA is India's sovereign fund, and
is thus the only one available for consolidation of large forest blocks. None of the international aid
agencies funding afforestation projects allow for this ecologically vital activity.
Other than investments to consolidate large Reserved Forest blocks, Protected Areas, and the
creation of wildlife corridors, the other important activity that needs to be funded through CAMPA is
natural restoration or regeneration of degraded forests. The approach must be to first identify degraded
forest areas with existent root stock, and invest only on appropriate protection measures such as
trenching, fencing and fire prevention.' The degraded forests will then recover through a natural process
at a very nominal cost to the exchequer. Funding for artificial plantations should only be considered in
extremely degraded areas with no existing root stock.

89
We are at a critical moment in India's fight to achieve ecological security while ensuring economic
and social progress. If recast on the basis of sound science, the CAF Bill 2015 will form the basis of
a far-sighted, and genuinely beneficial strategy to protect India's forests. However, given the way it is
crafted presently, it will allow thirty five thousand crore rupees to be squandered away on corruption-
ridden 'afforestation' projects involving digging pits, buying polythene bags for raising saplings, and
planting trees that can never become forests.

90
Memorandaum received from Shri Shankar Gopala Krishnan
The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015, seeks to provide a statutory framework for using
the funds collected from user agencies seeking diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes for
"compensatory afforestation", "net present value" and related activities. In order to understand this Bill,
it is important to understand the legal background to this issue, which is summarised below.
Background - What Are Compensatory Afforestation and Net Present Value?
Under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, a law enacted for protection of forests, no "forest
land" can be used for any non-forest purpose without the permission of the Central government. Such
permission is referred to as "diversion" of the said forest land. Upon such diversion, the Forest
(Conservation)'Rules require that either twice the area of diverted land of'degraded forest' or the same
area of non-forest land be set aside for "compensatory afforestation" - essentially tree plantations. The
user agency is required to pay sufficient funds for such planting to the State government, which is then
required to do the planting.
In 2002, and subsequently, over a period of several years, in the course of hearing the Godavarman
case
1, the Supreme Court issued a series of orders that changed this system. In response to concerns
that compensatory afforestation was not taking place, the court ordered that:
• Henceforth, the funds for compensatory afforestation would be deposited not with the State
governments, but in a specialised central fund;
• This fund would be administered by a central body called the Compensatory Afforestation
Management and Planning Authority;
• Payments would include not only money for various categories of compensatory afforestation,
but also for the "Net Present Value" (NPV) ofthe forest being destroyed calculated as per
an arbitrary figure of Rs 5.8 - 9.6 lakhs per hectare.
The said Authority was notified by the Central government but given no statutory basis. As a result
these funds are now lying unspent, up to a total of over Rs 38,000 crores.
Problems With The Current System
There are some severe problems with the system of compensatory afforestation and net present
value payments as it is currently instituted. These have been made more acute due to the Bill contravening
the legal requirements of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of
Forest Rights Act), 2006 (FRA for short) unanimously passed by Parliament after the Supreme Court's
order of 2002-creating this special fund. The current Bill not only does not address these problems, but
will make them much worse. The problems include:
• Depriving people of their rights over forests and forest land. A forest is a source of minor
forest produce like fruits, food items, saleable tendu patta or kendu patta, fuelwood, medicinal
herbs, etc., as well as containing water bodies, grazing areas, common lands and other
1 WP 202/95, T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad and Ors. vs. Union of India and Ors.

91
areas that people depend on for their-livelihood. Even where people in fact own the so-called
"forest land" (a lot of which has never been legally notified), as the community lands in the
hill areas of Manipur, they are paid nothing for its diversion. Instead, the Forest Department
collects the money for NPV as well as for compensatory afforestation for which another
piece of community land is taken. Destruction of the forest deprives adivasis, forest dwellers
and other local communities of some or all of their livelihood or basic resources- for which
they are neither informed, nor consulted, nor compensated. Enactment of the FRA now
makes it illegal to remove forest dwellers from forest land till the process of recognition
of their forest rights has been completed. In the Niyamgiri case, the Supreme Court has
upheld the FRA's requirement that the gram sabha must decide whether their forest land
may be diverted. Despite this, forest diversion, often based on obtaining fraudulent gram
sabha resolutions, is continuing.
• Equating tree planting with compensating the loss of diverse natural forests. The system
implies that, if an equivalent area of land is planted with trees, it is somehow equivalent to
the environmental damage caused by destroying an area of natural forest. In fact a natural
forest has multiple environmental and cultural values - such as providing forest products
and ecosystem services including water, a habitat for wildlife, biodiversity, abode of deities,
etc. These cannot be recreated simply by planting trees in another location, often far away
from the site of forest destruction.
• Encouraging seizure of community and individual lands for plantation purposes. In most
cases, the non-forest land used for such plantations which has to be mutated in the name
of the forest department consists of customary community or individual lands of adivasis
and forest communities on which their rights have not been recognized. Even where so
called 'degraded forest' land is used for compensatory afforestation, the FRA requires prior
completion of the recognition of forest rights in these areas, and where the land is claimed
or recognized as community forest resources (CFRs), the gram sabha is the authority for
its management. Neither the forest department nor the state or central governments have
the right to undertake compensatory afforestation on CFRs or other common lands without
the gram sabha's consent. Even as per official records, tens of thousands of hectares of
people's land have been planted with such trees in recent years. Seizure of land for
compensatory afforestation thus leads to double displacement of communities from their
livelihood resources, the first time for diversion of forest land and the second time for
compensatory afforestation.
• Levying of monetary charges does not compensate for the resulting environmental and
livelihood damage. This approach assumes that, just by requiring companies or the
government to pay money for forest destruction, environmental damage will be contained.
This ignores the multi-faceted impacts and nature of environmental damage caused by
natural forest destruction which are closely inter linked with damaged lives, livelihoods and
cultures.

92
What is needed is a system of environmental regulation that will protect people's interests and the
forests in a democratic and transparent manner. The current Bill
does not achieve this in any sense.
Problems with the Current Bill
The Bill Threatens the Rights of Adivasis and Other Forest Dwellers
As stated above, the most fundamental flaw with the current system is that those most directly
affected by forest destruction - adivasis and forest communities - have no control whatsoever over the
process. The current Bill will make this even worse, as despite enactment of the Forest Rights Act, 2006,
it neither refers to the Act nor the rights of forest dwelling communities on forest land.
This will neither result in any reduction of forest destruction nor in any just spending of this
money. Indeed, the Supreme Court's own expert committee on Net Present Value, the Kanchan Chopra
Committee, had recommended in May 2006 that NPV should be shared as per a tripartite sharing
formula. The formula granted the majority share of NPV money to local bodies and State governments.
Plantations by the forest department have become one of the biggest threats to the lands of
adivasis and forest dwellers - especially with regard to land used for shifting cultivation and other
common lands resulting in frequent conflicts. There is no provision for the local community to have any
voice in deciding where this plantation will take place.
There is no reference whatsoever to the gram sabha or the local community institutions. The Bill
thus violates the spirit and letter of the Forest Rights Act, 2006 as well as of the Panchayats (Extension
to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (PESA for short) and will encourage further seizure of community
lands.
Further, the Bill Will Legalise an Environmentally Destructive and Ill-Thought Tree Plantation
Programme without any consideration of how the resulting changes in land use will impact local
livelihoods.
The Bill Proposes an Expensive Bureaucratic Structure Placing Effective Control over Huge Funds
in the Hands of the Forest Bureaucracy.
The proposed National Authority is to consist of a Governing Body with representation of the
Environment Minister, Secretaries of different central ministries, several forest officials and two
non-government environmentalists. There is no provision for significant involvement of the Ministry of
Tribal Affairs, the nodal Ministry for the Forest rights Act mandated to ensure recognition of customary
rights on the same forest land. The Executive Committee has only forest officials with no representation
of other ministries, along with 3 non- government forestry experts - once again without any expert on
tribal affairs or a social scientist (sec 9(2)). The Chief Executive Officer of both is to be a forest officer.
It is this Executive Committee which is to approve the annual plans of the State Authorities and to
formulate and implement 'schemes' approved by theGoverning Body under Section — 5(b)(iii). Such

93
"schemes" "include any institute, society, centre of excellence in the field of forest and wildlife, pilot
schemes, standardisation of codes and guidelines and such other related activities for the forestry and
wildlife sector". (Explanation to section 5(b)(iii)).
Thus, not only will effective decision making control overstate plans remain primarily with forest
officials but also, the Bill provides for channelizing the funds for setting up a range of undefined agencies
and activities in violation of the primary objectives for which the funds have been collected.
Further, as much as 10 percent of the national and state funds, including the interest accrued on
them, are to be allocated for the National Authority amounting to "a recurring expenditure of approximately
Rs. 75 crore per annum and a non-recurring expenditure of approximately Rs. 6,000 crore per annum"
(Sec 8 of Financial Memorandum). From this, it is evident that a considerable proportion of the funds
collected for compensatory afforestation and wildlife/biodiversity conservation will be diverted for sustaining
a top heavy bureaucracy. This must not be permitted.
The State Authorities have a confusing three tier structure of a Governing Body, a Steering
Committee and an Executive Committee with representation of different departments and non-government
nominees at each level. It is unclear how these bodies will perform, since they will be meeting only once
in three or six months. The actual implementation of plans and activities will remain with the State Forest
Departments, whose poor performance is what led to the Supreme Court creating the central fund in
the first place. There is no provision for using the funds in consultation and with the consent of the
concerned gram sabhas and other democratically elected institutions such as district councils and Gram
Panchayats from whose areas the forest lands have been diverted. This is when the Forest Rights Act
vests the authority for managing community forest resources in the right holding gram sabhas who
should rightfully be using these funds when compensatory afforestation is to take place on their supposedly
degraded forest land.
Weak Provisions for Monitoring
Both the Supreme Court's orders and the CAG's report on CAMPA indicated the need for transparency
and effective monitoring of the funds being used for the purpose for which they had been collected. The
Bill provides for the National authority having (Sec 9(3) a monitoring group consisting of "six experts
in the field of environmental, economics, wildlife, forest, remote sensing and geographical information
system and social sector and the Director General, Forest Survey of India, Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change, Government of India." Expected to meet once in 3 months, (Section 16(1))
this "this group is to evolve "an independent system for concurrent monitoring and evaluation of the
works implemented in the States and Union territories ... by utilising the services of the regional offices,
of the ...the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change" while the Central government may
also undertake third party monitoring and evaluation. Once again, the critical task of monitoring has to
actually be undertaken by the regional offices of the MoEF&CC. The same applies to the State and Union
Territory Authorities. In other words, monitoring will be done by the same agencies utilising the funds!

94
Monitoring, however, needs to be done by neutral agencies in close collaboration with community
institutions like Gram Sabha.
Little difference between the present Bill and the ad-hoc CAMPA
The present Bill does not provide for anything substantially different from the existing ad-hoc
CAMPA and permits forest departments almost total control over the huge existing and future funds.
However, it is the failure of this very arrangement which led to the Supreme Court creating the central
fund in the first place. Instead of increasing transparency and public oversight, the Bill removes judicial
scrutiny over the fund while re-legitimizing the institutional structure providing room for corruption and
financial irregularities. It also empowers MoEF&CC to utilize the funds for any other purpose it deems
fit, while totally excluding the forest dwelling communities, who lose the most when their customary
forests are diverted, from any say in the matter. This is in total violation of the Forest Rights Act and
PESA and the rights and authority vested in gram sabhas to protect, conserve and manage their community
forest resources. The decision making and control over utilization of the funds needs to be with the
communities being dispossessed. The same holds true for demarcation and regeneration of the common
lands to be taken up for compensatory afforestation. By vesting control over the funds in the powerful
forest bureaucracy, the Bill will facilitate increased injustice and rights denial at the grassroots. It will
obstruct the implementation of FRA and PESA.
More importantly, it will incentivize forest officials to promote and expedite forest diversion for
the increased funds that it will make available at their disposal.
Alternatives and Required Provisions in the Statute
There is undoubtedly a need for a statute on this issue, if only to remedy the situation created by
the Supreme Court's orders. But this Bill will not achieve this objective. Rather, the new statute should
contain the following elements:
Democratic Process for Deciding Forest Diversion
Diversion should also be the subject of a public process of decision-making in which the views
of all those affected are taken, both for deciding on whether the diversion is necessary and for deciding
on the quantum of money to be paid for that diversion. Those seeking diversion of forest land should
have to demonstrate that:
(a) A public purpose is being served by the diversion of forest land;
(b) The social and environmental impacts have been minimised or eliminated;
(c) The diversion will directly serve the interests of the general public;
(d) The project proponent has created a plan for rehabilitation and compensation for the damage
to people, and for reducing and remedying the damage to the environment that will result
from the project.

95
This should be decided through a process that includes:
• Local public hearings and discussion, along with environmental and social impact assessments
of the impact of the forest diversion, including calculation of the compensation required;
• Taking the consent of the affected local communities through their gram sabhas as now
required by MoEF&CC's own order of August 2009 for making forest diversion comply
with the FRA;
• Approval by a State level authority and by a Central authority, which must include elected
representatives along with officials and experts.
This process should decide both whether the forest clearance should be granted and how the
resulting damage can be minimised or eliminated.
Levying and Sharing of Compensatory Funds
While compensatory payments must be required for all diversion of forest land, the quantum of
money to be levied should be decided by the process mentioned above, as should the use of that money.
The money should not simply be sent to a Central fund. Rather, it should be shared in accordance with
the damage sustained, and spent as per the purposes decided by the above process.

96
Memorandum received from Sh. Kiran Srivastava
Sub: The Compensatory Afforestation Bill 2015 must be revised and recast.
Dear Sir,
At the outset, we seek condonation of delay, if any, in submitting our views. However we hope
you will take them into consideration during the deliberations of the committee to examine the CAE Bill
2015.
We, the undersigned, strongly believe that the CAF Bill 2015 in its present form will not add to
the ecological security of this country, but is far more likely to (a) result in ecological disaster, and (b)
foster massive corruption in the forestry sector. Expert views on this subject have recently appeared in
The Hindu-(Sowing the Seeds of a Disaster, July 29, 2015) and other media articles.
Here we present some well-founded reasons why the Bill must be recast on the basis of sound
science and common sense. We also show how the Compensatory Afforestation Management Planning
Authority (CAMPA) corpus can be utilized to genuinely benefit the country.
1. Flawed premise: The Bill is fundamentally flawed in that it assumes that the loss of forests or
other natural habitats as a result of development projects can be 'compensated' by simply planting trees
else-where. The truth is, forests and other natural habitats are extremely complex ecosystems that have
evolved to a state of ecological equilibrium over millions of years, with their full complement of pollinators,
seed dispersers, predators and prey. These natural habitats are the repositories of Indians extraordinarily
rich biodiversity, which is already under tremendous stress. The 'compensatory afforestation' that this
country has witnessed so far predominantly consists of raising artificial plantations of Non-native species
of trees, which have zero biodiversity value. Even where plantations of mixed species of native trees have
been raised, they do not come anywhere close to replicating the natural habitat that was destroyed.
2. Tree planting is no panacea: It is also meaningless to plant trees in lieu of diverted natural
habitats such as wetlands or grasslands, which have their own distinct ecological value. Sometimes,
over-zealous tree planting in the wrong place can badly affect a natural ecosystem. Here is just one
example of how the compensatory afforestation approach often ends up not just being a 'greenwash',
but archeological disaster as well. From 1980 to 2005, the Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Limited
(KIOCL) strip-mined hill slopes clothed in virgin rainforests in the heart of Karnataka's Kudremukh
National Park. Besides this horrendous damage to the fragile ecosystem, over 150 million tonnes of
tailings - the waste mud left over after extraction of low grade ore - were dumped into a pristine, 100
metre deep, forested valley. To 'compensate' for this loss of natural habitats, KIOCL went on a massive
compensatory afforestation spree, planting millions of trees. The problem with this was twofold: the trees
were non-native species; and they were planted on adjoining areas of natural grassland, which are an
extremely important component of the Bhadra River's watershed. Thus, apart from the forested hill
slopes and the valley that were destroyed by mining activities, a third natural habitat, in the form of
ecologically important grasslands, was destroyed through mindless tree planting. The CAF Bill 2015, if
approved in its current form, would end up repeating such colossal mistakes all over the country.
96

97
3. Nothing but a fig leaf:  'Compensatory afforestation' is nothing but a fig leaf to cover up the
diversion of natural habitats in the name of development. It is a sad irony that the money spent and the
plantations raised are then touted as 'achievements' towards a 'Green India'.
4. Abysmal record: Afforestation in general has had an abysmal record in India. Massive amounts
of money have been spent with little to show on the ground. In Maharashtra, a recent official evaluation
of ten-year old plantations in all 11 Forest Circles has shown that 74% of plantations have failed. 13%
were shown to be partially successful and only 13% were deemed successful. 12th Plan, an allocation
of 2500 crore rupees; was made for the National Afforestation Programme, but with little to show for
it. The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology and Environment & Forests in 2015
has recorded that despite massive budgetary provisions, 40% of forests in the country are still, degraded.
'Compensatory Afforestation' has had an even more dismal records write numerous instances of money
allotted for afforestation being misused for purchasing vehicles and installing air conditioners. According
to some studies, Goa used 69% of its compensatory afforestation allocation on buildings, vehicles and
computers. Similarly, Andhra Pradesh wanted to spend 43% on construction activities, Sikkim 53%,
Himachal Pradesh 53% and Tamil Nadu 67%.
5. The CAMPA corpus must not be squandered: It would be an immense tragedy if the huge
corpus of over 35,000 crore rupees that has accrued with CAMPA is frittered away on meaningless and
corruption-ridden tree planting schemes. Even setting aside the flawed premise that 'compensatory
afforestation' is based upon, analysis shows that non-forestland is virtually unavailable for afforestation.
In it's report of September 2013 on compensatory afforestation, the CAG has put forth some startling
facts. It computes that between 2006 and 2012, state environment de-partments were to get 103,382
hectares of non-forestland for afforestation from revenue departments. Instead, all they got was 28,086
hectares, out of which afforestation was carried out on "an abysmal 7,280.84 hectare constituting seven
percent of the land which ought to have been received".
6. Other funds available for afforestation: Currently, Japan International Co-operation Agency
(JICA) has committed 15,000 crore rupees for 22 forestry projects in 13 States. Other multi-lateral
agencies have committed huge sums of money for afforestation in the past and will doubtless do so in
the future. This obviates the need for CAMPA funds to be used for the same endeavour.
7. How CAMPA funds can be used to truly benefit the nation: The massive corpus accrued
under CAMPA is akin to 'blood money' collected from the destruction of forests and other natural
habitats. Squandering this fund would only add insult to injury. Instead of spending this sovereign fund
on highly leakage-prone tree planting projects, we suggest that it would be better spent in the following
way:
• Defragmentation of large forest blocks: When ill-planned development projects are thrust
into the heart of PAs, the result is fragmentation, i.e., the breaking up of large forest blocks
into smaller and more vulnerable patches. Peer reviewed scientific research has clearly
established that fragmentation is one of the most serious threats to long-term biodiversity
conservation, causing several devastating impacts; among other things, it disrupts landscape

98
connectivity, affecting dispersal of animals, and creates new edges that expose forests to
exploitation and severe degradation. The Bill must be modified to allow a major percentage
of CAMPA' funds to be utilized for defragmenting and consolidation of the remaining large
blocks of natural old-growth forests. Among other measures, this could involve (i) Strategic
land acquisitions (ii) Extinguishment of old leased lands in thickly forested areas (iii) V oluntary
resettlement of people from PAs (iv) Creation of wildlife corridors, and (v) Facilitating
natural regeneration of degraded forests. CAMPA, being our sovereign fund, is the only one
available for such ecologically vital activities, which are not allowed by international agencies
funding afforestation projects in India.
• Mitigation of the impacts of development projects in and around PAs: all development
projects within and in the vicinity of PAs will inevitably result in a multitude of negative
impacts. Some, if not all, of these impacts could be mitigated to an extent through scientifically
designed measures. For instance, where a highway running through a PA is to be widened
from a two lane one to a four lane or six lane one, it will become impossible for animals
to cross the road safely from one side of the forest to the other. Often, the NHAI claims
lack of funds for effective mitigation. CAMPA funds would be invaluable in such cases for
re-establishing habitat connectivity through the careful deployment of traffic overpasses and
wildlife underpasses at critical animal crossing points.
• Assisting natural regeneration of degraded forests on the basis of good science: the
other important activity that needs to be funded through CAMPA is natural restoration or
regeneration of degraded forests. The approach here must be to first identify degraded
forest areas with existent rootstock, and invest only on appropriate protection measures
such as trenching, fencing and fire prevention. The degraded forests will then recover
through a natural process at a very nominal cost to the exchequer. Funding for artificial
plantations should only be considered in extremely degraded areas with no existing rootstock.
We are at a critical moment in India's, fight to achieve ecological security while ensuring economic
and social progress. If the CAF Bill 2015 is recast on the basis of sound science, it can create the
foundation for a far-sighted, and genuinely beneficial strategy to protect India's forests. If not, it may
result in the squandering of thirty five thousand crore rupees on corruption-ridden 'afforestation' projects
involving digging pits, buying polythene bags for raising saplings, and planting trees that can never
become forests.
We humbly request the honourable Rajya Sabha Standing Committee to take these matters into
careful consideration while providing recommendations on the CAF Bill 2015.

99
Memorandum received from Shri A.N. Prasad, IFS (Retd.)
In response to the advertisement in Newspaper that Department related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forest is examining the above Bill and has invited
Memoranda thereon by 10th July, 2015, I hereby submit my Memoranda for kind consideration of the
Committee through Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director, Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Room No.142,1st floor,
Parliament House Annex, New Delhi.
1. The Bill is basically for Management of Money's received from user agencies under Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980. The Bill proposes replacement of the current Ad-hoc CAMPA
constituted by the Ministry under the orders of the Supreme Court into a permanent
National Authority and State Authorities. The Bill also lays down the powers and functions
of the two authorities with chapters on Finance, Accounts, Audits, and Annual Report
Chapter (V) and on Miscellaneous Chapter (VI).
2. As far as the Constitution of National and State Authorities and their Powers and Function
and management of fund is concerned, they are more or less the same as currently under
the Ad-hoc CAMPA framed in guidance and orders of the Supreme court.
3. However, the proposal of the Ministry to make this fund public fund is departure from the
Hon'ble Supreme Court order "dated 26 September, 2005 wherein it has dearly observed that
this fund should not be treated as under article 266 and article 283 of the constitution,
whereas this Bill proposes the fund to be treated as under article 266 and article 283 of the
constitution. Ministry has relied on the report of CAG on compensatory afforestation
(21 of 2013) to bring the CAMPA fund into public fund. In my view this will destroy the
very purpose of creation of this fund.
4. Given the fact that not much changes in operation and management of the fund is proposed
in this Bill, the very need of new Act is questionable. The same could be achieved either
through executive order or by making Rule under the FC Act, 1980.
5. The advantage of doing it by Rule rather than Act is that it would be easier to make changes
in future.
6. The whole process of creation and management of the CAMPA fund started in 2006 and
after delay of almost 4-5 years i.e. in 2010, State CAMPA authorities were constituted and
the flow of fund from Ad-hoc CAMPA to State CAMPA's started. Now as per the new Bill
again the same process of constitution of National Authority and State Authorities will have
to be done leading to disruption and further delay in transfer of funds and execution of
compensatory afforestation and other activities.
7. The CAMPA fund basically consists of the following components:
(i) Compensatory Afforestation
(ii) Panel Compensatory Afforestation
99

100
(iii) Catchment Area Treatment Plan
(iv) Safety Zone Regeneration
(v) Any specific Mitigation Measures including Wildlife Management
(vi) Net Present Value
The activities to be undertaken out of money received towards (i) to (v) above are site
specific activity for which a detailed scheme is always submitted by the respective State/
UTs While submitting the proposal for diversion of forest land under the Forest (Conservation)
Act, 1980 and they are to be carried out mandatorily as per the scheme. Now that the State
CAMPA Authorities are in place, better and simple process is to allow States / UTs to use
this part of the money as soon as it is deposited in their account. State and U.T.'s should
not be asked again to include them under the Annual Plan of Operation (APOs) and seek
again approvals of the State Authority and National Authority. One of the main reasons for
the slow progress of utilization of fund and execution of the activities under (i) to (v) above
is insistence by Ad-hoc CAMPA for seeking fresh approval. In fact for activities under
(i) to (v), user agency should be allowed to deposit the fund directly to the State Authority
CAMPA fund. The National Authority should only monitor the progress. In fact the Supreme
Court in its order dated 26.9.2005 ordered collection of these funds by CAMPA because
States had utilized only 83 % of the funds collected. The fact is that after creation of
Ad-hoc CAMPA this utilization has come down drastically ( otherwise 38,000 crores would
not have accumulated with CAMPA) thus defeating the very purpose. What the MOEF
could not clarify to Apex Court at that point of time is that 83 % utilization was not bad
as under CA scheme money for maintenance of plantations was also collected and the same
was to be spent over 3-5 years at least.
8. If MoEF is keen to collect entire money, they can do so but should pass on the monies for
(i) to (v) component to states immediately without insisting for the formalities of submission
and approval of APO mentioned above because they are already approved as part of the FC
Act proposal. Else there will always a delay of 2-3 years in carrying out the activities under
items (i) to (v) as is happening now.
9. The only flexible component under the CAMPA is the NPV component where the State or
the National Authorities have the liberty to use the fund for activities permissible under the
CAMPA guidelines or as proposed under Section 6(b) of the Bill. The pragmatic approach
would have been to collect this NPV component directly by the National Authority and to
use it for the activities proposed under Section 6(b) for the entire country rather than
limiting it to the States where actual diversion has taken place. The entire concept of NPV
is to compensate for the ecological damage due to deforestation. Since environment &
ecology ecology is all pervasive, not limited to State boundaries, it is not appropriate to limit
its use to that particular state only. Even the Supreme Court order dated 26.9.2005 starts

101
with the sentence " Natural resources are the assets of entire nation". As such rational use
of fund collected from such resource for the entire nation is what MoEF should consider.
Some weightage or extra funding for states / UTs were actual deforestation has taken place
can be thought of.
10. Perusal of the statement of CAMPA fund ( As on 31.3.2014) on website of MoEF, reveals
that out of total principal amount of Rs 23,901 crores with Ad-hoc CAMPA, Rs 17,919
crores (75 %) are from 9 states only (AP, Arunachal Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, HP, Jharkhand,
MP, Maharashtra, Odisha and Uttarakhand. It means as per current proposal, 75 % money
will go to these 9 states only. Forest States constituting Mega biodiversity hotspots like
Assam, Gujrat, Karnataka, Kerala, TN, WB and NE States other than Ar. Pradesh are going
share rest of the 25 % along with rest ofthe states.
11. One of the main reasons for the country's forest loss or degradation has been lack of
adequate investment in our forests. Since independence not more than 1% of the plan outlay
has been allocated to forestry sector. Collection of NPV is an opportunity where this gap
can be bridged and easily the entire requirement of country's forestry sector can be met
out of this fund.
12. Moreover, the NPV should not be perceived as revenue generation instrument but as an
instrument to discourage the User Agencies from demanding excess or luxurious use of
forest land.
13. The better approach would be to mainstream CAMPA fund management into the main
structure of the Ministry's forestry wing. Since Central Government can not use it for any
other purpose than for what it has been collected and the fund is to be kept outside the
consolidated fund of India, MoEF may consider creation of Forestry Commission on the
lines of British Forestry Commission or Forestry Board on the lines of Swedish Forestry
Board or Railway Board of India under the Chairmanship of DGF & SS with three clear
wings namely Forest, Wildlife and CAMPA. Rest of the structure as proposed in the Bill or
as it exists under Ad-Hoc CAMPA like Governing Body and Executive Body etc. can
continue. This will provide flexibility to manage the fund could have been accordingly
proposed.
14. As such the I am opposed to the Bill in present form and prays to the Hon'ble Committee
to either modify or return to MoEF for reconsideration.

102
Memorandum recd. from Shri Praveen More, All India Forum of
Forest Movements (AIFFM)
The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015, seeks to provide a statutory framework for using
the funds collected from user agencies seeking diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes for
"compensatory afforestation", "net present value" and related activities. In order to understand this Bill,
it is important to understand the legal background to this issue, which is summarised below.
Background- What Are Compensatory Afforestation and Net Present Value?
Under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, a law enacted for protection of forests, no "forest
land" can be used for any non-forest purpose without the permission of the Central government. Such
permission is referred to as "diversion" of the said forest land. Upon such diversion, the Forest
(Conservation) Rules require that either twice the area of diverted land of 'degraded forest' or the same
area of non-forest land be set aside for. "compensatory af forestation" — essentially tree plantations. The
user agency is required to pay sufficient funds for such planting to the State government, which is then
required to do the planting.
In 2002 and subsequently, over a period of several years, in the course of hearing the Godavarman
case
1, the Supreme Court issued a series of orders that changed this system. In response to concerns
that compensatory afforestation was not taking place, the court ordered that:
• Henceforth, the funds for compensatory afforestation would be deposited not with the State
governments, but in a specialised central fund;
• This fund would be administered by a central body called the Compensatory Afforestation
Management and Planning Authority;
• Payments would include not only money for various categories of compensatory afforestation,
but also for the "Net Present Value" of the forest being destroyed - calculated as per an
arbitrary figure of Rs 5.8 - 9.6 lakhs per hectare.
The said Authority was notified by the Central government but given no statutory basis. As a result
these funds are now lying unspent, up to a total of over Rs 38,000 crores.
Problems with the Current System
There are some severe problems with the system of compensatory afforestation and net present
value payments as it is currently instituted. These have been made more acute due to the Bill contravening
the legal requirements of the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of
Forest Rights Act), 2006 (FRA for short) unanimously passed by Parliament after the Supreme Court's
order of 2002 creating this special fund. The current Bill not only does not address these problems, but
will make them much worse. The problems include:
• Depriving people of their rights over forests and forest land. A forest is a source of
minor forest produce like fruits, food items, saleable tendu patta or kendu patta, fuelwood,
102
1 WP 202/95, T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad and Ors. vs. Union of India and Ors.

103
medicinal herbs, etc., as well as containing water bodies, grazing areas, common lands and
other areas that people depend on for their livelihood. Even where people in fact own the
so-called "forest land" (a lot of which has never been legally notified), as in community
lands in the hill areas of Manipur, they are paid, nothing for its diversion.  Destruction of
the forest deprives adivasis, forest dwellers and other local communities of some or all of
their livelihood or basic resources– for which they are neither informed, nor consulted, nor
compensated. Enactment of the FRA now makes it illegal to remove forest dwellers from
forest land till the process of recognition of their forest rights has been completed. In the
Niyamgiri case, the Supreme Court has upheld the FRA's requirement that the gram sabha
must decide whether their forest land may be diverted. Despite this, forest diversion, often
based on obtaining fraudulent gram sabha resolutions, is continuing.
• Equating tree planting with compensating the loss of diverse natural forests, The system
implies that, if an equivalent area of land is planted with trees, it is somehow equivalent to
the environmental damage caused by destroying an area of natural forest. In fact a natural
forest has multiple environmental and cultural values - such as providing forest products
and ecosystem services including water, a habitat for wildlife,, biodiversity, abode of deities,
etc. These cannot be recreated simply by planting trees in another location, often faraway
from the site of forest destruction.
• Encouraging financial malpractices: The present Bill, in its preamble part, cites absence
of institutional mechanism as a reason for huge unspent funds in ad hoc CAMPA and hence
tries to make a case for the current Bill. However, this does not stand scrutiny. The 2013
CAG (Comptroller Auditor General, India) report on Compensatory Afforestation and CAMPA
rightly pointed out that even in cases where state forest departments had money for
plantation, not much could be shown on the ground as activities really undertaken. Instead,
CAMPA funds have been used for highly questionable manner. Recent reports in Times of
India and Economic Times
2. citing a monitoring report prepared by Maharasthra State
Forest Department, and other sources reiterate that most of the compensatory plantations
shown on paper do not exist and funds earmarked for compensatory afforestation are being
arbitrarily spent on other activities. Independent studies conducted by civil society organizations
in 2013-14, also bear this out.
• Encouraging seizure of community and individual lands for plantation purposes. In most
cases, non-forest land used for such plantations consists of customary community or
individual lands of adivasis and forest communities on which their rights have not been
recognized, and over which forest department has administrative or legal control.
2 http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/nagpur/Forest-officials-spend-crores-on-plantation-with-nothing-to-show-for it/
articleshow/47239889.cms, see also: http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2015-03-24/news/60439177_1_campa-
guidelines-forest-land-campa-funds

104
Even where so called 'degraded forest' land is used for compensatory afforestation, the FRA
requires prior completion of the recognition of forest rights in these areas, and where the
land is claimed/pereceived as community forest resources (CFRs) by Gram Sabha, according
to the provisions of the FRA the gram sabha is the proper legal authority for its management.
Neither the forest department nor the State or Central Government have the right to
undertake compensatory afforestation on CFRs or other common lands without the gram
sabha's consent. Seizure of land for compensatory afforestation thus leads to double
displacement of communities from their livelihood resources, the first time for diversion of
forest land and the second time for compensatory afforestation.
• Levying of monetary charges does not compensate for the resulting environmental
and livelihood damage. This approach assumes that, just by requiring companies or the
government to pay money for forest destruction, environmental damage will be contained.
This ignores the multi-faceted impacts and nature of environmental damage caused by
natural forest destruction which are closely inter linked with damaged lives and livelihoods.
What is needed is a system of environmental regulation that will protect people's interests
and the forests in a democratic and transparent manner. The current Bill
does not achieve this in any sense.
Problems with the Current Bill
Definitions
(d) "compensatory afforestation" means afforestation done in lieu of the diversion of forest land
for non-forestry use under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980;
It needs to be mentioned that the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 does not provide for such
afforestation, this provision came much later, in the subsequent rules and elaborated upon partly as a
result of judicial interventions.
(e) "environmental services" means—
(i) provision of goods such as wood, non-timber forest products, fuel, fodder, water and
provision of services such as grazing, tourism, wildlife protection and life support;
(ii) regulating services such as climate regulation, disease control, flood moderation, detoxification,
carbon sequestration and health of soil, air and water regimes;
(iii) non-material benefits obtained from ecosystems, spiritual, recreational, aesthetic, inspirational,
educational and symbolic;
(iv) supporting such other services necessary for the production of ecosystem services,
biodiversity, nutrient cycling and primary production;
The spectrum of widely diverse tangible things naturally found within forest ecosystems, in
conjunction with an assortment of concepts and ideas about their intangible functions, have been termed

105
as 'environmental services', a term which should not be used in any law, because it does not agree to
precise definition. There is, at present, no scientific and universally accepted definition of what constitutes
such 'services' or whether a forest ecosystem can be thus defined in terms of separate, compartmentalized
and precisely identifiable services. A forest is an ecological continuum and whole, whose so-called
'services' distinguish the natural system, but cannot be rationally alienated from it as 'services'.
(f) "net present value" means the "quantification of the environmental services" provided for the
forest area diverted for non-forestry uses, as may be determined by an expert committee appointed by
the Central Government from time to time in this regard;
"Net present value" is yet another questionable term that cannot have any place in the law. The
entire issue of valuation of forests is highly controversial and no established models exist which
take into account the myriad tangible and intangible values of a forest ecosystem, most of which
are non-commercial, economic or financial in any definable way. The definition of environmental
services as provided in the Bill also includes "non-material benefits obtained from ecosystems,
spiritual, recreational, aesthetic, inspirational, educational and symbolic". How can these be valued
in economic terms and by whom, and based on which criteria will these be determined? Or will
the calculation of net present value exclude such 'non-material' benefits?
II. 3(5) There shall also be credited to the National Fund—
(a) grants-in-aid received, if any, by the National Authority;
(b) any loan taken or any borrowings made by the National Authority;
(c) any other sums received by the National Authority by way of benefaction, gift or
donations.
Why should a fund created primarily by a judicial intervention for a specific purpose be free to
receive 'grants-in-aid' and other funds by way of 'benefaction, gift or donations'? Is it a legal authority
under the management of Central government, or a charitable trust set up by benevolent citizens for
philanthropic reasons? The objective of the fund be restricted to performing the functions for which the
funds have been collected.
4. (3)
There shall be credited into the State Fund established under public accounts of a State—
(i) the unspent balance of all monies which has been transferred by ad hoc Authority to the
State Compensatory Afforestation Compensatory Afforestation Funds Management and
Planning Authority constituted in such State in compliance of guidelines dated the 2nd July,
2009;
(ii) all monies transferable from the National Fund under clause (a) of section 5;
(iii) receipt of all monies from user agencies by such State towards compensatory afforestation,

106
additional compensatory afforestation, penal compensatory afforestation, net present value,
catchment area treatment plan or any money for compliance of conditions stipulated by the
Central Government while according approval under the provisions of the Forest (Conservation)
Act, 1980; and
(iv) the funds recoverable from user agencies by such State in cases where forest land diverted
falls within the protected areas, that is, areas notified under sections 18, 26A or 35 of the
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 for undertaking activities relating to the protection of
biodiversity and wildlife.
In effect, the above provides for transfer of most of the money currently being held in ad-Hoc
CAMPA fund (38 thousand Crores and more) to the state CAMPA authorities. In addition, the State
authorities will be free to collect money from other sources, such as grants-in-aid, benefaction, gift or
donation. Once again, the same questions arise —why should an agency constituted for carrying out a
specific task (which, in this case, is to utilize funds collected for a specific purpose) need to collect
additional money for discharging its duties?
(4) A State Government may also credit to the State Fund constituted by it—
(i) grants-in-aid received, if any, by the State Authority constituted in such State;
(ii) any loan taken or any borrowings made by the State Authority constituted in such State;
(iii) any other sums received by the State Authority constituted in such State by way of
benefaction, gift or donations.
5. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the monies available in the National Fund shall be disbursed
and utilised in the following manner, namely:—
(a) ninety per cent of the all monies collected by a State, which has been placed under the
ad hoc Authority and the interest accrued thereon, shall be transferred to the State Fund
established in such state under sub-section (1) of section 4;
(b) the balance ten per cent, of all monies collected by the States and Union territory
Administrations, which has been placed under the ad hoc Authority and the interest accrued
thereon, and all fresh accrual to the National Fund, as provided in sub-section (4) of section
3, and the interest accrued thereon, shall be utilised for meeting—
(i) the non-recurring and recurring expenditure for the management of the National
Authority including the salary and allowances payable to its officers and other employees;
(ii) the expenditure incurred on monitoring and evaluation of works executed by the
National Authority and each State Authority;
(iii) the expenditure incurred on specific schemes approved by governing body of the
National Authority.

107
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "scheme" includes any institute, society,
centre of excellence in the field of forest and wildlife, pilot schemes, standardisation of
codes and guidelines and such other related activities for the forestry and wildlife sector.
Section 5(b)(iii) above validates channelizing CAMPA funds to setting up a range of undefined
agencies and vague activities in violation of the primary objectives for which the funds have
been collected.
6. Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the monies available in a State Fund shall be disbursed and
utilised in the following manner, namely:—
(a) the money received for compensatory afforestation, additional compensatory afforestation,
penal compensatory afforestation, catchment area treatment plan and for any other site
specific scheme may be used as per site-specific schemes submitted by the State along with
the approved proposals for diversion of forest land under the Forest (Conservation) Act,
1980;
(b) the money received towards net present value and penal net present value shall be used for
artificial regeneration (plantation), assisted natural regeneration, forest management, forest
protection, infrastructure development, wildlife protection and management, supply of wood
and other forest produce saving devices and other allied activities in the manner as may be
prescribed;
(d) all monies realised from the user agencies in accordance with the decision taken by the
Standing Committee of the National Board for Wild Life constituted under section 5A of the
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 or the orders of the Supreme Court involving cases of
diversion of forest land in protected areas shall form the corpus and the income therefrom
shall be used exclusively for undertaking protection and conservation activities in protected
areas of the States and the Union territory Administrations and in exceptional circumstance,
a part of the corpus may also be used subject to prior approval of the National Authority;
Instead of defining what precise activities will be eligible under the law, broad ranges of 'activity
categories' have been proposed: "forest management, forest protection, infrastructure development, wildlife
protection and management, supply of wood and other forest produce saving devices and other allied
activities in the manner as may be prescribed". None of these activities are activities per se, or have been
defined as such. Instead, each one of these can be interpreted as a bundle of separate activities as may
be 'prescribed'. Such prescriptions would come from the state CAMPA authorities, consisting mainly of
forest officers.
Read together, through the above provisions, the Bill proposes an expensive bureaucratic structure
placing effective control in the hands of the forest bureaucracy:
1. The proposed National Authority is to consist of a Governing Body with representation of
the Environment Minister, Secretaries of different central ministries, several forest officials

108
and two non-government environmentalists. There is no provision for significant involvement
of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs, the nodal Ministry for the Forest rights Act. The Executive
Committee has only forest officials with no representation of other ministries, along with
3 non-government forestry experts - once again without any expert on tribal affairs or a
social scientist (sec 9(2)). The Chief Executive Officer of both is to be a forest officer. It
is this Executive Committee which is to approve the annual plans of the State Authorities
and to formulate and implement 'schemes' approved by the Governing Body under Section
5(b)(iii). Such "schemes" "include any institute, society, centre of excellence in the field of
forest and wildlife, pilot schemes, standardisation of codes and guidelines and such other
related activities for the forestry and wildlife sector". (Explanation to section 5(b)(iii)).
Thus, not only will effective decision making control over state plans remain primarily with forest
officials but also, the Bill provides for channelizing the funds for setting up a range of undefined agencies
and activities in violation of the primary objectives for which the funds have been collected.
2. Further, as much as 10 percent of the national and state funds including the interest accrued
on them, are to be allocated for the National Authority amounting to "a recurring expenditure
of approximately Rs. 75 crore per annum and a non-recurring expenditure of approximately
Rs. 6,000 crore per annum''  (Sec 8 of Financial Memorandum). From this, it is evident that
considerable proportion of the funds collected for compensatory afforestation and wildlife/
biodiversity conservation will be diverted for sustaining a top heavy bureaucracy. This must
not be permitted.
3. The State Authorities have a confusing three tier structure of a Governing Body, a Steering
Committee and an Executive Committee with representation of different departments and
non-government nominees at each level. It is unclear how these bodies will perform, since
they will be meeting only once in three or six months. The actual implementation of plans
and activities will remain with the State Forest Departments, whose poor performance is
what led to the Supreme Court creating the central fund in the first place. There is no
provision for using the funds in consultation and with the consent of concerned gram
sabhas and other democratically elected institutions such as district councils and Gram
Panchayats from whose areas the forest lands have been diverted. In fact, the Forest Rights
Act vests the authority for managing community forest resources in the right holding gram
sabhas who should rightfully be using these funds when compensatory afforestation is to
take place on their supposedly degraded forest land.
4. Weak Provisions for Monitoring
v. 28(2) The annual report of a State Authority shall, inter alia, provide for—
(i) the number and location of each reforestation, afforestation and conservation activity
subject to the requirement of this section;

109
(ii) the amount and location of lands in hectares, cleared, conserved and planted in
connection with the activity; and
(iii) the amount of afforestation money collected and expended.
Both the Supreme Court's order and the CAG's report on CAMPA indicated the need for transparency
and effective monitoring of the funds being used for the purpose for which they had been collected. The
Bill provides for the National authority having (Sec 9(3) a monitoring group consisting of "six experts
in the field of environment, economis, wildlife, forest, remote sensing and geographical information
system and social sector and the Director General, Forest Survey of India, Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change, Government of India." Expected to meet once in 3 months, (Section 16(1))
this group is to evolve "an independent system for concurrent monitoring and evaluation of the works
implemented in the States and Union territories ...by utilising the services of the regional offices, of the
...the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change"  while the Central government may also
undertake third party monitoring and evaluation. Once again, the critical task of monitoring has to actually
be undertaken by the regional offices of the MoEF&CC. The same applies to the State and Union
Territory Authorities. In other words, monitoring will be done by the same agencies utilising the funds!
Given the dismal experience of compensatory afforestation throughout India, and concerns over
gross financial irregularities-raised by various official agencies from time to time, there is no point in
assigning the state bodies a monitoring role—there will obviously be a conflict of interest. Monitoring
of actual plantations raised with funds from CAMPA must be done by neutral agencies in close collaboration
with community institutions like Gram Sabha.
General Observations
The Bill Threatens the Rights of Adivasis and Other Forest Dwellers
As stated above, the most fundamental flaw with the current system is that those most directly
affected by forest destruction - adivasis and forest communities - have no control whatsoever over the
process. The current Bill will make this even worse, as despite enactment of the Forest Rights Act, 2006,
it neither refers to the Act nor the rights of forest dwelling communities (redundant)
This will neither result in any reduction of forest destruction nor in any just spending of this
money. Indeed, the Supreme Court's own expert committee on Net Present Value, the Kanchan Chopra
Committee, had recommended in May 2006 that NPV should be shared as per a tripartite sharing
formula. The formula granted the majority share of NPV money to local bodies and State governments.
Plantations by the forest department have become one of the biggest threats to the lands of
adivasis and forest dwellers - especially with regard to land used for shifting cultivation and other
common lands resulting in frequent conflicts. There is no provision for the local community to have any
voice in deciding where this plantation will take place.
There is no reference whatsoever to the gram sabha or the local community institutions. The Bill
thus violates the spirit and letter of the Forest Rights Act, 2006 as well as of the Panchayats (Extension
to Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996 (PESA for short) and will encourage further seizure of community lands.

110
Further, the Bill Will Legalise an Environmentally Destructive and Ill-Thought Tree Plantation Programme
without any consideration of how the resulting changes in land use will impact local livelihoods.
Little difference between the present Bill and the ad hoc CAMPA
The STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS appended to the bill repeatedly mentions the
CAG's observations about Compensatory afforestation and ad-hoc CAMPA, claiming that the present bill
has been framed keeping them in mind :
The Comptroller and Auditor General in its report on Compensatory afforestation in India (21 of
2013) observed that given the substantial amounts of funds being collected under the compensatory
afforestation, the expenditure there from, the overall objectives of conservation, protection, regeneration
and management of forests, conservation, protection and management of wild life and its habitats and
compensatory afforestation; the clear public purpose involved in the work relating to CAMPA, "there is
need, to review the existing paradigm of CAMPA ". "The Comptroller and Auditor General recommended
that this should be done in a way that enhances transparency, brings CAMP A within the broader focus
of both Parliament and State Legislatures and in greater public view so as to ensure the largest possible
stakeholders' participation. italis added)
The present bill apparently is not creating anything substantially different from ad-Hoc CAMPA,
other than providing that state forest departments will have almost total control over the huge fund
already lying with the ad hoc CAMPA, and the new money that will be deposited. However, it is the
failure of this very arrangement which had led to the Supreme Court creating the ad hoc CAMPA in the
first place. Instead of making the exercise more transparent and increasing public oversight, the bill
essentially takes the fund and its disbursement away from judicial scrutiny and re-legitimizes the same
institutional structure which provides room for more corruption and financial irregularities. It also
empowers the state forest departments and Ministry of Environment, forests and Climate Change to
utilize the funds for any other purpose they deem fit, while totally excluding the forest dwelling communities
who lose the most when their customary forests are diverted from any say in the matter. This is in total
violation of the Forest Rights Act and PESA and the rights and authority vested in gram sabhas to protect,
conserve and manage their community forest resources. The decision making control over utilization of
the Funds needs to be in the hands of those communities who are being dispossessed, and through their
direct agencies. The same holds true for demarcation and regeneration of the common lands to be taken
up for compensatory afforestation. By vesting control over the funds in the powerful forest bureaucracy
the Bill will facilitate a scenario of yet more injustice and rights denial at the grassroots. It will obstruct
the implementation of FRA and PESA.
More importantly, the state forest officers will see this as a direct incentive to promote and
expedite forest diversion—the red tape and jurisdictional ambiguities over ad-Hoc Campa funds have
hindered large-scale tinkering with the funds so far. In the present scenario, the CAMPA bill will
smoothen forest officials' unimpeded access to those funds without adequate safegaurds.

111
The Bill stands on legally as well as scientifically questionable premises, excludes most of the stakeholders
whose concurrence in both forest diversion and raising new plantations have now been mandated by law
(FRA and PESA), and allows for a top-down bureaucratic practice.
The Bill, in its present form, must be scrapped.
Alternatives and Required Provisions in the Statute
There is undoubtedly a need for a statute on this issue, if only to remedy the situation created by
the Supreme Court's orders. But this Bill will not achieve this objective. Rather, the new statute should
consider the following elements and the drafting of the bill must be informed by those
• The Re-drafting of the Bill must be preceded by a review by an impartial and transparently
constituted team of environmental experts and representatives of civil society groups to look
into the CA process so far, including a thorough ground-level fact-finding exercise to
determine how CA is being executed in the areas where deforestation (forest diversion)
events are taking place: in particular, the review should look into the question of land for
CA, and present as well as potential impacts on communities, and specific instances of
violation of laws and denial of justice as well as issues of non-compliance and alleged
corrupt practices.
• A complete overhaul of the Forest Clearance mechanism is called for before such a statute
comes into being or even considered : instead of facilitating fast-track clearance of
development projects that cause deforestation and displace forest communities, it should re
really an environmental instrument: each proposed case of forest diversion, beyond those
specifically recommended by Gram Sabhas under relevant provisions of FRA should be
looked into separately, and judged only by its potential environmental impacts at micro-level
as well as the larger ecological landscape level. Gram Sabha consent for all kinds of forest
diversion projects are already legally mandatory and the new FC mechanism should incorporate
this by making necessary changes in the FC(Rules) itself. The Rules should be changed in
consonance with the relevant provisions of FRA and PESA, the GO issued by MoEF in
august 2009, and the verdict of the Supreme Course in the Niyamagiri-Vedanta case in April
2013, all of which reiterate the primacy of Gram Sabhas in decision making.
• The manifestly failed process of Compensatory Afforestation must be generally done away
with. Because these plantations, instead of ensuring environmental compliance, only facilitate
and escalate deforestation, allow a wide margin for corrupt practices, and finally encroach
upon people's lands and forests, the Forest Clearance mechanism should not generally have
this provision at all.
• In exceptional cases, and only if the concerned communities give prior informed consent,
the plantation part of CA should be handed over to affected communities: who should
identify suitable land, species and cost for such plantations independent of interference by
forest department or user agency. For this purpose, degraded forest land as well as plantation

112
areas with commercial monoculture (eucalyptus, teak, pine varieties) can be used. Under
no circumstances, community-held Jhum/podu areas with 40 percent canopy density (and
below), can be used for Compensatory Afforestation.
• In case a community gives its consent to a particular case of forest diversion, its control,
access and use of forests must figure prominently in determining the mitigation exercise,
irrespective of whether such control, access and usage have been officially recorded by
forest department. Section 5 of FRA provides for community control and access of all kinds
of forests, and Section 3 and 4 of the same act stipulate that rights of governance control,
access and usage have already vested in forest communities.
• The money in CAMPA fund must be spent in an equitable, democratic and transparent
manner. The communities who had been displaced or in any affected by cases of approved
deforestation must be given first charge of this money for community development works
including development of various sustainable forest-based livelihood programmes inc: the
fund can be routed through local panchayats or autonomous councils(where such councils
exist) to the concerned gram sabhas/community-level institutions. It must be ensured that
CAMPA funds are no longer used for grabbing community land under the pretext of CA,
and/or shifting villagers from wild life conservation areas in violation of FRA and Wild Life
Protection Act.

113
Memorandum received from Shri A.K. Verma, Retired PCCF, Karnataka
COMMENTS ON PROPOSED COMPENSA TORY FORESTATION BILL 2015
Realising critical role of Forests in sustainable development Millennium Development Goal adopted
in 2000 to reduce extreme poverty with series of steps by 2015, has been replaced by Sustainable
Development Goal in UNCSD 2012 (Rio+20). Thus while in MDG only goal no.7 addressed environment
and forest's role in poverty alleviation, the present shift has given good opportunity to properly and fully
recognise role of forests in achieving above objectives especially their socio economic contribution.
In any initiative for SFM people are as important as trees and all benefit from forests to locals
must be assessed, surveyed and documented after collection of relevant data with the help of organisations
that do this job. Forest Policy must focus explicitly on forests' role in providing food, energy and shelter
and recognisation of the value of the forest' service such as erosion protection and pollination is essential
to sound decision making.
Besides this, Sustainable Forest Management must include more efficient production to meet rising
and changing demands including the informal sector. Providing people with access to forest resources
and markets particularly at local levels is a powerful way to enhance socio economic benefits. Capacity
building should be the focus area to make real progress in socio-economic benefits from Forests.
Accordingly four Global Objectives on Forests that have been identified include reversing loss of
forest cover through SFM, enhance forest based social, economic and environmental benefit, increase
significantly the area of sustainable managed forests and enhance the official development assistance for
sustainable forest management.
All these issues must find a place in the proposed Bill.
And to ensure that forests are being managed in a sustainable way, concept of forest certification
too needs to be brought in preeminently in the proposed Bill.
Forest Certification is an independent and voluntary market driven tool to ascertain whether forests
produce are coming from forests that apply the principles of Sustainable Forest Management or not. This
is a worldwide movement and about 8% of world's forests are certified.
India has entered the field rather late and some initiatives have been taken recently, both at
Government level and at consumer/industry and other stakeholders' level by seeking partnership with well
known and reputed organisations like WWF, ITTO etc.
However setting internationally accepted standards and institutionalising forest certification system
is not only time consuming exercise but also requires lot of funding, which unfortunately is not being
looked at fay funding agencies including Governments primarily due to lack of vision and policy in this
regard.
The proposed fund bill is therefore a very good opportunity to address this issue and should
support fully above initiative which would go a long way in taking our forests towards sustainable
management aspect.
113

114
The Compensatory Forestation Bill inter alia provides for setting up institutes, society, centre for
excellence in the field of wildlife and forest, pilot schemes, standardization of codes and guidelines and
such other related activities for forestry and wildlife. This proposed arrangement is compatible to the
objectives stated above to ensure collaborative and streamlined efforts towards developing a credible
forest certification in India which should be compatible to the National Statues and legal framework of
the Country. (refer section 5(iii) of the bill-page5).
It is hoped that the Bill would incorporate all the above concerns which are vital to our forests
and wild life.

115
Memorandum received from Shri Kumar Anirvan and others
At the outset, we seek condonation of delay, if any, in submitting our views. However we hope:
you will take them info consideration during the deliberations of the committee, to examine the CAF Bill,
2015.
We, the undersigned, strongly believe that the CAF Bill 2015 in its present form will not able to
the ecological security of this country, but is far more likely to (a) result in ecological disaster, and (b)
foster massive corruption in the forestry sector. Expert views on this subject have recently appeared in
The Hindu (Sowing the Seeds of a Disaster, July 29, 2015) and other media articles.
Here we present some well-founded reasons why the Bill must be recast on the basis of sound
science and commonsense. We also show how the Compensatory Afforestation Management Planning
Authority (CAMPA) corpus can be utilized to genuinely benefit the country.
1. Flawed premise: The Bill is fundamentally flawed in that it assumes that the loss of forests
or other natural habitats as a result of development projects can be 'compensated' by simply
planting trees elsewhere. The truth is, forests and other natural habitats are extremely
complex ecosystems that have evolved to a state of ecological equilibrium over millions of
years, with their full complement of pollinators, seed dispersers, predators and prey. These
natural habitats are the repositories of India's extraordinarily rich biodiversity, which is
already under tremendous stress. The 'compensatory afforestation' that this country has
witnessed so far predominantly consists of raising artificial plantations of non-native species
of trees, which have zero biodiversity value. Even where plantations of mixed species of
native trees have been raised, they do not come anywhere close to replicating the natural
habitat that was destroyed.
2. Tree planting is no panacea: It is also meaningless to plant trees in lieu of diverted natural
habitats such as wetlands or grasslands, which have their own distinct ecological value.
Sometimes, over-zealous tree planting in the wrong place can badly affect a natural ecosystem.
Here is just one example of how the compensatory afforestation approach often ends, up
not just being a 'greenwash', but an ecological disaster as well. From 1980 to 2005, the
Kudremukh Iron Ore Company Limited (KIOCL) strip-mined hill slopes clothed in virgin
rainforests in the heart of Karnatakas Kudremukh National Park. Besides this horrendous
damage to the fragile ecosystem, over 150 million tonnes of tailings - the waste mud left
over after extraction of low grade ore - were dumped into a pristine, 100 metre deep,
forested valley. To 'compensate' for this loss of natural habitats, KIOCL went on a massive
compensatory afforestation spree, planting millions of trees. The problem with this was
twofold: the trees were non-native species; and they were planted on adjoining areas of
natural grassland, which are an extremely important component of the Bhadra River's
Watershed. Thus, apart from the forested hill slopes and the valley that were destroyed by
mining activities, a third natural habitat, in the form of ecologically important grasslands,
115

116
was destroyed through mindless tree planting. The CAF Bill 2015, if approved in its current
form, would end up repeating such colossal mistakes all over the country.
3. Nothing but a fig leaf: 'Compensatory afforestation' is nothing but a fig leaf to cover up
the diversion of natural habitats in the name of development. It is a sad irony that the money
spent and the plantations raised are then touted as 'achievements' towards a 'Green India'.
4. Abysmal record: Afforestation in general has had an abysmal record in India. Massive
amounts of money have been spent with little to show on the ground. In Maharashtra, a
recent official evaluation of ten-year old plantations in all 11 Forest Circles has shown that
74% of plantations have failed. 13% were shown to be partially successful and only 13%
were deemed successful. Under the 12th Plan, an allocation of 2500 crore rupees was made
for the National Afforestation Programme, but with little to show for it. The Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science & Technology and Environment & Forests in 2015 has
recorded that despite massive budgetary provisions, 40% of forests in the country are still
degraded. 'Compensatory Afforestation' has had an even more dismal record, with numerous
instances of money allotted for afforestation being misused for purchasing vehicles and
installing air conditioners. According to some studies, Goa used 69% of its compensatory
afforestation allocation on buildings, vehicles and computers. Similarly, Andhra Pradesh
wanted to spend 43% on construction activities, Sikkim 53%, Himachal Pradesh 53% and
Tamil Nadu 67%.
5. The CAMPA corpus must not be squandered: It would be an immense tragedy if the huge
corpus of over 35,000 crore rupees that has accrued with CAMPA is frittered away on
meaningless and corruption-ridden tree planting schemes. Even setting aside the flawed
premise that 'compensatory afforestation' is based upon, analysis shows that non-forestland
is virtually unavailable for afforestation. In it's report of September 2013 on compensatory
afforestation, the CAG has put forth some startling facts. It computes that between 2006
and 2012, state environment departments were to get 103,382 hectares of non-forestland
for afforestation from revenue departments. Instead, all they got was 28,086 hectares, out
of which afforestation was carried out on "an abysmal 7,280.84 hectare constituting seven
percent of the land which ought to have been received".
6. Other funds available for afforestation: Currently, Japan International Co-operation Agency
(JICA) has committed 15,000 crore rupees for 22 forestry projects in 13 States. Other
multi-lateral agencies have committed huge sums of money for afforestation in the past and
will doubtless do so in the future. This obviates the need for CAMPA funds to be used for
the same endeavour.
7. How CAMPA funds can be used to truly benefit the nation: The massive corpus
accrued under CAMPA is akin to 'blood money' collected from, the destruction offorests

117
and other natural habitats. Squandering this fund would only add insult to injury. Instead
of spending this sovereign fund on highly leakage-prone tree planting projects, we suggest
that it would be better spent in the following way:
• Defragmentation of large forest blocks: When ill-planned development projects are
thrust into the heart of PAs, the result is fragmentation, i.e., the breaking up of large
forest blocks into smaller and more vulnerable patches. Peer reviewed scientific
research has clearly established that fragmentation is one of the most serious threats
to long-term biodiversity conservation, causing several devastating impacts; among
other things, it disrupts landscape connectivity, affecting dispersal of animals, and
creates new edges that expose forests to exploitation and severe degradation. The Bill
must be modified to allow a major percentage of CAMPA funds to be utilized for
defragmenting and consolidation of the remaining large blocks of natural old-growth
forests. Among other measures, this could involve (i) Strategic land acquisitions (ii)
Extinguishment of old leased lands in thickly forested areas (iii) Voluntary resettlement
of people from PAs (iv) Creation of wildlife corridors, and (v) Facilitating natural
regeneration of degraded forests. CAMPA, being our sovereign fund, is the only one
available for such ecologically vital activities, which are not allowed by international
agencies funding afforestation projects in India.
• Mitigation of the impacts of development projects in and around PAs: all
development projects within and in the vicinity of PAs will inevitably result in a
multitude of negative impacts. Some, if not all, of these impacts could be mitigated
to an extent through scientifically designed measures. For instance, where a highway
running through a PA is to be widened from a two lane one to a four lane or six lane
one, it will become impossible for animals to cross the road safely from one side of
the forest to the other. Often, the NHAI claims lack of funds for effective mitigation.
CAMPA funds would be invaluable in such cases for re-establishing habitat connectivity
through the careful deployment of traffic overpasses and wildlife underpasses at
critical animal crossing points.
• Assisting natural regeneration of degraded forests on the basis of good science:
the other important activity that needs to be funded through CAMPA is natural
restoration or regeneration of degraded forests. The approach here must be to first
identify degraded forest areas with existent rootstock, and invest only on appropriate
protection measures such as trenching, fencing and fire prevention. The degraded
forests will then recover through a natural process at a very nominal cost to the
exchequer. Funding for artificial plantations should only be considered in extremely
degraded areas with no existing rootstock.

118
We are at a critical moment in India's fight to achieve ecological security while ensuring economic
and social progress. If the CAF Bill 2015 is recast on the basis of sound science, it can create the
foundation for a far-sighted, and genuinely beneficial strategy to protect India's forests. If not, it may
result in the squandering of thirty five thousand crore rupees on corruption-ridden 'afforestation' projects
involving digging pits, buying polythene bags for raising saplings, and planting trees that can never
become forests.
We humbly request the honourable Rajya Sabha Standing Committee to take these matters into
careful consideration while providing recommendations on the CAF Bill 2015.

119
Memoranda Received from Shri O.P. Kasana
In India, forest meet the livelihood needs of people living in and adjoining the forests in about
1,73,000 villages. Forests also act as carbon sinks and regulators of water regime. Many development
and industrial projects such as erection of dams, mining, power and construction of industries or roads
require diversion of forest land. The Hon'ble Supreme Court on 10th July 2009 issued orders that there
will be a Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) as National
Advisory Council under the chairmanship of the Union. Minister of Environment & Forests for monitoring,
technical assistance and evaluation of compensatory afforestation activities. The amount accrued so far
is more than Rs. 38,000 crores of rupees which directly reflects the loss of livelihood of innumerable
number of peoples living around that area and also loss of carbon sinks and water regime for that area
and other areas too. In view of the above, I am offering following comments on CAMPA amendment
bill, 2015 -
1. The amount is charged from the developers for loss of forest area and its resources and
to further make a compensatory afforestation in lieu of loss of forest land which is
deposited with the Union Govt under CAMPA.
2. After the amount is deposited by the developer and the Forest Clearance (FC) is granted
to him, as decided by the Union Govt, under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 in short
FCA, 1980, the developer is made free and no liability remains on the developer to compensate
the loss before commissioning the project for which the forest land has been taken away.
3. The loss of forests in the last 35 years is horrifying as compared to growth of forest area
in the country. This loss is contributed by the Govt and the project developers in the name
of development and also functioning as catalyst for climate change which this nation's
people are facing in the form of poverty, diseases, malnutrition etc etc.
4. If we introspect our past contribution done in the name of Social forestry (started in 1976),
National Afforestation and Eco-development Board activities and plantation to be done by
the project developers under CSR and other mandatory/obligatory, activities then there
would not be an inch of land available for any purpose in this poor country except forests
every where. This is one of the remarkable contribution so far done by the Forest
Departments of the each and every states of the union and the Ministry of Environment and
Forests in regard to development Rejuvenation of forests programme.
5. This fact can be better explained by looking on the facts and data given in the State of
Forests Reports (SFR), being prepared by Forest Survey of India, Dehradun, in which the
Tree Outside Forests (TOF), the trees population standing on agricultural land etc. and not
on the forest land, is included in the total forest cover to show increase in forest area of
the country. This the miracle of Forest Administration in the country.
6. The amount under CAMPA is yet to released by the Union Govt to the implementing
agencies i.e. the states of union. The credibility of states in implementing such programme
119

120
can be compared by giving one example - the Ganga and other rivers cleaning programme
implemented by the respective states in the last 30 years or so. Therefore, the fate of this
programme will certainly be the more or less same. And this would not only the loss of
the exchequer but also the loss of livelihood of people who were living around that forest
area which had been taken away for the projects and loss of carbon sinks to mitigate the
climate change effects on this vast population and other life saving resources of the nation.
7. In my opinion, the-industrial development policy should be changed first then this amount
be released to the requiring agencies. For example, the setting up of industries i.e. the
setting up location for the industries should be decided by the Union Govt in consultation
with State Govts and not by the project developers. The Govt has to take all precautionary
measures of the industrial area well in advance keeping in mind the quantum of industrial
pollution, waste generation, loss of natural resources i.e forests etc in mind. The industrial
estate should be well prepared prior to setting of industries. This CAMPA amount may be
better used in developing such industrial areas/ estates rather than distributing this amount
to the State of the Union for doing afforestation programme etc or Green India mission
programme when the credibility of the states of this union have been proved mostly as
failure on such duties and that loss becomes irreversible by the passing of time, leaving no
space for improvement at that stage rather than to accept the destiny.

121
Memorandum received from Shri S. Rama Krishnan, Conservation India
At the outset, we seek condonation of delay, if any, in submitting our views. However we hope
you will take them into consideration during the deliberations of the committee to examine the CAP Bill
2015.
We, the undersigned, strongly believe that the CAF Bill 2015 in its present form will not add to
the ecological security of this country, but is far more likely to (a) result in many ecological disasters,
and (b) foster massive corruption in the forestry sector. Expert views on this subject have recently
appeared in The Hindu (Sowing the Seeds of a Disaster, July 29, 2015) and other media articles.
Here we present some well-founded reasons why the Bill must be recast on the basis of sound
science and commonsense. We also show how the CAMPA corpus can be utilized to genuinely benefit
the country.
1. Flawed premise: The Bill is fundamentally flawed in that it assumes that the loss of forests
or other natural habitats as a result of development projects can be 'compensated' by simply
planting trees elsewhere. The truth-is, forests and other natural habitats are extremely
complex ecosystems that have evolved to a state of ecological equilibrium over millions of
years, with their full complement of pollinators, seed dispersers, predators and prey. These
natural habitats are the repositories of India's extraordinarily rich biodiversity, which is
already under tremendous stress. The 'compensatory afforestation' that this country has
witnessed so far predominantly consists of raising artificial plantations of non-native species
of trees, which have zero biodiversity value. Even where plantations of mixed species of
native trees have been raised, they do not come anywhere close to replicating the natural
habitat that was destroyed.
2. Tree planting is no panacea: It is also meaningless to plant trees in lieu of diverted natural
habitats such as wetlands or grasslands, which have their own distinct ecological value.
Sometimes, overzealous tree badly affect a natural ecosystem. Here is just one example of
how the compensatory afforestation approach often ends up not just being a 'greenwash',
but an ecological disaster as well. From 1980 to 2005, the Kudremukh Iron Ore Company
Limited (KIOCL) strip-mined hill slopes clothed in virgin rainforests in the heart of Karnataka's
Kudremukh National Park. Besides this horrendous damage to the fragile ecosystem, over
150 million tonnes of tailings - the waste mud left over after extraction of low grade ore
- were dumped into a pristine, 100 metre deep, forested valley. To 'compensate' for this loss
of natural habitats, KIOCL went on a massive compensatory afforestation spree, planting
millions of trees. The problem with this was twofold: the trees were non-native species; and
they were planted on adjoining areas of natural grassland, which are an extremely important
component of the Bhadra River's watershed. Thus, apart from the forested hill slopes and
the valley that were destroyed by mining activities, a third: natural habitat, in the form of
ecologically important grasslands, was destroyed through mindless tree planting. The CAF
121

122
Bill 2015, if approved in its current form, would end up repeating such colossal mistakes
all over the country.
3. Nothing but a fig leaf: 'Compensatory afforestation' is nothing but a fig leaf to cover up
the diversion of natural habitats in the name of development. It is a sad irony that the money
spent and the plantations raised are then touted as 'achievements' towards a 'Green India'.
4. Abysmal record: Afforestation in general has had an abysmal record in India. Massive
amounts of money have been spent with little to show on the ground. In Maharashtra, a
recent official evaluation of ten-year old plantations in all 11 Forest Circles has shown that
74% of plantations have failed. 13% were shown to be partially successful and only 13%
were deemed successful. Under the 12th Plan, an allocation of 2500 crore rupees was made
for the National Afforestation Programme, but with little to show for it. The Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science & Technology and Environment & Forests in 2015 has
recorded that despite massive budgetary provisions, 40% of forests in the country are still
degraded. 'Compensatory Afforestation' has had an even more dismal record, with numerous
instances of money allotted for afforestation being misused for purchasing vehicles for
Forest Officials and installing air conditioners in their offices. According to some studies,
Goa used 69% of its compensatory afforestation allocation on buildings, vehicles and
computers. Similarly, Andhra Pradesh wanted to spend 43% on construction activities,
Sikkim 53%, Himachal Pradesh 53% and Tamil Nadu 67%.
5. The CAMPA corpus must not be squandered: It would be an immense tragedy if the huge
corpus of over 35,000 crore rupees that has accrued with CAMPA is frittered away on
meaningless and corruption-ridden tree planting schemes. Even setting aside the flawed
premise that 'compensatory afforestation' is based upon, analysis shows that non-forestland
is virtually unavailable for afforestation. In its report of September 2013 on compensatory
afforestation, the CAG has put forth some startling facts. It computes that between 2006
and 2012, state environment departments were to get 103,382 hectares of non-forestland
for afforestation from revenue departments. Instead, all they got was 28,086 hectares, out
of which afforestation was carried out on "an abysmal 7,280.84 hectare constituting seven
percent of the land which ought to have been received".
6. Other funds available for afforestation: Currently, Japan International Co-operation Agency
(JICA) has committed 15,000 crore rupees for 22 forestry projects in 13 States. Other
multi-lateral agencies have committed huge sums of money for afforestation in the past and
will doubtless do so in the future. This obviates the need for CAMPA funds to be used for
the same endeavour.
7. How CAMPA funds can be used to truly benefit the nation: The massive corpus
accrued under CAMPA is akin to 'blood money' collected from the destruction of forests
and other natural habitats. Squandering this fund would only add insult to injury. Instead

123
of spending this Sovereign Fund on highly leakage-prone tree planting projects, we suggest
that it would be better spent in the following way:
• Defragmentation of large forest blocks: When ill-planned development projects are
thrust into the heart of PAs, the result is fragmentation, i.e., the breaking up of large
forest blocks into smaller and more vulnerable patches. Peer reviewed scientific
research has clearly established that fragmentation is one of the most serious threats
to long-term biodiversity conservation, causing several devastating impacts; among
other things, it disrupts landscape connectivity, affecting dispersal of animals, and
creates new edges that expose forests to exploitation and severe degradation. The Bill
must be modified to allow a major percentage of CAMPA funds to be utilized for
defragmenting and consolidation of the remaining large blocks of natural old-growth
forests. Among others, this could involve (i) Strategic land acquisitions (ii)
Extinguishment of old leased lands in thickly forested areas (iii) Voluntary resettlement
of people from PAs (iv) Creation of wildlife corridors, and (v) Facilitating natural
regeneration of degraded forests. CAMPA, being our sovereign fund, is the only one
available for such ecologically vital activities, which are not allowed by international
agencies funding afforestation projects in India.
• Mitigation of the impacts of development projects in and around PAs: All
development projects within and in the vicinity of PAs will inevitably result in a
multitude of negative impacts. Some, if not all, of these impacts could be mitigated
to an extent through scientifically designed measures. For instance, where a highway
running through a PA is to be widened from a two lane one to a four lane or six lane
one, it will become impossible for animals to cross the road safely from one side of
the forest to the other. Often, the NHAI claims lack of funds for effective mitigation.
CAMPA funds would be invaluable in such cases for re-establishing habitat connectivity
through the; careful deployment of traffic overpasses and wildlife underpasses at
critical animal crossing points.
• Assisting natural regeneration of degraded forests on the basis of good science:
the other important activity that needs to be funded through CAMPA is natural
restoration or regeneration of degraded forests. The approach here must be to first
identify degraded forest areas with existent rootstock, and invest only on appropriate
protection measures such as trendiing, fencing and fire prevention. The degraded
forests will then recover through a natural process at a very nominal cost to the
exchequer. Funding for artificial plantations should only be considered in extremely
degraded areas with no existing rootstock.
We are at a critical moment in India's fight to achieve ecological security while ensuring economic
and social progress. If the CAF Bill 2015 is recast on the basis of sound science, it can create the

124
foundation for a far-sighted, and genuinely beneficial strategy to protect India's forests. If not, it may
result in the squandering of thirty five thousand crore rupees on corruption-ridden 'afforestation' projects
involving digging pits, buying polythene bags for raising saplings, and planting trees that can never
become forests.
We humbly request the honourable Rajya Sabha Standing Committee to take these matters into
careful consideration while providing recommendations on the CAF Bill 2015.

125
Memorandum received from Shri A.K. Srivastava, IFS (Retd.)
This is to inform that the Network for Certification and Conservation of Forests (NCCF) is a not,
for profit organisation registered under the Societies Registration Act 1860, on 5th January 2015, with
the objective of ensuring Collaborative and streamlined efforts towards developing a credible forest
certification in India which should be compatible to the national statues and legal framework of the
Country. We have a balanced multi-stakeholder participation from diverse and prestigious backgrounds,
including but not limited to trade and business organizations, Institutes, Private Organizations, Workers
and traders, People in their individual capacities such as retired Senior professional Foresters, NGOs and
many more. The Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change (MoEFCC) has also nominated
two senior officers to the Governing Body of NGCF in their ex officio, capacity.
As a Society registered for promotion of, sustainable forest management and credit self forest
certification in India, we are extremely happy to note the provisions and institutional arrangements made
under Compensatory Afforestation Bill, 2015 to promote sustainable forest - management compensatory
afforestation, wildlife management, managing human-wildlife conflicts, development of infrastructure of
forest and wildlife departments etc. We are also happy to note that the bill inter alia provides for setting
up institutes, society, centre for excellence in the field of wildlife and forest, pilot schemes, standardization
of codes and guidelines and such other related activities for forestry and wildlife (section 5(iii) of the,
bill-page5). This proposed arrangement is compatible to the objectives of NCCF to ensure collaborative
and streamlined efforts towards developing a credible forest certification in India.
With a forest and tree cover of 24.01% of the geographical area of the country, the forest in India
comprise of diverse forest types and protected areas designated as National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries.
The forest meet the livelihood-needs of about 275 million people living in and adjoining, the forests in
about 1,73,000 villages. Forests also act as carbon sinks and regulators of water regime. Sustainable
management of forest is a huge challenge and requires adequate funding and institutional arrangements
for assisted natural regeneration, compensatory afforestation and wildlife management activities.
Central Govt. while according approval under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 for diversion
of forest land for non-forest uses viz. construction of dams, roads, transmission lines, canals, railway
lines, setting up industries and for mining activities etc., stipulates condition that the State/UT Government
shall create and maintain compensatory afforestation (CA) over non-forest land equal in extent to the area
of forest land diverted or degraded forest land double in extent to the area of diverted forest land, from
funds realised from the concerned user agencies. In the matter of I.A. No. 566, Hon'ble Supreme Court
vide their order dated 29th-30th October 2012 directed, that a Compensatory Afforestation Fund shall
be created in which all the monies received from the user-agencies towards compensatory afforestation,
additional compensatory afforestration, penal compensatory afforestation, net present value etc. will be
deposited. The Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) vide Notification dated 23.04.2004 constituted
CAMPA- as an authority in accordance with Section 3 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. Taking
note that CAMPA had not become operational, the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide their order dated 5th May
2006 directed for constitution of an ad-hoc body comprising of Director General of Forests and Special
125

126
Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests as Chairman, Inspectors-General of Forests (FC), a
representative of the Comptroller and Auditor General and a nomineeof the Chairman of the CEC, as
members and directed to ensure that all the monies received on behalf of CAMPA and which were lying
with the various officials of the State Government are transferred to the bank account(s) to be operated
by this body;
We are aware that pursuant to the above orders of Supreme Court, the ad-hoc CAMPA opened
State- wise accounts for deposit of compensatory levies from the States/ UTs. State CAMP guidelines
were formulated and in consideration of the submission of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, the
State/ UT Governments and report of the CEC, the Supreme Court, vide their order dated 10.07.2009,
permitted for notification of the guidelines and the structure of the State CAMPA and release of about
Rs.1000 crore per year, for the next 5 years, in proportion of 10% of the principal amount pertaining
to the respective State/UT. The Supreme Court also directed that:
i. An amount upto 5% of the amount released to the State CAMPA may also be released and
utilized by the National CAMPA Advisory Council, for monitoring and evaluation and for the
implementation of the various schemes as given in para 19 of the Guidelines of the State
CAMPA.
ii. The recommendations for the release of the additional funds, if any, will be made in due
course from time to time after seeing the-progress made by the State Level CAMPA and
the effectiveness of the accounting, monitoring and evaluation systems.
iii. The State Accountant General shall carry out the audit of the expenditure done out of State
CAMPA funds every year on annual basis.
iv. The State Level Executive Committee shall evolve and appropriate and effective accounting
process for maintenance of accounts, returns and for audit
v. The interest received by the State CAMPA on the amounts placed at their disposal by the
Ad hoc CAMPA may be used by it for administrative expenditure.
vi. Till an alternative system is put in place (after obtaining permission from this Court) the
money towards CA, NPV and Protected Areas (National Parks, Wildlife Sanctuaries) shall
continue to be deposited in the Ad hoc CAMPA and its release will continue to be made as
per the existing orders of this Court.
vii. While carrying out the work of utilizing these funds the broad guidelines adopted by the
NREGA may be followed and as far as possible work may be allotted mostly to rural
unemployed people, maintaining the minimum wages level.
We are also aware that then Hon'ble Minister for Environment & Forests vide his letter dated
15.07.2009 sent a copy of the State CAMPA Guidelines to the Chief Ministers/ Administrators of : all
State/ UT Governments with the request to take appropriate follow up action. Allocation of funds to the
State CAMPAs began in the year 2009-10. Funds limited to about Rs. 1,000 crore in a year as said down

127
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India were released to State CAMPA, after careful examination of the
Annual Plan of Operations (APOs) duly approved by the State CAMPA Steering Authority, All state
specific activities for CA, CAT plan, Wildlife Conservation Plan and development of forest infrastructure
for front line staff etc. are undertaken by the State CAMPAs as per the APOs duly approved by the
National CAMPA.
We have noted with concern that huge funds of the order of about Rs.38,000 Crores have accrued
to the accounts of Ad hoc CAMPA on account of the funds realised by the state governments on account
of Compensatory Afforestation, additional compensatory Afforestation, penal compensatory Afforestation,
net present value of the forest, costs of catchment area treatment and wildlife management plan etc.
Though there is considerable progress towards compensatory Afforestation, the accumulated funds could
not be sufficiently used for the purpose for which it was collected owing to various constraints like
limitation of the infrastructure of forest departments, lack of adequate mechanisms for monitoring and
evaluation of the CAMPA activities and limit of fund release prescribed by Honourable Supreme Court.
Also, we note with concern that huge extent of non forest land on which compensatory Afforestation
has been taken up, has not been mutated as reserve/protected forest land.
We welcome the provisions of the Compensatory Afforestation Bill 2015, for establishment of
funds under the Public Accounts of India and the Public accounts of each States and crediting thereto
the monies received from the user agencies towards compensatory afforestation, additional compensatory
afforestation, penal compensatory afforestation, net present value and all other amounts recovered from
such agencies under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980; constitution of an authority at national level
and at each of the State and Union territory administration for administration of the funds and to utilise
the monies so collected for undertaking artificial regeneration (plantations), assisted natural regeneration,
protection of forests, forest related infrastructure development, Green India Programme, wildlife protection
and other related activities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
We also hope that setting up of State CAMPAs will facilitate early devolution of funds to the states
for undertaking various activities for which funds have been collected. It is expected that National
CAMPA and State CAMPAs will develop appropriate mechanism for effective monitoring and evaluation
of CAMPA activities. The compensatory Afforestation and implementation of Green India Mission as a
major component of National Action Plan on Climate Change will accelerate the process of carbon
sequestration through appropriate mitigation and adaptation arrangements.
As already stated, the bill provides for setting up institutes, society, centre for excellence in the
field of wildlife and forest, pilot schemes, standardization of codes and guidelines etc. The Network for
Certification and Conservation of Forests (NCCF) would like to actively supplement the efforts of the
Central Government (Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change) and the State Governments
(Forest Departments) in the area of sustainable forest certification system in India. It is expected that
National CAMPA and State CAMPAs will support institutions like NCCF for development of National
Standards and in undertaking monitoring and evaluation of CAMPA activities.
In view of the above, we strongly support the Compensatory Afforestation Bill 2015 and expect
that the same will be enacted expeditiously in the National Interest.

128
Memorandum received from Dr. U.M. Farooqui, IFS (Retd.)
"The Compensatory Afforestation Bill, 2015" is indeed a revolutionary one, particularly Section
which envisages the expenditure incurred on "Specific Schemes'' which includes any institute, society,
centre for excellence in the field of forest and wildlife, pilot schemes, standardization of the codes and
guidelines and such other related activities for the forestry and wildlife sector.
Though, "Specific Schemes" has got wide scope and would cover many activities, but what I feel
is there should be special mention of Forest Certification to encourage forest produce from certified and
sustainably managed forests and to get an international market for their products.
Sir, I would like to point out here that the Process of Forest certification in India has not come
up as expected. This is mainly due to the fact the though expenditure need for certification is very
meager, it is not available in any budget head: Even the certified forest areas such as that of Bhamragarh
Division is unable to continue due to lack of funds. If such provision is made under section 5(iii) of the
proposed bill, this will ensure forest certification process in a large way. Besides, the ownership of Minor
Forest Produce in FRA area lies with tribal, as it may not-he possible for the tribal to go, for certification
on their own, hand holding is needed. This can be done by encouraging institutions to carry out
certification work in tribal area by making provision in the said bill. This will ensure sustainably managed
forest in future and also ensure higher returns for their product. Therefore, it is suggested that in the
Explanatory note of Section 5(iii) of the said proposed bill-
"Institutions working for Forest Certification and/or amount required for Forest Certification" to
be added. This will give a boost to the process of certification and ensure a market for the products
abroad.
128

129
Memorandum received from Shri Ravi Singh, WWF India, New Delhi
The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015 (CAF, 2015)
Given that since the initiation of the CAMPA fund in 2004 based on the diversion of forests in Rajaji
National Park, funds have still not been utilised for the designated purpose, WWF India welcomes the
CAF Bill, 2015 which will help operationalise and institutionalise the CAMPA. fund. We would like to
impress that certain components of the CAF Bill 2015 need to be strengthened for which specific
section-wise comments are offered below.
Preamble
• We propose inserting paragraph 12 in the Preamble to read as,  "And whereas
the fund will be treated as a special fund and is not meant to replace, the
annual National or State budgets allocated for forests and wildlife."
The above to be inserted in continuation of Paragraph 11, "And whereas
absence of permanent institutional mechanism for utilization of funds
collected by the State governments and Union Territory administrations is
the main reason for accumulation of a huge unspent funds in the ad hoc
authority;"
Disbursement and utilisation of the National Fund Chapter II Section 5 (b)
• A provision of 10% of the funds for the central body may be excessive,
given that the major decision making rests with the States. The Central
agency could limit itself to laying down guidelines and verifying that they
are met The Central agency could thus emerge as a lean and efficient
National Authority with the States empowered and accountable for
implementation.
• We propose that "The balance ten percent of the monies collected by the
States and Union territory administration to meet 5 (b) (i) (ii) (iii)" should
be revised to "the interest accrued on the fund".
• In context of the above, the Monitoring and Evaluation of the work
undertaken by each State Authority should be carried out at the State level
with oversight by the Centre.
Disbursement and utilization of the State Fund Chapter II, Section 6
• The bill drafts under clause 6(b) that "the money received under the State
fund shall be used for artificial regeneration (plantation), assisted natural
regeneration, forest management, forest protection, infrastructure development,
wildlife protection and management, supply of wood and oilier forest produce
saving devices and other allied activities in the manner as may be
prescribed;" The terms infrastructure development, supply of wood and
129
Treat as a
Special Fund
Efficient
Fund
Utilisation
Clarifying
and
Enhancing
the scope
|of Fund
Utilisation

130
other forest produce saving devices and other allied activities are not clearly
defined and open to interpretation and therefore needs clear explanation,
otherwise there is serious danger of the funds misuse.
• To ensure that the funds can also support wildlife conservation and
maintenance of critical wildlife habitats and populations, the Clause 6(b)
detailing the utilization of the money received through net Present Value be
expanded to include "...establishing habitat connectivity between Protected
Areas and Forests and for management of human-wildlife conflicts".
• Clause 6(d) be expanded in purview to include, "....the income therefrom
shall be used exclusively for undertaking protection and conservation activities
with focus on the more vulnerable and endangered species within and
outside protected areas of the States and Union Territories administrations
and in exceptional circumstance a part of the corpus may also be used
subject to prior approval of the National Authority".  In this context please
also note that frontline protection staff has vacancies due to budgetary
reasons, reportedly 40 percent all India and substantially higher numbers in
Tiger Reserves. We appreciate the clause 6(g) on trans-boundary reparation
within States.
• Consider introducing a detailed schedule in the bill as incorporating therein
the constituent elements of forest regeneration. Putting the science into the
law will be a safeguard to the possible abuse of the law, for example,
prioritizing the use of funds for activities leading to natural regeneration
followed by assisted natural regeneration and then artificial regeneration to
the extent possible. Similarly, planting trees non-native to the region could
create ecological edges endangering floral and faunal diversity and should
be discouraged. We strongly recommend that, any afforestation should be
based around planting local/indigenous species only.
• In the same schedule include that all monies realized from the user agencies
should be utilized for building capacities of various State agencies involved
in implementation of CAF.
Governing Bodies and Executive Committees of the National and State Authorities
Chapter III, Section 8 to 11
• The constitution of the Governing Body of the National Authority should be
expanded to include at least five experts (environmentalists or conservationists,
scientists, social scientists and economists) from outside the Government,
whereas the Bill as it stands now provides for only two members saying
that 'two environmentalists or conservationists or scientists or economists or
Include Science
in Law and
Capacity
Building
Enhancing
Representation
and Inclusively

131
social scientists appointed by the Central Government for a period of two
years subject to not more titan two consecutive terms — Members'. This
clause may accordingly be revisited.
• The composition of the Governing Council and Steering Committee of the
proposed State Authority also needs to be broad based to include members
from the civil society organisations such that the role is expanded to policy
formulation and planning and not just an implementation function. This
needs to be revisited in the bill.
Accounts and Audit of National Authority Chapter V , Section 22, 27, 28 & 29
• We note the positive provisions for accounts and audit of National and State
authorities under chapter 5 of the Bill. The provision for furnishing the full
account of activities under the Bill through the annual report of the State
authority and that is to be laid before the State legislature is also commendable.
• Further, we suggest that the Bill may provide for greater transparency and
accountability by placing in the public domain (website) the number and
location of each reforestation, afforestation and conservation activity within
a stipulated timeframe by the National authority.
Transparency
and
Accountability

132
Memorandum received from Dr. Shaju Thomas, Tropical Institute of
Ecological Sciences, Velloor
I appreciate Govt. of India for its concern on the deteriorating forest resources of our country
and strategies for addressing the issue, in a broader perspective. It is also heartening to note that the
Govt. is following the directions given' by the highest court in our country in this regard.
I congratulate the Committee chaired by Respected Mr. Ashwani Kumar, Member of Rajya Sabha
for their genuine efforts to listen to all the: stake holders.
I wish to bring the following issues regarding The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015,
for your kind attention and remedial measures.
CHAPTER I
1.2. (d) "compensatory afforestation means afforestation done in lieu of the diversion of forest land for
non- forestry use under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. There are two issues. One is regarding the
definition of forest and the second is regarding the meaning of Afforestation. What is the definition of
forest in the Indian context?
Unfortunately, we have no good national definition.
If we follow the definition as per the orders in the Godavarman case, in 1996 in the Supreme
Court Judgement, the term "Forest" to include (as in FAO's definition) any "area having a tree canopy
cover of more than 10% over an area of more than 0.5 ha, with forestry as the principal land use." Here
it is better to incorporate the modified FAO definition.
"Land spanning more than 0.5 hectares with trees higher than 5 meters and a canopy cover of
more than 10 percent, or trees able to reach these thresholds in situ. It does not include land that is
predominantly under agricultural or urban land use"  (Forest Resources Assessment Programme Working
Paper 180 / Rome 2015).
Be specific on the term Afforestation- there are several definitions including IPCC, but not make
sense in our context. If we expand the meaning in tune with our requirements-Then, there is a scope
to include any degraded land within or above the extent in the armpit of afforestation.
Hence, add to 2 (d) "compensatory afforestation" means not only the afforestation done in lieu of
the diversion of forest land for non-forestry use under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 but also
afforestation/ restoration of any degraded landscape to increase forest/tree cover in the area.
2. 2 (j) Estimation of Net Present Value (NPV) of the forest is a very tricky issue. Therefore, there
is need to specify at least a few set of criteria or a broad frame work for the same in tune with
international standards, which should be available to public for scrutiny.
3. Please incorporate just like (o) "user agency", another item (p) an Afforestation agency i.e. any
citizen of the country, institutions, registered NGOs and all others mentioned in (o) for undertaking
afforestaion programme.
132

133
CHAPTER II
4.5(b) The issue here is regarding utilization of the Fund- States like Kerala where, inspite of high
population density, they maintain comparatively good tree cover and convert less forest land for non-
forest purpose. It is due to public vigil and lack of large scale mining and industrial activities. Hence,
they generate only fewer funds for afforestation compared to other states where large scale conversions
take place. So, there must be a financial mechanism to incentivise the maintenance of good tree cover
by sharing an appropriate amount in relation to the extent of the tree cover area, from the 10% of the
fund in the custody of the central government.
5.6(b). Use of NPV money- used for any artificial regeneration (plantation) - it is better to replace this
with specific programmes like Biodiversity Conservation Park/Butterfly Park/ Hedge Rows etc.,
CHAPTER III
6. National and State Authorities
8 (4) The Governing Body of the National Authority (GB of NA)- enhance the number of the GB by
adding two conservation biologists and two social scientists + one technocrat, thus make it five.
7.9(2) National Executive Committee (N Ex.C)- Fine
9(3) In the national monitoring group (NMG), instead of six experts make it 8 and specify : One
Zoologist, one Botanist, One Field Biologist, One Economist, One Sociologist, One RS& GIS Specialist,
One Atmospheric Scientist and One Engineering Expert (Civil/ Environmental).
8.10(5) The State Governing Body (SGB) is a typical Bureaucratic Body with 14 members. So just like
the GB of NA give representation to atleast two wildlife Biologist/ Ecologist and one NGO Representative
thus make the number 17, to keep it odd.
9. Why the States have a Steering Committee? Just like the National pattern bring a State Monitoring
Group (SMG).
For the State Steering Committee (change to Monitoring Group) keep the pattern of the National
MG, and limit the number of experts to five- one Zoologist, One Botanist, One Wildlife biologist/
Ecologist, one from Social Science and one from Physical Science (Atmospheric/ Geology etc.)
10.11 (3) The Executive Committee of the State Authority- Now the number is 17, make it 19
by giving representation to one block Panchyat and one village Panchyat member in the Body. Also,
Instead of representative from two eminent NGO, reserve one for NGO and the other for and eminent
Biologist/ Ecologist.
CHAPTER IV
11. Let there be a provision for special invitees form the States concerned to attend the National Level
Bodies to raise the point of view.

134
Regarding 16 (2), let the monitoring group meet at least once in four months instead of three months
for expense reduction.
CHAPTER V
12.24. The central Govt. shall cause the annual report - it makes no sense?
28. Let all the documents in the public domain.
CHAPTER VI
13.31.1 (ii) Why putting all the obligations and liabilities and all contracts to the head of the National /
State Authority? This definitely provides an unwanted opportunity to the ad hoc Authority. So please mind
before adding such provisions.
Statement of Objects and Reasons
14. "The compensatory afforestation envisages additional plantation activities by utilising the money....".
This is an ambiguous statement. The fund should be for very specific activities ensuring restoration of
the lost forest / tree cover and environment.
It should be noted that:-
There is no logic or science in destroying natural forest in the name of "Development" and
spending money collected from the levy of such a damage for afforestation - It helps promote that trend
in the name of development at the cost of Natural Capital, which the people of the country deserve. So
what to do?
1. Tree planting is not an absolute remedy- as planting wrong tree (exotics) and in wrong
places can badly affect a natural ecosystem.
2. Not a greenwash- Not allow 'compensatory afforestation' to cover up the diversion of
natural habitats in the name of development. We surely need development. Explore all the
other, options before converting the forest for non-forest purposes. Forests are the product
of long term natural process. Don't allow it to link with 'Green India Mission'.
3. Learn from the Past -  It is better to have a look at the fund borrowed from the World
Bank for Social Forestry and how it was spent in our country. So bring in, checks and
measures to avoid misuse of this Natural Currency.
4. Bring in a Social Audit Mechanism- for monitoring the spending of the huge CAMPA
corpus fund.
5. Funds available for afforestation from other agencies - Multi-lateral agencies have
committed big money for afforestation in the past and will do the same in the future in the
name of Developmental Assistance / climate change mitigation etc. This will lead to an
overlapping of money for the same purpose.
6. What to do - before finalising the Bill, it would be wise and pragmatic to include, provisions
for the utilization of CAMP Fund not only for afforestation but also for well defined

135
conservation/ restoration of our environment and forest. Like compensation for re-location
form PA, establishing corridors, mitigating Man-Animal conflict, natural regeneration of
degraded forests, establishing tree cover in available spaces in urban/ sub urban areas,
butterfly parks, biodiversity conservation parks, hedge rows, green walkways etc., thus to
broaden the scope of the Bill for the benefit of the country and the people.
On behalf of TIES we humbly request the honourable Rajya Sabha Standing Committee to
consider these matters while finalising your recommendations on the said Bill.

136
COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION BILL
Memorandum received from Justice K. Sukumaran, (Former Judge,
High Courts of Kerala and Bombay)
The Bill is NOT an ordinary one.
It involves a very serious study, for more reasons than one.
The Bill is intended to effectuate the intentions of the Supreme Court, as expressed in Godavarma
case.
The direction was issued long years back. In 2002. The delay is long. (There is, however, no use
of the time already passed as the lost time cannot be retrieved.)
The directive is about the PROPER utilization of the funds already collected and to be collected
hereafter.
It is an un-usually large sum. Rs.38000 crores already collected. There has been further additions,
later.
In the implementation of the Bill, a recurring expenditure of Rs.75 Crore per annum and a non-
recurring expenditure of Rs.6000 crore per annum are estimated.
It has national relevance and regional special features, as is evident from the composition of
National and State Authorities visualised under Clauses 8 and 10, respectively.
The Focus of the Law
The focus of the Law is to be on Afforestation.
This has to be attempted at the grass-root level. The law should, therefore, have a local participation.
The Authorities have their greater role in the formulation of policies.
It is in relation to the actual work of afforestation.
This guidance has necessarily to come from the clearly delineated items in the enactment itself.
Many legislations have taken care to clearly define the powers and functions of the various
implementational agencies. The Kerala Municipalities Act has done so, under Sections 14 & 15 (of the
Chairperson and 56 (of the Government). The implementational agencies may not have effective guidance
in the matter otherwise.
CONSTITUTION OF AUTHORITIES
Coming to specific provisions, the composition of the Authorities need special attention. They
appear to be essentially controlled by bureaucrats and technical people. The Local Authorities and Non-
Governmental organizations do not have their due role and recognition.
136

137
Expansion of the bodies by giving larger representation is a matter of importance.
This change will not result in unduly large financial commitment, as the Authorities are not meeting
very frequently, as evident from Clauses 14, 15 and similar provisions.
The Committee may consider this fundamental aspect, even if it may entail some delay in adding
additional provisions in the Bill. There is pressing necessity to checkmate possible leakages of the Funds.
Effective preventive measures are to be provided.
At the same time, expenditure has to be incurred for fully realizing the goal of afforestation.
Modern devices such as Public relations and Advertisement included in the permissible activities.
Invoking the aid of cultural orgnisations may be given the due attention.
Provisions to Form Close Connection Between Officials, Elected Representatives and Non-governmental
Organizations.
The close collaboration between officials, the elected representatives and the public would be a
pre-requisite for the successful implementation of the Bill.
A good illustration of such collaborative effort is the Forest venture ABHAYARANYA, at the foot-
hills of the Malyattur Division, close to the Inter-National Airport at Nedumbassery, Cochin.
The centre is about 14 KMs from the expanding town Perumbavvor.
The River Periyar flows along the area for a distance of 4.75 kms. It is very near the Pilgrimage
Centres like Kalady of Adi Sankara and the Malayattoor Church. There are some unique features for this
Forest resort such as the facility for a safe river bath and the arrangement for seeing the elephants being
trained and given the luxuriant bath by affectionate mahouts. If given adequate publicity, it on attract
foreign visitors who will never get such an opportunity anywhere in the world.
A member of the local authority has recorded the success of tenacious efforts to make a successful
project in forest ventures.
He took to contact the Forest Minister, more than six times, and impress upon the Minister the
unique features of the Project.
The Minister, Mr. Benoy Viswam  the Political affiliation is irrelevant, he was from the CPI -was
noted for his political tradition and un-impeachable honesty. It was this Minister that named the sanctuary
as ABHAYARANYAM, meaning a Forest Refuge, which, by itself, conveys a message. Mr. V .M Shaji,
then a member of the Koovappadi Panchayath, (9961896497), has recorded some of his experiences as
an active representative of the people of the locality.
It should be the Aim and Endeavour of the Act to Encourage Such Representation of Local Knowledge
in the Enforcement of the Act.
The Authorities under the Act.

138
Authorities for the effective enforcement of the Act have been visualisd at the Central and State
level.
The constitution of both authorities is loaded with officials' presence.
While the role of the experienced and dedicated officials cannot be disputed, the desirability for
the presence of other segments cannot be ignord.
There should be greater representation for professional sections like the Academics.. Lawyers and
the like.
It may be recalled that the Lawyers played a prominent part in getting a Judicial declaration from
the Apex Court (Goda varman case) which facilitated the formation of this Committee.
Invariably, the legal disputes will surface in the enforcement of any law. Those familiar with Law
will be helpful to detect the legal flaws in an attempted project before much energy and time is wasted.
The local authorities have now greater power than before. This should be properly reckoned while
providing for the representation in the authorities both at the Centre.
The greater share of representation should be there in the State Authorities.
The Authorities should not give occasion for criticism that the they are essentially sight seeing
bodies.
Much of costly tavel can be avoided with the great strides in information technology. Optimum
use should be made of these facilities. The exchange of views can be effectively done through digital
devices.
Of course, there is the great virtue of collective discussion which correspondence cannot achieve.
In such circumstances, the Authorities should meet and transact business meaningfully.
The close collaboration between officials, the elected representatives and the public would be a
pre-requisite for the successful implementation of the Bill.
A good illustration of such collaborative effort is the Forest venture ABHAYARANYA, at the foot-
hills of the Malyattur Division, close to the inter-National Airport at Nedumbassery, Cochin.
The centre is about 14 KMs from the expanding town.
The River Periyar flows along the area, for a distance of 4.75 kms. It is very near the Pilgrimage
Centres like Kalady of Adi Sankara and the Malayattoor Church. There are some unique features for this
Forest resort such as the facility for a safe river bath and the arrangement of seeing the elephants being
trained and given the luxuriant bath by affectionate mahouts. If given adequate publicity, it can attract
foreign visitors who will never get such an opportunity anywhere in the world.
A member of the local authority has recorded the success of tenacious efforts to make a successful
project in forest ventures.

139
He took pains to contact the Forest Minister, more than six times, and impress upon the Minister-
the unique features of the Project.
The Minister, Mr. Benoy Viswam-the Political affiliation is irrelevant he was from the CPI - was
noted for his political tradition and un-impeachable honesty. It was this Minister that named the sanctuary
as ABHAYARANYAM, meaning a Forest Refuge, which, by itself, conveys a message.
Mr. V .M Shaji, then a member of the Koovappadi Panchayath, (9961896497), has recorded some
of his experiences as an active representative of the people of the locality.
It should be the Aim and Endeavour of the Act to Encourage such Representation of Local Knowledge
in the Enforcement of the Act.
The Authorities under the Act.
Authorities for the effective enforcement of the Act have been visualisd at the Central and State
level.
The constitution of both authorities is loaded with officials' presence.
While the role of the experienced and dedicated officials cannot be disputed, the desirability of the
presence of other segments cannot be ignord.
There should be greater representation for professional sections like the Academics, Lawyers and
the like.
It may be recalled that the Lawyers played a prominent part in the preparation of the Bill and in
getting a Judicial declaration from the Apex Court (Goda Varman case) which facilitated the formation
of this Committee.
Invariably, the legal disputes will surface in the enforcement of any law. Those familiar with Law
will be helpful to detect the legal flaws in any attempted project before much energy and time is wasted.
The-local authorities have now greater power than before. This should be properly reckoned while
providing for their representation in the authorities both at the Centre.
The greater share of representation should be there in the State Authorities.
The Authorities should not give occasion for criticism that they are-essentially sight-seeing
bodies.
Much of costly tavel can be avoided with the great strides in information technology. Optimum
use should be made of these facilities. The exchange of views can be effectively done through digital
devices.
Of course, there is the great virtue of collective discussion which correspondence cannot achieve.
In such circumstances, the Authorities should meet and transact business meaningfully, whenever they
meet.

140
There should be periodic inspection of afforested areas by a powerful Committee with:
(a) Senior Officials
(b) Elected representatives of Local authorities; and
(c) Representatives of non-Governmental organizations.
There is a small extent of Compensatory Afforestation very near the International air port at
Nedmbassery, Cochin, demonstrating actual Compensatory Afforestation.
For about 2 hectares of land obtained in Thattekat forest (Bird Sanctuary), about 10 Hectares of
land was given for Forest Department. A visit would be a good relief for the weary passenger and a good
encouragement for those who look after the afforested area.

141
Memorandum received from Sh. Kishore Rithe, President,
Satpuda Foundation
Let me first thank you for providing us the opportunity to provide inputs and suggestions in the
present draft of "Compensatory Afforastration and Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA) Bill
2015".
With my past 25 years of field experience of working in central India for forest and wildlife
conservation, I would like to give following submission-
Page-5- clause 5 (a) The 90% of all monies collected by the state and interest accrued thereon
shall be transferred to state fund.
NO comment. But-
clause-6- "the monies available in a state fund" shall be disbursed and utilised in the manner as
stated in a prescribed manner.
As the said amount is huge compare to state's total budget for forest and wildlife, I suggest to
allow the states to spend only - amount contributed by the user agencies plus 10% of the capital (90%)
amount given by the central CAMPA and total annual interest accrued in the bank account of the state
CAMPA.
This will provide enough time to spend the money and ensure wise and appropriate utilisation of
funds towards the specific objective for which this money has come.
Page-6, clause-6(b)-the money received towards NPV and penal NPV shall be used for artificial
regeneration (plantation), assisted natural regeneration .......... in the manner as may be prescribed.
I suggest to include "for relocation of villages from core of the Tiger Reserves as mentioned in
the Tiger Conservation Plans (TCPs) and promised to the Hon'ble High Courts, Supreme Courts and in
the states assemblies.
Backgrounds:
The standing committee of National Board for Wildlife ((NBWL) in 2013 recommended to spend
"maximum" amount of interest income of CAMPA money on relocation of villages from Protected Areas/
Tiger Reserves.
SC-NBWL has stated that this would be the direct benefit to wildlife and their forest habitats to
recover and regenerate. Not only this, it would be the biggest contribution towards the development of
forest dwelling communities who are suffering from the issue of "livelihood" deficiency due to insufficient
agriculture lands within the PAs/Tiger Reserves and also face high degree of human-wildlife conflict
(crop losses, livestock and human injury/deaths).
At other instance, the letter was written to Hon'ble Minister of State (Independent Charge),
Ministry of Environment and Forests on 4th July 2013 to grant the proposal for voluntary village
141

142
relocation from Tiger Reserves/PAs of Maharashtra state which was not granted even when the state
was ready to relocate needy villages. So this indicates that the states are Willing to spend CAMPA money
for village relocation and they do not get sufficient funds to relocate all villages from core areas.
Please add a clause and mention-NOT to spend CAMPA money on purchase of vehicles (other
than Jeeps for RFOs), other equipments, buildings (except quarters for forest Guards)' and any other
civil work.
Page-6, clause-6 (c)word "development" of forest should be replaced by "conservation".
6(d) states that all monies realised from user agencies...........taken by the standing committee of
the NBWL under sec.5A of WPA-1972 ................ National Authority.
I suggest to ask the state CAMPA to hand over this amount to the respective Tiger Reserve
Foundation Account, if the area diverted falls in the Tiger Reserve. However as stated by the Supreme
Court of India, this amount should be kept as a "corpus" in the Foundation account and the annual
interest should be spent as per the approved Tiger Conservation Plans on only tiger conservation works.
Chapter III-clause 8(4)(x) Governing Body- the word "environmentalist" should be replaced by
"Conservationist with at least 15 years of field experience in forest/wildlife conservation".
Hope you would give serious consideration to above points.

143
Memorandum received from Advocate Sunil V. Mohammed, President Lawyer's
Environmental Awareness Forum (LEAF), Kerala
The following are the suggestions regarding the modification to certain clauses in the Bill:-
Clause 2:
Sub clause (d) may be substituted as follows:
"Compensatory Forestation" means non-forest use of whatever nature of forest land".
For sub-clause (e) the following may be substituted:
"Ecosystem Services" means benefits people obtain from ecosystems and include food, water,
regulating services such as flood and disease control, cultural services such as spiritual, recreational
and cultural benefits, supporting services such as nutrient cycling that maintain the conditions
living on earth.
For sub-clause (i) the following may be substituted:
"Net present Value" means quantification of loss of ecosystem services on account of non-forest
use of forest land as may be determined by an expert committee appointed by the Central
Government from time in that regard.
Sub-clause (k) may be omitted.
Clause 4
Sub-clause (3) (H) may be substituted as follows:
Receipts of all monies from user agencies by such State towards compensatory forestation,
penalty or fine paid, received and collected under this Act, net present value, catchment area
treatment plan or any money for compliance of conditions stipulated by Central Government while
according approval under the provisions of Forest (Conservation) Act 1980; and
Clause 6
For sub-clause (a) the following may be substituted:
All monies received for compensatory forestation and penalty and fine received for illegal use of
forest land for non-forest purposes without prior consent of Central Government shall be used for
forestation, reforestation and natural regeneration in the manner and in accordance with site
specific schemes formulated and published by the State;
For clause (b) the following may be substituted:
Monies received towards net present value shall, be used for afforestation, reforestation, regeneration
and restoration and improvement of ecosystem services in the manner and in accordance with
scheme formulated and published by the State Government in that regard.
143

144
Clause 8
For clause 8(4) (x) the following may be substituted:
Two environmentalists, ecologists or scientists well versed in environment and ecology, of national
repute, appointed by the Central Government for a period of two years subject to not more than
two consecutive terms-Members.
Clause 9
After sub-clause 5(v) the following may be added:
(vi) Two environmentalists, ecologists or scientists well versed in environment and ecology, of
national or state repute, appointed by the State Government for a period of two years subject to
not more than two consecutive terms-Members.
After clause 29 the following may be added:
Any non-forest use of forest land without prior permission of the Central Government shall be
punishable with simple imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years and with fine equivalent
to twice the amount of net present value of the forest land used for non-forest purpose or
purposes without the prior permission of the Central Government.
Provided that the imprisonment shall not be less than three months;
Provided further that the fine payable under this section shall not be less than Rupees fifty
thousand.
The offence under this Act shall be cognizable and non-bailable and shall be triable by Judicial
Magistrate of the First Class.
General Suggestions:
The Bill envisages compensatory afforestation, which is defined as afforestation done in lieu of
the diversion of the forest land for non-forest use under the Forests (Conservation) Act, 1980 for
promoting sustainable development. One of our suggestions is that afforestation should be located
in the very same location where diversion of forest land for non- forest use etc. is done. Utilizing
the fund for afforestation at a different place or area would not serve the purpose as the affected
area remains in the same condition. Yet another suggestion from our side is to include the District
Magistrate/District Collector of each district as the co-ordinating member for utilizing the fund in
the areas coming under his/her jurisdiction. Another point is that a broad policy is required to be
formulated before the functioning of the National and State level Authorities after due deliberations
and discussions at levels. Lack of an authority for considering complaints, if any, raised on the
quantification of the value or any other activities objected by any law or public policy, including
an appellate body has also to be looked into.

145
Communication from State Government of Rajasthan
OFFICE OF PRINCIPAL CHIEF CONSERV ATOR OF FORESTS, RAJASTHAN, JAIPUR
Shri Rohtas
Director
Rajya Sabha Secretariat
Parliament of India
Parliament House Annexe
New Delhi-110001
Sub.: The Compensatory Afforestation Bill, 2015.
Ref: Letter No. RS.5/1/2015-S&T dated 29th December, 2015.
Sir,
With reference to above, the comments of Rajasthan State Forest Department are as follows:
The Department has examined the draft Compensatory Afforestation Bill, 2015 in details. The
provisions enshrined in the proposed Bill seems appropriate which would strengthen the State CAMPA
Authority wherein more funds would be available to the Forest Department for carrying out compensatory
afforestation, regeneration of Forest Ecosystem, Wildlife protection and infrastructure development.
However it is suggested that provision mentioned at para 25 of the draft Bill regarding disbursement and
utilisaation of National Fund which provides for transfer of funds from National Fund to the State Fund
may be re- considered. In the Draft Compensatory Afforestation Bill, 2015 it is envisaged that sharing
of CAMPA funds Would be on 90:10 basis i.e. 90 percent by the State and rest 10 percent by the National
Authority. It is suggested that only one percent of the CAMPA funds should be given to the National
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Authority for the purposes of monitoring and evaluation of schemes
implemented in the States and setting up of institutes, societies, centre of excellence in the field of forest
and wildlife and rest 99 percent should be left to the State Compensatory Afforestation Fund.
The Department is of the view that the Bill will create a proper institutional mechanism, both at
the National level and State level, for utilizing of CAMPA fund for the purposes to mitigate the adverse
effects of the diversion of the forest land or felling of the trees.
Yours sincerely
(S.S. Choudhary)
PCCF(HoFF)
Rajasthan, Jaipur
No.F.14(02)CAMPA/PCCF/2015-16 Dated:
Copy forwarded:
(1) PS to A.C.S. Forests, Govt, of Rajasthan, Jaipur with reference to letter no. F.9(2) Van/2014
dated 8.1.2016
(2) Pr. Secretary, Department of Law (Group 2), Govt of Rajasthan
(S.S. Choudhary)
PCCF (HoFF)
145

146
Communication received from State Government of Madhya Pradesh
Ramesh Kumar Srivastava (I.F.S.)
Secretary, Forest
D.O. Letter No. 59/1617/2015/10-3
Bhopal, Dated 19-01-2016
Sub: Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015.
The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015 introduced in Lok Sabha on 8th May 2015, is
a right effort by the MoEF & CC in the direction of ensuring speedy and timely utilization of funds kept
with Adhoc CAMPA. We have following suggestions on the Bill:-
(i) The Bill provides that out of all the compensatory funds deposited by the User Agencies,
the State Authority (CAMPA) will retain 90% and the remaining 10% will be transferred to
the National Authority (CAMPA). Except Net Present Value (NPV), rest of the funds deposited
by the User Agencies are meant for site specific works. Any curtailment will seriously
hamper the proposed site specific works. Hence, it is proposed that 10% of the funds,
deposited under the NPV head, only be transferred to the National Authority. [Reference-
Section 3(4)]
(ii) The Bill also provides that the aforesaid 90% of the fund, retained by the State Authority,
can be used every year only after approval of the Annual Plan of Operations (APO) by the
National Authority. This translates into de facto control of all the funds by the National
Authority. This provision is against the spirit of the Bill [Reference-Section 15(1) (i)].
Instead, the National Authority may issue detailed guidelines on allocation limits to various
sectors, prohibition of certain activities, etc. The National Authority may also put in place
a strong monitoring and evaluation system to ensure compliance of the guidelines.
(iii) The Bill provides for formation of the State Authority consisting of Governing Body, Steering
Committee and Executive Committee. Governing Body is proposed to be headed by the
Honorable Chief Minister. Considering the busy schedule of the Honorable Chief Minister,
it is proposed that the Governing Body of the State Authority may be headed by the
Honorable Forest Minister of the state. [Reference-Section 10]
(iv) The Bill gives Rule making powers to Central Government. Various site specific projects,
for which funds are deposited by the User Agencies, will be implemented in the specific
state only, further more, there are many provisions relating to establishment of state fund,
its management and constitution of Governing Body and other Committees. My suggestion
is that considering different situations in different states, the rule making powers be given
to the State Governments. [Reference Section 30]
146

147
Hope you would consider and incorporate the above suggestions in the Bill.
(Ramesh Kumar Srivastava)
To
Shri V .S.P. Singh,
Joint Director,
Rajya Sabha Secretariat,
Room No. 142, First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi - 110001
Copy to: The Secretary, Ministry Of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for information.
(Ramesh Kumar Srivastava)
Secretary, Forest

148
Communication received from Govt. of Madhya Pradesh
Ramesh Kumar Shrivastava
                 (I.F .S.) D.O. Letter No 222/1617/2015/10-3
Secretary Forest Bhopal, Dated 12/02/2016
Madhya Pradesh
Sub: Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015 (Bill No. 153 of 2015).
The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015 introduced in Lok Sabha on 8th May 2015, is
a right effort by the MoEF & CC in the direction to ensure speedy and timely utilization of funds kept
with ad hoc CAMPA. Government of Madhya Pradesh has following suggestions on the Bill:-
(xi) Clause 3 (4) of the Bill provides that out of the compensatory funds realised from the User
Agencies, ten percent will be transferred to the "National Compensatory Afforestation Fund"
created under clause 3(1). The Government of Madhya Pradesh request to delete the clause
3(4) as forest, land is owned by the State Government and any proceed realised against it
belongs to the State. Central Government may levy any additional surcharge if it desires.
(xii) W ith the deletion of clause 3(4), subsequently clause 5(a) also needs to be suitably amended.
(xiii) Similarly Clause 5(b) also needs to be suitably amended in the light of deletion of clause
3(4).
(xiv) In the clause 6(a) "......as per site-specific schemes submitted...", the word "submitted"
should be substituted by "approved"
(xv) Clause 6(e) should be deleted as an affect of deletion of clause 3(4).
(xvi) Clause 10(5) (i) and (iii) to be deleted and in clause 10 (5) (iv) word "Forest" should be
added.
(xvii) In Clause 10(6) "Principal Secretary in-charge of the Forest Department..." Should be
replaced by "Additional, Principal Chief Conservator of Forest in-charge of CAMPA"
(xviii) Clause 15(1) (i) should be deleted as this translates into de facto control of all the funds
by the National Authority.
(xix) Clause 18(i) should be deleted as an effect of deletion of clause 15(1)(i).
(xx) Similarly Clause 19(1)(i) should be deleted as an effect of deletion of clause 15(1)(i).
The clause 30 of the Bill gives Rule making powers to Central Government. Various site specific
projects, for which funds are deposited by the User Agencies, will be implemented in the specific State
only. Further, there are provisions relating to establishment of State Fund, its management and constitution
of Governing Body & other Committees suggestion is, that considering different situations in different
States, the Rule making powers be given to the State Governments also.
148

149
We hope the above suggestions would be incorporated in the Bill. These views were also expressed
before the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests which
visited Madhya Pradesh on 23 January 2016.
(Ramesh Kumar Shrivastava)
To
Rohtas,
Director,
Rajya Sabha Secretariat,
Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi - 110001

150
Communication from Lakshadweep Administration
GOVT. OF INDIA
LAKSHADWEEP ADMINISTRATION
(Department of Environment & Forests)
Kavaratti Island - 682555
F.No. 13/2/20T0-E&F/40 Dated : 11.02.2016
To
Shri Rohtas
The Director,
Parliament House/ Annexe,
New Delhi- 110001
Email: rohtas@sansad.nic.in
Sub: The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015- Reg;
Ref:- No. RS.5/1/2015-S&T Dated 29th December
Sir,
On the above, it is to mention here that the Lakshadweep is a very small territory without any
mining activities. In view of that the Compensatory Afforestation Programme are not relevant to this
territory. Therefore the views and comment to this Bill in respect of U.T of Lakshadweep may be treated
as NIL.
Yours faithfully
(Gulab Singh) IFS
Conservator of Forests
Ph: 04896 262592, E-mail: Lak-dcf@.nic.in
Fax No. 0489626 3365
Copy to :
1. The P.A to the Administrator, U.T. of Lakshadweep, Kavaratti.
2. The Secretary, Environment & Forests, U.T. of Lakshadweep, Kavaratti.

151
Views of Government of Maharashtra
Sl. No. Proposed in bill Government of Maharashtra Recommendation
1. Chapter II, Clause 5- Disbursement and
utilization of National Fund.-
save as otherwise provided in this Act, the
monies available in the relational fund shall
be disbursed and utilized in the following
manner, namely :-
(b) the balance 10 percent of all monies
collected by the States and Union territory
Administrations, which has been place under
the ad-hoc Authority and the interest accrued
thereon, and all fresh accrual to the National
fund, as provided in sub-section (4) of
section 3, and the interest accrued thereon,
shall be utilized for meeting-
(i) the non-recurring and expenditure for
the management of the National Authority
including the salary and allowances payable
to its officers and other employees;
(ii) the expenditure incurred on monitoring
and evaluation of works executed by the
National Authority and each State Authority;
(iii) The expendi ture incurred on specific
schemes approved by Governing body of
the National Authority.
This provides for retaining 10% of all monies
collected by state and placed under ad-hoc
authority in the National Fund. Here it is
submitted that money received in Ad-hoc
CAMPA consist of funds for Compensatory
Afforestation (CA) and Net Present Value
(NPV). The Compensatory Afforestation
levies are to be spent for Compensatory
Afforestation only. The amount generated
under CAMPA fund needs to be invested
back in the State for development of forest
and wildlife in the states. Therefore, retaining
10 % of funds by the Government of India
do not appear to be justified.
It is suggested that 2% of only NPV and
interest thereon may be retained for
expenditure of National Authority.
2. Chapter III, Clause 10 - Constitution of
State Authority.
(5) The governing body of a State Authority
shall consist of the following, namely:—
(i) Chief Minister—Chairperson, ex officio;
(ii) Minister of Forests—Member, ex of ficio;
(iii)Chief Secretary—Member, ex of ficio;
(iv) Principal Secretaries, Departments of
a) It is recommended that the Governing
Body of the State Authority be chaired by
the Chief Minister of the State however, the
Minister of Forests may be appointed as ex-
officio co-chairman of the Governing Body.
b) Principal Secretary of Revenue,
Agriculture, Panchayati Raj, Science and
Technology are not directly related to CAMPA
funds and hence only key officers namely

152
Sl. No. Proposed in bill Government of Maharashtra Recommendation
Environment, Finance, Planning, Rural
Development, Revenue, Agriculture, Tribal
Development, Panchayati Raj, Science and
Technology—Members, ex of ficio;
(v) Principal Chief Conservator of Forests
(Head of Forest Force)—Member, ex of ficio;
(vi) Chief Wildlife W arden—Member, ex
officio;
Secretaries of Environment, Finance,
Planning, Rural development and Tribal
development may be retained as its members.
3. Chapter III, Clause 10 - Constitution of
State Authority.
(6) Principal Secretary in-charge of the
Forest Department in a State or the Union
territory shall be Member Secretary of the
State Authority in such State or Union
territory.
The Chief Executive Officer of State
authority may be Member Secretary of the
Governing body to allow independent status
of State Authority instead of Principal
Secretary in-charge of the Forest
Department of the State.
4. Chapter III, Clause 11 - Steering
Committee and Executive Committee of
State Authority
(2) The steering committee of a State
Authority shall consist of the following,
namely:—
(i) Chief Secretary—Chairperson, ex officio;
(ii) Principal Secretaries, Departments of
Forests, Environment, Finance, Planning,
Rural Development, Revenue, Agriculture,
Tribal Development, Panchayati Raj, Science
and T echnology—Members, ex of ficio;
(iii) Principal Chief Conservator of Forests'
(Head of Forest Force)- Member, ex officio;
(iv) Chief Wildlife W arden—Member, ex
officio; (v) Nodal Officer, the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980—Member, ex
officio; (vi) Head of the concerned regional
office of the Ministry of Environment, Forest
and climate change—Member, exofficio;
(vii) Nodal Officer, State Forest Development
a) In the Steering Committee too Secretary
Revenue, Agriculture, Panchayati Raj,
Science and Technology are not directly
related to CAMPA funds and hence only
key officers namely Secretaries of Planning,
Environment, Finance, Rural development
and Tribal development may be retained as
its members.
b) PCCFs looking after works of
implementation of working plans, Social
Forestry and Managing Director, State
Forest Development Corporation may be
included as members of the Steering
Committee.

153
Sl. No. Proposed in bill Government of Maharashtra Recommendation
Agency—Member, ex of ficio; (viii) Chief
Executive Officer, State Authority—
Member-Secretary.
5. Chapter III, Clause 11 - Steering
Committee and Executive Committee of
State Authority
(3) The executive committee of a State
Authority shall consist of the following,
namely:—
(i) Principal Chief Conservator of Forests
(Head of Forest Force)—Chairperson, ex
officio; (ii) Chief Wildlife Warden- Member,
ex officio; (iii) Chief Conservator of Forests
(Plan/Schemes)—Member, ex of ficio;
(iv) Principal Chief Conservator of Forests
or Additional Principal Chief Conservator
of Forest (Research)- Member, ex officio;
(v) Nodal Officer, State Forest Development
Agency—Member, ex of ficio (vi) a
representative each of the Departments of
Environment, Finance, Planning, Rural
Development, Revenue, Agriculture, Tribal
Development, Panchayati Raj, Science and
Technology—Members, ex of ficio;
(vii) financial Controller or Financial Adviser,
to be nominated by the Finance
Department—Member, ex of ficio; (viii) two
eminent non-government organisations to
be appointed by the State Government—
Members; (ix) two representatives of district
level Panchayati Raj Institutions to be
appointed by the State Government—
Members; (x) Chief Executive Officer, State
Authority—Member Secretary.
(a) Regarding clause 11 (3) (vi), it is stated
that representative of Department of
Environment, Finance, Planning, Rural
Development, Revenue, Agriculture, Tribal
Development, Panchayati Raj, Science and
Technology are not directly related to day
to day working of CAMPA funds and hence
may not be included as Members.
(b) Regarding clause 11 (3) (vii), it is stated
that as the works of CAMPA are carried
out as per sanctioned APO and under
financial guidelines set by Government of
India and there is separate mechanism of
audit, there is no need of Financial Controller
or Financial Adviser, to be nominated by
the Finance Department.
(c) Regarding clause 11 (3) (ix), it is stated
that as the Panchayati Raj institution does
not have direct role in day to day affairs of
CAMPA there is no need of representatives
of district level Panchayati Raj Institutions.
(d) PCCFs looking after work of
implementation of working plans, Social
Forestry and Managing Director Forest
Development Corporation may be include
as members of the Executive Committee.
6. Chapter III, clause-9 and Chapter IV ,
clause-16
Executive committee and monitoring group
of National Authority.
As the function of Executive Committee is
of administrative and management nature,
it need not be; included in the Act.
Moreover present phrasing of the clause is
too open ended to be of any use.

154
Sl. No. Proposed in bill Government of Maharashtra Recommendation
7. Chapter IV- clause 17 - Powers and
functions of State Authority-
2) The Governing Body of State Authority
shall meet at least once in Six months.
The Governing Body of State Authority may
be provided to meet at least once in a year
instead of 6 months.
8. Chapter IV- clause 18- Powers and
functions of Steering Committee of State
Authority.
In the Steering Committee there is no
mention of frequency of the meeting. It is
requested to add it as "to meet at least once
a year".
9. Chapter IV- clause 19- Functions and
powers of executive committee of State
Authority.
(1) The executive committee of a State
Authority shall—
(iii)invest surplus amounts available in the
State Fund under public accounts of such
State;
The bill envisages the state CAMPA fund to
be kept in interest bearing fund under public
account (clause 4 (5)). Hence there appears
no advantage of separate provision for
investing surplus amount and exposing fund
to market risks even if it be moderate or
small.

155
Observation and comments of Government of Himachal Pradesh.*
Chapter-I - Preliminary
Clause Proposed Comments
1(o) The word used is diversion or denotification. There is no provision of denotification under
FCA, 1980, hence only word diversion be
used.
Chapter-II - Management and utilisation of National Compensatory Afforestation Fund and State
Compensatory Afforestation Fund.
3(4) To be credited into the National Fund, By each 1% instead of 10%
State on yearly basis 10% of Funds realised
from user agencies
5(a) 90% of all deposits presently with ad hoc It need to be 99%
CAMPA to be transferred to State Authority.
5(b) Balance 10% placed under ad hoc CAMPA It need to be 1%
along with interest accrued and fresh accrual
with National Authority.
6(d) Funds/Revenue accrued from protected area Shall be used not only for undertaking
corpus to be utilised exclusively for under- protection and conservation activities in
taking protection and conservation activities protected areas of the States/UTs but for
in PAN. conservation of wildlife and biodiversity even
outside PAN.
6(e) 10% 1% instead.
Chapter-III - Constitution of National Authority and State Authority.
10(5) (i) CM as Chairperson Either Forest Minister as Chairman or as Vice
Chairman to preside over the meetings of
Governing Body in the absence of CM.
10(6) Principal Secretary of State Government is Suggested as at present and as the Secretariat
proposed as Member Secretary of Governing would  be  in  Forest  Department HQ let
Body of State Authority. Principal CCF continue to hold this post.
11(2) Chief Secretary as Chairperson. For effective Implementation and M&E ACS/
Principal Secretary (Forests) be Chairperson.
11(3)(iii)CCF (Plan Schemes) Additional Principal CCF/CCF (Plan
Schemes).
155
* Relevant extract from the power-point presentation made before the Committee by the representatives of the State
Government on 15.10.2015.

156
Clause Proposed Comments
11(4)(i) Joint Chief Executive Officer of the rank not Joint Chief Executive Officer of the rank not
below CF. below CCF/CF.
11 (4) (iii) Deputy Chief Executive Officer of the Deputy Chief Executive Officer of the rank
rank not below Deputy CF. not below CF/DCF.
Chapter-IV- Power and functions of National Authority and State Authority.
15 (1)(i) Approval of APO of State Authority by Final approval of APO should remain  with
Executive Committee of National Authority. State Authority otherwise the State Authority
would become subservient to Executive
Committee of National Authority. However,
APO would be sent for information of the
Executive Committee of National Authority.
18 (i) The Steering Committee of State is to Same as in 15 (1) (i).
scrutinize approve the APO and to send
the same to executive Committee of
National Authority for final approval.
Chapter-V - Finance, Accounts, Audit and Annual Report.
23 (2) The annual report shall inter alia provide for. (i) Amount of funds received and spent
(ii) The summary of specific schemes
specified
(iii) The summary of monitoring and
evaluation of.
28 (2) The Annual Report of State Authority shall (i) Area diverted department or sector wise
inter alia provide for. in hectares
(ii) Amount of funds received and spent
(iii) The number and location of each
reforestation, afforestation, and conserved etc.
Chapter-VI- Miscellaneous.
30(1) Central Government empowered to make rules States may be empowered especially when
under this Bill/Act. under clause 32 (3) enjoins that "amounts
credited to the State Fund shall be deemed to
be credited and shall always be deemed to

157
have been credited to the public accounts of
the State within the meaning of article 266
and 283 of the Constitution, and shall be
regulated by the law made by the State
Legislature in this behalf. Accordingly, it is
suggested that except for such section as
relate to National Fund the Rule making power
should vest with the State.
Clause Proposed Comments

158
Communication received from State Govt. of Manipur
NO.19/7/2015-FOR&ENVT.
GOVERNMENT OF MANIPUR
SECRETARIA T : FORESTS & ENVIRONMENT DEPARTMENT
Imphal, the 8th February, 2016.
To
Shri Rohtas,
Director/Parliament of India,
Rajya Sabha Secretariat
Parliament House/Annexe,
New Delhi-110001.
Subject: The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015
I am directed to send refer to your letter No. RS 5/1/2015-S&T dated 29-12-2015 on the above
subject and to say that the State, of Manipur has no comment to make, as furnished by i/c Principal
Chief Conservator of Forests, Government of Manipur vide his letter No. 7/104/2013/ Forests/600 dated
14/1/2016.
Enclosed: As above.
Yours faithfully,
(Kengoo Zuringla)
Joint Secretary (Forest & Environment),
Govt. of Manipur.

159
Government of Manipur
OFFICE OF THE PRINCIPAL CHIEF CONSERV ATOR OF FORESTS
SANJENTHONG, IMPHAL
No.7/104/2013/Forests/600 Imphal, the 14th January, 2016.
To
The Joint Secretary (For & Envt)
Government of Manipur, Imphal
Subject: The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015.
Madam,
With reference to letter No. 19/7/2015-For & Envt dated 08/012/2016 on the above subject, I am
to say that the Draft Compensatory Afforestation Bill, 2015 has been perused and the Department has
no comment on it. The same may kindly be communicated to the Ministry.
Yours faithfully
(P.N. Prasad)
i/c. Principal Chief Conservator of Forests
Government of Manipur.

160
Communication received from Government of Puducherry
GOVERNMENT OF PUDUCHERRY
DEPARTMENT OF FORESTS AND WILDLIFE
MULLAIAGAM FOREST CAMPUS
CUDDALORE MAIN ROAD, MUDALIARPET POST
PUDUCHERRY-605 004
No. F&WL/CF/AO-I/2015-16/ Puducherry, dt. 17/02/2016
To
The Director, Rajya Sabha Secretariat,
Parliament of India,
Parliament House / Annexe,
New Delhi-110 001.
Fax No.011-23794328
Sir,
SUB: F&WL - 'The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015' - Views of the Union Territory
Government - Reg.
REF: Letter No.RS.5/l/2015-S&T, dated 28-12-2015.
I am to invite a kind reference to the letter cited on the subject motioned above and to furnish
hereunder the views of the Department of Forests & Wildlife, Puducherry in connection with "The
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015".
(a) Providing of incentives to persons / families who are displaced or relocated elsewhere from
the Eco-sensitive Zone. This incentive should be made out from the CAMPA Funds.
(b) It should be made from the funds to acquire lands in the Eco-sensitive Zone in order to
overcome loss of forests and native species.
(c) As vehicle purchase has been banned by Govt, of India, it is very difficult for Departments
to procure vehicles even against condemnation. The purchase of Department vehicles for
use by the Front Line staff may be permitted from this funds.
(d) In most of the States, it is very difficult to find area for Compensatory Afforestation. In
such cases, the plantation can be done in a private area with an agreement that that they
will share some usufruct but of the forest produces. Atleast this forest can mitigate climate
change and accelerate carbon sequestration.

161
(e) In States where private forest areas are in sizable area the CAMPA fund can be used to
procure / buy the forest, As such private forest owners are in a losing situation that they
cannot avail a single tree frpm the forest due to the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. They
have got many grudges that Government has taken over the rights of the owner property
i.e. the forest.
This is for favour of kind information.
Yours faithfully,
(G. KUMAR, IFS)
Conservator of Forest

162
Communication received from Government of Odisha
Government of Odisha
Forest & Environment Department
No.10F(Con) 6/2016(Pt.1)/326 F&E, Bhubaneswar, dated the 19-1-16
From
Shri Debidutta Biswal, IFS
Special Secretary to Government
To
Mr. Rohtas
Director, Rajya Sabha Secretariat
Parliament House/Annexe,
New Delhi-110001
Sub: The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015.
Sir,
I am directed to Invite reference to your letter No. RS.5/1/2015-S&T dt. 29.12.2015 on the above
mentioned subject and to say that the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015, if enacted, will be
helpful for timely and objective release/utilisation of funds from the proposed State Compensatory
Afforestation Fund by setting up an institutional mechanism. However, the provision of Sub-Section 4
of Section 3 read with Sub-Section(b) of Section 5 of the Bill regarding retention of 10% of the funds
along with Interest accruing thereon by the proposed National Fund appears to be in-appropriate. This
should rather be of the order of 1% to 2% only, and that too be spent on research, HRD and for the
purposes under Section 5, Sub-section (b) clause (I), (ii) &(iii).
Further, in view the fact that Annual Plans of Operations under State-CAMPA will be prepared/
finalised/approved by the State authorities as per broad framework prescribed under Section 6 of the Bill,
there seems no need for approval of the Annual Plan of operation by the National Authority. Therefore,
Section 15(1)(i) ofthe proposed Bill, requires to be deleted.
Consequently, Section 18(i) and Section 19(1)(i) ofthe Bill maybe substituted as under;
Section 18(i): "Scrutinise and approve the Annual Plan of Operations prepared by the Executive
Committee of the State Authority."
Section 19(1)0):  "Formulate and submit Annual Plan of Operations to the Executive Committee of
National Authority for information after obtaining approval of the Steering Committee
of the State Authority."
With the above views, the State Government supports the Bill.
Yours faithfully,
Special Secretary to Government

163
Views of State Government of Karnataka
Changes suggested for "The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015"
Section-6(b): (Please see Page: 6, Line: 4)
Acquisition of private lands that are voluntarily surrendered by private land holders inside the RF
and wildlife corridors should be included. Acquisition of wildlife corridors will play a great role in
reducing man-animal conflict and also adding areas for wildlife habitat. Further, If provision for acquisition
of private land inside the RF is not made, small hamlets embedded deep inside the forest areas will be
left out of the mainstream socio-economic development and they will remain backward forever. This is
an important issue of long-term significance
Section-6(f): (Please see Page: 6, Line: 24)
Provision has to be made to fix certain percentage (say 5% - 10%) of the NPV amount that can
be used towards administrative expenses. (Instead of saying.............may be met from part of the
interest accrued).
Section-6(h): (Please see Page: 6, Line: 33)
Since the fund is totally under the State Authority, there is no need of obtaining the approval/
concurrency of the Executive Committee of the National Authority.
Section-10(5)(i): (Please see Page: 8, Line: 41)
The Ex-Officio Chairperson of the Governing Body is the Chief Minister.
In addition to this, The Forest Minister be made the Vice-Chairperson of the Governing Body.
It may kindly be note that it is the Minister ofMoEF & CC who is the Chairperson in the Governing
Body of the National Authority. [S-8 (4) (i)]
Section-10(6): (Please see Page: 9, Line: 2)
The Member-Secretary of the State Authority shall be the Secretary (Forests); not the Principal
Secretary (or ACS) in-charge of the Forest Department. The latter to be a member of the State
Authority.
Section-11(2)(i): (Please see Page: 9, Line: 11)
The Principal Secretary (or ACS) in-charge of Forests Department may be made the Chairperson
of the Steering Committee, instead of the Chief Secretary.
Section-11(2)(ii to x): (Please see Page: 9, Line: 13 & onwards)
The Steering Committee is having too many Nos. of Members (20 Nos). Since most of these
departments are representing in the Governing Body, there is no need to include all these departments
again in the Steering Committee. Only the directly connected Departments like Forests, wildlife,
Environment, Planning & Finance would be sufficient.

164
Section-11(3)(vi): (Please see Page: 9 Line: 32)
The Executive Committee is also having too many Nos. of Members. Since most of these
departments are represented in the Governing Body, there is no need to include all these members
again in the Executive Committee. Only the directly connected Departments like Forests, wildlife,
Environment, Planning & Finance would be sufficient.
Section-15(1)(i): (Please see Page: 11 Line: 6)
"(i) approve annual plan of operations of the State Authorities;" -This shall be deleted. The power
of approving the APO shall vest with the Steering Committee of the State Authority.
Section-18(i): (Please see Page: 12, Line: 7)
18. The steering committee of a State Authority shall—
(i) scrutinise and approve the annual plan of operations prepared by the executive committee of
such State Authority and send the same to the executive committee of the National Authority for
final approval;
This may please be modified as -
18. The steering committee of a State Authority shall—
(i) scrutinise and approve the annual plan of operations prepared by the executive committee of
such State Authority.
Section-19(1)(i): (Please see Page: 12, Line: 19)
19(1) The executive committee of a State Authority shall—
(i) formulate and submit annual plan of operations to the executive committee of the National
Authority after obtaining concurrence of the steering committee of the State Authority;
This may please be modified as -
19(1) The executive committee of a State Authority shall—
(i) formulate annual plan of operations, obtain approval of the steering committee of the State
Authority and submit a copy to the executive committee of the National Authority.
General suggestions:
1. In terms of procedure and practice, it is necessary to link the money deposited in each case
of RF land diverted and the actual CAMPA works done. Closure of accounts case by case
is necessary as a practice. Other-wise it will mess up the CAMPA works and we will later
find it difficult to answer CAG queries.
2. There are too many members in the committees at all levels, both in National Authority &
at State Authority.

165
Views of State Govt. of Chhattisgarh
The Ministry of Environment Forest and Climate Change Government of India drafted and executive
order namely "CAMPA Order-2014" incorporating the various constitutional provisions for recovery of
funds from the user agencies and it's utilization. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change filed an application before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India for getting the approval for issuing
this CAMPA Order. On the advisory of The Government of India, the State of Chhattisgarh has also
submitted an application in support of the said draft CAMPA order as an intervener. An application on
behalf of the State of Chhattisgarh was submitted by Shri K.K.Venugopal Senior Advocate. The copy of
the application is enclosed herewith. The observation and opinion of the State of Chhattisgarh has been
mentioned in the para 3 of the application. As the contents of the Compensatory Afforestation Bill 2015
and draft CAMPA order 2014 are almost the same, the submissions of the State of Chhattisgarh made
before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India may also be taken as the views of the State on the
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill 2015.
The State of Chhattisgarh endorses the contents and provisions made in the Compensatory
Afforestation, Bill 2015 along with the following suggested amendments:
Sl. No. Section Comment
1. Chapter II para 3 (4) The Chhattisgarh State is of the view that, the State contribution to
National Fund, should not be more than 5% per year, (not 10% as
envisaged in the draft bill)
2. Chapter III Section 10(1) The constitution of the State Campa Authority should be done by the
respective State Governments and not the Central Government. Also
such notification should be published in the official Gazette of the
State.
3. Chapter IV 15 (1) (i) Under this provision, final approval of the Annual Plan of Operations
of State Authorities have been vested with the Executive Committee
of National Authority. The Chhattisgarh State is of the view that, the
said provision should be amended as, "The National Authority shall
accept the Annual Plan of Operations as approved by the Steering
Committee of the State Authority".
4. Chapter IV 18 (i) The provision of this sub section should be amended as follows:-
The Steering Committee of a State Authority shall - "Scrutinise and
give final approval to the Annual Plan of Operations prepared by the
Executive Committee of such State Authority and send the same to
the Executive Committee of the National Authority for information."
5. Chapter TV 19(1)(i) Same as above.

166
Sl. No. Section Comment
6. Chapter V 26 Provision should be made for the State funds to be invested in
Central or State Securities.
7. Chapter VI 30 (2) (f) The power to make rules pertaining to regulation of the manner of
crediting moneys to State funds should be in the domain of the State
Government.
8. Chapter IV 30 (2) (p) The power to make rules regarding the financial regulation and
procedure for drawing up and implementing the budget of the State
Authorities should be with the State Government.
9. Chapter VI para 33 (3) The Chhattisgarh State is of the view that, provision for an arbitration
clause should be made, for resolving disputes, in case of any conflict
on any policy matter between the National and State Authority.

167
Communications received from Govt. of Mizoram Received on 24.02.2016
GOVT. OF MIZORAM
OFFICE OF THE PRINCIPAL CHIEF CONSERV ATOR OF FORESTS
MIZORAM : AIZWAL
No.B.20018/8/2013-CAMPA/PCCF/139 Dated Aizawl the 17th Feb., 2016
To,
The Director,
Rajya Sabha Secretariat,
Parliament House /Annexe,
New Delhi-110001
Fax-23794328
Email: rothas@sansad.nic.in
Sub.: The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015.
Ref: No. RS 5/1/2015-S&T dt.29.12.2015
Sir,
With reference to the subject and letter no. cited above, I am to furnish herewith comment on
the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015 as follows:
"The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2015 is good enough for adoption as it aims to
compensate loss of forest cover, regeneration of forest ecosystem, wildlife protection and infrastructure,
development and as it will also facilitate timely execution, of works and effective utilization of the funds
depending on the capacity of state forest departments".
(ROSIAMA VANCHHONG)
Addl. Principal Chief Conservator of
Forests & Nodal Officer (CAMPA)
Copy to:
1. Under Secretary, Government of Mizoram, Environment & Forest Department, for information
and necessary action.
Addl. Principal Chief Conservator of
Forests & Nodal Officer (CAMPA)

168
Communication received from Govt. of West Bengal Received on 24.02.2016
GOVERNMENT OF WEST BENGAL
DEPARTMENT OF FORESTS
ARANYA BHA V AN, SECTOR-III
SALT LAKE CITY , KOLKATA-98
No-373-For/O/L/6M-20/2012 (Pt.I) Dated Kolkata, the 17th Feb. 2016.
From : The O.S.D. & Ex-officio Joint Secretary to the Government of West Bengal.
To
The Director
Rajya Sabha Secretaries
Parliament House/ Annexe
New Delhi-110 001
Ref : His letter No. RS.5/1/2015-S&T dtd. 28.1.2016
The undersigned is directed to send him the views of the State of West Bengal on "The Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Bill - 2015" as follows:-
Section 5:
(a) 95% (in place of 90%) of all monies collected by a State with interest accrued upon shall
be transferred to the State Fund.
(b) The balance 5% shall be utilised for meeting by Ad-hoc Authority.
Section 6:
(c) Fund deposited directly in ad-hoc CAMPA, thus this clause is superflows.
O.S.D. and Ex-officio Jt. Secretary
to the Government of West Beagal.

169
* Relevant extract from the power-point presentation made before the Committee by the representatives of the State
Government on 25.11.2015.
Views of Government of Kerala*
The share of the State in the ad hoc fund - Rs. 55 crores only.
The annual collection of Fund will be almost Nil
In the light of the above facts, the State proposes to provide in the draft Bill a provision to allocate,
out of 10 percent of ad hoc fund & 10 percent share of National Fund, a share higher than the
contribution by the State, for compensating the environmental services rendered by the State forests.