PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 185
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY , 
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY FIFTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 83)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
TH  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY FIFTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-2009)
OF THE DEPARTMENT  OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 83)
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 29 TH APRIL, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 29 TH APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/V AISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT O F T HE C OMMITTEE ................................................................................................ 1—13
4S UMMARY OF R ECOMMENDATIONS .......................................................................................... 14—17
5. M INUTES OF T HE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................ 19—23

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2007-2008)
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
**2. V acant
3. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
4. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
5. Shri Kamal Akhtar
6. Shri Saman Pathak
7. Shri Jabir Husain
**8. V acant
9. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
*10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Francis Fanthome
16. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
17. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
18. Shri Brahmananda Panda
19. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
20. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
21. Shri Pratik P. Patil
22. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
23. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
#25. V acant
26. Shri Rampal Singh
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
29. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
30. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
31. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
** Dr. Prabha Thakur and Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of
their term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2008.
* Nominated w.e.f. 28th August, 2007.
# Shri Rakesh Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 1st December, 2007 on his resignation from
the Membership of the Committee.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Eighty-fifth report of the Committee. This Report
deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Science and
Technology (Ministry of Science and Technology) (Demand No.83).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on the 25th March, 2008, the Secretary and other
Officers of the Department of Science and Technology gave an overview of the various activities
of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance
of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee express its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the
clarifications sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 23rd April, 2008.
DR. V . MAITREYAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
April 23, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

1
REPORT
India is a land of one of the oldest civilizations of the world with a rich cultural heritage,
thriving economy and civic life. It has been a fountainhead of ancient knowledge and wisdom. The
traditions of science and technology in India are over 5000 years old. The resurgence of science
in India came as an offshoot of the Nationalist Movement, towards the end of 19th century and
the early decades of the 20th century. Since 1947 a renaissance was witnessed with the emergence
of India as a politically independent nation and as it pursued a programme of employing modern
Science and Technology for national development. A few exceptionally talented and committed
scientists and teachers of that period laid down the foundations of Indian science with their zeal,
dedication and sacrifice. Conscious efforts were made to enhance and modernize the scientific
infrastructure in the country by establishing a series of national laboratories, institutes of advanced
technical education, universities, etc. Science and Technology inputs were made an intrinsic part
of the planning process and development strategies. Many institutions were created soon after
independence to promote basic research and technological progress.
1.1 The Department of Science and Technology was established with the primary objective to
give fillip to promotion of new areas of Science and Technology and to play the role of a nodal
Department for organizing, coordinating and promoting S&T activities in the country.
1.2 Over the years, the investments in S&T sector have gone up consistently and significantly.
From an allocation of Rs. 349 crores in the Seventh Plan to the Department of Science and
Technology, it went up to Rs. 1192 crores in the Eighth Plan, Rs. 1497 crores in the Ninth Plan,
Rs. 3400 crores in the Tenth Plan to Rs.11028 crores in the Eleventh Five Year Plan. Provision
proposed in the Plan outlay for the year 2008-09 was Rs. 1800 crores, however, the allocation
made by the Planning Commission is Rs.1530 crores which is Rs. 270 crores less than the
projected demand by the Department. The Committee was informed that the Department has been
assured that additional funds would be made available based on performance assessment at the R.E.
stage.
1.3 The detailed budget allocation of the Department of Science and Technology for
the financial year 2008-09 was considered by the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests at its meeting held on
25th March, 2008 and the Demands for Grants of the Department provided the following
provisions.
2. BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS
2.1 The Budgetary Estimates of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2008-09 are placed at Rs. 1780.00 crores (Plan Rs. 1530.00 crores and Non-Plan Rs. 250.00
crores) as compared to last year’s B.E. and R.E. of Rs. 1775.00 crores and Rs. 1511.00 crores
respectively. The percentage increase in B.E. 2008-09 over the B.E. 2007-08 is only 0.28% i.e.,
from Rs. 1775.00 crores to Rs. 1780.00 crores.
2.2 The Committee has been informed that the Department’s plan outlay of Rs. 1526
crores at the BE stage last year was reduced to Rs. 1270 crores at the RE stage. The
Department, however, was unable to spend even the reduced Grants during the last year.
The Committee takes serious note of the situation and recommends that the Department
should be more prompt and efficient in utilising the allocated funds. This acquires even
more importance because the rise in allocation this year, the committee feels, is miniscule,
if put in the context of inflation and economic growth. At the same time the Committee

2
is of the opinion that, keeping in mind the responsibilities of the Department and the role
it is expected to play in development of science and technology, the Department should be
given an increase in allocation in consonance with its requirements.
3. PROGRAMMES OF THE DEPARTMENT IN ELEVENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN
3.1 The list of various programmes to be carried out by the Department in Eleventh Five Year
Plan is as follows:
Sl. Name of the Scheme/Project/Programme
No.
1 Research and Development Support
2 Technology Development Programme
3 S&T Programme for Socio-economic Development
4 International Cooperation
5 State Science and Technology Programme
6 Modernization of Mapping Organizations (SoI & NATMO)
7 Autonomous Institutions and Professional Bodies
8 V ocational Employment Generation
9 Technology for Bamboo Products (Mission Mode Project)
10 Synergy Projects (O/o Pr. Scientific Adviser)
11 Information Technology
12 National Training Programme for Scientists/Technologists Working with Government
of India
13 Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research
14 National Mission on Nano-science and Nano-technology
15 Science and Engineering Research Board
16 Scholarships for Science in Higher Education (Oversight Committee Recommendation)
17 Water Technology Initiative
18 Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research ( INSPIRE)
19 Innovation Clusters
20 Security Technology Initiative
21 Mega Facilities for Basic Research
4. MECHANISMS TO MONITOR AND REVIEW THE PROGRESS OF ONGOING
SCHEME
4.1 The Committee has been informed that to monitor and review the progress of its ongoing
schemes before formulating/finalizing proposals for budgetary support, each scheme has an Expert
Advisory Committee to assist the department. This mechanism has been there in place and is well
established.

3
4.2 The Committee welcomes the constitution of Expert Advisory Committees to monitor
and review the progress of its ongoing schemes and is of the opinion that such a step can
be helpful in prioritization and rationalisation of schemes.
5. SHIFTING AND RESTRUCTURING OF PROGRAMMES
5.1 The Department has informed that Programmes such as India Meteorological Department
(IMD), National Council for Medium Range and Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF) and some
programmes related to Seismology have been shifted to the new Ministry of Earth Sciences. Some
internal restructuring of programmes and schemes has also been done.
6. Research and Development Support
6.1 The Department of Science and Technology, as a part of its S&T promotional activity has
been supporting R&D programmes under Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC). The
objectives of the SERC are:—
(i) To promote research in newly emerging and frontline areas of Science and Engineering
including multidisciplinary fields;
(ii) To selectively promote general research capability in relevant areas of Science and
Engineering taking into account existing research capabilities of the host institution; and
(iii) To encourage young scientists to take up challenging research and development
activities.
6.2 The allocation for ‘Research and Development Support to Multi-disciplinary Research in
Science and Technology’ which stood at Rs. 346.50 crores in Budget 2007-08 was increased to
Rs. 371.37 crores at the Revision Estimates Stage and has been now been increased to Rs.417.00
crores in Budget 2008-09.
6.3 The Committee has been informed that the department is committed to the pursuit
and promotion of science & technology with vigour in the Eleventh Five Year Plan. SERC, which
is the single largest basic research funding mechanism in the country across disciplines and
institutions, has intensified the R&D promotional activities through innovative programmes such
as Intensification of Research in High Priority Areas (IRHPA), Fund for Improvement of S&T
Infrastructure in Universities and Higher Educational Institutions (FIST), Fast Track Young
Scientist's R&D programme and Prestigious Fellowships like J.C. Bose, Ramanujan, Ramanna, etc.
The budget allocation of Rs. 417.00 crore in 2008-09 includes the allocation for the proposed
Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB).
7. SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING RESEARCH COUNCIL (SERC)
7.1 The objective of the Council is to promote research in newly emerging and frontier areas
of science and engineering including multidisciplinary fields; selectively promote the general
research capability in relevant areas of science and engineering taking into account capability of the
host institute; encourage young scientists to take up challenging R&D activities; give special
encouragement to projects from less endowed university departments; encourage patenting facilities
to scientists and technologists in the country for Indian and foreign patents on a sustained basis;
promote basic and applied research in frontline areas of engineering and technology in various
academic and research institutions, in collaboration with industry and user agencies (where
applicable), and to transfer such technologies for developmental activities; create and strengthen
S&T infrastructure in Universities and National Institutes; Creation of core groups/ units around an
outstanding scientist; take steps to widen, in general, the base of scientific R&D in the country
by attracting the best available talent to pursue research as career, by spreading R&D culture in

4
universities and other higher educational institutions at large and by taking all other necessary
promotional measures.
7.2 The Secretary of the Department during the presentation made to the Committee
has informed that Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) needs an increase in
allocation of about 25% in order to fulfil its objectives. The Committee, keeping in mind
the huge array of responsibilities for promotion of research in newly emerging and frontier
areas of science and engineering including multidisciplinary fields; need for encouraging
young scientists to take up challenging R&D activities and imperatives to promote basic and
applied research in frontline areas of engineering and technology in various academic and
research institutions, etc., among many others, recommends that sufficient budgetary
support may be provided so that the programme could be pursued with vigour.
7.3 The Committee has been informed that around 3000 research proposals are received
by the Department every year out of which 500-600 proposals are selected for funding. The
Committee is of the view that lack of fund should not be allowed to come in the way of
funding good and promising research proposals.
8. SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY PROGRAMMES FOR SOCIO-ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT
8.1 The Societal Programme of the Department plays a vital role in the development strategy
of various sections of the society, which provides opportunities to motivate scientists, engineers
and field level workers to take-up time bound developmental projects with inputs of Science and
Technology for the benefit of disadvantaged sections of the society. The programmes are being
implemented through S&T institutions, universities and S&T based voluntary organizations under
various schemes.
8.2 The following plan schemes: Science and Technology Entrepreneurship Development,
Science & Society Programme, Women Component Plan, S&T Communication & Popularization
and other schemes: (i) Special Component Plan for the Development of Scheduled Castes,
(ii) Tribal Sub-plan which were hitherto separate plan schemes have now been merged and renamed
as S&T Programme for Socio Economic Development insofar as budget outlays are concerned.
8.3 The success of Science can be gauged by the fact as to how far it has been able to
touch and ameliorate the life and lot of one and all. The committee feels that going by this
yardstick a lot more is desired to be done. The committee is of the opinion that science
should come out of the confines of laboratories to make its outreach to the common masses
and it needs to be done in a time bound manner or a sustained basis. This becomes all the
more imperative as India needs to shed its tag of a developing nation and acquire the
stature of a developed one, the sooner the better, and it is none other but science which
holds the magic stick to do wonders. DST being the nodal Ministry, the onus lies with it.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Science and Technology
should coordinate with all other scientific departments and institutions to move forward in
this direction and lay more and more emphasis on S&T programme for socio-economic
development.
9. TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
9.1 The programme is aimed at developing indigenous technology through joint projects with
industry and socio-economic Ministries. It also includes activities relating to Development of
Natural Resources Data Management System, Patent Facilitating Cells, Instrument Development
Programme, Technology Projects in Mission Mode, Joint Technology Projects and Drugs and
Pharmaceuticals Research.

5
9.2 Technology Development Board (TDB) has been set up to help the indigenously developed
technologies reach the stage of commercial application and for grafting imported technologies for
wider domestic applications.
9.3 Allocation for payment to Technology Development Board against Cess receipts has been
hiked from Rs.19.00 crores at R.E. Stage in 2007-08 to Rs. 20.80 crores in 2008-09. The
Committee has been informed that during the year 2007-08, BE for Technology Development Board
was Rs. 20.80 crores under non-plan. There was a mandatory cut of 5% on non plan expenditure.
This was, therefore, reduced to 19.00 crores at RE stage. During the year 2008-09, it has been
projected at the level of BE (2007-08) and hence BE for 2008-09 is Rs. 20.80 crores.
9.4 The committee acknowledges the important role that TDP plays in translating lab-
scale research into technology mode but for which the benefit of science cannot be reaped.
The Committee, therefore, desires that Technology Development Programmes should be
further strengthened and intensified so that the advantages of new breakthroughs in the
field of science could be taken to the masses at the earliest and at an affordable cost.
9.5 The Committee is also of the view that developing indigenous technology through
joint projects is also of utmost importance because without industry participation such
projects will not only become exorbitant but also lack the commercial dimension which is
very important for successful culmination of such projects.
10. MODERNISATION OF MAPPING ORGANIZATIONS (SOI AND NATMO)
10.1 Survey of India (SOl) and National Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organization (NATMO) are
operationally two different entities, but insofar as the budget outlays are concerned the two
schemes have been merged and renamed as ‘Modernisation of Mapping Organizations’. The
National Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organization set up in 1956 primarily aims at preparing
National Atlas of India. Subsequently, its scope and activities were extended to new fields of
geographical research, thematic mapping covering all the academic and applied aspects of
geography and allied subjects.
10.2 Allocation to the tune of 195.60 crores was made in Budget 2007-08 for ‘Modernization
of Mapping Organisation’ (SOI and NATMO). It has been reduced to 185.37 crores in Budget
2008-09. It is stated that the budgetary allocation under the Revenue section during 2007-08 was
Rs. 195.38 crore for both National Atlas and Thematic Maping Organisation (NATMO) and Survey
of India (SOI) under the scheme ‘Modernization of Mapping Organisation. This has been reduced
to Rs. 190.255 crore in the Budgetary allocation for 2008-09. This is only a marginal difference
in Budget allocation and shall be reviewed at the RE stage.
10.3 The Committee is of the view that the mapping work should not suffer as a result
of inadequacy of funds, as it plays an important role in planning of resource utilization and
other schemes.
11. AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS AND PROFESSIONALS BODIES
11.1 DST supports a total of 15 R&D centered institutions and two other technology bodies’ viz.
National Accreditation Board for Laboratories (NABL) and Technology Information, Forecasting,
Assessment Council (TIFAC). The Department of Science and Technology during the Eleventh plan
proposes to invest in autonomous institutions selected on the basis of performance and assist them
to attain global best standards in science and engineering. This initiative of DST will assist the
country to plan the supply side interventions on a national scale.
11.2 An impact assessment study of TIFAC and NABL is proposed. The study will help to shape
the future structure and programmes of the two organizations. TIFAC is being developed into

6
policy body for developing technology foresight and strengthening the innovation infrastructure of
the country.
11.3 During the Eleventh plan period, DST has been entrusted with the task to develop five
autonomous S&T institutions in some important and nationally critical areas like Glaciology,
molecular materials, pre-competitive research institute for computer sciences etc.
11.4 Allocation of Rs.425.73 crores at RE stage was made in Budget 2007-08 for ‘Autonomous
Institutions and Professional Bodies’. It has been increased to Rs. 442.00 crores in Budget
2008-09. The Committee has been informed that on the instructions of Ministry of finance a
mandatory cut of approximately 5%-7% was imposed on all Non-Plan allocations to Autonomous
Institutions (AIs). 25.00 crores earmarked for new Als in Plan was not utilized due to requisite
approvals not being available. Additional grants-in-aid as released to the following AIs:-
(Amount in crores)
• Indian Association for the Cultivation of Science (lACS) 7.00
• Indian Institute of Astrophysics 4.85
• Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical
• Sciences and Technology(SCTIMST) 2.00
• Jawahar Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research (JNCASR)  5.00
• International Advanced Research Centre for Powered Metallurgy and 6.00
New Materials (ARC I)
• Aryabhata Research Institute for Observational Sciences (ARIES) 7.00
The allocations of the following AIs were cut due to various reasons like availability of
unspent balances, etc.:
• Birbal Sahni Institute of Palaeobotany (BSIP) 5.00
• Technology Information, Forecasting & Assessment) 13.00
Council (TIFAC)
• National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratories (NABL) 6.00
• National Academy of Sciences (NAS) 1.2
11.5 The Committee has been informed that DST plans to initiate five autonomous S&T
institutions in areas of glaciology, molecular materials, pre-competitive research institute
for computer sciences, etc., where India would require R&D capacities and need for National
initiatives for R&D in these areas have been felt. The Committee recommends that the
process of establishment of five autonomous Science and Technology institutions in different
fields be expedited so as to ensure that they become operational within the stipulated period
and become ready to meet the demands and expectations of these areas. The Committee
also recommends that impact assessment study of other institutions on the lines of TIFAC
& NABL may also be undertaken so as to suitably restructure to derive maximum results
out of them.
12. SYNERGY PROJECTS
12.1 The scheme is operated by the Office of the Principal Scientific Adviser to the Government
of India. The objective of having a separate budget allocation is to enable that office to play a

7
catalytic role in taking up selective R&D and technology development projects in a number of
important areas where multiple scientific and technological agencies are involved.
12.2 As against the proposed outlay of Rs. 37.62 crores for ‘Synergy Projects’ under the Budget
Estimates 2008-09, only an amount of Rs. 8.00 crores has been allocated.
12.3 The Committee recommends enhancing allocations for the project at the RE stage
because such a strategic project which has a catalytic effect on very important R&D and
technology development projects involving multiple agencies needs more funds for cutting-
edge research.
13. NATIONAL TRAINING PROGRAMME
13.1 National Training Programme for Scientists/Technologists working with the Government of
India, is an initiative undertaken with a view to provide holistic training and empowering them with
capabilities. The programmes are categorised broadly to cater to General Management Development
Areas, specific and highly specialized areas, techno-scientific management covering multi-
disciplinary areas, etc.
13.2 Fresh allocation to the tune of Rs. 5.00 crores has been made in budget 2008-2009 for
information technology in National Training Programme for Scientist/Technologist working with
Government of India. The Committee has been informed that in 2007-2008 the Department of
Science & Technology had allocated Rs. 2.00 crores for this programme. During 2007-2008, the
Department conducted 28 training programmes which include:—
(a) Foundation Training Programme (10 weeks)-one
(b) Integrated Middle level Training Programmes (5 weeks)-one
(c) Senior Scientists Techno-Scientific Management Programme (2 weeks)-one
(d) Senior Scientist General Management Programme (2 weeks)-one
13.3 Besides these programmes, three programmes for Administrative Personnel working in S&T
Departments, three programmes related to Science and Society and eighteen specialized one/two,
weeks programmes related to various topics including newly introduced Science and Law, Science
Audit and Trends and Perspectives - Bioinformatics were also conducted.
13.4 In 2008-2009 on the recommendation of the Planning Commission - the scheme ‘‘National
training Programme for Scientists/Technologists working in Government Sector’’ with an allocation
of Rs. 5.00 crores has been shown as a separate scheme at page No.1 93, S1. No.12 of the
Expenditure budget V olume II.
13.5 The Committee welcomes the initiative of the Department to upgrade the skills of
its scientists by conducting various training programmes which will certainly enable them
to meet contemporary standards and overcome any difficulties arising out of lack of
training. The Committee recommends that more funds may be provided by the Government
at RE stage so that some more training programmes may be added under this scheme.
14. DRUGS AND PHARMACEUTICAL PROGRAMME
14.1 The scheme is to be used for the purpose of supporting research and development
programmes and setting up of national facilities for furthering R&D activities in the country and
for defining areas of relevance and value to the Indian populace and intensifying the work in such
areas by synergizing the core competence of the constituents (publicly funded R&D institutions and
the Indian Pharmaceutical industry).

8
14.2 Allocation made to ‘Drugs and Pharamaceutical Research’ has been reduced to Rs.100.00
crores in Budget 2008-09 from Rs.118.00 crores in Budget 2007-08. The Committee has been
informed that allocation of Rs.118 crores at BE/RE for 2007-08 was made at a time when the
Eleventh plan was under finalization. Subsequently, Eleventh plan was finalized and the allocation
for Drug and Pharma programme for the plan period is Rs. 500 crores. Accordingly, for the year
2008-09, 100 crores has been provided.
14.3 The Committee is of the view that in a country where poverty is rampant and
substantial part of population suffers from diseases, a continued effort in drug research is
required for providing cheaper medicines. Continued support to drug research programmes
should be provided to enable the scientists to find cheaper and effective drugs. The
Committee recommends that drug research programmes should focus on diseases which are
afflicting the large populace of our country.
14.4 In its 162nd report on Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research Programme including the herbal
medicines the Committee had observed that ‘‘On herbal research, as a short-term strategy, there
is a need to develop medicines to combat most prevalent diseases like Gastric problems, Arthritis,
Diabetes, Stress Related Disorders, Thoracic Diseases, etc., for which a well thought strategy
requires to be evolved. Time bound research on herbal drugs may be a suitable option. It was
informed that a large number of ISM drugs are being used for a long time, having no acute
toxicity. But long-term toxicity on these drugs must be established. A few more experiments could
be done in scientific manner to make it more meaningful. Public sector units may be utilized for
production of these drugs for mass consumption.’’ In its Action Taken Note on the same the
Government has replied that Studies related to scientific validation along with toxicity and efficacy
studies of certain herbal formulations besides certain herbo-mineral formulations are being carried
out under various programmes of Government of India.
14.5 The Committee reiterates it earlier recommendation that more efforts should be
made to make alternative system of medicines successfully fill in the gap in areas where
conventional cures are not available. The Committee felt that research in Traditional/
Alternative systems should focus on areas where conventional cures are either inadequate
or too costly.
15. NATIONAL MISSION ON NANO SCIENCES AND NANO TECHNOLOGY
15.1 The following areas of research have been identified for immediate attention :
• Studies of free atomic and molecular clusters, cluster assembled materials, low-
dimensional structures and quantum dots;
• Nano-electronics and nano-photonics
• Applications; nano-coatings, nano-device based sensors and diagnostics kits, controlled
and targeted drug delivery systems, nano-phosphor based display devices, etc.
15.2 Allocation to ‘National Mission on nano Sciences and Nano Technology’ had been decreased
from Rs. 150.00 crores in Budget 2007-08 to Rs. 120.00 crores at R.E. state. The allocation has
been enhanced to Rs. 145.00 crores in Budget 2008-09. The Committee has been informed that
a new. programme ‘‘National Mission on Nano Science and Technology (nano Mission)’ has been
allocated Rs. 150.00 crores in the BE stage. Based on the National consultation on Nano Mission,
the government has approved the implementation of nano Mission on May 3, 2007. The Mission
has many components such as basic research promotion & HRD programmes, Nano Technology
Application Programmes which look into Joint Industry-Academia/National lab R&D Projects,
Establishing nano Application & Technology Development Centres, nano-Technology Business

9
Incubators etc., International collaborations: Joint Centres in specific areas etc. These activities
have to be implemented in phases. A Mission management has to be put in place.
15.3 A Nano M ission council (NMC) has only recently been constituted. The technical
programmes of the Nano Mission are also being guided by two advisory groups, viz. the nano
Science Advisory Group (NSAG) and the nano Applications and Technology Advisory Group
(NATAG). Both the groups have been constituted. Several proposals have been identified for
support. It was recommended to establish three major Institutes of Nano Science and Technology
in the country with each costing approximately Rs. 100 crores. PG Teaching Programmes (M.Sc./
M.Tech.) in Nano Science and Technology has been initiated.11 Universities/institutes have been
identified in the first batch.
15.4 The Committee welcomes the proposal to establish three major Institutes of Nano
Science and Technology and the introduction of PG Teaching Programmes (M.Sc./M.Tech.) in
Nano Science and Technology. The Committee is of the view that such proactive steps are
required for creating a pool of scientists to cater to the needs of this unfolding research
frontier which holds immense potential for the future.
16. SCHOLARSHIPS FOR SCIENCE IN HIGHER EDUCATION (SHE)
16.1 Scholarship for Higher Education (SHE) is an innovative scheme aimed at attracting the
bright students in the age group of 17-22 year who have passed their Grade X and Grade XII
examinations with excellent marks. The Scheme offers Rs. 1 lakh per year for continuing science
education at B.Sc. and M.Sc. levels for 10,000 candidates per year. This will be linked with the
other two components of the INSPIRE program.
16.2 Allocat ion to ‘Scholarships for Science in higher Education’ has been decreased from
Rs. 100.00 crores in Budget 2007-08 to Rs. 85.00 crores in Budget 2008-09. The scheme aims
at an annual accretion of 10,000/- ‘best in class’ future researchers per year, which should enable
India to become a Global player in R&D. In this way a class of best young brains of the country
can be nurtured and retained for research in science streams. This would eventually enable India
to embark on ambitious course of wealth creation through IPR generation. The Department has
prepared the Detailed Proposal and has approached the Expenditure Finance Committee for
approval. Part of the fellowship is in cash and remaining as attachments like for attending national
(BSc & MSc Level) & international (at MSc Level only) conferences, Book etc. Therefore in the
first year (2007-08) an allocation of Rs. 85.0 crore i.e. 85% of the cost of 10,000 fellowships is
sufficient for effective implementation.
16.3 The Committee appreciates the scheme and is of the view that the above programme
is a step taken in right direction and more such programmes are required to initiate and
retain students in the field of science. The Committee feels that funds should not be
allowed to be an obstacle as the future of science and of the country rests on such small
beginnings which will have crucial effects on the future.
16.4 The Committee feels that the geographical reach of SHE should also be extended to
distant parts of the country like Ladakh and the Northeast and other backward States. The
Committee has also been informed that the Department was unable to implement the ‘SHE’
scheme because it required consultation and approval of several departments. The
Committee recommends that the Department expedite the process of consultation along
with other Departments for speedy execution of proposals. Beside this the Committee also
recommends that a special effort should be made to increase the reach of the programmes
to students who are not as advantaged as in the Metros but are equally deserving and this
should specially take into consideration girl students who are unable to take advantage of
opportunities.

10
17. INNOV ATION IN SCIENCE PURSUIT FOR INSPIRED RESEARCH (INSPIRE)
17.1 Innovations in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research (INSPIRE) is to attract and foster
talent in scientific research. The scheme draws benefits from the previous experience in the
education sector, but aims to expand the scale to gain critical size and mass.
17.2 Allocation to 'Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research’ has been decreased from
Rs. 100.00 crores in Budget 2007-08 to Rs. 85.00 crores in Budget 2008-09.The Committee has
been informed that ‘‘Innovation in Science Pursuit for Inspired Research (INSPIRE)’’ foresights
building innovative knowledge infrastructure by conversion of comparative strength of India by
virtue of its demography and inherited knowledge systems into competitive advantage. The scheme,
which offers science as a career option by providing necessary opportunities for youth, has the
following components:
17.3 ‘ ‘INSPIRE’’ includes Scheme for Early Attracting of Talents for Science (SEATS) providing
Science innovation scholarship of Rs 5000 for a total of one million young learners of the age
group 10-15 years once in their school career during the next five years for experiencing the joy
of innovations. This includes with a mentorship through global science leader including 60-70 Nobel
prize winners and 150-200 Indian leaders in science through a summer camp for the top 1%
performers in the Class X examination every year for a period of five years and Assured
Opportunity for Research Careers (AORC) in the age group of 22-32 years for 5 years doctoral
research backed by an assured research career opportunity scheme for a another period of five
years after their PhD in sciences. About 1000 young people in each category would be considered
under this program. The Department has prepared the Detailed Proposal and is in a process of
consolidating different components. Since the scheme requires a national movement involving
various stakeholders including State Boards/NCERT/ National Institutes, there would be a marginally
low initial expenditure.
17.4 In the light of the serious crunch in availability of quality scientists, schemes like
INSPIRE along with other such schemes need constant focus and attention. Scheme for
Early Attracting of Talents for Science (SEATS) and Assured Opportunity for Research
Careers (AORC) in the age group of 22-32 years for 5 years doctoral research backed by
an assured research career opportunity scheme for a another period of five years after their
PhD in sciences are well-thought schemes which if properly implemented have the potential
to meet the intended targets and the Committee therefore, feels that these schemes should
be given the required attention.
17.5 The Committee is of the view that the Department should prioritize its activities and
focus on its core competencies rather than spreading its resources too thin. The top-most
priority should be given to tapping young talent through various monetary and motivational
schemes. Stress should be laid on ‘catching them young’
18. WATER TECHNOLOGY INITIATIVE
18.1 The focus of the program is on design and development of low cost solutions for domestic
use of technologies for safe drinking water. Since quality is the main consideration of safe drinking
water research, such technologies are being focused. The initiative would include also the pilot
testing of a credible number of products and referencing of selected technologies to the social
contexts of the application regions.
18.2 Allocation to ‘Water Technology Initiative’ has been increased from Rs. 00.60 crores in
Budget 2007-08 to Rs.5.00 crores in Budget 2008-2009. The Committee has been informed that
the BE for Water Technology Initiative was Rs. 5 crores during the year 2007-08. As this is a new
initiative under the Eleventh Plan and 2007-08 was the initial year, it took some time to gear up

11
the activities after completing the administrative/financial procedural requirements. So, at RE stage,
it was reduced to 0.60 crores. During the year 2008-09, the programme is expected to run at its
full swing, in terms of up gradation/dissemination of technologies like nano-coated candles
developed by ARCI (Hyderabad), low cost candle filters developed by RRL (Bhubanesvar).
18.3 When the Committee enquired about the research work developed in removing fluoride and
arsenic from water in different parts of the country, the Secretary, Department of Science and
Technology has informed that CSIR has developed a technology for removal of hazardous minerals.
It was also informed that the Department has already developed necessary base for the
development of technology for the removal of various hazardous and harmful containments such
as arsenic, fluoride, iron and dissolved salts. Sixteen iron removal plants based on the ceramic
membranes have been supported in the north-eastern states. Fifteen more such plants are on the
anvil to cater to the requirement of Nagaland. Completion of development of arsenic removal
systems through microbial as well as innovative chemical processes is likely to be completed after
rigorous field tests. The sea water desalination units have been successfully installed at
Ramanathapuram district of Tamil Nadu. This technology is upscaled using heat recovery system
to cater to the requirements of other areas devoid of potable drinking water.
18.4 T he Committee is of the opinion that a project for development of low cost filters
for domestic purposes should be given top-most priority as millions of households in this
country, for want of affordable filters, suffer from waterborne diseases. Integrating effective
technologies to purify drinking water supplied by civic authorities is yet another challenge
to be taken by the Department in larger interest. The Committee would also like the
Department to enter into partnership with Industry so as to make such products
commercial and popular.
18.5 The Committee is also of the opinion that such water treatment technology should
be made available in large scale catering to the needs at community level and arsenic,
fluoride, iron and other hazardous minerals should be removed before it reaches
households. The Committee is of the further view that there is an urgent need to develop
models which would be low cost, low power consuming and which can benefit people of
different parts of the country afflicted by the problem.
19. INNOV ATION CLUSTERS
19.1 Whereas the education and industrial infrastructure in the country are developing side by
side there is a need to develop an innovation infrastructure to link knowledge products to the
generation of wealth. It is also necessary to mount such an initiative under an effective public-
private partnership model in areas where the trade and advantages have already been established and
the clustering processes are evident. Evidence based selection of the sectors and locations for
innovation clusters will be essential.
19.2 Allocation to ‘Innovation clusters’ has been increased from Rs.1.80 crores in R.E.
2007-08 Rs.5.00 crores in Budget 2008-09. The Committee has been informed that innovation
Clusters is a new scheme proposed for implementation in the Eleventh Five Year Plan. Since
2007-08 was the first year of the Plan, therefore R.E. was kept at Rs.1.8 crores. Necessary
approvals for implementation of the scheme are being sought during the current financial year.
During 2008-09 the implementation of the scheme is expected to be in full swing and therefore
the allocation has been increased to Rs.5.00 crores.
19.3 The Committee is of the opinion that an innovation infrastructure to link knowledge
products to the generation of wealth is of immense importance in knowledge economy. Rich
fruits of research should also be commercially viable to sustain themselves and encourage

12
further research. Innovation clusters benefiting the academy and industrial sectors under
an effective public-private partnership model is the need of the hour for future successes
of research initiatives.
20. SECURITY TECHNOLOGY INITIATIVES
20.1 Internal security is a subject of concern in modern civilizations in many countries and hence
a science and technology initiative in this area is essential. This technology however, involves a
careful selection and symbiosis of many disciplines. Since Department of Science and Technology
enjoys the benefit of linkages with a vast network of institutions, it has already made a preliminary
attempt to structure and implement the national initiative. A new national program is being proposed
using the NMITLI type model.
20.2 Allocation to ‘Security Technology Initiative’ has decreased from Rs 10.00 crores in Budget
2007-08 to Rs 5.00 crores in Budget 2008-09. The Committee has been informed that the
department is committed to pursuing its aim of development of technologies and other S&T
interventions for ‘Security’ purposes. In order to prepare a user-oriented and user-driven process
of evolving technologies some ground work needs to be done by this Department which is planned
in June/July, 2008. Subsequently such projects would be evolved. In view of the involvement of
few agencies and the time required to evolve user-oriented proposals it is felt that the initial
expenditure would be low and hence the reduction in the budget. The Committee is of the opinion
that in a world where security has been inextricably linked with technology, the country require
sophisticated technology for both intelligence gathering and security. Effective research initiatives
and adequate funds for the same should be provided at all costs. This initiative becomes all the
more imperative as our country is confronting the menace of all sorts of terrorism sported from
outside the border of the country.
20.3 The convergence of technology and security issues is indicative of the highly
technological world we are living in. Technology not only determines how we live our lives
but also how we protect ourselves from negative forces determined to destroy our social and
economic fabric. It is here that the Committee feels that technology has an important role
to play in intelligence gathering as well as monitoring internal security situation and it
urges that the Department should do all that is possible to achieve breakthroughs in
security technology in a time bound manner so that we could be in a position to effectively
tackle the threats posed to our internal security and improve our intelligence gathering
capabilities.
21. MEGA FACILITIES FOR BASIC RESEARCH
21.1 Basic research in the country has been depending upon mega and capital intensive facilities
created by other countries. This practice has led to asymmetries in credit sharing. DST alongwith
DAE has identified areas where an effective partnership of the two departments can bring about
an effective capacity building in the university and academic sector for creating mega faculties for
basic research.
21.2 Allocation to ‘Mega facilities for Basic Research’ bas been reduced from Rs. 25.00 crores
in 2007-08 to Rs. 20.00 crores in 2008-09. The Committee has been informed that the scheme
aims at creation of mega science programmes and facilities in and out side the country to improve
access to such state-of-the,.art facilities to the Indian scientific community, especially from the
academic sector.
21.3 Since the scheme requires the involvement of various stake holders including other
Scientific Departments like DAE, DBT etc. and International community, a. marginally low initial
expenditure is expected. Several proposals like Facility for Antiproton and Ion Research (Germany),

13
Japan beam line for materials research, ELETRA beam line etc. are in advanced stages for
implementation in 2008-09.
21.4 The Committee welcomes the symbiotic research initiative taken by the Department
along with Department of Atomic Energy (DAE). Identification of areas where an effective
partnership of the two departments can bring about an effective capacity building in the
university and academic sector for building mega faculties for basic research is of utmost
importance as it is a known fact that without progress in basic science, technological
progress cannot. sustain itself for very long.
21.5 The Committee has been informed -that the Department has developed a soil-testing kit,
which costs Rs. 3000 per unit. The Committee would like the Department to popularise the kit
among farmers and rope in Industry to promote the product. The Committee also recommends that
the Department should coordinate with the Ministry of Agriculture to promote its uses among the
farmers. It also recommends that at least one soil testing kit be made available free of cost at the
Panchayat or Village level so that even .small and marginal farmers, who otherwise can't afford to
purchase it, are not deprived of its benefits.
22. SCIENCE EXPRESS
22.1 The Rashtriya Vigyan Evam Prodyogiki Sanchar Parishad (RVPSP) has developed an
exhibition train ‘‘Science Express’’ in collaboration with Max Planck Society, Germany. This state
of the art exhibition, akin to their well know ground based ‘‘Science Tunnel’’, will take visitors
to a fascinating expedition into different issues of Modern Science through 12 thematic modules.
The presentation is through interactive plasma screens, TV monitors, PCs etc. The special train
would travel to about 57 selected destinations for 9 months. Colleges and schools in the districts
are being mobilized to visit the Science Express. The exhibition has a number of exciting activities
including the famous KIDZ LAB of BASF India, and on the spot competitions.
22.2 The Committee is of the view that the ‘Science Express’ programme of the
Department has shown encouraging results and should be further intensified and expanded
to the rural and backward areas of the country. There is need for better monitoring of the
programme for crowd management and more such expresses should be introduced so that
viewers get more time while viewing.
23. GLOBAL WARMING
23.1 The phenomena of Global warming and climate change are emerging as one of the greatest
and most formidable challenges of the 21st century which are stated to have the potential of
pushing the world to the brink of a Catastrophe. Adaptation and mitigation are the two possible
ways and means identified to counter their effects. But these are not so easy solutions as they
appear to be. Science has to play a pivotal role in this direction. Department of Science and
Technology with its vast network of multi disciplinary laboratories and huge resource of competent
and expert man power has to take a lead role in galvanizing and dovetailing its activities and
resources to find viable solutions to provide relief to the nation and the world from this impending
calamity. It can address scientific issues relevant to atmosphere, geosphere, hydrosphere as well
as biosphere. It can assume the responsibility of standardizing all measurement of global change
with international traceability. The Committee feels that separate budgetary provisions for this
purpose should be made.
23.2 Ater considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and
Technology assessing the progress of various important programmes and projects
administered by it, the Committee recommends that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 1780.00
crores under Demand No. 83 (Department of Science and Technology) as sought by the
Department for the year 2008-09 may be approved.

14
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
1. The Committee has been informed that the Department’s plan outlay of Rs. 1526
crores at the BE stage last year was reduced to Rs. 1270 crores at the RE stage. The
Department, however, was unable to spend even the reduced Grants during the last year.
The Committee takes serious note of the situation and recommends that the Department
should be more prompt and efficient in utilising the allocated funds. This acquires even
more importance because the rise in allocation this year, the Committee feels, is miniscule,
if put in the context of inflation and economic growth. At the same time the Committee
is of the opinion that, keeping in mind the responsibilities of the Department and the role
it is expected to play in development of science and technology, the Department should be
given an increase in allocation in consonance with its requirements. (Para 2.2)
2. The Committee welcomes the constitution of Expert Advisory Committees to monitor
and review the progress of its ongoing schemes and is of the opinion that such a step can
be helpful in prioritization and rationalisation of schemes. (Para 4.2)
3. The Secretary of the Department during the presentation made to the Committee
has informed that Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) needs an increase in
allocation of about 25 per cent in order to fulfill its objectives. The Committee, keeping in
mind the huge array of responsibilities for promotion of research in newly emerging and
frontier areas of science and engineering including multidisciplinary fields; need for
encouraging young scientists to take up challenging R&D activities and imperatives to
promote basic and applied research in frontline areas of engineering and technology in
various academic and research institutions, etc., among many others, recommends that
sufficient budgetary support may be provided so that the programme could be pursued with
vigour. (Para 7.2)
4. The Committee has been informed that around 3000 research proposals are received
by the Department every year out of which 500-600 proposals are selected for funding. The
Committee is of the view that lack of fund should not be allowed to come in the way of
funding good and promising research proposals. (Para 7.3)
5. The success of Science can be gauged by the fact as to how far it has been able to
touch and ameliorate the life and lot of one and all. The Committee feels that going by this
yardstick a lot more is desired to be done. The Committee is of the opinion that science
should come out of the confines of laboratories to make its outreach to the common masses
and it needs to be done in a time bound manner or a sustained basis. This becomes all the
more imperative as India needs to shed its tag of a developing nation and acquire the
stature of a developed one, the sooner the better, and it is none other but science which
holds the magic stick to do wonders. DST being the nodal Ministry, the onus lies with it.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Science and Technology
should coordinate with all other scientific departments and institutions to move forward in
this direction and lay more and more emphasis on S&T programme for socio-economic
development. (Para 8.3)
6. The committee acknowledges the important role that TDP plays in translating lab-
scale research into technology mode but for which the benefit of science cannot be reaped.
The Committee, therefore, desires that Technology Development Programmes should be
14

15
further strengthened and intensified so that the advantages of new breakthroughs in the
field of science could be taken to the masses at the earliest and at an affordable cost.
(Para 9.4)
7. The Committee is also of the view that developing indigenous technology through
joint projects is also of utmost importance because without industry participation such
projects will not only become exorbitant but also lack the commercial dimension which is
very important for successful culmination of such projects. (Para 9.5)
8. The Committee is of the view that the mapping work should not suffer as a result
of inadequacy of funds, as it plays an important role in planning of resource utilization and
other schemes. (Para 10.3)
9. The Committee has been informed that DST plans to initiate five autonomous S&T
institutions in areas of glaciology, molecular materials, pre-competitive research institute
for computer sciences, etc., where India would require R&D capacities and need for National
initiatives for R&D in these areas have been felt. The Committee recommends that the
process of establishment of five autonomous Science and Technology institutions in different
fields be expedited so as to ensure that they become operational within the stipulated period
and become ready to meet the demands and expectations of these areas. The committee also
recommends that impact assessment study of other institutions on the lines of TIFAC &
NABL may also be undertaken so as to suitably restructure to derive maximum results out
of them. (Para 11.5)
10. The Committee recommends enhancing allocations for the project at the RE stage
because such a strategic project which has a catalytic effect on very important R&D and
technology development projects involving multiple agencies needs more funds for cutting-
edge research. (Para 12.3)
11. The Committee welcomes the initiative of the Department to upgrade the skills of
its scientists by conducting various training programmes which will certainly enable them
to meet contemporary standards and overcome any difficulties arising out of lack of
training. The Committee recommends that more funds may be provided by the Government
at RE stage so that some more training programmes may be added under this scheme.
(Para 13.5)
12. The Committee is of the view that in a country where poverty is rampant and
substantial part of population suffers from diseases, a continued effort in drug research is
required for providing cheaper medicines. Continued support to drug research programmes
should be provided to enable the scientists to find cheaper and effective drugs. The
Committee recommends that drug research programmes should focus on diseases which are
afflicting the large populace of our country. (Para 14.3)
13. The Committee reiterates it earlier recommendation that more efforts should be
made to make alternative system of medicines successfully fill in the gap in areas where
conventional cures are not available. The Committee felt that research in Traditional/
Alternative systems should focus on areas where conventional cures are either inadequate
or too costly. (Para 14.5)
14. The Committee welcomes the proposal to establish three major Institutes of Nano
Science and Technology and the introduction of PG Teaching Programmes (M.Sc./M.Tech.) in
Nano Science and Technology. The Committee is of the view that such proactive steps are
required for creating a pool of scientists to cater to the needs of this unfolding research
frontier which holds immense potential for the future. (Para 15.4)

16
15. The Committee appreciates the scheme and is of the view that the above programme
is a step taken in right direction and more such programmes are required to initiate and
retain students in the field of science. The Committee feels that funds should not be
allowed to be an obstacle as the future of science and of the country rests on such small
beginnings which will have crucial effects on the future. (Para 16.3)
16. The Committee feels that the geographical reach of SHE should also be extended to
distant parts of the country like Ladakh and the North-East and other backward States. The
Committee has also been informed that the Department was unable to implement the 'SHE'
scheme because it required consultation and approval of several departments. The
Committee recommends that the Department expedite the process of consultation along
with other Departments for speedy execution of proposals. Beside this the Committee also
recommends that a special effort should be made to increase the reach of the programmes
to students who are not as advantaged as in the Metros but are equally deserving and this
should specially take into consideration girl students who are unable to take advantage of
opportunities. (Para 16.4)
17. In the light of the serious crunch in availability of quality scientists, schemes like
INSPIRE along with other such schemes need constant focus and attention. Scheme for
Early Attracting of Talents for Science (SEATS) and Assured Opportunity for Research
Careers (AORC) in the age group of 22-32 years for 5 years doctoral research backed by
an assured research career opportunity scheme for a another period of five years after their
Ph.D. in sciences are well-thought schemes which if properly implemented have the
potential to meet the intended targets and the Committee, therefore, feels that these
schemes should be given the required attention. (Para 17.4)
18. The Committee is of the view that the Department should prioritize its activities and
focus on its core competencies rather than spreading its resources too thin. The top-most
priority should be given to tapping young talent through various monetary and motivational
schemes. Stress should be laid on ‘catching them young’. (Para 17.5)
19. The Committee is of the opinion that a project for development of low cost filters
for domestic purposes should be given top-most priority as millions of households in this
country, for want of affordable filters, suffer from waterborne diseases. Integrating effective
technologies to purify drinking water supplied by civic authorities is yet another challenge
to be taken by the Department in larger interest. The Committee would also like the
Department to enter into partnership with Industry so as to make such products
commercial and popular. (Para 18.4)
20. The Committee is also of the opinion that such water treatment technology should
be made available in large scale catering to the needs at community level and arsenic,
fluoride, iron and other hazardous minerals should be removed before it reaches
households. The Committee is of the further view that there is an urgent need to develop
models which would be low cost, low power consuming and which can benefit people of
different parts of the country afflicted by the problem. (Para 18.5)
21. The Committee is of the opinion that an innovation infrastructure to link knowledge
products to the generation of wealth is of immense importance in knowledge economy. Rich
fruits of research should also be commercially viable to sustain themselves and encourage
further research. Innovation clusters benefiting the academy and industrial sectors under
an effective public-private partnership model is the need of the hour for future successes
of research initiatives. (Para 19.30)

17
22. The convergence of technology and security issues is indicative of the highly
technological world we are living in. Technology not only determines how we live our lives
but also how we protect ourselves from negative forces determined to destroy our social and
economic fabric. It is here that the Committee feels that technology has an important role
to play in intelligence gathering as well as monitoring internal security situation and it
urges that the Department should do all that is possible to achieve breakthroughs in
security technology in a time bound manner so that we could be in a position to effectively
tackle the threats posed to our internal security and improve our intelligence gathering
capabilities. (Para 20.3)
23. The Committee welcomes the symbiotic research initiative taken by the Department
along with Department of Atomic Energy (DAE). Identification of areas where an effective
partnership of the two departments can bring about an effective capacity building in the
university and academic sector for building mega faculties for basic research is of utmost
importance as it is a known fact that without progress in basic science, technological
progress cannot sustain itself for very long. (Para 21.4)
24. The Committee has been informed that the Department has developed a soil-testing
kit, which costs Rs. 3000 per unit. The Committee would like the Department to popularise
the kit among farmers and rope in Industry to promote the product. The Committee also
recommends that the Department should coordinate with the Ministry of Agriculture to
promote its uses among the farmers. It also recommends that at least one soil testing kit
be made available free of cost at the Panchayat or Village level so that even small and
marginal farmers, who otherwise can't afford to purchase it, are not deprived of its benefits.
(Para 21.5)
25. The Committee is of the view that the ‘Science Express’ programme of the
Department has shown encouraging results and should be further intensified and expanded
to the rural and backward areas of the country. There is need for better monitoring of the
programme for crowd management and more such expresses should be introduced so that
viewers get more time while viewing. (Para 22.2)
26. After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and
Technology assessing the progress of various important programmes and projects
administered by it, the Committee recommends that the budgetary allocation of Rs. 1780.00
crores under Demand No. 83 (Department of Science and Technology) as sought by the
Department for the year 2008-09 may be approved. (Para 23.2)

MINUTES

20

21
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. and at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 25th March, 2008 in
Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabha Thakur
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Jabir Husain
6. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
LOK  SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
9. Shri Brahmananda Panda
10. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
12. Shrimati Jayben B. Thakkar
13. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
REPRESENTATIVES FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
1. Dr. T. Ramasami, Secretary
2. Shri Sanjiv Nair, Joint Secretary (Admn.)
3. Shri K.P. Pandian, JS & FA
4. Brig. R.S. Tanwar, Surveyor General of India
5. Shri Dinesh Sharma, Secretary, TDB
6. Shri Anand Parwardhan, Exec. Director, TIFAC
7. Shri Rao V . Aiyagari, Scientist-‘G’
8. Shri Laxman Prasad, Scientist-‘G’
9. Shri Anuj Sinha, Scientist-‘G’
10. Dr. H.K. Mittal, Scientist-‘G’
11. Dr. R. Saha, Scientist-‘G’
21

22
12. Dr. B. Hari Gopal, Scientist-'G'
13. Dr. B.K. Jain, Scientist-'G'
14. Shri Sanjay Pandey, Controller of Accounts
15. Shri S.C. Chawla, Director
** *
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Department
of Science and Technology and requested the Secretary to make a presentation on Demands for
Grants (2008-09) of the Department. Thereafter, the Secretary made a visual presentation regarding
the major activities formulated for the year 2008-09 and achievements of the Department during
the year 2007-08. He also mentioned about the budgetary allocations under different heads as also
the functioning of the Department. Thereafter, Members sought clarifications on the points that
emerged out of the presentation. The Secretary replied to them.
The officials then withdrew.
3. * * *
4. * * *
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 1st
April, 2008.
*** Relates to other matters.

23
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 23rd April, 2008 in Room No. ‘139’,
First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Saman Pathak
4. Shri Jabir Husain
5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK  SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
9. Shri Francis Fanthome
10. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
11. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
12. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
2. The Committee took-up for consideration its draft 185th, *** *** *** *** *** *** ***
Reports on the Demands for Grants (2008-09) pertaining to the Departments of Science and
Technology ***; ***; ***; ***; *** and ***.
3. * * *
4. The Committee decided to present all the seven reports (185th to 191st) on 29th April, 2008
in both the Houses of Parliament. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence
Dr. Barun Mukherjee to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and to lay the copies of the reports
on the Table of Lok Sabha by Dr. Sujan Chakraborty and in his absence by Shri Francis Fanthome.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.35 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.
23

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.