PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
(1996-97) 
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS, (1996-97) OF THE; 
l\UNISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
(DEMAND NO. 22) 
(PRESENTED ON THE 12th SEPTEMBER, 1996) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
September, 1996/Bhadra, 191~ 

CONTENTS 
PAGE 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. REPORT OF THE CoMMITTEE 1-24 
3. ANNEXURES 2~5 
4. MINUTEs oF THE MEETINGS oF THE CoMMITTEE 47-54 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMEN­
'FARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1996-97) 
1. Shri V. Narayanasamy-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Brahmukumar Bhatt 
4. Shri N. Giri Prasad 
5. Slui K.R. Jayadevappa 
6. Shri K. Karunakaran 
7. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
8. Dr. Y. Raclhakrishna Murty 
9. Shri Narendra Pradhan 
10. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar 
11. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma 
12. Shri G. Swaminathan 
13. Shri Prakanta Warisa 
LOK SABHA 
14. Shri Mahabir La! Bishvakarma 
15. Shri Ranjib Biswal 
16. Shri A.B.A. Gani Khan Choudhury 
17. Prof. Jitendra Nath Das 
18. Shri Mohd. Ali Ashraaf Fatmi 
19. Shrimati Maneka Gandhi 
20. Shri K.C. Kondaiah 
21. Dr. Ramkrishan Kusmaria 
22. Shri G urn an Mal Lodha 
23. Slui Shivaji Mane 
24. Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta 
25. Shri Punnu Lal Mohle 
26. Shrimati Alka Nath 
27. Shri Sharad Pawar 
28. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
29. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
30. Shri Kalpnath Rai 
31. Shri A. Raja 
32. Shrimati Vasundhara Raje 
33. Shri P.V. Rajendran 
34. Shri K.B. Raut 
35. Shri S. Ramachandra Reddy 
36. Shri Harivansh Sahai 
37. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
38. Shrimati Vijayaraje Scindia 
39. Kumari Selja 
40. Capt. Satish Sharma 
41. Shri Soumya Ranjan Patnaik 
42. Sushri Uma Bharati 
43. Shri Srikanta Dutta Wadivar 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri 1-I.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer 

• .. 
. REPORT 
1, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and 
Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the report on its behalf. 
present the Thirty-seventh Report, on the Demands for Grants pertaining to the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests for the year 1996-97 (Demand No. 22). 
2. In its meeting held on 8th and 22nd August, 1996 the Committee discussed in detail 
the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the basis of 
documents made available and the submissions made before it by the Secretary and other 
officials of the Department. 
3. The Committee thanks the officers of the Ministry for replying to the clarifications 
sought by the Hon'ble Members and placing before it the required material to enable the 
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and 
Forests . 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on 9th 
September , 1996. 
5. India , the seventh largest country (area 329 million ha.) in the world, covers 2% of 
land area, while supporting 16% of human population (900 million) and 15% of cattle 
population (480 million): It is one of the 12 mega bio-diversity countries, commanding 7% 
of the world bio-diversity. India has merely 1% of forest area and 112% of grazing land of 
the world. Per capita forest area in the country works out to 0.08 ha. as against global 
average of about 1.00 ha. Forests in the country are thus subjected to enormous biotic 
pressures. 
6. The very existence of the country and its all-round progress is greatly dependent on 
sustainable development. lt is, therefore, vital 'that a check is exercised on the environment . 
Our hoary traditions of environmental conservation which have inculcated in us a deep 
reverence for nature and an awareness of the age-old truth that all forms of life, be it 
human, animal or plant are inter-woven and any damage to one may cause serious threat to 
the rest. The age-old traditions of environment protection and reverence to the mother 
nature have been given prominence in our national priorities. It is therefore duty of 
everyone of us to protect and improve the natural environment, including forest, lakes, 
rivers and wildlife and to have compassion for living creatures. However, it is being noticed 
that as a result of economic progress pressure is steadily increasing on the environment and 
the natural resources. 
7. Over the years , the countries have realised the importance of protecting environment 
and preserving forests for the welfare and good of the mankind . The organisation of the 
Stockholm Conference on Environment and Development in 1972 further provided impetus 
to this realisation amongst the countries, whether developed or developing. In India, the 
Departm ent of Environment, as a separate department, was set up towards the end of 1980. 
8. It is in our own intere st not to cause damage to the environment. Resour ces of the 
earth must bl! made use of in a sustainable manner. If we go on destroying natural 
resources , it would ultimately lead to our own extinction. There is no doubt that we must 
fecd anJ mcet the basic human needs of our population; but at the same time we have to 
n.:mcmbcr that our environment should not be damaged so much so that the existence of 
future generations of humanity is threatened. 
--- ------------ ·-- "-------- ------------- -------
• Ro.: ply tu JhliJlb 1 a i ~o.:J in the qucst ilHlnair..:, p. 10. 

9. Recorded forest area of the country is 77 million ha. (23% of country's geographical 
area) but actual tree cover is only 64 million ha. (19:47%) 'out of which 31 million ha. is 
degraded (25 million ha. between 0.1 to 0.4 density; 6 million ha. less than 0.1 density). 
Approximately, 70-75% of the country's rural population depends on forests directly. It may 
be relevant to mention that the tribal population increased during the last decade by 46.10% 
while forest cover decreased by 1930 sq. kms. Obviously, lesser forest area is catering to the 
needs of a larger population. As a result usufruct availability gets reduced leading to further 
degradation of forests. This creates a vicious cycle and the pinch is now being felt by rural 
poor including tribals. Marketing of non-timber forests produce (NTFP) has also added to 
the pressure on these resources. High population coupled with extreme poverty in rural 
areas has forced the people to borrow natural resources heavily against future (220 MT of 
fuelwood, 250 MT of fodder, 12 MT timber and countless NTFPs). In addition, the forests 
provide valuable environmental services which are difficult to quantify but of which we are 
all well aware. The very quality of life on this planet is directly dependent on a optimum 
forest cover which is well spread out throughout the country. It is estimated that at the 
market rate products worth Rs. 30,000 crores are drawn annually, primarily for subsistence 
uses from forest areas. However, funds available for forestry sector are around Rs. 1,000 
crores which is less than one percent of public sector outlay resulting in gross under 
investment. 
10. Forest Resource Assessment for the period 1980-1990 by the FAO has revealed 
that annual rate of deforestation in Asia and the Pacific is of the order of 1.0 million ha. 
whereas in Latin America and Africa it is around 6.0 million ha. and 3.0 million ha. 
respectively. However, forest cover of the country, which had been shrinking in the past has 
been largely arrested. State of Forest Report, 1993 published by Forest Survey of India 
reveals that forest cover of the country has increased marginally by 22 sq. kms. over the last 
assessment (1991). The Report further highlights the fact that forest cover in north-eastern 
region is falling alarmingly. As against overall increase in forest cov\!r by 1560 sq. kms 
(without interpretational corrections), forest cover in north-eastern region has declined by 635 
sq. km. bringing down the increase to 925 sq. kms. only. 
Functions of The Minis,ry 
11. The Ministry of Environment and Forests is the nodal agency in the administrative 
structure of the Central Government for the planning, promotion and coordination of 
environmental and forestry programme. Within the overall framework of its mandate, the 
main activities of the Ministry are conservation and survey of flora and fauna forests and 
wildlife, prevention and control of pollution, afforestation and regeneration of degraded 
areas and protection of environment. These tasks are sought to be fulfilled through 
envirQ.nmental impact assessment; eco-generation; assistance to organisations implementing 
environmental and forestry programmes; enactment of environmental legislation; formu1a­
tion of environmental policies; promotion of environmental and forestry research, extension, 
education and training to augment the requisite man power; collection and dissemination of 
environmental information; international cooperation and creation of environmental aware­
ness among all sectors of the country's population. 
11.1 The Ministry has been made responsible for environment and ecology, including 
environment in coastal water, mangroves and coral reefs, excluding marine environment on 
the high seas; The Prevention of Cruelty to Animals, Public Liability Insurance, Biosphere 
Reserves Programmes, National Forest Policy and Forestry development in the country, 
including Social Forestry; Forest Policy and all matters relating to forest and forest 

administration in so Ltr as the Andaman and Nicobar islands arc concernl!d; Indian Forest 
Service; Wildlife presa\'ation and protection of wild birds and animals; Fundamental 
research, including coordination thereof and higher edw.:ation of forestry: Padanwja Naidu 
Himalayan Zoological Park; National assistance to Forestry Devdopment Sd1eme. 
11.2 There are number of factors contributing to the pollution prohh:m which has, of 
late, become very acute. One of the factors causing pollution is vehicular emission to the 
extent of 50 to 60 per cent of the air pollution in our nh:tro-citks. In Ddhi alone, it is 
estimated that the contribution will increase from (+l pc.r cl!nt to 72 per cent by the year 2000 
A.D. In order to contain the spread of air pollution. the Secretary of the Ministry in his oral 
evidence before the Committee stated that a sc.!ril.!s of steps had been initiated to control 
vehicular pollution on priority basis. Emission norms for vehicles at the manufa~..:turing stage 
were being made progressively tighter for all catl.!goril!s of petrol and diesel driven vchic~es. 
Unleaded petrol is being in-troduced in the country in a phased man':ler for petrol vehicles 
fitted with catalytic -convertors. The programme is expected to cover all major metro-cities 
by December, 1998. For reducing pollution from diesel vehicles, the guality of diesel being 
supplied for the automotive sector was also being improved in a phast:;d ~nanner in order to 
reduce the sulphur content. ,: .. 
11) The Committee was informed during oral evidence that recently another develop­
ment had taken place. There are 21 ongoing centrally sponsored schemes, out of which 19 
were fully funded by the Ministry and one was on 50.50 basis between the State Government 
and the Central Government. In one case a subsidy of 25 percent was given by the Centre. 
1996-97 Outlay 
12. The Ministry has proposed an outlay of Rs. 552.74 crores including non-plan outlay 
of Rs. 83.34 crores for the financial year 1996-97 against Rs. 411.90 crores for the financial 
year 1995-96 and Rs. 387.67 crores actually spent in the year 1994-95. Activity-wise 
allocation for the year 1993-94, 1994-95 and 1995-96 of Plan and Non-Plan is shown at 
Annexure-! and Annexure-H. The statement showing the total demands made for the year 
1996-97 is placed at Annexure-Ill. 
13. The schemes wherein there have been variations in the Plan expenditure for the 
year 1993-94, 1994-95 and 1995-96 is placed at Annexure-lV. 
14. There has been an increase in Plan outlay to the tune of Rs. 177.18 crore and Non­
plan outlay of Rs. 7.05 crores in the Budget Estimates for the year 1996-97 for the Indian 
Institute of Forest Management. The plan outlay is on the decline and against the actual 
expenditure of only Rs. 62 lakhs, a provision has been made for Rs. 2 crore in the Budget 
Estimates for 1996-97, whereas the non-plan outlay has gone up from Rs. 60 lakhs to Rs. 62 
lakhs. 
14.1 The plan outlay on research in respect of Indian Council of Forestry Resea _rch and 
Education has increased for Rs. 41.10 crores to Rs. 60.05 crores. 
14.2 The Budget Estimates for 1996-97 in respect of Forest Survey of India indicate for 
1996-97 in respect of Forest Survey of India indicate that only Rs. 1.72 crores has been 
allocated, against the actual expenditure of Rs. 9.23 crores in 1995-96 for which projections 
were to the tune of Rs. 3.50 crores only. However actual expenditure in the years 1993-94 
and 1994-95 was Rs. 1.15 crores and Rs. 1.28 crores respectively. 
14.3 In the forest conservation development and regeneration head a sum of Rs. 7.45 
crores has been provided in 1996-97, whereas the actual expenditure during the last three 

years has been in the range of Rs. 5 crores only against the projected figures of Rs. 8.20 
crore in the years 1994-95 and 1995-96. 
15. The Committee is at a loss to understand the correlation between the actual 
expenditure on the one hand, allocation demanded and the budgetary support provided in the 
budget estimates for the current year as also the last few years. It appears that adequate 
ground work is not done by the Ministry before finalising their projecti ons. One gets a feeling 
of totaJ adhocism and total lack of well thought of in-depth planning. This rcllects the 
Ministry in a poor light. The Committee observes that realistic ground assessments are all the 
more necessary in view of the problems facing the forest cover including a large number of 
fire incidents that have caused dtvastation to the Forests. 
16. A provisjon of Rs. 68.82 crores in BE for 1996-97 has been made for wildlife against 
actual expenditure of Rs. 37.40 crores in 1995-96. Besides, the Ministry has sought a 
provision for a sum of Rs. 35.77 crores for Eco-development around important protected 
areas against actual expenditure of Rs. 6.60 crores only. The Ministry have reduced the 
outlay for National Afforestation and Eco-development and Regeneration from Rs. 93.18 
crores in 1995 96 to Rs. 90 crores for 1996-97. The out lay for the integrated Afforestation 
and Eco-development projects has been reduced from Rs. 50 crores in 1995-96 to Rs. 30 
crores in budget estimates for 1996-97. There is thus a gap of Rs. 20 crores. 
16.1 There is a marked increase of Rs. 1.60 crores in the Non-plan allocation for 
Ecology and Environment for the year 1996-97, whereas in plan allocation there is increase 
of Rs. 1 crore over the previous year. 
16.2_ The Ministry has proposed an increase of Rs. 34.97 crores, for .b:vironment 
Education, Training and Extension programmes. The Ministry could utilise only Rs. 6.31 
crores towards conservation programme against the revised estimates of Rs. 8 crores in the 
year 1995-96 <.tnd have proposed an outlay of Rs. 7.25 crore is the DE for 1996-97. Likewise 
in the <.trea of Research and Ecological regeneration the Ministry could utilise Rs. 8.59 
crores against the RE of Rs. 13.41 crores for the year 1995-96 and have proposed a higher 
outlay of Rs. 12.86 crores for the 1996-97. 
16.3 The Ministry has proposed an outlay of Rs. 30.35 crores in BE for 1996-97 for 
prevention and control of pollution against the actual expenditure of Rs. 10. 9S crorcs in 
1995-96 against the allocation of Rs. 26.53 crores in RE of that year. Likewise , the I3E for 
199-t-9-5 Ol-Rd 1993-94 provided Rs. 26.53 crores and Rs. 17.20 crores against the actual 
expenditure of Rs. 9.70 crores and Rs. 8.14 crores respectively. 
16.4 ln respect of the Ganga Project Directorat e the Ministry have utilised a sum of 
Rs. 42.07 crores against the projected figures of Rs. 79.00 crorcs for 1995-96 and have now 
proposed un outlay of Rs. 120 crores in the budget estimates for 1996-97. 
16.5 lludgetary support of Rs. 7.11 crore for the Civil Works for the year 1996-97 is at 
the level of 1995-96 when the Ministry could utilise only Rs. 3.43 crores. The Ministry have 
stated that the under utilisation was due to non-finaJisation of estimates/plans for new 
construction works; slow progress in existing works due to need for revised sanction for 
changes in scope and cost. 
17 .. The Committee was informed that tbe total budget estimates for the year 1995-96 
for the ~tinistry of Environment and For-ests was to the tune of Rs. 370.50 crores and the 
Revised Estimate was Rs. 335.5 crores because of resource crunch and out of that only 
Rs. 292.22 crores were actually utilised. The major areas where the budgetary provision 
remained under utilised included Ganga Project Directorate (Savings Rs. 36.93 crores); 

Industrial Pollution Control Projects (Savings Rs. 12.38 crores) and Integrated Afforestation 
and £co-development Projects (Savings Rs. 8.98 crores). 
17.1 The Committee feels that the record or the Ministry in relation to the projection or 
budgetary requirements, its utilisation, control and monitoring is quite dismal. Funds were 
sought and provided quite liberally keeping in view the pressing need to atleast protect the 
Forcst-co\'Cr and save the environment from the immense devastation being caused to it by the 
industry and other agents of material advancement but not much seems to have deen done. 
Forestry Research 
18. Since initiation of forestry research in India, valuable knowledge has been generated 
and documented as scientific finding on silviculture of over 550 species of trees; classification 
of forest types of India, Pakistan, Bhutan and Sikkim; European silviculture syst~ms 
embellished to suit tropical forests; successful introduction of exotics, Eucalyptus, Poplars, 
Tropical Pines, Acacias and Lucaena Leucocephala spp.; seed technology of over 80 
important forest tree seeds and management of bamboos etc. Over 2000 established sample 
plots have provided data for construction of yield and volume tables for over 120 tree 
species. The regime of preservation plots, established all over the country, since 1929, has 
helped in a better understanding of forest ecology, biodiversity and environment. In the field 
of utilisation of forest products, research has contributed valuably to the development of 
forest based industries in the country. The Arsenic-Copper chromate treatment for wood 
preservation development by the Forest Research Institute is now widely adopted through· 
out the world. Investigations on and documentation of mechanical and other properties of 
Indian timbers has helped industries utilising timbers. The Forest Research Institute also 
piom:crcd the process of pulping bamboos for paper making. 
19. Study and development of termite control measures; control of insect pests of Sal, 
Shisham, Teak and Babul rank among the foremost achievements in the entomology 
discipline. Similarly, many pioneering works were accomplished in the field of Forest 
mycology and pathology. Forest nurseries over the country have immensely benefited in 
producing quality seedlings using insect pest and disease control practices pioneered by the 
forestry researchers. Notable among achievements in Forest Genetics are the development of 
hybrids of Eucalyptus producing larger biomass creation of model seed orchards of teak and 
semul and tissue culture of eucalyptus. 
20. Researchers in Non-wood Forest produce (NWFP) have several important achieve­
ments of industrial importance to their credit, such as development of Rill method of 
tapping pines for resin extraction, perfection of technique for katha extraction from khair, 
extraction of oxalic acid from Terminalia tomentosa, and cultivation and utilisation practices 
of number of exotic aromatic and drug yielding plants. 
21. The herbarium maintained by the Forest Research Institute, Dehradun houses 
3,30,000 authenticated plant specimens, perhaps the best in the East. Also, its Xylarium, 
with a collection of over 18,000 wood specimens from India and abroad qualifies the institute 
as the best reference place on wood identification. 
22. Over the recent past, the forest area has continuously dwindled and conservation of 
the natural forests and its biodiyersity has assumed prime importance. To generate the 
requisite quantities of forest bio-mass required by the people, industries and others from 
,outside natural forest areas of tree plantations becomes important. Research at present is 
being ge,ared to increase the productivity of the forest plantations and the utilisation of 
juvenile woods produced therefrom. 

23. The Committe e was informed that in order to boost production of wood bio-mass in 
agriculture sector, trials with new species like Paulownia and clones of Poplars, Casurina, 
Eucalyptus and Teak developed/importe d have been initiatel1. 
24. The Committee is satisfied with the progress made in the fields of forestry research 
and recommen ds that the pace of resear ch be continued for the sustained development of 
the country . Ach ievements in this area need to be duly popularized so that people could 
benefit from them. 
Forest policy 
25. The Indian Forests Act, 1927, is the main Act which regulates the manag ement of 
forests by the States. Forestry, in fact is a concurrent subject since the enactment of the 
Constitutions (Forty-second Amendment) Act , 1976, w.e.f. 3rd January , 1977. Art icle 48-A 
enjoins that the State shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment and to 
safeguard the forests and wild life o f the country. It has been held" by the Supreme Court 
that Articl es 14, 21 and 51-A (g) are to be read together and duty under article 48-A can be 
enforced"" through a letter, based on article 21. 
25.1 Of late , forestry has undergone many conceptual changes leading to the 
announcement of New Forest Policy of 1988. Consequently , need has been felt for a revised 
and more comprehen sive legislation which would take into account the New National Forest 
Policy and the emerging impera tives of conservation of forests. 
25.2 The Indian Forests Act, 1927, regulates the management of forests by the States. 
In some states, the Act is applicable as it is, while some of the States have enacted their own 
Acts which in essence, are the adopted version of the Indian Forest Act, 1927. Since its 
. adoption , forestry has undergone many conceptual changes leading to the new National 
Forest Policy of 1988. Thereafter, need was felt for a revised and more comprehensive 
legislation which would meet the emerging imperat ives of conservation of forests. Tj1e 
proposed amendments had been circula ted to all the States!UTs for their comments. The 
cot'flments and suggestions · of NGOs and other organizations have also been received 
through Indi an Social lnstjt ute, New Delhi. These comments and suggestions are unde r 
process. The draft will be prepared taking into account the comments of all concerned. The 
final draft will be circulated to all the Ministries before it is placed before the Cabinet for 
consideration and approval. 
25.3 The National Forest Policy, 1988 provides for involveme nt of people in managing 
forests to attain the desired objectives of Forests Conservati0n and development. ln order to 
secure the total participation of commun ities and a better link between the panchayats and 
implementing agencies, guidel ines for the nomination and role of Van Mukhia have been 
issued to all the StateYUTs on 7 .12.95. The guidelines for consultative mechanism havt:! also 
been issued to assess the responsiveness of all concerned in tree planting programmes and 
conservation. 
25.4 The Committee recommends suitable amendments to the Indian Forest Act, 1927. 
"Subhash v. State of Bihar, AIR 1991 SL 420 
••Mehta v. Union of India, 1992 Supp. (2) SCC 85, 633 and 637 

Forest Conservation 
26. The Forest Conservation (Act), 1980 was enacted with a view to check indiscrimi­
nate deforestation and diversion of forest land for non-forest purpose. The Act was amended 
in 1988 to make it more stringent. The Advisory Committee with representation of eminent 
personalities was set up under this Act. At field level there are six regional offices situated 
at I3angalore, Lucknow, Shillong, Bhopal, Bhubaneshwar and· Chandigarh with Headquar­
ters at New Delhi. These offices were set up to monitor cases under Forest (Conservation) 
Act. Later, in 1988 these offices were strengthened and also entrusted with the responsibility 
of monitoring cases under Environment (protection) Act. Under the revised guidelines, the 
regional offices have been empowered to decide cases involving diversion of forest land for 
non-forest purposes up to the extent of 5 ha. except mining and regularization of 
encroachments and examine cases of 5 to 20 ha. in consulation with State Advisory Board. 
National Forestry Action Plan 
27. With the announcement of the National Forest Policy, 1988, it became necessary to 
orient all on-going forestry programmes to meet the objectives set by it. Consequently, an 
integrated perspective programme for long, medium and short term development of the 
forestry sector at national and state level has been prepared, taking all aspects of forestry 
and people. This is being done under the project National Forestry Action Programme 
(NFAP) with the assistance of UNDP and FAO. The project document was signed during 
June, 1993 and became operational since July, 1993. 
Forest Survey of India 
28. Forest Survey of India (FSI) carries out a comprehensive forest survey at regular 
intervals and brings infom1ation in form for planning at national, state and local levels 
including evaluation through inventory to facilitate scientific forestry planning. 
28.1 The Committee was informed that only 198 Thematic maps were prepared by 
Forest Survey of India upto March, 1996. The target of preparation of 260 maps could not 
be achieved as the remaining photographs of the targeted sheets were no.t received from the 
Survey of India in time. 
28.2 The Committee expresses its concern over the non-achievement of the target for 
preparation of 260 Thematic maps in 1995-96 and impresses on the Ministry to complete the 
task expeditiously. 
Forest Fire 
29. A Centrally Sponsored Scheme "Modern Forest Fire Control Methods" was 
initiated in 1992-93 in the 11 selected . States namely Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Gujarat, 
Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Tamil Nadu 
and Uttar Pradesh. An outlay of Rs. 5 crores was approved under the scheme for the entire 
8th Five Year Plan. Against the approved outlay an expenditure of Rs. 5.15 crores was 
incurred upto 1994-95. 
29.1 During 1993-94 a proposal was mooted to extend the scope of the scheme in all the 
fire prone areas of the country including those covered under protected areas network, with 
an outlay of Rs. 16 crores .. 
29.2 Due to extensive forest fires in Uttar Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh during 1995 
summer, Planning Commission made special allocation of Rs. 8.25 crores and Rs. 3.56 
crores to Uttar Pradesh and Himachal Pradesh tespectively for containing forest fire. The 

Committee was infonned that Government proposed to extent the scheme to all the fire 
prone forest areas of the country. 
29.3 The Committee in its earlier Reports have highlighted the problem of forest fire and 
bad emphasised adoption of Modern Forest Fire control methods in India . In light of the 
above recommendations the Committee notes with concern that out of an amount of Rs. 2.00 
crores provided for the purpose, a sum of Rs. 37 lakh only was utilised in 1995-96. The 
Committee is not satisfied with the contention that the entire budgetary allocations of Rs. 5.00 
Crores for VIII Plant had already been exhausted. The Committee is of the view that the 
Ministry should have projected its additional requirements for the purpose. 
30. An Air Operation Wing (AOW) has been in operation since December, 1991, to 
handle the work of maintenance, repairs, accounting, flight authorization of air craft and 
helicopter including operational control of the aircraft and the helicopter. 
30.1 The Ministry in response to various queries on the functioning and utility of AOW 
for fighting fires in a written note has stated that it had received two air machines, viz., 
Piper Senica III Fixed Wing Aircruft and Lama Helicopter in 1987 from the UNDP when 
the pilot project namely Modern Forest Fire Control Project was in operation in the two 
states of Uttar Pradesh and Maharashtra. The running and maintenance of the helicopters 
and vehicles of AOW along with the establishment expenditure of the staff posted in AOW 
is met out of the central component of the scheme. 
30.2 The written note on the AOW gives details for which the aircrafts had been used 
and also details of expenditure. While the expenditure during 1992-93 and 1993-94 was 
Rs. 56.08 lakhs and Rs. 54.60 lakhs respectively, it shot up to Rs. 76.24 lakhs in the year 
1994-95. No explanation for spurt in expenditure has been provided by the Ministry. 
30.3 Furthermore, the Piper Seneca Fixed Wing Aircraft was destroyed in an aircrash on 
August 25, 1994 in Sawai Madhopur district of Rajasthan. No details have been given of the 
crash, its reasons and whether any enquiry was conducted, and if so, the details thereof. 
30.4 It is presumed that bulk of the expenditure on AOW would be on running and 
maintenance of air-machines. If so, after the crash it is not clear on what items Rs. 30.15 
Jakhs were spent in 1995-96. · There is a provision of Rs. 1.54 crores on this head in the 
current financial year i.e. 1996-97. 
30.5 The Committee had also desired to know the full details of the use of aircraft over 
the years. But these details have not been provided. 
30.6 The Ministry has also not bothered to elaborate as to what it was doing after the 
crash of the aircraft it had. How the AOW was now functioning? The Committee would have 
appreciated if the Ministry was more forthright in giving detailed information on AOW rather 
than giving brief note covering-up details. 
31. The Ministry in its written note has informed that a training package was designed 
and the first training session in forest fire management planning was organised at IIFM, 
Bhopal. This was followed by two more programmes organised at . U .P. Academy of 
Administration, Nainital. In all 58 Indian Forests Service Officers underwent this training. 
The Ministry, however, gave no details as to when these training programmes were held and 
whether these programmes are adequate or jt has plans to organise more such programmes. 
Whether any review had been undertaken to see how useful had been this training etc.? The 
Committee desires that full details in this behalf should be made available. 

Regeneration of degraded forests 
32. A scheme has been put through to improve the environment and halt environment 
degradation through regeneration of degraded forests with people's participation and 
environmental awareness campaign in June, 1990. In pursuance thereof 16 State 
Governments (Annexure- VII) have issued guidelines to provide. for participation of local 
communities in forest management which also provides for representation of SCIST and 
women in executive committees of forest protection committee. 
32.1 The Committee was informed that under the scheme there were more than 10,000 
Forest Protection Committees, which are protecting 1.5 mba. of land and the Forest 
Protection Committee of West-Bengal has been awarded J. Paul Getty award for their 
outstanding work. 
Environment Education, Awareness and Training 
33. The Committee has been informed that the Ministry has accorded priority to 
promote environmental education and create environmental awareness among various age 
groups through diverse activities and mass media campaign. The National Environment 
Awareness Campaign (NEAC) was organised with the main theme of 'Women and 
Environment'. The campaign also addressed itself to the entire gamut of environmental 
issues such as people's participation in forest management, Soil Conservation, wildlife 
protection, Montreal Protocol, Natural Resources Conservation etc. 
Environmental Tribunal Commission 
34. The National Environmental Tribunal Act was passed in June, 1995. The 
Committee was informed that the amount of Rs. 1.00 crores allocated could not be utilised 
because the rules related to the commission could not be finalised. The Ministry has again 
sought budgetary support of Rs. 1 crore in the budget estimates for the year 1996-97. Asked 
about the finalisation of rules, the Committee was informed that the same are in the final 
stage of preparation. 
Zoological Survey or India 
35. The Zoological Survey of India concentrates on exploration and survey of faunal 
resources and research on taxonomy, biology, ecology, wildlife, animal population and 
animal behaviour. It provides data base and necessary inputs for environmental impact 
assessment and conservation programme. It also acts as a custodian of National Zoological 
Collections which comprise more than one million specimens belonging to. some 75,000 
species including about 10,000 species of other countries like Burma, Pakistan, Bangladesh, 
Thailand and Sri Lanka. In addition Zoological Survey of India maintains Zoological 
Galleries of Indian Museum, Calcutta and in Regional Museums at various Regional 
Stations. 
Botanical Survey or India (BSI) 
36. l)le primary functions of BSI are to conduct survey and identification of genetic 
res~urces of the country, list out all endangered species, collect and maintain species and to 
undertake measures for the effective conservation of such species. It also identifies, collects 
and preserves specimens of plants which are economically and medicinally beneficial to 
human beings. Further, it is compiling ~ National Data Base on plant resources in the 
country based on exploration of floral resources. 
36.1 The BSI has sought budgetary support of Rs. 10.57 crores of which Rs. 3.42 crores 

is on the plan side and Rs. 7.15 crores on the non-plan side. The actual budgetary support 
given to BSI last year totalled Rs. 9.01 crores of which Rs. 2.59 crores was on the plan side 
and Rs. 6.42 crores on the non-plan side. 
ECO Development Scheme 
37. In 1991-92 a centrally sponsored scheme of eco-development was started by 
Government of India on the suggestion of task force appointed by Indian Board of wildlife. 
The country has 80 National Parks and 441 wild life sanctuaries. This covers about 4.5% of 
the total land area of the country and about 250 areas could be classified as major projected 
areas. 
37.1 The Committee was informed that the Ministry was getting an average of Rs. 5 
crore a year whcih was extremely inadequate. Even if they went for an investment level of 
Rs. 40 lakhs per year, per area then the total requirement would work out to Rs. 100 crores 
a year. The global Environmental facility took note of the situation and supported our 
initiative. After proper study through Government and NGOs both at the National and State 
level have identified 7 areas for support of these activities through World Bank. 
37.2 As a result of negotiation in July, 1996 in Washington, about 67 million US dollars 
would be spent over five years around these several areas in the country. The current year's 
allocation for this purpose are tentatively estimated at Rs. 31.17 crores. The project would 
take shape after it is cleared by the Board of Governors, of World Bank which is scheduled 
to meet in September, 1996. 
Tribal Villages of Project Tiger Areas, National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries 
38. The scheme was launched during 1989-90 with an objective of rehabilitation of tribal 
families affected under the allocation plan of Project Tiger Areas, National Parks and 
Wildlife Sanctuaries. Under the scheme, so far, the central assistance has been provided to 
the State Governments of Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Kerala, Mizoram, Tamilnadu, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Karnataka and the West Bengal for relocation of tribal families outside 
the protected areas. Of late difficulties have been experienced in implementing this scheme. 
The State Governments were reluctant to send the proposals as the cost norms per family 
provided in the scheme were not attractive enough to encourage the tribal families to shift 
from the protected areas. During the year, the Ministry set up a Task Force to review the 
scheme and suggest a suitable package to make the scheme more acceptable to the State 
Governments. The report of the Task Force is awaited. 
39. The Committee has been given to understand that the Self-Employed Women's 
Association SEW A, as it is popularly called, surveyed some villages in Sabarkantha District 
in Gujarat and found that 93% of the families in these villages live below the poverty-line. 
The adivasis and other dependent on non-timber forest resources survive by making products 
of bamboo cane and other fribre, raw materials they obtained from the forests they have 
protected. These adivasis are required to obtain licences at every step-to buy the raw 
matt:rial, to transport and sell it. 
39.1 According to SEWA's report these women have to pay 200 to 300 percent more 
than paper mills pay for the same forest = produce . The Government monopoly actually robs 
the poor to subsidise the rich. The adivasi ·women also tap gum which also requires a 
licence. They are obliged to sell it to the .Government agencies such as the Forest 
Corporation where they get one quarter of the market price. When these women were 
operating 'illegally', they could earn Rs. 25/- per day but now as SEWA members when 
they wish to operate legally, their earnings have dropped to Rs. 1V- per day, with longer 

working hours and with the additional help of children who have to leave school to 
provide the necessary supportive labour. No justification has been given as to why should 
these products be required to be sold only to Government agencies and why should there 
be licences at every step, which means more corruption and crime. What ·about 
liberalisation for these poor people dependent on forest produce. for their livelihood? 
Tiger Project 
40. It was stated that the development and management of all the twenty three tiger 
reserves are being continued. The annual census of tigers has been conducted and the 
results were being analyzed/compiled. 
40.1 Project Tiger which was launched in 1973, would continue during 1996-97 to 
provide assistance for management and development of 23 Tiger Reserves in 14 States 
covering an area of 33,000 sq. kms. 
Project Elephant 
41. One of the schemes being implemented is Project Elephant which was started in 
1991-92 based on a Task Force report. It had recommended a budget of Rs. 19 crores over 
a period of five years. Following a review made, the outlay for the Eighth PlaJl was 
increased to Rs. 23 crores. In the five years of the Project, the States have been provided 
assistance to the tune of Rs. 17.84 crores as per details given in the Statement at 
Annexure-VIII. 
41.1 The Committee was informed that the implementation of this Project was through 
the State Governments. The money was transferred by the Ministry to the concerned State 
Governments. There, however, appears to be no systematic and proper monitoring of the 
Project to ensure that the money is being spent for the purpose for which it is given and 
whether the Project is progressing well. 
41.2 The details regarding funds released for habitat restoration works and for 
development of wireless communication network to the State Governments under this 
Project are given in the Statement at Annexure-IX. 
41.3 Creation of a post of Director was also recommended by the Task Force. At the 
time of review of the Project and seeking approval of EFC for the revised cost, it was also 
proposed to set-up a Central Cell. However, till. date neither the Director has been 
appointed nor Central Cell hlis been created. The Ministry is totally silent as to why no 
action has been taken on this direction. 
41.4 The Ministry in its written reply has stated that it is difficult to quantify 
conservation in tangible terms but some of the indicators giving an idea of the success of 
the activities undertaken can be identified. In this connection it was stated that estimation 
of elephant population by direct count and index count has been carried out in different 
States during 1992 and 1993. The compilation of results indicated the mid-value of the 
estimated elephant population in India is 25,571. As compared to an Asian Elephant 
Specialist Group estimate of 18,961 (mid-value) in 1985 there has been a distinct increase 
in the total population of elephants in India. 
41.5 Under the habitat restoration .and improvement activities various other schemes 
have been undertaken, wt..ich' include replacement of exotics cover plants with indigenous 
species. The Ministry has claimed that as a result of these measures, man-elephant conflicts 
have reduced in such arer.-;. The loss of human lives have come down from 79 in 1991 and 
78 in 1992 to 51 in 1994. In 1995 (upto October) the number of -human deaths was 

reported to be 38. In Andhra Pradesh the loss of human lives had come down from 10 in 1985-
86 and 7 in 1986-87 to nil in 1994-95 and 1 in 1995-96. 
42. The Committee finds that the note is, however silent about the position in other 
States, particularly, the Southern States where elephants are found in large number. 
42.1 The Committee had also specifically asked for details of total land acquired and where 
indigenous species of plants had been planted and with what success in respect of survival rate 
of these plants. No details have, however, been given by the Ministry on these points. 
42.2 The Committee would have appreciated if the Ministry's note was more 
comprehensive and exhaustive giving full details of various activities undertaken under this 
project inter-alia including the number of wire-less sets provided etc. for the purpose. The 
Committee has a lurking doubt that by not furnishing details, an attempt has been made to 
cover-up the deficiencies of the project. 
National Zoological Parks 
43. On the recommendation of the Indian Board of Wildlife the Government of India set 
up National Zoological Park in the capital in October, 1955, on a plot of land measuring 214 
acres. 
43.1 The scheme of National Zoological Park is a continuing scheme since 1955-56. The 
park has been set up mainly with the object to conserve and breed rare and endangered 
animals to conduct research regarding their behaviour, reproduction and nutrition to educate 
and entertain the people about preservation of wildlife. It also provides assistance and 
guidance to the other zoos in the country. It is, however, not known the extent to which the 
goals set have been achieved. 
Central Zoo Authority 
44. The main activity of the Central Zoo Authority has been to provide financial 
assistance to zoos for achieving the desired standards of management. The assistance has 
mainly been provided for construction of boundary walls, improvement of food storage and 
veterinary care facilities, improvement ' of water supply, sewerage disposal systems and 
upgradation of animals housing facilities. 
44.1 The Committee was informed that during 1994-95, a total of 31 Zoos were evaluated 
by the expert Team of Central Zoo Authority. There were no zoos which conformed to all the 
standards and norms prescribed under the Recognition of Zoo rules, 1992. Threrefore, only 
conditional recognition was granted to the evaluated Zoos and they were asked to comply with 
the stipulated conditions in phases within a period of two years. 
44.2 During the course of presentation, the Committee was informed that recognition of a 
number of Zoos has been cancelled as they have sold their belongings to circus in the country. 
Animal Welfare Board of India (A WBn 
45. Animal welfare programme in the country receives power from the provisions of the 
Prevention of Cruelty to Anima ls Act 1960 (PCA Act 1960). The Board is engaged in the 
Prevention of cruelty to animals . Various Ani mal Welfare Organizations along with the Board 
take steps to g enerate public awarenes. AWBI receives grant s-in-aid from Gove rnm ent of 
India and in turn provides assistance to various organizations in the country for rescue/shelter 
home, animal birth control, vehicles, med'icine's veterinary care, etc. It also impart s training to 
representat ives of various Animals Welfare Organizations and public in animal care laws and 
various o ther disciplines. 
45.1 A WBI proposes to give financial assistance for the following scheme s:-

(i) Propagation of Human Education 
(ii) Rescue Home for Animals 
(iii) Neutering centres ABC project 
(iv) Purchase of Ambulance/Mobile clinic 
(v) Veterinary Hospitals and rescue ope~ations (flood, drought etc.) 
(vi) Revitalizing of old A WOs and starting new ones. 
45.2 AWBI in its pilot project on Animal Birth control with the involvement of 15 
NGOs is carrying out mass immunization-cum-sterlization programme with a view to stop 
killing of stray dogs in dog pounds of municipalities and 13,500 stray dogs have been 
sterlized and immunized in six metropolitan cities so far. 
45.3 AWBI spends major share of the grant in aid on financial assistance to various 
organizations. The assistance so provided is monitored and evaluated in some cases by the 
members of the board. The board also analyses the forma for making available assistance 
and the reporting system. 
46. The Wildlife Institute of India conducts training courses in order to train managers 
and biologists. The Wildlife Institute of India is an ~utonomous body set up to ensure better 
management of the protected areas. The Institute also provides advisory and consultancy 
services to the Central and State Governments. 
46.1 The programme of activities for 1996-97 of the Institute includes development of 
the new campus, updating computer facililties, conducting the regular courses, initiation of 
new research programme etc. In addition the UNDP-FAO project assisted training 
programme of "Eco-development and Management Planning Capabilities" would be 
continued. 
Environment Education and Training Schemes 
47. The Committee was informed that the above scheme comprises of three main parts 
i.e. National Environmen t Awareness Campaign, Eco-Clubs and Films. The main theme for 
the campaign during 1995-96 was 'Women & Environment'. Out of the applicatio ns received 
from NGOs, Government Departments, academic institutions for grant of financial 
assistance for organising awareness activities, grants were given to 2450 organisations as 
compared to 2200 organisations in the previous year. Against a target of 1000 Eco-Clubs , 
about 1400 Eco-Clubs were actually set up during the year. However, the progress regarding 
the production of films was not satisfactory and out of 46 commissioned films, only 3 films 
were completed . Total allocation on this head last year was Rs. 3.90 crores, Rs. 3.85 crores 
on the Plan side and Rs. 5 lakhs on the non-plan side. This year they have sought a sum of 
Rs. 3.85 crores on plan side only against the actual expenditure of Rs. 2.84 crores. 
Ganga Action Plan (GAP) Phase-1 
48. The Ganga Action Plan (GAP) was launched in 1986. The main objective of GAP 
was to improve the water quality of river Ganga to the 'Bathing Class', which stipulates a 
bio-chemical demand of 3 mg/litre (max) and a dissolved oxygen of 5 mg/litre (min) . 
Under the programme sewage generated from 25 Class-I towns (population above 1 lakh) in 
U.P., Bihar and the West Bengal, is intercepted, diverted and treated before its final 
disposal either back into the river or for irrigation. To accomplish thi§ work, 261 schemes of 
population abatement had been sanctioned. These schemes include such works as 
interception and diversion of sewage, sewage treatment plants, low cost toilets, electric 

crematoria and bathing ghats. The Action Plan envisages diversion and treatment of 873 
million litres per day of sewage from the above towns. Out of this, a capacity of 654 million 
litres per day has already been created. 
48.1 Out of the 261 schemes sanctioned, 244 have been completed. The remaining 17 
are in progress and expected to be completed by the March 31, 1997. 
48.2 The Ministry in its written note has admitted that implementation of GAP Phase-1 
h~ been delayed due to various reasons which include lack of experience as a programme of 
this kind was taken for the first time in the country. There were inordinate delays in non­
execution of major schemes of sewage treatment and pumping stations as also litigation and 
court cases mainly in Kanpur and Allahabad in U.P. 
48.3 The Ministry's note gives only bald details of the various action programmes under 
the GAP Phase-I. However, no details of monitoring of the programme have been furnished. 
It has also not been indicated whether any foUow·up action is being taken on various activities 
which have been put in place. Whether these are working satisfactorily, if not, why and what 
steps have been taken to ensure their uninterrupted functioning. Furthermore, the Action 
Plan envisages a target of 873 million Utres per day of sewage diversion and treatment. 
However, against this, a capacity of 654 million litres had been achieved so far. The note does 
not indicate as to by when balanced capacity of 219 million litres per day would be achieved 
and what steps have been taken in this direction? 
48.4 It is also observed that one of the reasons for delay was due to contractors not 
fulfilling their part of the contract. The Committee would like to know what action had been 
U$en against the erring contractors and whether any liquidate damages claimed against such 
contractors? 
48.5 The Ministry has stated that the evaluation of the Ganga Action Plan (GAP) 
Phase-! by experts from the Roorkee University, Aligarh Muslim University, liT Kanpur 
and All ln_Qia Institute of Hygiene and Public Health, Calcutta has been completed. The 
evaluation has concluded that the reduction of discharge of organic matter-a necessary first 
step in restoring the water quality-has been achieved to a fair level and the GAP as 
conceived, and implemented is an appropria.te programme for replication in other river basins 
also. It further recommends appropriate intervention to reduce the microbial pollution of the 
river. rigorous qualitative and quantitative characterization of the sewage for adopting the 
most appropriate technology of treatment. 
49. The findings have been appropriately incorporated in the proposals of Ganga Action 
Pian (GAP) Phase-11 and National River Conservation Plan which have been approved by 
the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs. The findings of the evaluation on the 
rehabilitation of the turtles for biological control of pollution are likely to be available by the 
end of this year. 
Gsnga Action Plan Phase-IT 
50. The second Phase of Ganga Action Plan covered the following· works: 
(i) Works required but not included in the 1st Phase in 25 Class-1 towns; 
(ii) Pollution abatement works in Class-11 and Class-III towns identified on the main 
river; 
(iii) Pollution abatement works on ,the grossly polluted stretches of tributaries of the 
Ganga (Yamuna, Gomti and bamodar Action Plans). 

Yamuna Action Plan & Gomti Action Plan 
51. Under the Yamuna comp0nent of Ganga Action Plan Phase II, pollution abatement 
works arc to be taken up in 15 towns 8 in Uttar Pradesh, 6 in Haryana besides Delhi . The 
estimated cost of the Yamuna component is Rs. 357 crores for which external assistance 
from Government of Japan is available. 
51.1 Under the Gomti component, works are to be taken up in 3 towns of UP namely 
Lucknow, Sultanpur and Jaunpur. The estimated cost of the works is slated to be Rs. 64 
crores. The implementation period of both Yamuna Action Plan and Gomti Action Plan is 
six years. The Yamuna and Gomti Action Plans for the pollution abatement of rivers 
Yamuna and Gomti were formally launched on 5th June 1993. Yamuna and Gomti were 
formally launched on 5th June 1993. 
Yamuna Action Plan 
52. 73 Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) in respect of schemes of various categories 
except the Sewage Treatment Plants based on UASB process received till the end of 
October 1995 have been approved. The remaining DPRs are likely to be received and 
sanctioned schemes have begun and when these works are at various stages of completion. 
Gomti Action Plan 
53. 8 Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) in respect of schemes in Jaunpur and Sultanpur 
received till the end of October 1995 have been approved and, accordingly, implementation 
commenced. · 
53.1 In respect of works in Lucknow under Gomti Action Plan, the consultants 
appointed by Overseas Development Authority are collecting data to prepare document 
(Master Plan) containing details of investment proposals. As soon as the Master Plan is 
prepared, works would be finalized. One DPR for Gaughat drain diversion (I&D) at 
Lucknow as emergency work has been approved. 
National River Conservation Plan 
54. The Central Government on 3rd July 1995 approved the programme for pollution 
abatement of river Ganga under GAP II (UP and Bihar) and other river stretches under 
National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) as a centrally sponsored scheme .on the basis of 
equal sharin~ of capital cost of works between the Central and the concerned States. The 
operation and maintenance cost would, however, be fully borne by the States. 
The GAP Phase II (UP and Bihar) approved by the Government includes pollution 
abatement works in 10 towns of UP and 11 towns of Bihar located on main stem of 
river Ganga at an approved cost of about Rs. 235 crores. 
Under National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) the Government approved works 
in 46 towns located on polluted stretches of 18 rivers in 10 States. The approved 
cost of their works is about Rs. 772 crores. 
The PFRs received from States under both GAP II (UP and Bihar) and NRCP 
have been approved. The States are preparing Detailed Project Reports. 
Wetlands 
55. The scheme on Conservation and Management of Wetlands was started in 1986-87 
with the objective of undertaking a comprehensive study of important Wetlands representing 
different eco-systems like fresh water, brackish water and coastal water. 

55.1 A National Committee on Wetlands, Mangroves and Coral Reefs was constituted 
to lay down broad policy guidelines for implementing the programme and identifying the 
Wetlands for intensive conservation, management and research. So far 18 Wetlands have 
been identified in the different geographical regions of the country for intensive conservation 
and management. 
Mangroves and Coral Reefs 
56. The scheme on conservation and management of mangroves was initiated in 1987 
with the objective of conserving and protecting the mangrove eco-systems from further 
degradation, afforestation of degraded mangrove areas etc. So far based on the 
recommendation of the National Committee, 15 Mangroves and 4 Coral Reefs areas have 
been identified for conservation and management on priority basis. 
56.1 Paryavaran Sudhar Pariyojana has two components viz., Vaniki Vahini and 
Paryavaran Vahini. The Scheme of Vaniki Vahini was sent to Planning Commission for 
seeking the approval of full Planning Commission after it was cleared by Expenditure 
Finance Committee (EFC). After consideration, Planning Commission instructed that the 
scheme be placed before the Working Group on forestry and wild life for the Ninth Five 
Year Plan and the scheme could not be operationalised during 1995-96. 
56.2 Against the plan allocation of Rs. 3.32 crores for Paryavaran Sudhar Pariyojna for 
1995-96, the Ministry could utilise only Rs. 0.22 crore. 
56.3 The Paryavaran Vahini Scheme was launched during 1992-93 to create 
environmental awareness and involvement of people through active participation and 
reporting of illegal acts pertaining to forests, wildlife pollution and environmental 
degradation. There is one Paryavaran Vahini for each district and about 184 districts in the 
country have been selected for the purpose. 
56.4 The Committee was informed that so far Paryavaran Vahini, is concerned an 
expenditure of Rs. 0.22 crore was incurred during 1995-96 against the plan allocation of 
Rs. 1.00 crore. The shortfall in the expenditure was due to non-submission of Utilisation 
Certificates (UCs) by the concerned State/UTs Governments in respect of the money 
released during the previous years. Out of the 24 States and 6 UTs, to whom the money was 
released during the previouS' years, only 3 States have submitted the utilisation certificates. 
Since the money for the concerned Districts is released through the State Governments, no 
grant could be released ·during 1995-96 to the States which did not submit the utilisation 
certificates. 
EnvirOil.OMntal Information Sf*m (ENVIS) 
57. Environmental Information System (ENYIS) set up by the Ministry in 1982 provides 
descriptive information and numerical data on various subjects related · to environment to 
decision makers, researchers, academicians, policy planners, environme.ntalists , engineers 
and the general public. It is a decentralized system with a network of distributed subject 
oriented centres, ensuring integration of national efforts in environmental information, 
collection, collation, storage .. retrieval and dissemination to all user groups. A chain of 20 
Centres have so far been set up in various priority areas of environment. 
57.1 The ENVIS has joined the Educational Research Network (ERNET) programme 
of the department of electronics under which computer connectivity has been provided to a 
number of ENYIS Centres so that the Centres could have on-line access with the focal point 
and with each other. This has not only enhanced the scope of the ENVIS, but also resulted 

in speedier retrieval and dissemination of information to the users. Some more ENVIS 
Centres are also proposed to be set up. 
Biodiversity Conservation 
58. The scheme on biodiversity conservation was initiated during 1991-92 to ensure 
proper coordination among various agencies concerned with issues .relating to conservation 
of biological diversity, and to review, monitor and evolve adequate policy instruments for 
the same. 
58.1 The objectives of the Biosphere Reserve Programme are to conserve the 
biodiversity and genetic integrity of plants, animals and micro-organisms in their totality as 
part of the natural eco-systems, so as to ensure their self-perpetuation and unhindered 
evolution of the living resources etc. 14 potential sites were identified for setting up of 
Biosphere Reserves in the country. 
59. The Ministry of Environment and Forests, which is the nodal agency in the 
administrative structure of the Central Government for the planning, promotion and 
coordination of Environment and Forestry Programme, has sought total budgetary support 
(Plan-side) of Rs. 469.4 crores in the Budget estimates for 1996·97 against Rs. 370.5 crores in 
1995-96 Prima-facie there is an increase of about Rs. 100 crores . But this is stated to be 
entirely on account of externally aided projects. Budgetary support has thus remaind at the 
level of last year. According to the Ministry, while for most of the plan schemes the outlays 
for the current year have been retained at the 1995-96 level, some prioritisation has, however, 
been done in view of additional commitments devolving on the Ministry on account of 
Supreme Court directives or on account of externally aided projects becoming operational 
during the year. 
The Committee finds that out of the total budgetary support (Plan-side ) of Rs. 370.50 
crores in 1995-96 only a sum of Rs. 292.22 crores was utilised. The Committee was informed 
that the budget estimate of Rs. 370.50 crores was brought down to Rs. 335.50 crores on 
account of across the board cut imposed by the Ministry of Finance. The total unutilised 
portion therefore, amounted to Rs. 43.28 crores out of which Rs. 36.93 crores remained 
unutilised on account of the Ganga Project. 
60. While the Secretary admitted that the funds remained unutilised, he attributed the 
same to the intervention of the ·court. He stated that the non-utilisation to the extent of 
Rs. 12.38 crores was in respect of Industrial Pollution Control Project. Besides a sum of 
Rs. 8.99 crores remained unutilised in respect of Integrated Afforestation Project. Another 
reason for non-utilisation was the Plan ceiling imposed by the Planning Commission. 
The Committee expresses its concern on the non-utilisation of the budgetary support for 
whatever the reason it might have been and to whatever the project it belongs to. The 
Committee observes that the non-utilisation reflects poor planning on the part of the Ministry 
and it should have been avoided at all costs unless it is for reasons such as the intervention by 
Court for which too no details have been furnished. 
61. The Committee was informed that against the stipulated 6,68,000 hectares of land for 
afforestation, the Government had been able to achieve afforestation in 2,37,496 hectares of 
land as on 30th June, 1996. The records were now being maintained through the Regional 
Forest Conservation Officers who were monitoring this. Asked about the survival rate of the 
plants in the forests, the Committee was informed that the survival rate is not more than 15 
to 20 per cent. 
62. In his presentation before the Committee, the Secretary stated that the trend of 

shrinking forest cover in the past has largely been arrested. In support of his contention he 
has cited the findings· of Forest Report of 1993 published by the Forest Survey of India which 
claims a marginal increase in the forest cover by about 22 sq. kms. over the last assessment in 
1991. The forest cover, according to the report, in the Northern region is in fact falling. The 
Committee has been given to understand that the much delayed state of the forest cover 
report, 1995 presents a cause for alarm as it shows a decline of 507 sq. kms-. from the 
previous assessment. This report reflects the st!ltus between the years 1991 and 1993. Further, 
the dedi·Je was mainly due to rapid deforestation in the North Eastern region which has 
accounted for a lar~e percentage of forest cover in the past. Thus the Ministry's claim of 
marginal increase in the forest cover is not borne out of its own facts. The Committee 
observes that the average investment in the forest area of around Rs. 1,000 crores is not being 
monitored properly. It is not yielding expected results. The outlay therefore needs to be 
utilised in a result oriented manner. 
63. The Committee was informed that the afforestation programme was implemented 
through State Governments. The Committee is not happy with the system of obtaining 
feedback from field agencies located in different States, nor is there any system designed to 
ensure proper co-ordination and monitoring of the programme. The Committee ·feels that 
there should be regular check on the figures/feedback furnished by field agencies. In order to 
make the system of feedback from field agencies full-proof, the Government should use the 
satellite imageries. 
64. Control of pollution is one of the areas assigned to the Ministry. Here, the Ministry 
has sought total budgetary support of Rs. 73.48 crores of which Rs. 30.35 crores is on the 
plan side and Rs. 43.13 crores on the non-plan side. In 1995-96 the allocation on this head 
was Rs. 26.53 crores as per revised estimates whereas the actual expenditure was Rs. 10.98 
crores. In 1994-95 and earlier in 1993-94 the Ministry had sought Rs. 26.73 crores and 
Rs. 17.20 crores against the actual expenditure of Rs. 9.70 crores and Rs. 8.14 crores 
respectively. The Committee finds that the Ministry's record has persistently been that of non­
utilisation in the thrust areas of its assignments. Even though the first legislation on the 
control arad prevention of pollution was being considered by a Joint Committee of Parliament 
when the Stockholm conference on Environment and De\·elopment was held in 1972, the 
Committee observes that pollution has increased in alarming proportions be it the pollution of 
environment or that of water, and the impact thereof is being felt by one and all alike. The 
norms regarding discharge :of industrial effluents continue to be flouted and the control 
mechanism remaining only on paper. Even the drinking water being supplied by civic bodies 
in the country is not safe to drink. Chlorine content in the water is very high and in West 
Bengal detection of arsenic in the water supply in 630 blocks under 52 villages spread over 
7 districts has added to the gravity of the problem. 
As regards pollution, to cite an example, Delhi today is the fourth most polluted city in 
the world with 30% of its people suffering from respiratory disorders. About 2000 M'DD of 
pollutants are added to the city's air each day, out of which 64% is contributed by the two 
lakh odd vehicles mostly by two and three wheelers. Even the Government's move to 
introduce unleaded petrol is being thwarted by 81% petrol run vehicle owners. Many are even 
getting catalytic converters (cat con) removed. The reasons being the non-availability of 
unleaded petrol outside the metropolis. Secondly, for retrofitting a cat con a car bas to run on 
unleaded petrol without cat con for atleast 2000 Kms. While the car is being run without cat 
con on unleaded fuel, the ~mission levels are phenomenally high and far more hazardous than 
leaded petrol. 
65. The Co>mmittee therefore is of the view that it is time the Ministry seriously goes into 

the dimensions of the problem and educate Motorists as to the need to use unleaded petro l 
and other such products which result in a cleaner environment . 
The Committee is constrained to observe that the Ministry has not done anything 
significant to control the environmental pollution, the emphasis should be more on educative 
and preventive aspects than on punitive aspects. The whole approach needs to be radically 
altered and the utilisation of budgetary support should be oriented in thut direction only. 
66. Closely related to the ecology and environment are the grim revelations on the 
menace of carbon emissions threatening the globe with dire consequences. The carbon dioxide 
is the main "gree nhouse gas" responsible for the ea rth 's warming. Today, there is 30 per 
cent more carbon dioxide in the atmosphere than two centuries ago. Countries in Europe and 
North America produce more than half of the global carbon dioxide emissions e.g. North 
America produces 5.2 tonnes per head per hear, East Europe 3 tonnes, West Europe -2.1 
tonnes, China 0.6 tonnes, Africa 0.3 tonnes followed by India 0.2 tonnes. The global 
temperature has changed between 1870 and 1990; it has changed from minus 0.3 degree 
celsius in 1970 to plus 0.3 in 1990. One of the factors responsible for this is the record-level 
use of fossil fuels which boosts the atmospheric concentration of carbon dioxide, which traps 
heat to increasing heights. Last year alone, carbon emissions from burning fossils and fuels all 
over the world reached 6.1 billion tonnes which marl<s an increase of one million tonnes over 
1991. The Committee has been given to understand that most Governments of industrialised 
countries are failing to meet the goal of limiting carbon set by the Framework Convention on 
climate change signed at the earth summit in 1992. The Committee is of the view that curbs 
on carbon emission are necessary. Even though the scientific concept of a friendly 
environment is relatively new to us something drastically needs to be done by the Ministry in 
this regard with a view to control the environmental pollution. 
The Committee has been given to understand that according to a WHO report released at 
the conference tropical diseases like malaria, dengue and cholera will rise sharply in Africa 
and Asia. Besides, malnutri ·tion and water scarcity will affect many more families ·. Changes in 
h)·drological cycle will alter rainfall patterns in many areas. Many inland areas in the tropics 
may insteud face droughts and drying up o'f rivers. According to a study 3 to 4 degrees 
warming may eliminate up to 85 of the remaining wetlands, wipling out many birds and turtle 
species. 
67. The Committee agrees tliat ther-e is thus an urgent need to bring about a consensus to 
finally reduce emissions by 50 to 70 per cent over the next few decades by taking steps to 
increase energy efticiency, limit carbon consumption and encourage transition to renewables . 
This is all the more necessary because scientific studies advocate a stabilisation target of 450 
PPI\1 by 2100 A.D., where eco-systems could naturally adapt to climate change . 
The Committee further agrees that access to emironment friendly technology and finance 
is critical for countries like China and India which are stated to be fourth and fifth largest 
producers of Green House Gases (GIIGs) respectively to curb their emissions. The Committee 
recommends that Government should join the attempts to activate the Global Environment 
Facility (GEF) , a multilateral fund set up by affluent nations to meet obligations under the 
UN climate ~hange convention and lend budgetary support. 
(>S. The Committee notes that the l\linistry 's record in utilisation of budgetary support on 
conservation programmes in the last two )'cars has been poor. In 1995-96, the Ministr y 
utilised Rs. 6.31 crores out of the budget prO\'ision of Rs. S uores which is about 80% . ln 
199-J-95 the l\linistry utilised Rs. -L56 crorcs out of a pro\i ~ i on of Rs. ~ cron:s i.e., 50.7%. 
The Committee observes that the l\linistry should widen its hori,_,nl and should concentrate on 

urgent areas of Consevation Programme. This would also ensure optimum utilisation of 
budgetary support. 
69. As regard the dependence of the country's rural population on forest resources the 
Committee's attention has been drawn to a su~:vey conducted by Self-employed Women's 
Association (SEW .t\) in some villages in Sabarkanth~ District in Gujarat where 93% of the 
families live below poverty-line. These women have to pay 200 to 300 per cent more than what 
paper mills pay for the same forest produce. Besides, the Adivasi women who are at best 
semi-literate and who tap gum are also required to obtain licence. Another agony of these 
women is that they are required to sell their produce to Government agencies at one-fourth of 
the ,market price. In the process when these women were operating 'illegally' they could earn 
Rs. 25'- per day but now as SEW A members when they wish to operat~ 'legally' they earn 
Rs. 121-per day with longer working hours and with the additional help of c,hildren who have 
to leave school to provide the necessary supportive labour. 
The Committee therefore, feels that a line has to be drawn on the exploitation of forest 
wealth by the tribal ' and rural population on the one hand and unauthorised exploitation for 
commercial purposes. 
70. Another important aspect related to the preservation of forests is the large scale 
devastation by fire. This aspect, the Committee feels, is being neglected due to lack of modern 
fire fighting systems and insufficient control, monitoring and communication system to contain 
and prevent such fires. 
71. This is one of the projects for which budget estimates for 1996-97 provide an amount 
of Rs. 44 crores. Already till 1995-96, an amount of Rs. 89 crores has been released to the 
ICEF by the Ministry. The objective or the ICEF is to enhance the capacity of Indian 
institutions and organisations to promote and deli~er sustainable development programmes. 
For this purpose the priority areas identified under ICEF are the following projects: 
(i) Enhancing the capacity : of Indian private and public sector institutions and 
organisations to undertake environmentally sustainable development and 
management of energy and water resources. 
(ii) Providing support for programms which specifically address the inter-relationship 
between poverty .and environmental degradation, especially as it affects women, in 
energy, land and water management activities at the community and village level. 
(iii) Providing support for public awareness of environmental issues, community 
participation and community-based management of energy, land and water 
resources. 
72. The Committee feels that there is no correlation between the goals set forth, the 
projects identified and the amount of funds provided to these projects. It is also not clear how 
the funds spent on these projects ultimately benefit women engaged h~ energy, land and water 
management activities at the community and village_ level and provide support for public 
awareness of environmental issues etc. Among the beneficiaries are certain institutions like 
M.S. Swaminathan Research Foundation Project entitled "Coastal Wet Lands Mangrove 
Conservation and Management". The Committee is not aware whether there is any 
mechanism to monitor the satisfactory utilisation of funds by such beneficiaries. Further, 
certain amounts realised from the sale of commodities donated by the Canadian Government 
are also channelised to projects under ICEF. The Committee has not been apprised as to what 
are the commodities donated by the Canadian Government and how they are sold and the 
receipts accruing thereform are channelised to the project. Prima facie there seems to be a 

case for further investigation into the entire project and utilisation of the funds earmarked for 
the project. 
73. One of the projects under the head forestry is the Project Elephant for which the 
budgetary support amounted to Rs. 5 crores each year in the last three years namely 1993-94, 
1994-95, 1995-96. While the actual expenditure during 1993-94 was Rs. 5.69 crores, in 
1994-95, it went down to Rs. 4.80 crores and declined further to Rs. 3 •• 4 crore in 1995-96. 
The Committee was informed that the large portion of the funds were provided to the State of 
Kerala for providing an 'Elephant Corridor' in ldukki and Parambikulam. The amount was 
disbursed to the State Government through District Collector and so far about 60 hectares of 
land had been taken over by the Ministry for the establishment of corridor in Kerala. The 
Committee was also informed that they have planted trees on an area of 400 acres of land. 
While the total budgetary provision for the project is Rs. 23 crores of which the corridor will 
require roughly an amount of Rs. 4 crores 25 per cent of the amount is to be spent on 
strengthening of infrastructure namely specialy wireless stations as elephant is considered to 
be a wide ranging animal. Asked about the details of the project and the number of trees etc. 
planted all these years in the elephant corridor, the Ministry could not furnish details. 
Besides, it was stated that a census was conducted for estimation of elephant population by 
direct count and index count in different parts of the country during 1992 and 1993. The 
habitat restoration and improvement activities have resulted in reduction of the period of 
man-elephant encounters thus mitigating the man-elephant conflict in such areas. 
74. The Committee is not happy with the progress made by the Ministry in the Project 
Elephant. Despite whatever has been done by the Ministry, one elephant is killed everyday. 
The generation of elephants appears to have completely stopped. There are no details 
provided by the Government indicating whether life of any elephant has been saved anywhere 
as a result of large amounts spent by them under the scheme. The Committee feels that the 
figures furnished by the Government regarding increase in the population of elephants from 
23,000 in 1989 to 25,000 in 1993 are not realistic. On the other hand, a large number of 
elephants die for reasons other than poaching. The Committee recommends that tliis project 
should be closely monitored and detailed notes on action taken with results, indigenous species 
planted with survival rate, number of wireless sets given, etc. should be furnished to the 
Committee. 
. 
75. The Animal Welfare Board has been provided with budgetary support of Rs. 1.64 
crores in the budget estimates for 1996-97 of which Rs. 1.30 crores in on plan side an~ 0.34 
crores on the non-plan side. The budgetary allocation during the last three years ranged from 
LO to 1.5 crores (plan as well as non-plan) and it was largely over-spent. The Committee 
observes that there is a considerable scope for enhancing the budgetary support under this 
head for stopping rabies in the country, for providing rearing homes for cows, for health care 
and sterilisation of animals and for prevention of cruelty to animals. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the budgetary support in respect of Animal Welfare Board needs 
to be considerably enhanced to say, Rs. 10 crores, for catering to the needs of the animals. At 
the same time , Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry to ensure that the 
enhanced budgetary support, if provided, are spent really for the benefit of the animals and 
not on illusory overheads . 
76. Central Zoo Authority incurred an expenditure of Rs. 3 crores equal to the amount 
provided as budgetary support. The budgetary provision in 1993-94 and 1994-95 ranged from 
Rs. 1.5 crore to Rs. 3 crores and it was over-spent . A budgetary provision of Rs. 3 crores has 
been made in the budget estimates for 1996-97 also. The Committee observes that the 
budgetary support is not spent Jor the purpose for which it is intended otherwise the death 

rate of 15 to 20 per cent of animals due to gastroenteritis in Indian zoos would not have been 
there. The Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry that the animals should be 
protected from heatstroke. They should be provided with good food and safe drinking water 
so that the death of animals on these counts are avoided. Steps should also be taken to 
provide a trained cadre of officers for management of zoos. The Committee is constrained to 
observe that a sum of Rs. 3 crores spent on evaluation of zoos was not properly spent as 
nothing appears to have been spent for rehabilitation purposes. In Committee's view there is a 
strong case for enhancing the budgetary allocation, say, Rs. 10 crores for Central Zoo 
Authority to say Rs. 10 crores so that the programmes relating to the welfare of the animals 
as also the creation of a cadre comprising of trained officers can be taken care of. 
77. A provision of Rs. 106 crores has been made in the budget estimates for 1996-97 in 
respect of Ganga Project Directorate. The main objective of GAP Phase-! is to improve the 
water quality of river Ganga. To that end, sewage generated from 25 class I towns 
(populations above 1 lakh) in U.P., Bihar, and the West Bengal is intercepted, diverted and 
treated before its final disposal either back in the river or for irrigation purposes. 261 
schemes of pollution abatement have been sanctioned which include interception and diversion 
of sewage, sewage treatment plants, low cost toilets, electric crematoria and bathing ghats, in 
the States of U.P., Bihar and the West Bengal. The action plan envisages diversion and 
treatment of 873 million litres per day of sewage from the above towns. Out of this, a capacity 
of 654 million Jitres per day has already been created. 
It has been stated that 244 schemes have been completed, the remaining 17 are in 
progress and expected to be completed by 31.03.1997. Of the 35 sewage treatment plants 
proposed to be constructed, 26 are functional and remaining 9 are in their final stages of 
completion. The project has tieen delayed due to reasons such as inexperience in the kind of 
work required, inordinate delays in land acquisition for certain schemes, litigation and court 
cases in Kanpur, Allahabad in U.P. and in West Bengal encroachment of sites of major 
projects in Calcutta and Patna, tendering and retendering of certain schemes due to 
contractual problems, delay in the external aid component of ·Kanpur and Mirzapur and 
diversion of funds by State Governments of U..P. and Bihar and consequent delayed release of 
the Central funding to the States for implementation of certain programmes. 
78. The Committee has been informed that the Ganga Action Plan Model with necessary 
corrections on the basis of lessons learnt and experience gained has been applied to all the 
major rivers of the country un,der the two schemes of GAP Phase-11 and the NRCP. It would 
take- about 10 years of time to complete these works. 
79. The Committee notes that a sum of Rs. 18.70 crores was surrendered against GAP 
Phase-1 and Rs. 70 crores in GAP Phase-11 Rs. 14 crores on NRCP and Rs. 3.30 crores on 
establishment. The Committee expresses its concern on the non-utilised component of the 
Ganga Action Plan. The Committee observes that non-utilisation/surrender of funds at least 
on some programmes could have been visualised and corrections made accordingly. Further, 
the Committee would like to be apprised of the mechanism put in place to monitor the 
working of various plants set up under the GAP, Phase-1 and whether any provision was 
incorporated in the contracts with contractors for liquidated damages for failure/delay in 
execution of contracts. 
80. On the basis of the oral evidence tendered before the Committee and the written 
submissions made, the Committee has regretfully come to the conclusion that the functioning 
of the Ministry of EnYironment and Forests is far from satisfactory. The Committee had 
asked for detailed and comprehensive notes on some of the issues like modern fire-fighting 

controls including helicopters and aircrafts, the Project Elephant and Ganga Action Plan and 
certain other issues. While notes have been supplied but those are not very detailed and lack 
critical analysis. For example, note on Project Elephant had no details on the issues the 
Committee had specifically asked for. The Committee had also asked for details of the 
indigenous species of plants planted and how bad they been received by the local people? 
Similarly, no details of the equipment etc. supplied under this project have been furnished. 
81. A large amount of expenditure of the Ministry is by way of grants-in-aid to the 
various State Governments and Non-Government Organisation (NGOs). It therefore becomes 
incumbent on the part of the Ministry to interact more closely with the grantee states and 
NGOs to ensure that the grants made available are in fact used for the purpose for which 
these are being made available. The Committee, however, feels that this part of the activity 
has not been taken seriously. In fact, whenever explanations and details were asked for during 
the course of oral evidence, the Committee was told that the same was under the State 
Government and the Ministry had no control over it. The Committee is unable to accept this 
explanation and recommends greater monitoring on the funds made available to different 
State Governments and NGOs. 
82. The Committee has also noted the delays in completion of various civil works 
undertaken by the l\linistry. The Committee would like to emphasise the importance of their 
timely completion so as to avoid cost-overruns and delays in the projects. 
83. The attention of the Committee has also been drawn to some of the observations in 
respect of review of various projects, as have appeared in the Report of the Comptoller and 
Auditor General of India, for the year ended 31st March, 1993 (No. 6 of 1994). Some of these 
observations are reproduced below:-
Under 'National social forestry project', aided by World Bank and the United States 
Agency for classification resulting in non-reimbursement (Himachal Pradesh), excess purchase 
of polythene granules, non-transfer of plantation areas to gram panchayats (Rajasthan), non­
compliance with orders resulting in loss of revenue, non-conformity to norms of World Bank 
resulting in non-reimbursement and excess procurement of vehicles (Uttar Pradesh) were 
notices in audit. World Bank's assessment of project weaknesses in Uttar · Pradesh indicated 
lack of marketing information system, problems in supply of seedlings, ineffective monitoring 
and analysis of project research . and its use in project management decisions. 
There were dalays in completion of Ganga Action Plan (GAP) programme in the 
'Integrated sanitation works in Kanpur and 1\·lirzapur'. Effective performance of the upflow 
anaerobic sludge blanket system is dependent upon the adoption of technology for chromium 
recovery from tanneries' discharges. A mid-term evaluation report (February · 1992) revealed 
that only 26 out of 151 tanneries were likely to adopt chromium recovery thereby affecting the 
performance of upflow anaerobic sludge blanket system. The technology for post-treatment of 
effluents from upflow anaerobic sludge blanket system was still in an experimental stage in 
Netherlands and therefore could not be adopted in India. 
Non-installation of equipments, training details not being available, delays in planning, detailed 
review not having been conducted were somt of the problems that affiicted the project: in respect of 
'Technical assistance and equipments' aided by Unitt>d Kingdom no details of the aid received were 
available. 
Aid provided by Governm'ent of Sweden for 'Strengthening of Indian Institute of Forest 
Management' could not be utilised substantively because of management problems, infighting in the 
faculty, problems in design of management development programmes etc. 
The project progress review report in its analysis also indicated lack of clarity in planning, 

problems in management and co-ordination by Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and problems 
in co-ordination between Indian Authorities and German Technical Co-operation Agency (GTZ) head 
office. No details of the aid received were available. 
Similar observations have appeared in respect of review covering the implementation of Schemes of 
Ganga Action Plan Phase-1 and an appraisal of its achievements at selected cities of Uttar Pradesh 
(U.P.), Bihar and West Bengal (W.B.) and Forest Survey of India (F.S.I.) as have appeared ln the 
Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, for the year ended 31st March, 1994 (No. 6 
of 1995). These are only a few of the observations. The list is endless. 
84. The Committee observes that these observations should be implemented expeditiously. The 
Committee would also take the opportunity to emphasise that foreign aid lo any form should be 
avoided where in all such cases the indigenous resources can be utilised. 
NEw DELHI, 
September 9, 1996 
V. NARAYANASAMY, 
Chairman, 
Committee on Science and 
Technology, Environment and 
Forests 

ANNEXURES 

ANNEXURE-I 
PLAN 
Statement Showing The Budget Demands Made/Approved and Actually Utilised During the 
Last Three Years i.e. 1993-94, 1994-95 and 1995-96 
(Rs. in Cro~s) 
NAME OF SCHEME '1993-94 1994-95 1995-96 
BUDGET ACTUALS BUDGET ACTUALS BUDGET ACTUALS 
ESTIMATE ESTIMATE ESTIMATE 
2 3 
A. · SECRET AIUAT 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
B. FORESTRY & WILDLIFE 
(i) State Forc:st Service & Rangers College 0.50 0.60 0.80 0.87 0.80 0.78 
(ii) Indira Gundhi Nutionul 0.92 0.56 1.40 1.18 1.40 1.27 
Forest Academy 
(iii) Training of I.F.S. Officers 0.35 0.36 0.45 0.54 0.45 0.45 
(iv) Indian Council of Forestry Rc:s. & Edn. l.o.t 1.04 1.05 1.05 1.05 1.16 
(v) Indian Institute of Forest 2.44 2.44 2.50 2.36 2.50 0.65 
Management 
TOTAL: 5.25 5.00 6.20 6.00 6.20 4.31 
B.2 RESEARCH 
(i) Indian Cound of Forestry Rc:s. & Edn. 27.50 28.00 39.00 40.00 46.55 41.10 
(ii) Indian l'rywood Research Institute 0.30 0.40 0.40 0.45 0.40 0.50 
(iii) Fore~t Policy and Preparation 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.13 1.00 0.4'2 
(~1· ) Bio·di\'ersity conservation 0.45 0.00 
ToTAL: 27.80 28.40 40.40 40.58 48.40 42.07 
U.3 SURVEY A:\0 UTILISATION OF FOREST 
RESOURCES 
(i) Forest Survey of India 8.05 1.15 3.80 1.28 3.50 9.23 
U.4 FOREST CONSERVATION. DEV. &•REGENERATION 
(i) Str.:ngthc:ning of Forest Divisions 1.50 1.55 2.20 2.00 2.20 2.09 
(ii) Introduction of M.F.F.C in India 1.60 1.78 2.00 1.91 2.00 0.37 
(iii) National Forestry Action Plan 0.35 0.18 0.25 0.04 0.25 0.03 
(iv) Bene. Oriented Scheme for Tribal Dev. 1.00 0.54 1.00 0.39 1.00 0.16 
(v) Assn. of ST & Rural Poor in Regeneration 2.45 1.30 2.75 0.44' 2.75 2.19 
of Degraded Forests 
TOTAL: 6.90 5.35 8.20 4.78 8.20 4.84 
ToTAL-FoR.osn.v: 48.00 39.90 58.60 52.64 66.30 60.45 
U.S WJLOLIFE 
(i) Wildlife: Institute of India 3.25 3.25 3.50 3.50 3.50 3.80 
(ii) Project Tiger 7.50 7.63 7.70 7.98 7.70 8.40 
(iii) Strc:ngthc:ning of Wildlife Division & 0.40 0.54 0.50 0.53 0.50 0.48 
Consultancies for spl. tasks. 
(iv) Management Planning for Protected area 0.75 0.03 1.00 0.16 0.50 0.28 
( 1·) Project Elephant 5.00 5.69 5.00 4.80 5.00 3.14 
(vi) Central Zoo Authority 1.50 1.65 3.00 3.30 3.00 3.00 
(vii) Eco·Dev. around important Protected areas 4.80 4.84 6.80 3.58 6.80 6.60 

2 3 
(viii) Animal Welfare Board 1.00 1.08 1.30 1.43 1.30 1.43 
(ix) National Zoological Park 0.05 0.08 0.05 0.12 0.05 0.15 
(x) Assis. for Dev. of National Parks & Sanctuaries 11.00 11.30 11.50 11.41 11.50 10.12 
TOTAL: 35.25 36.09 40.35 36.81 39.85 37.40 
TOTAL-Forestry & Wildlife (Excl. N.A.E.B.) 89.25 75.99 98.95 89.45 106.15 97.85 
NATIONAL AFFORESTATION & ECO·DEVELOPMENT 
AND REGENERATION 
(i) Nah.:lnal Afforestation & Eco-Dev. Board 5.90 2.98 3.90 3.40 3.95 3.52 
(ii) Central Support Unit. 2.00 0.96 1.60 0.92 1.30 0.90 
(iii) Fuelwood & Fodder Projects 30.10 30.57 34.00 30.48 34.00 34.00 
(iv) Seed Development Agencies 2.00 1.53 2.00 1.91 2.00 1.50 
(v) Aerial Seeding 2.00 0.50 1.50 0.00 0.50 0.00 
(vi) Integrated Afforestation & Eco. Dev. Projects 46.00 42.97 48.00 51.42 50.00 41.02 
(vii) Plantation of Minor Forests Produce 10.00 10.82 12.00 15.00 12.25 12.24 
TOTAL-N .A.E.B. 98.00 90.33 103.00 103.13 104.00 93.18 
ToTAL-Foresty & Wildlife 181.25 166.92 201.95 192.58 210.15 191.03 
C-ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENT 
C.1 SURVERY 
(i) Botanical Survey of India 2.00 1.93 2.42 2.20 2.92 2.59 
(ii) Zoological Survey of India 2.44 2.28 2.68 2.75 2.68 2.56 
TOTAL: 4.44 4.21 5.10 4.95 5.60 5.15 
C.2 ENVIRONMENT EDUCATION/TRAINING/EXTENSION 
(i) Environmental Edu. Training Schemes 3.50 3.31 3.85 3.01 3.85 2.80 
(ii) Workshop. Seminars and Symposia 0.30 0.27 0.30 0.25 0.30 0.19 
(iii) National Museum of Natural History 2.00 1.27 2.00 0.93 2.00 1.87 
(iv) Environmental Information System 1.00 1.03 1.10 1.13 1.10 1.51 
(v) Centres of Excellence 5.00 3.15 3.04 2.67 3.04 2.54 
(vi) Grants-in-aid to Prof. Societies & Institutions. 0.10 O.D7 0.10 0.07 0.10 0.01 
(vii) Pitambar Pant Fellowship 0.04 0.02 0.05 0.04 0.05 0.02 
(viii) Paryavaran Sudhar Pariyojana 3.80 0.27 3.99 0.01 3.32 0.22 
(ix) Indo-Canada Environmental Facility 0.00 19.18 0.50 55.24 0.55 13.36 
Projects (Externally Aided Scheme) 
ToTAL: 0.00 19.18 0.50 55.24 0.55 13.36 
TOTAL: 15.74 28.57 14.93 63.35 14.31 22.52 
C. 3 CONSERVATION PROGRAMME 
(i) Biosphere Reserves 3.00 3.84 3.00 1.60 3.00 2.26 
(ii) Assis. for Regional Botanical Gardens 1.00 1.19 0.50 0.59 0.50 0.49 
(ii1) Mangroves Eco-Systems 1.50 1.06 1.50 0.26 1.50 1.22 
(iv) Wetlands 1.50 1.32 1.50 0.79 1.50 1.64 
(v) National Natural Resources Management System 1.00 0.96 1.00 0.99 1.00 0.65 
(vi) National Board for Bio-Diversity 0.50 0.15 0.50 0.33 0.50 0.05 
TOTAL: 8.50 8.52 8.00 4.56 8.00 6.31 
C.4 RESEARCH AND ECOLOGICAL REGENERATION 
(i) Research and Development 3.50 3.18 3.85 3.42 3.85 3.65 
(ii) Fieid Action Programme on Restoration 0.20 0.02 0.10 0.00 0.10 0.00 

2 3 
or Sd~cted Eco-Syste!ms 
(iii) Himal;.syan Insll of Environment & Dev. 4.15 4.35 4.57 4.85 4.57 4.39 
(i1·) Integrated Action Oriented Restarch 0.35 0.34 .0.39 0.39 0.39 0.38 
& Extension Projc:cts 
(1·) Eco-Dc:l'dopmc:nt Forces 4.50 2.36 4.50 3.95 4.50 '0.17 
TOTAL: 12.70 10.25 13.41 12.61 13.41 8.59 
C.5 PREVE:\TI0:-.1 AND CONTROL OF POLLUTION 
li) Central Pollution Control Board 3.40 3.40 3.73 3.73 3.73 3.73 
(ii) Promotion o( Common Ernuc:nt Trc:atment Plants 3.00 0.40 3.00 0.24 3.00 2.56 
(iii) Pollution Control Projects 4.00 0.40 12.00 2.13 13.50 1.12 
(Externally Aided Scheme) 
( i1·) Assistance Cor Abatement of Pollution 3.00 2.01 2.00 2.03 2.00 1.48 
(1·) Environmental Commission and Tribunal 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 
(~"i) llazardous Substance ~lan;.sgemc:nt 3.50 1.61 3.00 1.33 3.00 1.78 
(vii) Environmental Audit 0.10 0.11 0.10 O.Q2 0.10 0.12 
(viii) Environmental Statistics & ~lapping 0.10 O.IO O.IO O.I2 0.10 0.10 
(ix) Clean Tc:ch. by Small Sc;,sle Industries 0.10 0.11 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.09 
TOTAL: 17.20 8.14 25.03 9.70 26.53 10.98 
C.6 1!\IPACT ASSESS~1EJ'\T 
(i) Environmental Impact Assessment Prog. 4.90 4.93 5.29 0.86 5.29 1.34 
(ii) Dcv. & Promotion or Clean Technologies 0.00 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.10 0.00 
ToTAL: 4.90 4.93 5.39 0.86 5.39 1.34 
c. 7 l~TERNATIONAL COOPERATION 0.85 0.61 0.88 1.17 1.00 0.80 
TOIAL-ECOLOGY & ENVIR0i'\~1ENT 65.35 65.23 72.74 97.20 74.24 55.69 
(EXCLD. G.P.D.) 
C. S PREVENT10:-.I OF POLLUTION OF GANGA 
(i) Cc:ntral Ganga Authority 3.35 2.43 3.55 2.43 3.39 2.25 
(ii) Ganga Action Plan I 56.65 44.35 44.45 24.79 31.61 10.03 
(iii) Ganga Action Plan II 0.00 I7.95 25.00 3.96 32.00 I4.08 
(iv) Natin;,sl River Action Plan 5.00 0.18 5.00 0.16 I2.00 15.71 
ToTAr.-GANGA PROJECT DIRECTORATE 65.00 64.9I 78.00 31.34 79.00 42.07 
~- ·;. --
TOTAL-ECOLOGY & ENVIRON~I E NT I29.33 130.14 I50.74 I28.54 I53.24 97.76 
TOTAL-REVENUE SECTION 310.58 296.46 352.69 321.12 363.39 288.79 
D. CIVIL WORKS 
(i) Civil Engineering Wing 0.60 0.68 0.66 0.73 0.66 0.86 
(ii) Civil Works (Ecology & Environment) 4.97 5.25 5.60 5.59 5.10 2.05 
(iii) Civil Works {Forestry & Wildlife) 1.65 1.13 1.05 0.81 1.35 0.52 
TOTAL-CAPITAL SECTION 7.22 7.06 7.31 7.13 7.11 3.43 
ToTAL-ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENT 134.90 I36.07 157.00 134.86 159.00 100.67 
(INCL. WORKS) 

2 3 
ToTAL- FORESTRY & WILDLIFE (INCL. WORKS) 182.90 167.45 203.00 193.39 211.50 191.55 
GRA~D TOTAl 317.80 303.52 360.00 328.25 370.50 292.22 

ANNEXURE-II 
NON-PLAN 
Statement Showing The Budget Demands Made/ Approved and Actually Utilised During the 
Last Three Years i.e. 1993-94, 1994-95 and 1995-96 
(Rs. in crores) 
NA~IE OF SCHEME 1993-94 199HS 1995-% 
BUDGET ACTUALS BUDGET ACTUALS BUDGET ACTUALS 
ESTIMATE ESTIMATE ESTIMATE 
2 3 4 
A. SECRETARIAT 3.12 3.08 3.27 3.23 3.54 3.62 
n. FORESTRY & WILDLIFE 
ll.l EDUCATION A~D TRAl~lNG 
(i) Stale fort:~t Service & Rangers College 0.97 0.98 1.04 1.08 1.12 1.16 
(ii) Indira Gamlhi 1'\ational 1.25 l.J6 1.33 1.39 1.53 1.57 
Fore:~! Acad~:my 
(iii) Indian Cou111:il of Forestry Res. & Edn. 0.42 0.42 0.44 0.46 0.46 0.46 
(iv) Indian Institute of Forest 0.56 0.56 0.56 0.56 0.60 0.60 
Management 
TorAL: 3.20 3.32 3.37 3.49 3.71 3.79 
ll.2 RESEARCH 
(i) Indian Council of Fort:~try Res. & Edn. 6.62 6.62 6.62 6.62 6.75 6.75 
(ii) Indian Plywood Rc:searl·h Institute 0.65 0.65 0.65 0.65 0.70 0.70 
TorAL: 7.27 7.27 7.27 7.27 7.45 7.45 
11.3 SURVEY Al\D UTILISATION OF FOREST 
RESOURCES 
(i) forest Survey of India 1.90 1.90 2.00 2.17 2.20 2.70 
TorAL Forestry: 12.37 12.49 12.64 12.93 13.36 13.94 
ll.S WILDLIFE 
(i) Wildlife Institute of India 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.85 0.90 0.90 
(ii) Project Tiger 0.05 0.06 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.07 
(iii) Enforcc:ment o£ Wildlife 0.20 0.22 0.22 0.24 0.26 0.26 
Protection Act,' 1972 
(iv) Convention on International Trade for 0.01 0.01 1.01 0.01 0.01 O.Dl 
Endangered Specil!s of P&A (CITES) 
(v) Animal Welfare Board 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.24 0.25 0.27 
("i) Committee for purpose of control and 0.05 0.01 0.05 0.01 0.02 0.(1() 
supen·ision of experiment on Animals 
(vii) National Zoological Park 1.55 1.55 1.61 2.19 1.78 1.81 
(viii) Padmaja Naidu Himalayan Zoological Park 0.00 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 0.06 
(ix) International Cooperation 0.48 0.44 0.48 • 0.55 0.55 0.67 
TOTAL: 3.39 3.40 3.53 4.20 3.88 4.05 
ToTAL-Forestry & Wildlife (Excl. N.A.E.n.) 15.76 15.89 16.17 17.13 17.24 17.99 

NATIONAL AFFORESTATION & ECO·DEVELOPMENT 
AND REGENERATION 
2 3 4 
(i) Customs & Imports Duties on Personal 0.03 0.01 0.03 0.00 0.03 0.00 
Effects of foreign Experts 
ToTt.L-N.A.E.B. 0.03 0.01 0.03 0.00 0.03 0.00 
TOTAL-FORESTRY & WILDLIFE 15.79 15.90 16.20 17.13 17.27 17.99 
C. ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENT 
C.l Surveys 
(i) Botanical Survey of India 5.10 5.63 5.60 6.06 6.22 6.42 
(ii) Zoological Survey of India 4.97 5.01 5.41 5.50 5.88 5.83 
TOTAL: 10.07 10.70 11.07 11..56 12.10 12.25 
C.2 Environcmnt Educaitolnlfraining!Extcnsion 
(i) Environmental Education Training 0.05 0.00 0.05 0.00 0.05 0.04 
Scheme 0.55 0.50 0.55 0.46 0.57 0.57 
(ii) National Museum of Natural History 0.18 0.17 0.18 0.16 0.20 0.20 
(iii) Environmental Information System 0.90 0.75 0.90 0.90 0.93 0.93 
(iv) Centres of Excellence 
TOTAL: 1.68 1.42 1.68 1.52 1.75 1.74 
C.S Pprevcntion and Control oC Pollution 
(i) Central Pullution Control Board 4.50 4.25 4.50 4.50 460 4.65 
(ii) Prevention of Control of Water 16.30 30.66 21.00 20.95 25.00 35.00 
Pollution (Cess) 
TOTAL: 20.80 34.91 25.50 25.45 29.60 39.65 
C.6 Impact Assessment 
(i) Environmental Impact Asscssmenl 0.05 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.05 0.10 
Prog. 
TOTAL: 0.05 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.05 0.10 
C. 7 International Cooperation 0.50 0.39 0.50 0.46 0.60 0.93 
ToTAL-ECOLOGY & 33.10 47.46 38.80 39.05 44.10 54.68 
ENVIRONMENT 
(EXCLD. G.P.D.) 
TOTAL-EOLOGY & ENVIRONMENT 33.10 47.46 38.80 39.05 44.10 54.68 
TOTAL-REVENUE SECTION 52.01 66.44 58.27 59.41 64.91 76.29 
TOTAL-ECOLOGY & 33.10 47.46 38.80 39.05 44.10 54.68 
ENVIRONMENT 
ToTAL-FORESTRY & WILDLIFE 15.79 15.90 16.20 17.13 17.27 17.99 
GllAND TOTAL: 52.01 66.44 58.27 59.41 64.91 76.29 
,.,,., 

Statement showing the total demands made for the year 1996-97 
Sl. 
No. 
Item 
A. SECRETARIAT 
B. FORESTRY & WILDLIFE 
(i) State Forest Service & Rangers College 
(ii) Indira Gandhi National Forest Academy 
(iii) Training of I.F.S. Officers 
(iv) Indian Council of Forestry Res. & Edn. 
(v) Indian Institute of Forest Management 
8.2 Research 
(i) Indian Council of Forestry Res. & Edn. 
(ii) Indian Plywood Research Institute 
(iii) Forest Policy and Preparation 
(iv) Bio-diversity Conservation 
B.3 Sun·ey and Utilisation of Forest Resources 
(i) Forest Survey of India 
8.4 Forest Consenation Dev. & Regeneration 
(i) Strenghthening of Forest Divisions 
(ii) Introduction of M.F.F.C. in India 
(iii) National Forestry Action Plan 
(iv) Bene. Oriented Scheme for Tribal Dev. 
TOTAL: 
ToTAL: 
(v) Assn. of ST & Rural Poor in Regeneration of Degraded Forests 
(vi) Dev. of Infrastructure for Promotion of Forests from Biotic Interference 
(vi~ Others 
8.5 Wildlife 
(i) Wildlife Institute of India 
(ii) Project Tiger 
TOTAL: 
ToTAL FORESTRY 
ANNEXURE-III 
.; 
(Rs. in crores) 
B.E. 
Plan 
0.00 
0.80 
1.30 
0.45 
1.05 
2.00 
5.60 
60.05 
0.43 
1.00 
1.73 
63.21 
1.72 
2.20 
2.00 
0.25 
i.OO 
2.00 
0.00 
1.45 
77.98 
3.50 
7.70 
1996-97 
Non-
Plan 
4.10 
1.28 
1.72 
0.00 
0.48 
0.62 
4.10 
6.88 
0.76 
0.00 
0.00 
7.64 
3.10 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.03 
0.03 
14.87 
0.90 
0.06 

2 
(iii) Enforcement of Wildlife Prot. Act 1972 
(iv) Strengthening of Wildlife Division & Consultancies for spl. tasks 
(v) Management Planning for Protected areas 
(vi) Project Elephant 
(vii) Central Zoo Authority 
{viii) Eco-Dev. around important protected areas 
(ix) Animal Welfare Board 
(x) Com. for Cont. & Sup. of Exp. on Animal 
(xi) National Zoological Park 
(xii) Padmaja Naidu Him. Zoological Park 
(xiii) Assistance for control of poaching and illegal trade in wildlife 
(xiv) Assis. for Dev. of National Parks & Sanctuaries 
(xv) Convention on International Trade in endangered species of Wild Fauna & 
Flora 
(xvi) International Co-operation 
TorAL: 
ToTAL-FORESTRY & WILDLIFE (ExcL. N.A.E.B) 
B., National Afforestation & Eco. Dtvelopmtnt and Regeneration 
(i) National Afforestation & Eco-Dcv. Board 
(ii) Central Support Unit 
(iii) Fuelwood & Foddet Projects 
(iv) Seed Development Agencies 
(v) Aerial Seeding 
(vi) Integrated Afforestation ll. Eco-Dev. Projects 
(vii) Plantation of Minor Forests Produce 
(viii) Indira Kunj 
TOTAL-N.A.E.B. 
To.rAL-FORESTRY & WILDLIFE 
C. ECOLOGY i ENVIRONMENT 
C.l s~u;veys 
(i) Botanical Survey of India 
(ii) Zoological Survey of India 
C.2 Environment Education!fraining!Extension 
(i) Environmental Edn. Training Schemes 
(ii) Workshop, Seminars and Symposia 
(iii) National Museum of Natural History 
(iv) Environmental Information System 
( v) Centres of Excellence 
ToTAL: 
3 
0.00 
1.00 
0.50 
4.50 
3.00 
35.77 
1.30 
0.00 
0.05 
0.00 
11.50 
0.00 
0.00 
68.82 
1,46.80 
4.05 
1.20 
40.00 
2.50 
0.50 
30.00 
10.75 
1.00 
90.00 
236.80 
3.42 
2.73 
6.15 
3.85 
0.30 
2.40 
1.10 
4.69 
4 
0.27 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.34 
O.Q2 
2.13 
0.06 
0.00 
0.01 
0.70 
4.49 
19.36 
0. ()\) 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
0.00 
19.36 
7.15 
6.70 
13.85 
0.05 
0.00 
0.60 
0.28 
0.90 

1 2 3 4 
(vi) Grants-in-aid to Prof. Societies & Institutions 0.10 0.00 
(vii) Pitambar Pant Fellowship 0.05 0.00 
(viii) Paryavaran Sudhar Pariyojana 1.00 0.00 
(ix) Indo-Canada Environmental Facility Projects (Externally Aided Scheme) 44.00 0.00 
TOTAL: 57.49 1.83 
C.3 Conservation Programme 
(i) Biosphere Reserves 2.50 0.00 
(ii) Assis. for Regional Botanical Gardens 0.50 0.00 
(iii) Mangroves Eco-Systems 1.50 0.00 
(iv) Wetlands 1.50 0.00 
(v) National Natural Resources Management System 1.00 0.00 
(vi) National Board for Bio-Diversity 0.25 0.00 
TOTAL: 7.25 0.00 
C.4 Research and Ecological Regeneration 
(i) Research and Development 3.85 0.00 
(ii) Field Action Programme on Restoration of Selected Eco-Systems 0.05 0.00 
(iii) Himalayan Instt. of Environment & Dev. 4.57 0.00 
(iv) Integrated Action Oriented Research & Extension Projects 0.39 0.00 
(v) Eco-Development Forces 4.00 0.00 
TOTAL: 12.86 0.00 
C.S Prevention and Control of Pollution 
(i) Central Pollution Control Board •· 4.75 4.88 
(ii) Prevention & Cont. of Water Poilu. (Cess) 0.00 38.25 
(iii) Promotion of Common Effluent Treatment Plants 3.00 0.00 
(iv) Pollution Control Projects (Externally Aided Scheme} 14.00 0.00 
(v) Assistance for Abatement of Pollution 1.50 0.00 
(vi) Environmental Commission and Tribunal 1.00 0.00 
(vii) Hazardous Substance Management 5.80 0.00 
(viii) Environmental Audit 0.10 0.00 
(ix) Environmental Statistics & Mapping 0.10 0.00 
(x) Oean Tech. by Small Scale Industries 0.10 0.00 
TOTAL: 30.35 43.13' 
C.6 Impact Assessment 
(i) Environmental Impact Assessment Prog. 4.29 0.10 
(ii) Dev. & Promotion of Clean Technologies 0.10 0.00 
ToTAL: 4.39 0.10 

1 2 3 4 
C.7 International Cooperation 1.00 0.97 
ToTAL:-ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENT (EXCLD. G.P.D.) 119.49 59.88 
C.8 Prevention of PoUutlon of Ganga 
(i) Central Ganga A~thority 3.30 0.00 
(ii) Ganga Action Plan I 18.70 0.00 
(iii) Ganga Action Plan II 70.00 0.00 
(iv) National River Action Plan 14.00 0.00 
TOTAL:-GANGA PROJECT DIRECTORATE 106.00 0.00 
TOTAL:-ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENT 225.49 59.88 
TOTAL:-REVENUE SECTION 462.29 83.34 
D. Civil Works 
(i) Civil Engineering Wing 0.66 0.00 
(ii) Civil W~rks (Ecology & Environment) 4.85 0.00 
(iii) Civil Works (Forestry & Wildlife) 1.60 0.00 
TOTAL:-CAPIT AL SECTION 7.11 0.00 
TOTAL:-sECRETARIAT 0.00 4.10 
ToTAL:-ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENT (INCL. WORKS) 231.00 59.88 
TOTAL:-FORESTRY & WILDUFE (INCL. WORKS) 238.40 19.36 
GRAND TOTAL: 469.40 83.34 

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
ANNEXURE-IV 
PLAN 
Main Schemes Showing Variations-1993-94 
Scheme 
2 
Promotion of Construction of 
Common Effluent Treatment 
Plants (CETP ) for clusters of 
small-sca le industrial units 
Savings were occasional 
because of non-release of 
State Government share of 
funding. 
Industria l Pollution Control 
Project 
Eco Task Forces 
Paryavaran Sudhar 
Pariyojana Env. improvement 
and dissemination scheme 
Centres of Excellence 
Environmental Policy and 
Law Environmental 
Commission and Tribunal 
Hazardous Subst;mces 
Management 
Forest Survey of India 
Association 
Tribes and 
regeneration 
forests 
of Scheduled 
Rural Poor 
of degraded 
Support to Regional Centres 
Grants in Aid 
B.E. 
1993-94 
3 
3.00 
4.00 
4.50 
3.80 
5.00 
1.00 
3.50 
8.05 
2.45 
2 ~00 
2.50 
Actuals 
1993-94 
4 
0.40 
0.40 
2.36 
0.27 
3.15 
0.00 
1.61 
1.41 
1.30 
0.96 
1.28 
(Rs. in crores) 
Difference Reasons 
(-) Saving 
( +) Excess 
5 
-2.60 
-3.60 Saving were due to non-utilisation of 
funds earmarked for procurement of 
equipments through DGS&D. 
-2.14 Savings were as a result of 
implementation of cost effectiveness 
study's recommendations. 
-3.53 EFC for the Vaniki Vahini, which is 
the majo'r compo nent of the scheme, 
was held in February, 1994. Planning 
Commission's approval could not be 
obtained before the conclusion of 
financial year. 
-1.85 Delay in setting up of new Centres. 
EFC approval is being obtained. 
-1.00 The bill is pending approval of the 
Parliament. 
-1.89 Non-materialization of matching 
contributions from State!>. 
-6.64 Non-finalisation of purchase of Digital 
Cartographic System. 
-1.15 Lower demand from States due to 
carry forward of funds from previous 
year. 
-1.04 The scheme was supported by the 
World Bank under the Natio na l Social 
Forestry Project which came to a close 
in 1993-94. A new scheme of running 
these Regional Centres was 
formulated, the EFC of which was 
finalised in 1994-95. This process 
caused the reduced expenditure in 
1993-94. 
-1.22 Since cost of the projects sanctioned, 
and under implementation under the 
scheme related to the . mandate of the 
NWDB , these projects/project file 
were transferred to NWDB, hence the 
expenditur e envisaged in the Budget 
Estimate of 1993, could not be 
achieved. Generation of new projects 
on lands falling in the purvi ew of 
NAEB has taken time , s ince the work 
area depends on th e a re a where 
existing NGO~ s are functioning. 

12. 
13. 
14. 
2 
Integrated Wastelands 
Development Projects 
Aerial Seeding 
Indo-Canada 
Facility 
Environment 
15. Prevention and Control of 
Water Pollution (Cess) 
3 
46.00 
2.00 
0.00 
16.30 
4 
42.97 
0.50 
19.18 
30.66 
5 
-3.03 Due to micro-level approach the 
number of projects received from the 
States were higher leading to increased 
committed liabilities of the on-going 
projects. 
-1.50 Number of adequate proposals not 
received from the State Governments. 
19.18 Receipts of commodity grants on 
account of new scheme of Indo­
Canada Environment Facility Project. 
NON-PLAN 
14.36 Payment of arrears to the States on 
account of enhanced rates applicable 
W.t.f. 1.2.1992. 

ANNEXURE-V 
Main Schemes Showing Variations-1994-95 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Scheme 
Indo-Canada 
Facility 
Environment 
Industrial Pollution Control 
Project+ CETP 
Environmental 
Assessment 
Impact 
4. Paryavaran Sudhar 
Pariyojana Env. 
Improvement and 
dissemination scheme 
5. Environmental Policy and 
Law Enviro nmental 
Commiss ion and Tribunal 
6. Hazardous 
Management 
Substances 
7. Natio nal Museum of Natural 
History 
8. Biosphere Reserves 
9. Mangroves Eco-systems 
10.' Ganga Action Plan 
B.E. 
1994-95 
0.50 
15.00 
5.39 
3.99 
1.00 
3.00 
2.00 
3.00 
1.50 
78.00 
Actuals 
1994-95 
55.24 
2.37 
0.86 
0.01 
0.00 
1.33 
0.93 
1.60 
0.26 
31.34 
Difference 
(-) Saving 
( +) Excess 
Reasons 
PLAN 
(Rs. in crores) 
54.74 Higher receipts than anticipated were 
received from the Canadian 
Government; this consequently led to 
higher expenditure, as receipts in 
entirety had to be transferred to the 
ICEF society. 
-12.63 Non-matcrialisation of purchase of 
cquipmcnts through DGS&D . 
-4.53 Original project could not materialise 
since institutions originally envisaged 
were not willing to take up the study. 
In som6 projects the methodology 
could not be framed and in some 
others the requisite EFC approval 
could not be obtained . 
-3.98 The full Planning Commission's 
approval of the EFC held in Feb., 
1994. was not received. 
-1.00 The bill was pending for approval of 
Parliament. 
-1.67 The EFC Memo had to be revised 
upon the revision of certain 
components and inclusion of new 
objectives in the scheme. Hence, 
anticipated expenditure could not be 
incurred. 
-1.07 Saving was due to delay in completion 
of the Regio nal Museums. 
- 1.40 Saving was due to availability of funds 
by carry over balances from previous 
year with the State Governments . 
-1.24 Savings were due to proposals pending 
for approval of Expenditure Finance 
Committee on Mangroves and Coral 
reefs. 
-46.66 Savings due to change in scope of 
work/design and contractual problems 
of some projects. Detailed surveys and 
preparation of project reports by the 
concerned States took longer time 
than anticipated. This led to delay in 
tendering of work and execution of 
schemes. 

2 
11. Indwn Council of Forestry 
Research and Education 
12. Forests Survey of India • 
13. Association of Schcdukd 
14. 
Tribes and Rural Poor ·in 
Regeneration of degraded 
forests 
Eeo-development 
Sanctuaries and 
Parks including 
Reserves 
around 
National 
Tiger 
15. Integrated Wastelands 
Development Projects 
16. Fuclwoodlfodder Projects 
17. . Aerial Seeding 
18. Plantation of Minor Forest 
Produce including Medicinal 
Plants 
3 
39.00 
3.80 
2.75 
6.80 
48.00 
34.00 
1.50 
12.00 
40.01) 
1.28 
0.44 
3.58 
51.42 
30.48 
0.00 
1$.00 
5 6 
1.00 Excess w:~s due to purch:~se of 
cquipmcnts required for 
implcm.:ntation of World Bank aided 
project. 
-2.52 Savings were due to non-finalization of 
contract agreement for procurement of 
·Digital Cartographic System and 
withdrawal of field crew from Andhra 
Pradesh due to sudden confrontation 
with armed extremist. 
-2.31 Savings were due to Jess relca~ of 
funds because of non-reeeip( of 
utilisation certificates from the States. 
-3.22 Eighth Plan ceiling exceeded: EFC 
Memo was under revision. 
3.42 Excess Expenditure due to higher 
demand from State Governments. 
-3.52 Savings due to reduction in matching 
share by some of the States. 
-1.50 The scheme has been kept in abeyance 
till technological improvements are 
suggested by the ICFRE. 
3.00 It is an important tribal welfare 
scheme and effort has been 
consciously mad'e to step-up teinpo of 
the scheme. 

ANNEXURE -VI 
l\lain Schemes Showing \'arhl tions--1995-96 
Scheme 
1. Indo-Canada Environment 
Facility Project 
2. Industrial Pollution Control 
Project 
3. Paryavarun 
P<~riyojana 
4. Env. Commission 
Tribunuls 
Sudhur 
& 
S. Env. Education & Training 
Schemes 
6. Env. Impact Assessment 
7. Hazardous Substance Mana­
gement 
B.E. 
1995-96 
0.55 
13.50 
3.32 
1.00 
3.85 
5.29 
3.00 
Actuals 
1995-96 
13.36 
1.12 
0.22 
0.00 
2.80 
1.34 
1.78 
Diff.:n:ncc 
(-) Saving 
( +) Excess 
R.:asoris 
(Rs. in crores) 
PLAN 
12.81 Higher receipt than anticipated were 
received from the Canadian 
Government: this consequently led to 
higher expenditure, as the receipt in . 
entirety had to be transferred to ICEF 
society. 
-12.38 Procurement of equipment was 
origin:llly entrusted to DGS&D which 
could procure only a very few items. 
Subsequently, after due consideration , 
the job. of procurement as per World 
Dank procedures has been entrusted 
to the NTPC for the first phase and 
negotiations is been held with RITES 
for the second phase. The 
procurement action has already begun 
for the first phase. 
-3.10 The full Plunning Commission's 
approval of the EFC w~s not received. 
-1.00 The National Environmental Tribunal 
Act was passed in June, 1995. Framing 
of Rules is under progress. EFC 
Memo is under consideration . 
Therefore, expenditure could not be 
incurred . 
1.05 The Savings largely arose in the area 
of advertisement/publicity due to 
suggestion to review/modify the policy 
of funding such activities. " 
-3.95 EFC's approval was obtained in the 
later part of the year for the revised 
cost/scope of the scheme. Further , it 
was decided that new projects would 
be sanctioned after earlier sanctioned 
projects has been completed & 
reviewed. 
-1.22 Non-materialisation of proposals for 
complementa'lion from States, and 
non-receipt of proposals in the area of 
Industrial solid waste. 

2 
8. Ganga Project Directorate 
9. Civil Works (Ecology & 
Environment) 
10. Indian Institute of Forest 
Management 
11. Indian · Council of Forestry 
Research and Education 
12. Forest Survey of India 
13. Introduction of Modern 
Forest Fire Controls in India 
14. Project Elephant 
15. Assistance for National Parks 
& Sanctuaries 
16. Integrated Afforestation & 
Eco-Dev. Projects 
17. Prevention and Control of 
Water Pollution (Cess) 
3 
79.00 
5.10 
2.50 
46.55 
3.50 
2.9Q 
5.00 
11.50 
50.()(, 
25.00 
4 
42.07 
2.05 
0.65 
41.10 
9.23 
0.37 
3.14 
10.12 
41.02 
35.00 
5 6 
-36.93 (i) In execution of Phasc-1 there 
have been litigations pertaining to 
land, contractual disputes and 
encroachments due to which there 
was slow progress in works 
leading to kss expenditure. 
(ii) Delay cau~ed by conditionalities 
imposed by external funding 
agencies i.t. OECF, Japan in 
finalisation of consultants to 
oversee the works under Ganga 
Action Plan and ODA, UK, to 
partly finance works under Gomti 
Action Plan. 
(iii) Time taken in finalisation of 
Treatment Technology of UASB 
and to verify its proveness in 
India for the Sewage Treatment 
Plants also contributed to· low 
expenditures under Yamuna 
Component of GAP Ph:•sc-11. 
-3.05 Non-finalisation of estimates/plans for 
new construction works; slow progress 
in existing works due to need for 
revised sanctions for changes in scope 
and cost. 
-1.85 EFC Memo is under revision. 
-5.45 The funds were diverted for meeting 
the committed expenditures on 
5.73 purchase of Digital Cartographic 
Systems under the scheme Forest 
Survey of India. 
-1.63 EFC Memo could not be approved. 
The approved amount of Rs. 5.00 
crores as per SFC for VIIIth Plan has 
already been exhausted. 
-1.86 No release was made to those State 
Govts. who did not submit statements 
of expenditure/UC for past releases. 
-1.38 Some of the States did not submit 
statements of expenditure and UCs for 
the past releases. 
-8.98 Due to ceiling on outlay imposed by 
CCEA for the plan period, the full 
amount could not be spent. 
NON-PLAN 
10.00 The increase is due to enhanced Cess 
(arrears) collection by various State 
Pollution Control Boards. 

ANNEXURE-VII 
List of Statcs/UTs who have issued Government Resolution 
1. West Bengal 
2. Orissa 
3. Karnataka 
4. Madhya Pradesh 
5. Gujarat 
6. Jammu & Kashmir 
7. Himachal Pradesh 
8. Haryana 
'9. Uttttr Pradesh 
10. Rajasthan 
11. Bihar 
12. Andhra Pradesh 
13. Tripura 
14. Maharashtra 
15. Punjab 
16. Tamil Nadu 

PERFORMANCE OF PROJECT ELEPHANT 
(1991-92 to 1995-96) 
ANNEXURE- VIII 
Figures rerer to assistance provided in Lakhs or Rupees 
BROAD COMPONENT-WISE ASSISTANCE SANCTIONED TO THE STATES 
Components Habitat Protection Conflicts Land Res./ Total 
Restoration Acquisition Trg. 
States Area Other Wire- Other Total Loca- Total Total Sane-
Treat- items less items tion tioned 
ment 
1. Andhra Pradesh 25.30 27.90 7.30 27.66 29.63 4.50 122.28 
2. Arunachal Pradesh 3.10 2.10 6.50 3.50 ·D.~O 16.25 74.75 .. Assam 4.50 11.50 2.00 2.00 MdlO I 24.15 130.15 -'. 
4 Bihar 6.00 1.50 2.50 KSO .t(J.55 3.20 68.25 
5. Karn~ttaka 9.78 29.29 2.00 28.50 206.14 7.00 284.71 
6. K~.·rala 11.20 8.60 6.00 22.50 94.49\Vynad- 133.58 3.00 279.46 
wis 
7. 111-·gh:.tlaya 3.10 4.50 13.00 12.6012.50** 308.59 18.40 372.99 
8. N<tgaland 1.20 2.50 3.00 0.40 7.10 
9. Orissa 9.80 16.80 10.00 6.20 51.90 5.00 99.70 
10. Tamil Nadu 20.70 15.25 9.00 6.00 16.65 6.86 74.46 
11. Utt:.tr Pradesh 51.17 54.01 25.29 30.37 34.25 2.60 197.69 
12. We~t Bengal 44.0~ 23.67 25.97 1.50 126.21 1.98 223.39 
13. Madhya Prad esh 52.07 52.07 
ToTAL 189.91 195.21 109.56 161.82 804.99 442.17 93.34 1987.00 
••Balphakram N.P. and Nongkhylium wis: 

I,erformance of Project Elephant 
(1991-92 to 1995-96) 
ANNEXURE-IX 
Derails of 1/abitat Restoration and Wireless Ne/1\'ork 
-··---- · -·-··· 
;\;I ;l)~ of Plantations Grassland RT n~twork Total 
(·\lin pone nts Development Development 
-·--"' .. -
ST,\TES Area in Rs. in Area Rs. in Details Rs. in Amount 
ha. Lakhs. in ha. Lakhs (Nos.) Lakhs 
l. ,\ndhra Pradesh 140 13.80 210 11.05 22 7.30 32.15 ., Arunachal Pradesh 100 2.50 60 0.60 6.50 9.60 
3. ,\ssam 50 3.50 l.Oll 2.00 8.50 
-l. Bihar 4.50 1.50 2.50 8.50 
S. Karnataka 209 9.78. 6 2.00 11.78 
0. Kcrala 260 9.20 100 2.00 (>.()() 17.:W 
7. i\lcghalaya 124 3.10 67 13.00 16.10 
8. l'\agaland 20 1.20 
9. Orissa 140 9.80 20 10.00 19.$0 
10. Tamil Nadu 422 20.20 20 0.50 l). ()() 29. ill 
11. Uttar Pradesh 300 33.83 190 17.34 34 25.29 76.46 
1::!. West Bengal 485 44.06 40 2S.•J7 711 ll.'\ 
T(>Ti\L 2086 152.37 704 37.09 lSlJ 10lJ.56 299.02 
28 Fixed Stations 
147 Mobile Sets 
14 Repeaters Sets 

l\1INUTES 

II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met from 11.00 A.M. to 1.40 P.M . and again from 3.15 P.M. to 
5.40 P.M. on Thursday, the 8th August, 1996 in Committee Room 'D', Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi 
PRESENT 
1. Shri V. Narayanasamy-Chairman 
RAJY A SABIIA 
2. Slui Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Drahmakumar Bhatt 
4. Sluj N. Giri Prasad 
5. Shri K.R. Jay adevappa 
6. Slui K. Karunak aran 
7. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar 
8. Dr. ~lahcsh Chandra Sharma 
LOK SABIIA 
9. Slui Mahabir La! Bishvakarma 
10. Prof. Jitendra Nath Das 
11. Smt. Maneka Gandhi 
12. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
13. Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta 
14. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
15. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
16. Slui A. Raja 
17. Slui K.B. Raut 
18. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
19. Smt. Yijayaraje Scindia 
20. Kumari Selja 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri O.D. Sharma, Under Secretary 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer 
• • 
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
Shri T.K.A. Nair, Secretary 
Shri Y. Anand, Additional Secretary (IA) 
Shrimati Multi S. Sinha, Additional Secretary (NRCD) 
Shri Yinod Yaish, Additional Secretary (NAEB) 
Shri S.C. Dey, Additional Inspector General of Forests 
Shri S.K. Pande, Additional Inspector General of Forests 
Shri Sarweshwar Jha, Joint Secretary (Parl.) 
Ms. A.K. Ahuja, Joint Secretary 
Shri Vijai Sharma, Joint Secretary 
••• Relates to other matter. 
• 

2. 
Shri Nirmal Andrews, Joint Secretary 
Shri P.K. Brahma, Joint Secretary and Financial Adviser 
Dr. S.C. Maudgal, Adviser (M) 
Shri Harjit Singh, Adviser (H) 
Shri R.P. Sharma, Adviser (NRCD) 
Shri K. Mohan, Adviser (NRCD) 
In the afternoon session, the Committee took up Demands for Grants (1996-97) of the 
Ministry of Environment and Forests. The Secretary in the Ministry gave a presentation on 
the allocations on different projects of the Ministry as also its functioning. The Members 
then sought clarifications on various points. 

3. The Committee sought detailed notes on certain aspects from the Ministry. 
4. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
5. The Committee then &djourned at 5.40 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, 
the 9th August, 1996. 
v 
FIFfH MEETING 
The Committtee met irom 11.00 A.M. to 1.10 P.M. and again from 3.15 P.M. to 4.50 P.M. 
on Thursday, the 22nd August, 1996 in Committee Room 'Main', Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri V. Narayanasamy-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri N. Giri Prasad 
3. Shri K. R. Jayadevappa 
4. Shri Pranab Mukherjee 
5. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar 
6. Shri G. Swaminathan 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma 
8. Shri Ranjib Biswal 
9. Smt. Maneka Gandhi 
10. Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta 
11. Shri Kalpuath Rai 
12. Shri K. B. Raut 
13. Shri S. Ramchandra Reddy 
14. Shri Harivansh Sahai 
15. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj • 
16. Kumari Selja 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri H. K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri 0. D. Sharma, Under Secretary 
Shri D. P. Ahuja, Committee Officer 
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
Shri T.K.A. Nair, Secretary 
Shri M.F. Ahmed, Inspector General of Forests 
Shri V. Anand, Additional Secn:t-tt"y 
Shrimati Malti S. Sinha, Additioilal Secretary 
Shri Vinod Vaish, Additional Secretary 
Shri S.C. Dey, Additional Inspector General of Forests 
Shri S.K. Pande, Additional Inspector General of Forests 
Shri Sarweshwar Jha, Joint Secretary (Pari.) 
Shri Alok Jain, Joint Secretary 

Ms. A.K. Ahuja , Joint Secretary 
Shri Vijai Sharma, Joint Secretary 
Shri P.K. Brahma, Joint Secretary and Financial Adviser 
Dr. ·s.c. Maudgal, Senior Adviser 
Shri Harjit Singh, Senior Adviser 
Shri R.P. Sharma, Adviser 
Shri K. Mohan, Adviser 
Shri H.R. Kunwar, Chief Engineer 
Shri N.K. Joshi, Director General (ICFRE) 
Shri Pradeep KMnna, Head of Department, (ICFRE) 
•• • • 
2. The · Committee took up further consideration of Demands for Grants (1996-97) of 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests. The Secretary of the Ministry assisted by the other 
officers clarified some of the points earlier made before the Committee and points on which 
clarification was sought by the Members . 
•• • • 
3. A verbatim reoord of the proceedings was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 P.M . to meet again at 11.00 A .M. on Friday, 
the 23rd August , 1996. · 

IX 
NINTH MEETING 
The Committe~ met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 9th September, 1996 in Room 
No. 67, First Floor, P'afliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri V. Narayanasamy-Chairman 
RAJYA SABUA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3, Shri K. R. Jayadevappa 
4. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar 
5. Dr. Mahesh Chandra Shanna 
6. Shri G. Swaminathan 
LOK SABUA 
7. Shri Ran jib Biswal 
8. Prof. Jitendra Nath Das 
9. Shri Guman Mal Lodha 
10. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
11. Shri Kalpnath Rai 
12. Shri K. B. Raut 
13. Shri Harivansh Sahai 
14. Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
15. Kumari Selja 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri H. K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary 
Shri 0. D. Shanna, Under Secretary 
Shri D. P. Ahuja, Committ~e Officer 
2. The Committee, took up consideration of the draft report on Demands for Grants 
(1996--97) of the Ministry of Environment & Forests. After some discussion, the 
Committee adopted the same with minor changes. 
3. The Committee decided to present this report to Rajya Sabha and lay a copy 
thereof on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 12th September, 1996. The Committee also 
decided to place a set of memoranda and notes received from the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests as also the evidence tendered before the Committee, in the 
Parliament Library. 
4. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri K. R. 
Jayadevappa and in his absence Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma to present the report to 
the Rajya Sabha and Prof. Jitendra Nath Das and in his absence Shri Harivansh Sahai to 
lay the report on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
5. The Committee considered its future programme and after some discu~sion 
rescheduled its study visit to Sriharikota, (A.P.), Karnataka, Thiruvananthapuram and 
Tamil Nadu in order to visit-Institutions/Centres related to the Department of Space and 
Department of Electronics tentatively from lOth October to 17th October, 1996. The 

Committee also authorised its Chairman to approach Hon 'ble Chairman, for obtaining 
necessary permission to undertake the study visit. 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5 r.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 25th 
September, 1996. 