 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained in 
the Three Hundred Sixteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Science and Technology,   Environment, Forests and Climate 
Change on 'Air Pollution in Delhi and National Capital Region'. 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
348 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
Action taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations contained  
in the Three Hundred Sixteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science and Technology,   Environment, Forests and Climate  
Change on 'Air Pollution in Delhi and National Capital Region'. 
 
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2021/Agrahayana, 1943 (Saka) 
 

 
C O N T E N T S 
   
 
  PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION  (ii) 
  3.  ACRONYMS  (iii)-(iv) 
 
4. 
 
REPORT 
 
1-29 
 Chapter I.       Recommendations/Observations which  have been 
                      accepted by the Government 
 
2-20 
 Chapter II.  Recommendations/Observations which the  Committee     
does not desire to pu rsue in view of the Government’s 
replies 
 
21-23 
 Chapter III.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
            replies of the Government have not been accepted 
                      by the Committee 
 
24-26 
 Chapter IV.    Recommendations/Observations in respect of which 
                      Final Replies of the Government are still awaited 
 
27-28 
5. FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS-  
 AT A GLANCE 
 
29 
  6. MINUTES 
 
30-31 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2021-22) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh – Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2.    Shri Anil Baluni 
3.    Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
4.    Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
5.    Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
6.    Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
7.    Shri Parimal Nathwani 
8.    Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
9.    Shri Nabam Rebia   
10. # Vacant 
 
 
   LOK SABHA 
 
 
11.    Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
12.    Shri Pradan Baruah 
13.    Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
14.    Shri Jashvantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
15.    Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16.    Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
17.    Shri S. Jagathrakshakan 
18.    Shri Mohammed Azam Khan 
19.    Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
20.    Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
21.    Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
22.    Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
23. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
24. Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
25. Shri Francisco Sardinha  
26. Shri Anurag Sharma 
27. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
28. Dr. M.P. Abdussamad Samadani  
29. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
30. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
31. Shri Ram Shiromani Verma 
 
 
         SECRETARIAT 
 
         Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
         Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
         Shri Rakesh Anand, Additional Director 
         Smt. Monica Baa, Additional Director 
         Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
         Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
          
____________________________________________________________________                      
#Prof. Manoj Kumar Jha ceased to be the member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation 
from the Committee w.e.f. 11th October, 2021  
 
(i) 

         
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of t he Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Repo rt on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred Forty 
Eighth Report on the recommendations/observations contained in the Three Hundred Sixteenth 
Report on “Air Pollution in Delhi and National Capital Region ” of the Ministry of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change, which was presented/laid in both the Houses of Parliamen t on               
7th August, 2018. 
2.   There were 39 recommendations/observations in the Three Hundred Sixteenth Report of 
the Committee.  Action Taken Notes on the recommendations/observations of the Committee 
were received from the Ministry on 21st September, 2020. 
3. In the meeting held on held on 30th November, 2021, the Committee considered the draft 
Report and adopted the same.  
 
 
 
 
 ( JAIRAM RAMESH ) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
30th November, 2021   Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Agrahayana 09, 1943 (Saka)                                   Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha 
                         
                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

ACRONYMS 
 
AQI Air Quality Index 
ATN Action Taken Note 
ATR Action Taken Report 
CAP Comprehensive Action Plan 
C-DAC Centre for Development of Advanced Computing 
CHCs Custom Hiring Centres 
COPD Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease  
CPCB Central Pollution Control Board 
CREAMS Consortium for Research on Agro ecosystem Monitoring and Modeling 
from Space 
DCB Delhi Cantonment Board  
DPCC Delhi Pollution Control Committee 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EDMC East Delhi Municipal Corporation  
EOI             Expression of Interest’ 
EPC Environment Protection Charge 
FAME Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Hybrid and Electric Vehicles 
GDP Gross  Domestic  Product 
GSDL Geospatial Delhi Limited 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
IEC Information, Education and Communication 
IIT/ CRRI Indian Institute of Technology/ Central Road Research Institute 
ITMS Intelligent Traffic Management System 
MoEF&CC Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport & Highways 
MRS Mechanical Road Sweepers 
MRSMs Mechanized Road Sweeping Machines 
NCR                   National Capital Region  
NDCs Nationally determined Contributions  
 
(iii) 

 
NEERI National Environmental Engineering Research Institute  
NGT National Green Tribunal 
PESO Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation 
PWD Public Works department 
RLVD Red Light Violation Detection 
SDMC South Delhi Municipal Corporation  
SMS Super Straw Management System 
TPD Tonnes Per Day 
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  
WAYU Wind Augmentation and Purification Units  
WPE                 Western Peripheral Expressway 
WS Water Sprinklers 
                    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
REPORT 
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Committee deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in Three Hundred Sixteenth Report 
on 'Air Pollution in Delhi and National Capital Region '.  The Report was presented to Rajya 
Sabha and laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 7th August, 2018. 
2.  Action Taken Note (ATN) has been received from the Ministry of Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change  in respect of  thirty six of the  thirty nine  recommendations/observations 
contained in the Three Hundred Sixteenth Report.  This has been categorized as follows:- 
Chapter I:  Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the 
Government:  
Para:- 4.8, 4.9, 4.10, 4.11, 4.12, 4.14, 4.16, 5.12, 5.13, 5.14, 5.15, 5.16, 6.6, 6.8, 
6.9, 7.7, 7.9, 8.5, 9.3, 10.7, 10.8, 10.9, 11.2, 11.5, 12.7, 12.8  13.2, and 14.1       
Total recommendations -28.  Accepted. 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry has accepted its 
recommendations as mentioned in Chapter-1 of the Report. 
Chapter II:  Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government’s replies:  
Para:-2.6, 2.11, 3.2, 5.11, 5.17 and 9.2  
Total recommendation - 06. Not to be pursued further. 
The Committee is convinced with the explanations furnished by the Ministry and, 
therefore, does not want to pursue the recommendations further.    
Chapter III:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee:  
Para:- 6.7 and 13.3.   
Total recommendations -02. Not convincing replies. 
The Committee expresses its concern over the non -implementation of its 
recommendations contained in Chapter -III and desires that the Ministry should 
furnish convincing action taken steps in respect of those recommendations. 
Chapter IV:  Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited:  
Para: 7.8, 8.2 and 8.3  
Total recommendations-03. To be pursued further.  
The Committee desires that the Ministry should furnish pointed and detailed 
Action Taken Notes in respect of the further Recommendation/Observation made 
by the Committee in Chapter III and IV of the Report. 
3. The details of the ATR have been analyzed in the succeeding Chapters. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
GOVERNMENT 
CROP RESIDUE BURNING 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.1 The Committee notes that despite a series of measures taken by the Governments of 
Haryana, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh, including the statutory ban on stubble burning in the years 
2003, 2013 and 2015 respectively, the air pollution situation in Delhi and NCR has not improved 
much and, in fact, it has been deteriorating further. It is further worrisome to note that despite t he 
statutory ban  imposed by these States on the crop residue burning, many such instances have 
been brought to  the notice of the Committee from these States.   Satellites images have also 
showed that paddy  burning in Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh had in creased after Diwali 
during the year 2017adding to the problem of air pollution in Delhi and NCR. The Committee 
expresses its strong reservations towards the failure of these State Governments in implementing 
the statutory ban on stubble  burning in letter and spirit.  Although the concerned State 
Governments have listed number of measures taken by them to tackle the issue, the Committee is 
of the view that the required  action has been taken by the State Governments rather late.  The 
Committee is of the opinio n that weak enforcement of the statutory ban by these State 
Governments coupled with laxity 13  towards the sensitivity and gravity of the matter has also 
adversely affected the ongoing efforts to tackle the issue of air pollution in Delhi and NCR. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry  of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should 
also take the Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers  Welfare on board in the matter and impress 
upon the concerned State Governments of Haryana,  Punjab and Uttar Pradesh to en sure that the 
laid down guidelines and statutory provisions are implemented in letter and spirit.        (Para 4.8) 
Action Taken 
1.2.1 In pursuance to  Budget 2018 announcement regarding „a special Scheme to support the 
efforts of the governments of Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and the NCT of Delhi to address air 
pollution and to subsidize machinery required for in -situ management of cro p residue‟,  a new 
Central Sector Scheme on „Promotion of Agricultural Mechanization for In -Situ Management of 
Crop Residue in the States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and NCT of Delhi‟ for the period 
from 2018 -19 to 2019 -20 is being implemented with th e total outgo from the Central funds of            
Rs. 1151.80 crore (Rs. 591.65 crore in 2018-19 and Rs. 560.15 crore in 2019-20). 
1.2.2 Under this Scheme the agricultural machines and equipments for in -situ crop residue 
management such as Super Straw Man agement System (SMS) for Combine Harvesters, Happy 
Seeders, Hydraulically Reversible MB Plough, Paddy Straw Chopper, Mulcher, Rotary Slasher, 
Zero Till Seed Drill and Rotavators are promoted with 50% subsidy to the individual farmers and 
80% subsidy for establishment of Custom Hiring Centres of these machines.  
1.2.3 Under the above stated scheme, during 2018 -19, the funds amounting to Rs.269.38 crores, 
Rs. 137.84, Rs.148.60 crores and Rs.28.51 crores have been released as 100% share of G oI to the 
State Governments of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Central Agencies respectively for 
distribution of in -situ crop residue management machinery to the farmers under subsidy, 
establishment of Custom Hiring Centres (CHCs) of  in-situ crop residue management mac hinery 
and undertaking Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities for creating 
awareness among farmers. 
1.2.4 As per the analysis of paddy residue burning in Punjab, Haryana, & UP in 2018 using 
Satellite Remote Sensing carried out by  Consortium for Research on Agro  ecosystem Monitoring 
and Modeling from Space (CREAMS) Laboratory, Division of Agricultural Physics, ICAR – 
Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi, overall, about 15% and 41% reduction in 
number of burning events were obs erved in current year (2018) as compared to that in 2017 and 
2016, respectively. 

3 
 
1.2.5 About 11%, 29.5 % and 24.5% reduction in number of burning events were observed in 
current year (2018) as compared to that in 2017 in the States of Punjab, Haryana and U ttar 
Pradesh respectively. 
1.2.6 In 2018, 2.96 Mha  area was planted in Punjab, out of which 1.51 Mha (51%) area was 
burnt. Out 1.04 Mha area planted in Haryana, 0.23 Mha (22%) area was burnt. 
1.2.7 Air Quality Index (PM) in Punjab was  273 during November, 2017 which was 
significantly reduced to 132 during November, 2018 (reduction of 50 % in air quality). 
1.2.8 1374 villages in Punjab (out of about 8000 villages where rice is being grown, which 
constitute about 17%) were declared as Zero Stubble Burning Villages during 2018. 
1.2.9 Overall for the three states, about 23 Million tons of GHGs (Green House Gases) and 
Particulate matter (PM) was estimated to be emitted from paddy residue burning in 2018.The total 
pollutants emitted by burning paddy residue during  2017 were about 28 Million tons which 
signifies an 18.3% reduction in pollution in 2018 over 2017. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.3 The Committee also firmly believes that the unscientific methods to deal with the crop 
stalk and solid waste in the neighbouring States of Delhi namely, Punjab, Haryana and Uttar 
Pradesh have aggravated the problem of the air pollution in Delhi and NCR.   The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that more scientific approach should be adopted to address the issue of 
stubble burning in these States. The Committee also recommends that the State Governments 
should further sensitise  and educate the farmers of their respective States about the adverse 
impact of stubble  burning on the environment, ecology and bio -diversity of Delh i and NCR. The 
Committee also believes that for scientific disposal of the waste, segregation and identification of 
waste is equally  important and best suited approach needs to be evolved to yield the desired 
results in this direction.                                                                                                   (Para 4.9) 
Action Taken 
1.4 Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change ( MoEF&CC) in supersession of 
Municipal Solid Waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000, has notified the Solid Waste 
Management Rules, 2016.  The Rules prescribe that no waste generator shall throw, burn or bury 
the solid waste generated by him, on streets, open p ublic spaces outside his premises or in the 
drain or water bodies. Further, the Rules direct the waste generators to segregate the waste at 
source and hand over the segregated waste to authorised waste pickers or waste collectors. Under 
the duties and resp onsibilities of local authorities and village Panchayats, the Rules direct street 
sweepers not to burn tree leaves collected from street sweeping and store them separately and 
handover to the authorised waste collectors. The Rules mandate the Urban Local B odies to frame 
Bye-Laws incorporating the provisions of Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 and ensure 
timely implementation. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.5 The Committee notes that the State Governments of Punjab and Haryana run subsidy 
schemes to promote disposal of the agricultural residues in a scientific manner instead of burning 
it. However, the subsidy schemes of these State Governments have not helped much to address the 
issue of stubble burning.  The Committee is surprised to note that no scientifi c study has been 
undertaken by any of the concerned State Governments or by the Central Government to 
ascertain the level of damage that has been caused to the environment on account of stubble 
burning. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministr y of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, Government of India,  in consultation with the concerned State Governments of 
Haryana, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh, should undertake a scientific study to assess the 
environmental impact of crop burning on Delhi and  NCR and the methodology to miti gate it in a 
time-bound manner.  The Committee notes that Government of Punjab has also suggested some 
scientific solutions for converting paddy straw into other useful items. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry of En vironment, Forest and Climate Change should, in 

4 
 
consultation with other concerned Ministries of Government of India, explore as to how the paddy 
straw can be used to convert this challenge into a new possibility.                                 (Para 4.10) 
Action Taken 
1.6 Central Pollution Control Board has awarded a study to NEERI on “Assessment of 
contribution of stubble burns  in Haryana and Punjab States on Air quality of Delhi” under 
Environment Protection Charge (EPC) funds. Further, Ministry of Agric ulture and Farmers 
Welfare has constituted an Expert Committee vide its order dated 12.11.2018 comprising of 
members from MoEF&CC, CPCB and other departments to explore ex -situ solutions for 
prevention of crop residue burning. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.7 The Committee is constrained to note that in terms of the orders of NGT, the State 
Governments of the Haryana, Punjab and Uttar Pradesh are penalising the farmers for burning 
crop residues. However, the Committee is of the opinion that instead of being pen alised, the 
farmers should be provided with some practical solutions instead of crop burning.  It is of 
paramount importance that technological and scientific solutions coupled with financial 
assistance should be made available to  the farmers to motivate t hem not to burn their crop 
residues. The Committee is of the considered view that it would help minimise the problem of 
stubble burning in these States.                                                                                        (Para 4.11) 
Action Taken 
1.8.1 To stop burning of crop residue that may lead to higher level of air pollution in Delhi NCR 
especially during adverse meteorological conditions in early winter in North India, the Central 
Government has approved a new Central Sector Scheme on „Promotion of Agricultural 
Mechanization for in -situ management of Crop Residue in the States of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar 
Pradesh and NCT of Delhi for the period from 2018-19 and 2019-20 with an outlay of Rs.1151.80 
crore.  This year‟s all ocation of Centr al funds of Rs. 591.65 crore has been released to the 
concerned States except Delhi. 
1.8.2 Under this scheme, there is financial assistance on purchase of eight straw management 
implements (50% of the cost of the implement for individual farmers; and 80% of  the cost of 
implements for Custom Hiring Centre (CHC) by Co -operative Societies of farmers, groups or 
SHGs, FPOs and Private Entrepreneurs). Name of the implements are i) Super Straw Management 
System (Super SMS) to be attached with Combine Harvester,; ii ) Happy Seeder; iii) Paddy Straw 
Chopper/Mulcher; iv) Shrub Master / Cutter cum Spreader; v) Hydraulic Reversible M.B. Plough; 
vi) Rotary Slasher; vii) Zero Till Seed cum Fertilizer Drill; viii) Rotavator. 
1.8.3 The State Governments, out of these funds re leased during 2018 -19, have provided 4552 
Nos. Super Straw Management Systems, 12158 Happy Seeders, 4425 Hydraulic Reversible MB 
Plough, 316 Shrub Masters & Cutter Cum Spreaders, 6163 Paddy Straw Choppers &  Mulchers, 
760 Rotary Slashers, 6870 Zero Till See d Drills and 20519 rotavators to farmers and Custom 
Hiring Centres.  Establishment of „Custom Hiring Centres‟ on larger scale have been promoted to 
offset the adverse effects of economies of scale arising due to small landholding and high cost of 
individual ownership of the machines. Accordingly, 7960 numbers of Custom Hiring Centres of 
in-situ crop residue management machinery have been established in these three States. 
1.8.4 The Scheme is also being implemented in 2019 -20 and so  far the funds amounting t o 
Rs.273.80 crores, Rs.194.06 crores, Rs.105.28 crores and Rs. 15.00 crores have been released to 
the Government of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and ICAR, respectively, for distribution of in -
situ crop residue management machinery to the farmers under sub sidy, establishment of Custom 
Hiring Centres (CHCs) of in -situ crop residue management machinery and undertaking 
Information, Education and Communication (IEC) activities for creating awareness among 
farmers. 
 
 

5 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.9 The Committee  notes the measures being taken by the respective State Governments to 
curb the menace of crop residue burning. The Committee, however, is of the considered view that 
awareness needs to be created amongst the farmers highlighting the negative and adverse impact 
of crop residue burning not only on environment, human health, ecology, etc., but on the fertility 
of soil also. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate 
Change and the concerned State Governments sho uld launch a massive awareness programme 
for the above purpose. Educational messages in this regard should also be publicised on audio, 
TV and print media so as to reach the maximum numbers of farmers in these States. The 
concerned State Governments should also run awareness campaign in schools in order to educate 
children about ill effects of crop residue burning.                                                            (Para 4.12) 
Action Taken 
1.10.1 ICAR KVKs in the states of Punjab, Haryana and Uttar Pradesh had put tremendous effort 
for creating awareness and demonstration of the crop residue management technologies in the 
villages to avoid straw burning during 2018-19 as detailed below: 
o Number of field demonstration conducted for crop residue managem ent   
implements/machines: 8601 
o Number of farmers trained for using crop residue management implements machines:  
8760 
o Number of awareness programmes (camp/ kishan  mela etc.) conducted at 
Panchayat/Block/District level: 1190 
o Number of radio jingles/ Scroll messages on TV/ audio-visual clips displayed: 140 
o Number of TV programmes/ panel discussions conducted on Doordarshan/                    
DD-Kisan and other private channels : 69 
o Number of advertisement and publicity brought out through print media: 1066 
o Number of columns/ articles in newspaper magazine published: 435 
o Number of programs conducted on mobilization of school & college students through 
awareness/ essay completion etc.: 302 
o Number of hoardings fixed for awareness: 1200 
o Number of posters/banners/display: 6558 
o Number of publicity materials/ leaflets distributed: 4,11,945 
1.10.2 The funds provided during 2018 -19 includes funds to the tune Rs. 16.80 crores, Rs.21.64 
crores, Rs.12.84 crores and Rs.28.51 crores to the States Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and other 
Central Agencies, respectively, for undertaking    various Information, Education and 
Communication (IEC) activities for awareness on  in-situ crop residue management. As per the 
reports received from the State Governments and Central Agencies, the following IEC activities 
have been conducted: 
o Demonstrations of different in -situ crop residue management machinery in about 18555 
acres area with the participation of more than 19000 farmers. 
o Training of 22525 farmers 
o 1254 advertisements in the print media 
o 22582 awareness camps/kisan melas at block/village/panchayat levels. 
o 134544 hoardings/ wall paintings at prominent location such as Mandis, Panchayat, 
Markets and schools etc. 
o 31256 columns/articles have been published in various magazines/ journals/ newspapers. 
o More than 24,94,576 leaflets/pamphlets distributed in villages. 
o 710 schools have been mobilized with participation of around 69000 students. 
o 127 panel discussions have been organized on various TV channels. The State 
Governments have broadcasted radio jingles on daily basis. 
1.10.3 The DAC&FW has telecasted 8 different scrolls on in -situ crop residue management on 
DD News and DD Kisan Channels. 

6 
 
1.10.4 DAC&FW has also telecasted two films, one each of 3.5 minutes duration and 1.5 minutes 
duration on DD Kisan, DD News, DD National and regional channels of Doordarshan such as 
DDK Hisar, DDK Jalandhar and DD Gorakhpur 
1.10.5 During 2019-20 the funds amounting to Rs. 15.06 crores, Rs.12.20  crores, Rs.8.62 crores 
and Rs.11.60 crores have been provided to the States Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and other 
Central Agencies, respectively for conducting the similar IEC activities to create  awareness about 
ill effects of crop residue burning and benefits of in-situ management of crop residues. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.11 The Committee welcomes this move of the Government and hopes that the suggestions 
made by the Sub-Committee would be implemented at the earliest. The Committee hopes that with 
the allocation of Rs. 1151.80 crore made for in -situ management of crop residue in the States of 
Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and NCT of Delhi would also address the financial needs of the 
concerned State Governments in promoting the scientific disposal of agricultural residues.  
                 (Para 4.14)    
Action Taken 
1.12.1 About 28,490 different types of crop residue management implements/machines were 
procured by farmers/ cooperatives/ CHCS during 2018 -19. In Punjab, out of 2.3 million ha to be 
managed under paddy crop, about 1.03 million ha (44%) has be en covered under mechanized 
solutions of crop residue management during 2018. Similarly, in Haryana, out of 0.681 million ha 
to be managed under paddy crop, about 0.25 million ha (36%) has been covered under 
mechanized solutions of crop residue management during 2018. 
1.12.2 Under the above stated scheme, during 2018 -19, the funds amounting to Rs.269.38 crores, 
Rs.137.84, Rs.148.60 crores and Rs. 28.51 crores have been released as 100% share of G oI to the 
State Governments of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Central Agencies, respectively. 
1.12.3 The available budget under the scheme for 2019 -20 is Rs. 600 crores and so far the funds 
amounting to Rs.273.80 crores, Rs.194.06 crores, Rs.105.28 crores and Rs.15.00 crores have been 
released to the Government of Punjab, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and ICAR, respectively. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.13 The Committee welcomes the move of NTPC to procure farm stubble for its thermal units. 
The Committee feels that this move would not only incentivize the farmers to no t to burn the farm 
stubble and get some monetary benefit out of it but would also help mitigate the problem of the air 
pollution in Delhi and NCR to a large extent.                                                                  (Para 4.16) 
Action Taken 
1.14.1 Balers and Rakes are used for collection of straw for further use including making pellets 
and briquettes for use in thermal power plants. 
1.14.2 The financial assistance for balers @ 40% to 50% of the cost limited to Rs.1.60 lakhs to 
9.00 lakhs dep ending on the size of balers is available under the Sub -Mission on Agricultural 
Mechanization (SMAM). This scheme is also implemented in the States of Punjab, Haryana and 
Uttar Pradesh in addition to the Crop Residue Management Scheme. 
VEHICULAR EMISSION 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.15 The Committee is surprised to note that despite the orders/directions from the 
Courts/Tribunal, the desired progress has not been achieved on this count. The Committee urges 
upon the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Clim ate Change and the concerned State 
Governments to ensure strict compliance of the orders/directions of Hon’ble Supreme Court of 
India, Hon’ble Delhi High Court, and National Green Tribunal for the purpose.          (Para 5.12) 
 

7 
 
Action Taken 
1.16 The Ministry of Road Transport & Highways (MoRTH) has been taking all possible 
measures to ensure strict compliance of the of orders/directions of Hon‟ble Supreme Court of 
India, Hon‟ble Delhi High Court and National Green Tribunal for the purpose through 
amendments in Motor Vehicle Rule, 1989.  
Recommendation/Observation  
1.17 The Committee takes note of the decision of the Government of India to skip BS -V and 
leapfrog directly from BS-IV to BS-VI for all vehicles in April, 2020 and to advance the proposed 
use of BS-VI fuel from the year 2026 to 2020. The Committee appreciates this decision and hopes 
that all the modalities required for switching from BS -IV to BS-VI would be completed within the 
stipulated timeframe set for the purpose.                                                                          (Para 5.13) 
Action Taken 
1.18.1 BS-VI fuel has been introduced in NCT of Delhi from 1st April, 2018. 
1.18.2 In line with the directions issued by Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas, supply of BS -
VI auto fuel has been started in 10 Districts of NCR & 3 Districts/cities outside NCR (Karauli, 
Dhaulpur & Agra City) w.e.f. 01.04.2019 and 07 Districts/cities of NCR will be covered w.e.f. 
01.10.2019. These standards will be adopted throughout the country from 1st  April 2020 along 
with the roll out of BS-VI vehicles. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.19 The Committee feels that the problem of vehicular emission should be seen from the prism  
of vehicular technology, fuel quality, stringent vehicular emissions norms, inspection  and 
maintenance of the vehicles and traffic management.  The Committee is of the opinion that these 
parameters should be taken into consideration by all the concerned State Governments as well as 
Central Government while drafting any strategy to mitigate t he problem of air pollution. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
should take  up this issue with the Concerned Union Ministries/Departments/Agencies in 
consultation with the automobile industry so that an effective and long term solution can be found 
out to address the  problem. The Committee also recommends that Government of India should 
consider the ITM Proposal submitted by Delhi Police and made adequate funds available so that 
the system could be introduced and contribute towards reducing vehicular air pollution by 
providing technology based traffic solutions.                                                                  (Para 5.14) 
Action Taken 
1.20.1 MoRTH is in support of recommendation and has taken proactive steps like: 
o Promoting use of alternate fuels by issuing notifications specifying mass emission 
standards for flex -fuel (E85 or E 100), Ethanol (ED 95), Biodiesel, Compressed Natural 
Gas, LNG and flex- fuel Methanol M15 or M 100 and Methanol MD 95 Vehicle. 
o MoRTH has issued notification mandating all vehicle manufactures to give a detailed 
declaration about emission level of vehicles. 
o MoRTH has issued as advisory to the State Governments for proper functioning of PUC 
centre. 
o The linkage of PUC data with the VAHAN database of the Ministry has been notified. 
1.20.2 National E -mobility Program launched in 2018 to take steps to have more than 30% of 
electric vehicles. 
1.20.3 Faster Adoption and Manufacturing of Hybrid and Electric Vehicles (FAME) for early 
adoption and market creation of hybrid and electric vehicles is being implemented. 
1.20.4 National Policy on Biofuels has an indicative target of 20% of ethanol blending in petrol 
and 5% blending of biodiesel in diesel by 2030. 
1.20.5  Status of Intelligent Traffic Management System (ITMS): On 13th January, 2018, 
approval was conveyed to Delhi Police for hiring of Consultant for preparation of the Detailed 

8 
 
Project Report (DPR) for the ITMS project and for implementation support. On 03/08/20 18, “In 
Principle” approval for ITMS project was conveyed to Delhi Police. When the „Expression of 
Interest‟ (EOI) was invited by Delhi Police first time, only one firm submitted documents with 
requisite pre -qualification criteria. Therefore, EOI was invit ed again by Delhi Police with the 
modified pre-qualification criteria and response was received from four firms. 
1.20.6 Due to lack of competition in Global tender floated twice, proposal for nomination of 
Centre for Development of Advanced Computing (C-DAC) to undertake the ITMS project on 
turnkey basis is under consideration. 
1.20.7 Status of pilot ITMS: In the meantime, the following pilot projects have been/ are being 
implemented: 
o Installation of 3D Radar -based Red Light Violation Detection (RLVD) System: Central 
Control Room at Traffic HQ Todapur has been established and made operational. The 
RLVD system has been installed at 24 junctions and approval/sanction for installation of 
this system in 06 more intersections have been conveyed to Delhi Police on 11.08.2020. 
o Installation of Gantry-mounted Radar-based over speed Detection Camera at 100 locations: 
Central Control Room at Traffic HQ Todapur has been established and made operational. 
100 cameras have been installed and approval/sanction for insta llation of this system at 25 
more locations have been conveyed to Delhi Police on 11.08.2020. 
o Portable Tripod -mounted Radar: Procured 55 portable Tripod -mounted Radar and 
distributed to the field functionaries for undertaking enforcement action against over-
speeding vehicles. 
o New e -challan system: New e -challan system has been implemented w.e.f. 17.06.2019 in 
collaboration with NIC. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.21 The Committee further opines that the problem of air pollution is encompassing 
everything which is related covertly or overtly to human beings and any leniency on the part of 
Government in  tackling the issue will have cascading effect on the health of its citizens. The 
Committee feels that  worst situations demands stringent solutions. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the  Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, in consultation with 
Ministry of Road, Transport 19and Highways along with the Ministry of Heavy Industries and 
Public Enterprises, should chalk out  a mechanism for phasing out of the polluting vehicles at the 
earliest.                                                                                                                             (Para 5.15) 
Action Taken 
1.22.1 MoRTH has already issued instructions t o vehicle manufacturers to give a detailed 
declaration about vehicle emission level. Moreover, Ministry has issued advisory to State 
Governments for proper functioning of PUC Centre. The Data of PUC Centre is also linked with 
VAHAN database of Ministry. 
1.22.2 Hon„ble Supreme Court vide order dated has 29.10.2018 has passed the following orders 
with regard to old polluting vehicles: “The Transport Departments of NCR will immediately 
announce that all the diesel vehicles more than 10 years‟ old and petrol vehicles more than 15 
years‟ old shall not ply in NCR in terms of the order of the National Green Tribunal dated 
07.04.2015. The order of the National Green Tribunal was challenged in this Court and the Civil 
Appeal was dismissed. Vehicles violating the or der will be impounded. The list of such vehicles 
should be published on the websites of the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and the 
Transport Departments of NCR. Similarly, a meaningful advertisement should be published in a 
local newspaper for the convenience of the owners of the vehicles.” In compliance of the above 
orders, CPCB has already provided a link on its website where the information of such vehicles is 
updated. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.23 The Committee is happy to note that the const ruction of Eastern Peripheral Expressway 
has been completed and the completion of Western Peripheral Expressway is likely to be 

9 
 
completed by  30th September, 2018. The Committee hopes that all the work related with the 
completion of Western  Peripheral Expressway will be completed within the given timeline. The 
Committee is of the considered  view that the completion of Western Peripheral Expressway and 
the already completed Eastern  Peripheral Expressway would play an important and crucial role 
in mitigating the problem of air  pollution in Delhi and National Capital Region. The Committee 
also recommends that the Ministry  of Environment, Forest and Climate Change in consultation 
with the concerned State Governments  should undertake a massive plantation driv e along both 
the sides of these Expressways so that they can play their role in mitigation of vehicular emission. 
Since the matter concerns to one and all,  the Committee also recommends that Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change should  urge upon the Central PSUs to play a role too 
and contribute from their CSR funds for plantation activities and the Ministry should play a role 
of a mentor for the purpose.                                                                                              (Para 5.16) 
Action Taken 
1.24.1 Western Peripheral Expressway (WPE) has been made operational on 19.11.2018. 
1.24.2 MoRTH has adopted Green Highways (Plantation, Transplantation, Beautification and 
Maintenance) Policy, 2015. The policy of plant ing trees alongside NH is being implemented in 
the said policy. 
ROAD DUST 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.25 The Committee notes that road dust is one of the major sources of air pollution in Delhi 
and NCR. Dust on roads, construction sites, etc. adds to the particulate pollution and a mitigation 
plan for road dust is extremely essential for solving the problem of air pollution in Delhi and 
NCR. The Committee takes note of the action plan of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change regarding con trol of road dust/re -suspension of dust and other fugitive 
emissions. However, the Committee is of the view that the action taken by the concerned State 
Governments of this Region so far has not helped much in addressing the issue. Further action on 
some o f these points is yet to be taken up with full vigour. The Committee feels that though 
vacuum cleaning of the roads dust may play an important role in addressing the issue of road 
dust as an immediate step but for the long term solution to the problem, inn ovative solutions are 
required to be taken by the Government. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change must impress upon all the concerned State 
Governments to aggressively take action on all the action poin ts for control of road dust/re -
suspension of dust and other fugitive emissions.                                                                (Para 6.6) 
Action Taken 
1.26.1 Directions dated September 15, 2018 were issued to all Municipal Corporations and State 
Boards of Delhi & NCR to prepare targeted action plans for sources such as road & construction 
dust, ensuring mechanized sweeping on roads especially with heavy traffic and water sprinkling 
on unpaved roads. 
1.26.2 “Clean Air Campaign” was organized from November 01, 2018 to November 10, 2018 
where in 52 joint teams including members from Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate 
Change, Central Pollution Control Board and Government of Delhi and NCR States (Noida, 
Gurugram, Greater Noida, Faridabad a nd Ghaziabad) took on -spot ground actions to control air 
polluting activities. Complaints redressal mechanism is facilitated through Sameer App, E -mail, 
Facebook page, Twitter handle, and web-based complaint lodging. 
1.26.3 Sprinkling of water at construction site, cleaning service road by broomer machine, 
covering of construction material during transportation, no grinding of cutting of stone/concrete in 
open area, etc. are some of the measures taken for control of road dust/re -suspension of dust and 
other fugitive emission during road construction. 
1.26.4 A pilot project has been awarded to EPRI, Pune on “Control of road dust using dust 
suppressant” under EPC funds. The demonstration has been carried out at 03 sites in Delhi. 

10 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.27 The Committee also takes note of the number of mechanised road sweeping machines 
currently being used to curb the road dust in Delhi/NCR and feels that the impact of using such 
machines invisible only in selected areas of Delhi. Thus there is a n urgent need to increase the 
number of mechanised road sweeping machines. The Committee is also of the considered view 
that adequate funds be made available to the concerned Government agencies so that the plans to 
procure more machines is fructified and the process of procurement is not stalled or delayed for 
want of funds.                                                                                                                      (Para 6.8) 
Action Taken 
1.28.1 The number of Mechanized Road Sweeping Machines (MRSMs) ha s increased to 60 in 
Delhi. 
1.28.2 NCR cities Ghaziabad, Noida, Gurugram and Faridabad are also using MRSMs. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.29 The Committee also observes that the continuous digging of roads and other areas for 
various municipal works in Delhi and NCR is highly irrational and exhibits a classic example of 
the concerned Government agencies working in silos without having any co -ordination amongst 
them. It is a well known fact that one part or the other part in Del hi and NCR is under digging 
activities by a 21  Government agency and as soon as the work is completed some other agency 
starts digging work related to them on the same site causing not only a great amount of 
inconvenience to the public at large but also do es burden the public exchequer. This also adds to 
the air pollution in Delhi. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the concerned civic 
agencies should collectively draw up plan of developmental activities for the next five years and 
undertake developmental works simultaneously so that no repetitive digging of the roads etc. is 
undertaken and their contribution to air pollution is minimised.                                       (Para 6.9) 
Action Taken 
1.30.1 Regarding dust mitigation measures, all SPCBs/PCCs including those of Delhi NCR were 
communicated (February, 2018) for their information about the Central Government‟s notification 
of “The Environment (Protection) Amendment Rules, 2018” vide G.S.R. 94(E) 2018 dated 
25th January, 2018 where regar ding dust mitigation measures following entries were made - i) 
“Mandatory Implementation of Dust Mitigation Measures for Construction and Demolition 
Activities for projects requiring Environmental Clearance” and ii) “Mandatory Implementation of 
Dust Mitiga tion Measures for all Construction and Demolition Activities”. For effective 
implementation of the above Rules, they are advised to incorporate the above guidelines as a part 
of consent mechanism. 
1.30.2 Further, they have been asked to identify the cities  and towns where value of PM10  or 
PM2.5 exceeds the limits prescribed in National Ambient Air Quality Standards and the list of 
identified cities and towns may be forwarded to this Office. 
1.30.3 Delhi Cantonment Board is in process of taking up of surveyi ng of all the services along 
main roads through Survey of India so that the same can be uploaded on Geospatial Delhi Limited 
(GSDL) Portal in order to minimize digging. It is further informed that digging in Delhi 
Cantonment Area is bare minimum as Cantonm ent is a restricted Area and preference is given to 
trenchless technology and open digging is permitted only in exceptional cases. 
1.30.4 Delhi Cantonment Board  has directed all the executing agencies to follow all the 
instructions issued by Hon‟ble NGT from time to time for combating air pollution such as. 
1.30.5 The Contractor shall not store/dump construction material or debris on metalled road. 
1.30.6 The contractor shall take appropriate protective measures like raising wind breakers of 
appropriate hei ght on all sides of the plot/area to ensure that no construction material/dust fly 
outside the plot area. 

11 
 
1.30.7 The contractor shall ensure that all the trucks or vehicles of any kind which are used for 
construction purposes/or are carrying construction m aterial like cement, sand and other allied 
material are fully covered. 
1.30.8 The Contractor shall compulsorily use wet jet in grinding and stone cutting. 
1.30.9 The Contractor shall ensure that all DG sets comply emission norms notified by 
MoEF&CC. Further violations are being prosecuted for environment compensation. 
1.30.10 Dust mitigation measures for all construction and demolition activities as notified on 
25.01.2018 by MoEF&CC, GOI is being implemented. 
1.30.11 SDMs alongwith Tehsildars (Executive Magistrate), Department of Revenue, Govt. of 
NCT of Delhi and Assistant Engineer of Public Works department (PWD) have been authorized 
to take action against violations. Penalty is being imposed in accordance with the directions of 
Hon‟ble National Green Tribunal. 
1.30.12 All local bodies and DDA have also been asked to apprise public in general and owners 
and builders in particular who have got their building plans sanctioned for following dust control 
measures. 
1.30.13 DPCC has imposed fine on constructio n projects who have obtained Environmental 
Clearance (built up area more than 20,000/ - sq. mtr.). With respect to Construction Projects with 
built up area more than 20,000 sqm, 68 notices were issued and penalty of Rs.3.36 crore was 
imposed. (since 01.01.2018 till August 2020). 
1.30.14 Dust suppressant: Directions have been issued to different local bodies to use dust 
suppressant on construction sites and dusty patches of the road. 
1.30.15 Anti Smog gun: The Delhi Government has identified major construction projects having 
potential of generating dust and consequent air pollution and accordingly directions have been 
issued to the project proponents of the major projects to install anti smog guns on site to arrest 
dust emissions. 20 major projects  have already deployed Anti Smog Guns and at 13 projects 
installation of anti smog guns are under pipeline. 
1.30.16 Complaints uploaded on SAMEER APP are being redressed by the concerned 
agencies/departments. 
1.30.17  To Control local Sources of Air Pollut ion at source, 13 hotspots namely Okhla Phase II, 
Dwarka, Bawana, Narela, Mundka, Punjabi Bagh, R K Puram, Wazirpur, Rohini, Vivek Vihar, 
Anand Vihar, Jahangir Puri and Mayapuri have been identified in Delhi in consultation with 
EPCA and CPCB as the said spots have higher air pollution levels in comparison to other areas of 
the city. Specific action plans have been drawn up for identifying and mitigating the local sources 
of air pollution so that there is immediate impact on the improvement in the air quali ty around 
these hotspots.  The Dy. Commissioners of respective MCD Zones have been made responsible as 
Nodal Officers for the execution of the action plan(s). These specific action plans have been 
prepared covering the local air pollution sources such as i dentifying and clearing the Construction 
and Demolition waste, illegal garbage and plastic dumps, filling up of potholes and unpaved 
stretches, intensified night patrolling to prevent garbage burning and mechanized road sweeping 
and water sprinkling on dus ty patches through scientifically designed sprinklers. Regular review 
of the status of the above hotspots is carried out. Special drive has been launched to increase 
green cover on the road sides and vacant spaces in these hotspots. Directions have been gi ven to 
the nodal officers of each hotspot to continuously take action as per the plan and adopt additional 
measures in the coming winter months when the air generally quality deteriorates. 
1.30.18 Smog Tower:- In compliance with this Hon‟ble Supreme Court order dated 13.01.2020 in 
WP (C) 13029/1985, Smog Towers have to be installed at Anand Vihar Bus Terminal and Baba 
Kharak Singh Marg, Connaught Place. DPCC is in process of installation of Smog Tower at 
Connaught Place with IIT Bombay & TPL. Other Smog Tow er at Anand Vihar Bus Terminal is 
being done by CPCB. The main focus is to set up a large air cleaning system in Delhi and assess 
its performance in reducing PM2.5 & PM10 concentrations. 

12 
 
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.31 The Committee feels that construction activities provide daily earning to the poor and 
weaker sections of the society. Banning construction activities results in loss of livelihood to the 
26 poor and the needy, especially labourers. A World Bank report also st ated that India’s labour 
losses due to air pollution in the year 2013 stood at about $55.39 Billion or about 0.84% of its 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP). The said losses could be even more due to the air pollution 
situation prevalent during the last few year s. The Committee recommends that instead of banning 
construction activities, which deprive the poor of their daily earnings, efforts should be made for 
the stringent enforcement of the construction guidelines and international best practices.  
                                                                                                                                            (Para 7.7)   
Action Taken 
1.32.1 Direction has been issued to construction agencies dated September 15, 2018 to prepare 
targeted action plans for air pollution sources and to implement these plans  and on October 29, 
2018 to NCR SPCBs to initiate criminal prosecution against the construction agency who fail to 
take corrective action for control of pollution. 
1.32.2 After inspection of C&D sites within D elhi NCR, the Pollution Control Board/Committee 
of Delhi, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan were informed  (February, 2018)  about 
observations made by the teams and asked to ensure the executive agencies to implement the 
various provisions of “The C&D W M Rules, 2016” and compliance be reported to CPCB. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.33 The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to sensitise the concerned State 
Governments in the Region to strictly follow the guidelines/norms specified by CPCB in order to 
prevent pollution caused by construction activities. The measures taken by DMRC to control dust 
emission and creative touch given to construction waste from construction sites are highly 
commendable. Instead of dumping the con structional waste here and there, the wastes are 
dumped at pre -designated and approved sites by the Government. The measures adopted by the 
DMRC by following the C&D waste rules and the guidelines should be adopted and followed by 
other agencies involved i n construction activities. Strict implementation of the C&D waste rules 
and guidelines should also be enforced by the concerned law enforcement agencies of Delhi and 
NCR. The Committee strongly believes that good construction site practices can help to the  great 
extent in controlling and preventing air pollution in the Region. The Committee also feels that 
Environment Risk Assessments for all the construction activities and materials being used and 
likely to cause air pollution must be made in consonance wi th the laid down norms/regulations. 
The Committee recommends that the construction industry should also be encouraged to use eco -
friendly construction methods, materials and technologies.                                              (Para 7.9) 
Action Taken 
1.34.1 Direction has been issued to construction agencies dated September 15, 2018 to prepare 
targeted action plans for air pollution sources and to implement these plans  and on October 29, 
2018 to NCR SPCBs to initiate criminal prosecution against the co nstruction agency who fail to 
take corrective action for control of pollution. 
1.34.2 After inspection of C&D sites within Delhi NCR, the Pollution Control Board/Committee 
of Delhi, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Rajasthan were informed  (February, 2018)  about 
observations made by the teams and asked to ensure the Executive Agencies to implement the 
various provisions of “The C&D W M Rules, 2016” and compliance be reported to CPCB. 
1.34.3 NCT of Delhi has C& D waste processing capacity of 2500 Tonnes  Per Day (TPD) and a 
capacity addition of 2000 TPD is being done. 
 
 

13 
 
LANDFILL SITES 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.35 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate 
Change must impress upon the Government of NCT of Delhi to take immediate necessary 
measures to fix  the problem relating to the landfill sites of Delhi and, if required, take help of 
agencies like CSIR-IIP and CSIR-NEERI in the matter.                                                    (Para 8.5) 
Action Taken 
1.36 Following actions for proper implementation of Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016 and 
management of landfill sites in Delhi Region have been taken. 
1.  Directions issued to Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) u/s 18(1) (b) of the Water 
/Air Act to direct authorities of Delhi for implementation of SWM Rules, 2016. 
2.  Directions issued on 11.09.2017 u/s 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 to the 
Secretary-in-charge, State UD Departments of all States/UTs for constitution of State Level 
Advisory Body (SLAB) and convening its six-monthly meeting. 
3.  Directions issued on 22.09.2017 under section 5 of Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 to 
East Delhi Municipal Corporation (EDMC), South Delhi Municipal Corporation (SDMC), 
North Delhi Municipal Corporation, New Delhi Municipal Corporation, and Delhi 
Cantonment Board (DCB) and under section 18(1)(b) to DPCC for implementing SWM 
Rules, 2016 including ensuring of structural stability of landfill sites. 
4.  Directions issued on 05.10.2017 under Section 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 
to the Commissioners of Municipal Authorities of 53 Metro -cities and 18 State Capitals for 
implementation of Solid Waste Management Rules, 2016. 
FIRE CRACKERS 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.37 The Committee, however, feels  that much more needs to be done in this regard. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central Government in consultation with the 
concerned State Governments should chalk out a mechanism whereby the cracker manufacturers 
are allowed to manufacture only low polluting crackers. The Committee also recommends that the 
Central Government should also consider issuing firm guidelines with regard to the chemicals to 
be used in crackers by the manufacturers for minimising their adverse impact on the environ ment 
and human health.                                                                                                               (Para 9.3) 
Action Taken 
1.38 Petroleum and Explosives Safety Organisation (PESO) will give certificate for reduced 
emission crackers and then only these can be introduced in the market. 
IMPORTANCE OF TREES IN REDUCING POLLUTION VIS-À-VIS FELLING OF 
TREES IN DELHI 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.39 The Committee is of the view that trees are the most important and essential part of our 
environment. The rising population, industrialization, deforestation, and urbanization has caused 
problems like climate change, global warming, rising pollution, loss of natural habitats for 
animals, effects on the water cycle, effects on the carbon cycle and so many other diverse effects 
on the environment. Cars, Trucks, Diesel engines, Railways, Motorcycles, and other vehicles all 
over the world release millions of to nnes of carbon dioxide gas. Trees contribute to the 
environment by providing oxygen, improving air quality, climate amelioration, conserving water, 
preserving soil, and supporting wildlife. During the process of photosynthesis, trees take in 
carbon dioxide and produce the oxygen we breathe. Trees have a great role to play in reducing 
pollution. Not only do they provide nourishment for the entire food chain as well as the earth 
itself, but they are a safe and effective solution to some of our biggest environ mental problems, 
improving both outdoor and indoor environments. Trees control climate by moderating the effects 

14 
 
of the sun, rain and wind.  Trees also lower the air temperature and reduce the heat intensity of 
the greenhouse effect by maintaining low leve ls of carbon dioxide. Hence it is imperative to cut 
down on excessive carbon dioxide emissions, go in for massive afforestation, increase the forest 
cover, etc. Plantation, protection and conservation of trees and forest is the only way of human 
survival on earth.                                                                                                              (Para 10.7) 
 Action Taken 
1.40.1 Forest Policy Division at MoEF&CC has proposed new National Forest Policy, 2018 
which proposes policy prescription on the issues of clean air and carbon sequestration.  Thrust has 
been given on promoting urban greens, agro forestry, city forests, integrating climate change 
mitigation and adaptation measures, achieving the NDC targets and tree plantation ou tside forests 
on mission mode and afforestation on degraded forests, etc. 
1.40.2 India‟s Nationally determined Contributions (NDCs) under United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) include creation of 2.5 to 3 billion tonnes of 
CO2 equivalent of additional tree and forest cover as carbon sink by 2030. 
1.40.3 About 32 lakh trees are being planted in NCT of Delhi in current year. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.41 Maintenance of ecological balance and preservation of environment is essential for the 
very survival of life on earth. At the same time, we need to raise standards of living of the people 
for which the economy needs to grow rapidly and tourism needs to be promoted. The challenge 
before us, therefore, is to strike the right balance between the two imperatives as a holistic 
national enterprise.  While, on the one hand, Delhi is waging a war against air pollution, on the 
other, trees, which play a very vital r ole in reducing one of our biggest environmental problems, 
are being indiscriminately felled in the name of developmental projects. This felling of trees has 
also adversely affected the biodiversity of Delhi. The Committee notes that the number of trees 
proposed to be cut in the above proposals involving development plans in Delhi is too large. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the aforementioned development projects should be 
revisited and the project proponents of these developmental projects shou ld be requested to 
submit revised proposals with minimal requirement of tree felling. In view of the critical air 
pollution scenario in Delhi, all possible efforts should be made for preserving the trees at these 
sites. Further, the possibility of transloc ation the maximum number of trees should also be 
explored. The Committee also recommends that in future also, whenever any developmental/re -
developmental project comes up, efforts should be made for minimum felling of trees at the 
planning stage itself.                                                                                                         (Para 10.8) 
Action Taken 
1.42.1 Govt. of Delhi has "The Delhi Preservation of Trees Act, 1994" (DPTA, 1994) under 
which section 8 provides "Restrictions on felling and removal of trees:- Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any custom or usage or contract and 
except as provide in this Act or the rules made there under, no person shall fell or remove or 
dispose of any tree or forest produce in any land, whether in this ownership or permission of the 
Tree Officer Forest land or land with tree cover should not be -treated merely as a resource." 
1.42.2 Provided that if the tree is not immediately felled. There wo uld be grave danger to life or 
property or traffic, the owner of the land may take immediate action to fell such tree and report 
the fact to the Tree Officer within twenty-four hours of such felling. 
1.42.3 DPTA, 1994 provides a complete procedure for obta ining permission to fell, cut, remove 
or dispose of a tree (u/s 9) and also provides duties of Tree Authority (u/s 7). 
1.42.4 Further, some relevant policy directions of the National Forest Policy, 1988 needs to be 
taken into consideration: - 
1.42.5 Maintenance of environmental stability through preservation and, where necessary, 
restoration of the ecological balance that has been adversely disturbed by serious depletion of the 
forests of the country. 

15 
 
1.42.6 Increasing substantially the forest/tree cover in  the country through massive afforestation 
and social forestry programmes, especially on all denuded, degraded and unproductive lands. 
1.42.7 Green belts should be raised in urban/industrial areas as well as in arid tracts. Such a 
programme will help to check erosion and desertification as well as improve the microclimate. 
1.42.8 No forest should be permitted to be worked without - the Government having approved 
the management plan, which should be in a prescribed format and in keeping with the National 
Forest Policy. The Central Government should issue necessary guidelines to the State 
Governments in this regard and monitor compliance. 
1.42.9 Forest land or land with tree cover should not be -treated merely as a resource readily 
available to be utilised for various projects and programmes, but as a national asset which requires 
to be properly safeguarded for providing sustained benefits to the entire community. Diversion of 
forest land for any non -forest purpose should be subject to the most careful examinat ions by 
specialists from the standpoint of social and environmental costs and benefits. 
1.42.10 As per the recommendations of the committee on the reworking of the proposals and 
revision of the development plans; NBCC and CPWD have reworked their concept p lans on the 
above principles for all six GPRA colonies i.e. Netaji Nagar, Sarojini Nagar, Mohammadpur, 
Kasturba Nagar, Sriniwaspuri and Thyagraj Nagar.  This reworking has resulted in following 
changes: 
1.42.11 Reduction in Dwelling Units: 739 numbers of D Us have been reduced; thereby numbers 
of DUs have come down from 25,667 to 24,928, as given here under: 
GPRA Type wise Reduction in Quarters Total 
 II III IV V VI  
Netaji Nagar 2 2 35 41 38 118 
Sarojini Nagar 61 110 128 77 76 452 
Mohamadpur 22 15 - - - 37 
Kasturba Nagar - - - 59 36 95 
Sriniwaspuri - - - - - - 
Thyagraj Nagar 9 23 5 - - 37 
Total Reduction 94 150 168 177 150 739 
Qtrs in Old Proposal 7905 7636 5734 2347 2045 25667 
Qtrs in New proposal 7811 7486 5566 2170 1895 24928 
% age reduction 1.19 1.96 2.92 7.54 7.33 2.88 
 
1.42.12 Further changes in layout plan Changes were made in the Concept Plan, Architectural 
design, re-alignment of location of towers, buildings around trees and retention of existing road 
network. The parking space has bee n considered in an additional underground floor, surface 
parking/Podium and by making localized basement/reducing the ground coverage with the aim to 
bring down the number of trees being affected. 
 
GPRA Plot Area 
in Acres 
No. of 
Existing 
trees 
Affected trees as 
per original design 
Affected tree which 
may be translocated 
as per revised design 
Netaji Nagar 254.64 11913 8893 3500 
Sarojini Nagar 110.00 3906 2490 1600 
Mohamadpur 8.03 562 433 213 
Kasturba Nagar 52.81 1203 723 405 
Sriniwaspuri 73.14 2763 1336 1239 
Thyagraj Nagar 13.30 349 100 40 
Total 511.92 20696 13975 6997 
 
 
 

16 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.43 The Committee notes that recently eight metro pillars in Delhi were covered with 
evergreen plants that remain green throughout the year, giving the pillars the look of vertical 
gardens. Delhi Metro has a wide network in Delhi and ve rtical gardens on metro pillars is a 
unique idea. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the concerned agencies should explore 
the possibility of erecting such verti cal gardens on metro pillars, flyovers and other strategic 
structures, which would not only beautify these structures but also can be a good medium of 
increasing the green cover of Delhi. In light of the existing environmental crisis in Delhi, these 
vertical gardens could be one step forward in helping the citizens of Delhi to breathe a little easy 
since these vertical gardens serve the dual purpose of improving air quality by trapping dust and 
pollutants and absorbing heat from the surroundings to provide a cooling effect.          (Para 10.9) 
Action Taken 
1.44.1 262 pillars of flyovers/over -bridges have been covered with vertical gardens in NCT of 
Delhi. 
1.44.2 Greening of spaces below flyovers at 38 places has been done in NCT of Delhi. 
AIR POLLUTION DURING SUMMERS 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.45 Depletion of forests is one of the main causes of air pollution in the country.                 
Delhi and its surrounding areas are not so green now as they used to be earlier. There was a 
thick green belt around Delhi but the same has gradually receded. This green belt acted as a wall 
to protect Delhi from dust and pollution from neighbouring States.  The Committee feels that the 
absence of greenbelts permits such dust storms from neighbouring States to enter  Delhi. The 
Committee recommends that a massive tree plantation exercise should be undertaken, in a time -
bound manner, on the borders of Delhi with Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh so that they 
not only absorb the pollution causing particulate matter b ut also act as a natural barrier and 
shield the city from frequent dusty winds from the neighbouring States.                        (Para 11.2) 
Action Taken 
1.46.1 Transplantation of Trees: It was proposed to avoid cutting of trees to the maximum extent 
and instead transplant the affected trees, within the site or in the vicinity, in a phased manner. The 
executing agencies were directed to engage specialized agencies for such transplantation ensuring 
survival rate to the maximum. The Transplantation proce dure was directed to be commensurate 
with the construction so that the green cover of the area is not reduced. 
1.46.2 It may also be mentioned that Delhi Forest Department is in the process of finalizing a 
policy for Tree Transplantation which aims to mini mize tree felling, tree preservation plan for all 
projects and transplantation of 80% of the trees to be affected by any project. The policy is 
awaiting approval from the cabinet. 
1.46.3 While Developmental Projects are inevitable fallout of rapid urbaniza tion especially in a 
rapidly growing metropolis like Delhi, it is also submitted that the Forest and Tree cover of Delhi 
has shown an increasing trend through the years. As per the State of Forest Report 2019 the Forest 
and Tree cover has gone up from 283 sq km (19.12% of total Geographic area) in 2005 to 
324.44sq km (21.92% of total Geographic area) in 2019. Moreover no forests under the very 
dense category in 2005 now Delhi has 6.72 sq km of forests under very dense category in 2019. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.47 The Committee is of the view that IIRS, Dehradun has conducted Air Quality Studies and 
Air Quality monitoring using Satellite data and ground instrumentations and has the 
infrastructural set up to issue real time alerts on the worsening air quality due to various factors. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should 
also coordinate with the IIRS, Dehradun and SAFAR programme of Indian Institute of Tropical 
Meteorology, Pune in the matter to get real time alerts  on the worsening air quality in Delhi and 

17 
 
NCR due to various factors so that immediate damage control exercise could be undertaken and 
necessary corrective measures could be initiated by all the concerned agencies.           (Para11.5)                                                                                                                     
Action Taken 
1.48 Air Quality Early Warning System for Delhi has been implemented in October, 2018 in 
association with Ministry of Earth Sciences. The system p rovides live air quality, active fire 
counts, AOD, 3-day forecast, etc. 
IMPACT OF AIR POLLUTION ON HEALTH 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.49 The Committee is extremely perturbed to note the replies of the Ministries of Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change and Health and Family Welfare with respect to the alarming impact 
of air pollution on the health of the residents of Delhi and NCR.   The Committee firmly believes 
that, as accepted by the Ministries of Health and Family Welfare and Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, polluted air in Delhi and NCR is a significant risk factor for a number of 
pollution-related diseases and health conditions including respiratory infections, heart disease, 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), stroke, lung cancer, difficulty in breathing, 
wheezing, coughing, asthma and worsening of existing respiratory and cardiac conditions 
resulting in increased medication use, increased doctor or emergency room visits, more hospital 
admissions and premature deaths. Infants, child ren and asthmatic patients are the most 
vulnerable in such conditions. The Committee is also deeply concerned to note that during the 
period from 2013 to 2017, a total of 981casualties have taken place due to Acute Respiratory 
Infection (ARI) in Delhi. The  Committee is of the view that the adverse health effects of poor air 
quality in Delhi and NCR and its toll on human life calls for immediate short and long term 
solutions to the problem. The Committee is also surprised to note that Ministry of Health and 
Family Welfare was not taken on board in the High Level Task Force on Air Pollution which is, 
in a way, indicative of the ignorance as well as denial about the negative impact of air pollution 
on human health. The Committee recommends that considering the severe health hazards of air 
pollution, Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should take immediate corrective 
and preventive strategic steps in consultation with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare to 
mitigate the air pollution.                                                                                            (Para12.7) 
Action Taken 
1.50.1 The Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change (MoEF&CC) has constituted a 
Working Group to evaluate and apprise environmental health projects.  The recommendations of 
the Working Group are to be considered for approval by the Apex Committee under the 
chairmanship of Secretary, MoEF&CC and Co -Chairpersonship of DG, Indian Council of 
Medical Research (ICMR). 
1.50.2 The reconstituted Worki ng Group in its first meeting held on 30th January, 2017 
recommended, inter alia, for initiating a study for National Environmental Health Profile with a 
view to create a database on pollution and health and to make an assessment of human health/ 
economic risks associated with environmental exposures. 
1.50.3 The Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate Change has initiated a National 
Environmental Health Profile study entitled „Study on air pollution and its effects on Health: 20 
City Multi-Site study‟ which will be conducted by the Medical Institutes of 20 cities & SPCBs. 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.51 Further, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should also aggressively start an 
awareness campaign to educate the people about the adverse health effects  of air pollution and 
the ways and means to minimise its adverse impacts.                                                   (Para12.8) 
 
 
 

18 
 
Action Taken 
1.52.1 The National Environmental Health Profile is aimed at evaluating the quantum  of health 
manifestation of environmental exposure in the country. The study is envisaged to be initiated 
with 20 cities in 4 zones of the country viz., North, South East and West. Further, 5 cities have 
been selected in each zone, with one city in each zone as a con trol/ referral city which is a 
comparatively cleaner one. Inter -relationship between pollution and mortality/ morbidity is to be 
analyzed and this requires pollution data of the 20 cities as well as data on morbidity and 
mortality. Trends in air pollution will be assessed vis-à-vis mortality/ morbidity data for each city 
to evaluate the quantum of health manifestations and to identify gaps to take  up further systematic 
studies.  The duration of study is proposed to be 3 years. 
1.52.2 High Level Task Force f or management of air pollution in Delhi and NCR has Director, 
AIIMS as its member. 
IMPACT ON INDIAN ECONOMY 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.53 The Committee expresses its deep concerns in the matter. The Committee firmly believes 
that if corrective preventive measures are not put in place by the Government, the situation will 
worsen which will also take a toll on our foreign exchange earning capa city in so far as tourism 
sector is concerned. As already stated in the report, a World Bank report has stated that India’s 
labour losses due to air pollution in the year 2013 stood at about $55.39 Billion or about 0.84%  
of  its  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP).   The Committee observes that since  the air pollution  
situation has only worsened during the last few years, the said losses may have crossed 1% by 
now.                                                                                                                         (Para 13.2) 
Action Taken 
1.54.1 Various regulatory and technical solutions in addition to integrated control strategies have 
been taken by CPCB for improving overall air quality in Delhi NCR. The results have been 
encouraging with gradual improvement noted in present year compared to previous years. Some 
of the important actions taken towards air quality management in Delhi NCR are as presented 
below: 
1.54.2 Strengthening of ambient air quality monitoring network in Delhi NCR to pr ovide 
information to pubic and assess the impact of actions against air polluting activities in ambient air 
quality. 
1.54.3  Directions were issued to various agencies to ensure strict implementation of 
Comprehensive Action Plan (CAP) for Air Pollution Con trol in Delhi NCR. Graded Response 
Action Plan prepared by CPCB is implemented in Delhi NCR based on air quality situation 
1.54.4  Air Quality Early Warning System for Delhi has been implemented in October, 2018 in 
association with MOES. The system provides timely alerts to implementing agencies. 
1.54.5  A complaint redressal mechanism has been established for taking swift action on 
complaints received through SAMEER app, email and social media platforms (twitter and 
Facebook accounts). 
1.54.6 Directions issued under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and the Air (Prevention 
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 to implementing agencies (SPCBS, Construction Agencies 
Municipal bodies, Traffic police and transport department and agriculture department in Delhi and 
NCR) for taking action against air polluting activities. 
1.54.7 Strict enforcement against air polluting activities through field teams deployed during 
critical winter months for monitoring and providing ground feedback about air polluting activities. 
1.54.8 Pilot projects have been initiated to assess air pollution mitigation technologies. 
1.54.9 Status of Air Quality:   Overall improvement in air quality of Delhi was noted in 2018 as 
compared to 2017. Total number of Good, Satisfactory and Moderated  days increased to 159 in 

19 
 
2018 as compared to 152 in 2017. Accordingly, the number of Poor, Very Poor and Severe days 
decreased to 206 in 2018 as compared to 213 in 2017. 
GENERAL OBSERVATION 
Recommendation/Observation  
1.55 Pollution prevention is a major global concern because of its harmful effects on people’s 
health and the overall environment. Air Pollution has assumed gigantic proportions in our 
country and Delhi, the capital of India, is not lagging behind. Growing urbanization, rapid 
industrialisation 36and increasing population etc. during the last few years have also adversely 
impacted the air pollution scenario of Delhi and NCR. In such a scenario, the measures taken by 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change for prevention and control o f air pollution 
have so far not been commensurate with the magnitude of the problem. In view of the foregoing, 
the Committee recommends that the Ministry, on its part, must prepare both short and long term 
plans, put forth futuristic projections and ensure  that all the measures planned are holistically 
implemented in coordination with the concerned State Governments. There are many scientific 
organisations of Government of India such as CSIR -Indian Institute of Petroleum, Dehradun; 
Indian Institute of Remot e Sensing; Dehradun; Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology, Pune; 
CSIR-National Environmental Engineering Research Institute, Nagpur which can help in 
contributing towards finding solutions to many aspects associated with the air pollution problem 
of De lhi. Improving air quality in Delhi and NCR demands sustained and coordinated 
government action at all levels and Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should 
seek the cooperation of all concerned agencies and stakeholders who can contribute t owards 
addressing the problem of air pollution in Delhi and NCR.                                         (Para14.1) 
Action Taken 
1.56.1 MoEF&CC has been working in close coordination with other ministries, State 
Governments of NCR States and eminent academic as well as research institutions to address the 
problem in holistic manner. 
1.56.2 A Graded Response Action Plan has been developed for implementation in Delhi and 
NCR under different Air Quality Index (AQI) categories. It lists out actions along with 
responsible agencies in accordance with the air pollution levels to prevent and deal with critical 
air pollution situations and emergencies. MoEF&CC  notified its implementation through 
Environment Pollution (Prevention & Control) Authority vide S.O. 1 18 (E) dated January 12, 
2017. 
1.56.3 Comprehensive Action Plan -With an objective of improving air quality in the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi and National Capital Region States of Haryana, Rajasthan and Uttar 
Pradesh, a time bound source specific C omprehensive Action Plan (CAP) has been evolved. It 
identifies timelines and implementing agencies for actions identified. As mentioned above, a total 
55 agencies have been directed under section 3 and 5 of E (P) Act, 1986 on January 25, 2018, 
March 06, 2018 and June 22, 2018 to ensure strict implementation of Comprehensive Action Plan 
for air pollution control in Delhi NCR. 
1.56.4 Expression of Interest for Projects/ Studies has been invited on Improvisation & 
Management of Air Quality in Delhi NCR under E nvironment Protection Charge (EPC) funds in 
compliance of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court Orders.   The project and activities identified being 
funded under EPC funds in Delhi -NCR are broadly classified under following thrust areas: 
capacity building with regard to infrastructure enhancement, mas s awareness on air pollution, 
R&D Activities with respect to air quality management & vehicular pollution contr ol, health 
impact studies vis -à-vis air pollution in Delhi -NCR, specific projects to control pollution in              
Delhi – NCR & Punjab. 
1.56.5 Pilot studies based on new technologies have been funded by EPC funds for mitigating air 
pollution. These are Wind Augmentation and Purification Units (WAYU) by NEERI, 
PARIYANTRA Filtration Units by Manav Rachna International Institute of Research and Studies 

20 
 
and Application of dust suppressants for dust containment at roads and construction sites by EPRI  
& NEERI 
1.56.6 Many scientific organizations of Govt. of India such as NEERI, CRRI, IITs have been 
awarded project under EPC funds that aim at addressing air pollution in Delhi and NCR. 
  

21 
 
CHAPTER-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT'S REPLIES 
 
MEASURES TAKEN FOR MITIGATING AIR POLLUTION 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.1 The Committee takes note of the new initiatives being taken by the Government of NCT of 
Delhi. The Committee appreciates the initiatives brought to the notice of the Committee and 
hopes that the intended benefits would be realised and these initiatives further will pave way to 
mitigate the air pollution problem in Delhi and NCR to a greater extent.                      (Para 2.6) 
Action Taken 
2.2 CAAQMS data indicated marginal improvement in air quality of Delhi in 2018 (Ja n– Dec 
03) compared to 2017 (Jan – Dec 03), such as increase in number of „Good‟ to „Moderate‟ days to 
158, compared to 150 in 2017, and reduction in number of „Poor‟ to „Severe‟ days from 187 in 
2017 to 179 in 2018, despite usual seasonal pattern wherein minimum pollutant levels are 
observed during monsoon, moderate levels during summers and high concentration of pollutants 
in winters. 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.3 The Committee notes that while GRAP is an emergency plan to respond to the daily air 
pollution levels, CAP is a comprehensive action plan that mandates short, medium and long term 
action for each source of pollution for more systemic reforms in Delhi and NCR. The Committee 
further notes the action taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry  of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change to mitigate the air pollution and hopes that the GRAP and CAP will be 
implemented in letter and spirit with the close co -ordination with the concerned State 
Governments of NCR. The Committee believes that the syne rgy between the concerned State 
Governments would definitely help in getting rid of the problem of air pollution in Delhi and 
NCR. The Committee is also of the view that both the plans i.e. GRAP and CAP need to be 
implemented together given the air polluti on level in Delhi and NCR. Further, a robust 
monitoring system should be evolved to ensure that the National Ambient Air Quality Standards 
are met and the negative impact of air pollution on the health of the residents of this Region is 
minimised.                                                                                                                (Para 2.11)                                                                                                                             
Action Taken 
2.4.1 Task Force on Graded Response Action Plan (GRAP) has been constituted in pursuant to 
the Hon‟ble Supreme Court‟s Order dated December 02, 2016 in the matter of M. C. Mehta Vs. 
Union of India regarding air quality in National Capital Region Delhi.  The members of Task 
Force include representatives from CPCB, Delhi Pollution Control Committee (DPCC), State 
Pollution Control Boards of NCR States, India Meteorological Department (IMD) and  Dr. T.K. 
Joshi, Health expert.  
2.4.2 In pursuant to Hon‟ble Supreme  Court‟s Order dated December 13, 2017 in W P (Civil) 
No. 13029 of 1985 in the matter of M. C. Mehta Vs. Union of India, a Comprehensive Action 
Plan for Air Pollution Control in Delhi NCR was finalized. A total 55 agencies have been directed 
under section 3 and 5 of E (P) Act, 1986 on January 25, 2018, March 06, 2018 and June 22, 2018 
to ensure strict implementation of Comprehensive Action Plan (CAP) for air pollution control in 
Delhi NCR. They include Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas (MoPNG), Ministry of  Road 
Transport & Highways (MoRTH), Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs MoHUA), Delhi Police, 
Delhi NCR–Chief Secretaries, Environment Departments, Transport Departments, Urban Local 
Bodies, Industry Departments, etc. 
 
 

22 
 
AIR QUALITY MONITORING STATIONS 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.5 The Committee welcomes the plan of the Government of India for increasing the existing 
monitoring network by adding 48 more of such stations by December, 2018.   The Committee 
hopes that the target set by the Government will not only be achieved within the stipulated time 
but the increased number of monitoring stations would also help in further strategising the action 
plans to combat the increasing air pollution in Delhi and NCR.                                    (Para 3.2) 
Action Taken 
2.6 In total, there are 93 ambient air quality stations (52 Continuous Ambient Air Quality 
Monitoring Stations and 41 manual monitoring stations) in Delhi NCR. Additional 22 manual and 
17 CAAQMS are proposed to be setup by Haryana while 9 CAAQMS are being setup by UP. All 
these stations are likely to be commissioned by the end this financial year. 
VEHICULAR EMISSION 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.7 The Committee is of the considered opinion that given the health hazards due to the 
increasing volume of PM  2.5 in the air of Delhi/NCR; it is imperative for the concerned State 
Governments as well as the Central Government to understand the gravity of the situation and 
make all concerted efforts to bring down the PM  2.5 level in the Region by making all possible 
efforts to control vehicular pollution.                                                                         (Para 5.11) 
Action Taken 
2.8.1 Hon„ble Supreme Court vide order dated has 29.10.2018 has passed the following orders 
with regard to old polluting vehicles: 
“The Transport Departments of NCR will immediately announce that all the diesel vehicles 
more than 10 years‟ old and petrol vehicles more than 15 years‟ old shall not ply in NCR in 
terms of the order of the National Green Tribunal dated  07.04.2015. The order of the National 
Green Tribunal was challenged in this Court and the Civil Appeal was dismissed. Vehicles 
violating the order will be impounded. The list of such vehicles should be published on the 
websites of the Central Pollution Co ntrol Board (CPCB) and the Transport Departments of 
NCR. Similarly, a meaningful advertisement should be published in a local newspaper for the 
convenience of the owners of the vehicles.” In compliance of the above orders, CPCB has 
already provided a link on its website where the information of such vehicles is updated. 
2.8.2 Proactive steps viz. promoting environment friendly vehicle (electric vehicle, hybrid 
electric vehicle, e-rickshaw, etc.), promoting alternate fuels, declaration of emission levels and  & 
proper functioning of PUC Centres, etc are some of the measures taken for control vehicular 
pollution. 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.9 The Committee notes that with the expansion of Delhi Metro network, a large number of 
people are commuting by Delhi Me tro. A large number of people are also using other modes of 
public transport. However, inspire of the increased availability of public transport, the 
dependence on personal vehicles, particularly cars and two -wheelers, has not gone down and a 
substantial population is still using personal vehicles for local commuting. This not only adds to 
the congestion on the roads but also contributes to the hazardous levels of air pollution. The 
Committee is of the view that the primary reasons for dependence on persona l vehicles are 
inadequate public transport facility and absence of last mile connectivity. Also, the Delhi Metro 
network needs to be further expanded so that a larger section can utilize this facility. The issue of 
last mile connectivity also needs to be a ddressed to ensure that people refrain from using 
personal vehicles and do not hesitate to utilize the public transport to the maximum. These 
measures would certainly help in reducing the air pollution in Delhi.                            (Para 5.17) 
 

23 
 
Action Taken 
2.10.1 Augmentation of public transport is part of Comprehensive Action Plan. 
2.10.2 For promotion of electric vehicles, the Government has exempted the battery operated 
vehicles and vehicles running on Ethanol & Methanol fuel from requirement of permits. 
FIRE CRACKERS 
Recommendation/Observation  
2.11 The Committee further observes that each year during Diwali, cheap firecrackers are 
burst, often manufactured using toxic chemicals, turning Delhi in to a ‘Gas Chamber’. The 
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the year 2017 has directed to suspend and not renew the licences for 
possessing, stocking and selling of fire crackers in Delhi. The Committee appreciates the efforts 
made by the Central Government and the Government of NCT of Delhi in thi s direction in the 
form of banning the import of Chinese crackers and confiscating the available stocks.  (Para 9.2)  
Action Taken 
2.12 Hon‟ble Supreme Court vide Order dated 23.10.2018 has permitted production of fire 
crackers with reduced emissions (improved crackers and green crackers) and further vide Order 
dated October 31, 2018 banned sale of fire crackers other than crackers with reduced emissions 
(improved crackers and green crackers). 
  

24 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
ROAD DUST 
Recommendation/Observation  
3.1 The Committee also observes that in some parts of the NCR, roads are broken, poorly 
maintained and partially paved surfaces which in turn have been resulting in adding to the 
problem of road dust. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to take up the matter 
with the concerned State Governments and the Central Government for paving of unpaved 
roads/streets in the Region and ensure that the civic agencies of the Region involved pay due 
importance to the maintenance of the roads/streets and complete the task in a fixed time frame. 
                                                                                                                                 (Para 6.7) 
Action Taken 
3.2.1 All the roads under the management of Delhi Cantonment Board are paved and are in 
good condition. Delhi Cantonment Board has stated using 8% waster plastic of total volume of 
bitumen for repairing the roads and with warranty of 5 years (Defect liability period). Further all 
Asphaltic dense concrete work are being undertaken under supervision of Indian Institute of 
Technology (IIT)/ Central Road Research Institute (CRRI). 
3.2.2 Consolidated statement about Act ion Taken by Agencies from March, 2020 to till 
August 2020: 
Stretch of Roads where action has been taken for mitigation of unpaved Roads/Pits/Potholes   
(in Sqm) 
1. SDMC 10804 
2. North DMC 13444 
3. EDMC (till 31.01.20) 445 
4. NDMC Nil 
5. DCB 450 
6. DSIIDC 161461 
7. PWD 4209 
Number of Mechanical Road Sweepers (MRS) and Water Sprinklers (WS) to control road 
dust:  
Existing Mechanical Sweepers = 60 Existing Water Tankers/Sprinklers: 269 
SDMC = 24 SDMC= 83 
North DMC = 18 North DMC= 130 
EDMC = 10 EDMC=40 
NDMC = 7 NDMC=14 
PWD = NIL (Road sweeping is being 
done by Municipal Corporation). 
PWD= NIL 
DCB = 01  DCB =02 
Total = 60 Total =269 

25 
 
Further recommendation/Observations 
3.3 The Committee observes that the Ministry has only furnished the action taken by 
Municipal Corporations of Delhi along with other Departments/agencies of the NCT of 
Delhi.  The action taken by other respective Governments of NCR in the matter has not 
been furnished by the Ministry.  The Committee would again like to remind the  Ministry 
that till the time p aving of unpaved roads/streets in the NCR Region is done along with the 
proper maintenance of the roads/streets, road dust would continue to remain an area of 
concern and other efforts being made by various wings of these Gove rnments to mitigate air 
pollution may not yield the desired results.  This issue must get due attention of all the 
concerned Governments and sincere efforts taken in this direction would go a long way in 
addressing the problem of air pollution in the Regio n.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change must sensitise 
the concerned State Governments about the action to be taken in this regard.   
FIRE CRACKERS 
Recommendation/Observation  
3.4 In view of the foregoing, the Committee feels that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and 
Climate Change, Government of India should impress upon the Ministries of Railways and Civil 
Aviation to join hands in sharing money in order to mitigate the problem of air polluti on in Delhi 
and NCR.                                                                                                                  (Para13.3)                                                                                                                      
Action Taken 
3.5.1 Railway is most eco -friendly mode of surface transport with minimal effect on 
environment. In fact, the carbon footprint in road transportation as compared to rail is nearly 12 
times for freight and over 3 times for passengers. 
3.5.2 Notwithstanding, with its massive push towards sustainable development, Indian Railways 
have been taking up a number of steps in the recent past to reduce carbon emissions. This includes 
switching to bio-fuels, solar and wind energy. 
3.5.3 Most of the stations on Indian Railways have been fitted with LED lightings and also have 
solar panels. Railways have taken up the work to replace all CFL/FL light fittings with energy 
efficient LED lights in all AC/TL/EMU/MEMU coaches. Production units are provid ing energy 
efficient LED lights in all newly manufactured coaches since Dec'16. Coaches have also been 
fitted with solar panels to reduce pollution. 
3.5.4 The HOG technology has been recently introduced in trains fitted with LHB coaches and 
hauled by elect ric traction. This technology caters to the power needs of the coaches such as 
coach lighting, air-condition, etc by substituting the earlier technology of having two power cars 
in the trains known as (End of Generators) EOG. The HOG system does not requir e any diesel oil 
consumption and as such will reduce air pollution and also noise pollution. In addition, it also 
provides uninterrupted illumination in the coaches. 
3.5.5 A major push is towards electrification of its routes. Most of the trains coming to Delhi 
from surrounding areas and running within Delhi have been electrified and hence are pollution 
free. Through its concentrated efforts, IR has already improved its emission intensity by nearly 
25% in year 2017 -18 (for which figures are available) as co mpared to base year of 2014 -15. The 
emission intensity in tonnes CO2/ million GTKM was 12.3892 in 2014 -15 which has reduced to 
9.3027 in 2017 -18. IR is well on its way to achieve reduction in emission intensity by 32% by 
year 2029-30 in terms of NDC. 
3.5.6 Since Indian Railway is already taking a number of steps toward sustainable development, 
it may not be feasible for it to spare funds for the above subject. 
Further recommendation/observations 
3.6. The Committee notes that although the Ministry has responded regarding the 
inability of the Ministry of Railways to spare funds for pollution mitigation in Delhi and 

26 
 
NCR, no response has been furnished in respect of Ministry of Civil Aviation.  After making 
recommendations/observations, the Committee expects a poin ted reply from the Ministry in 
respect of the said recommendations/observations.  The Ministry should , therefore, furnish 
the response in respect of Ministry of Civil Aviation to the Committee at the earliest. 
  

27 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES 
Recommendation/Observation  
4.1 The Committee notes the steps initiated by the concerned State Governments to mitigate 
air pollution due to construction activities in Delhi and NCR and hopes that these steps would be 
scrupulously implemented to achieve the desired results. The Committee also observes that 
noxious vapours from paints, thinners, oils,  cleaners, etc. are environmentally hazardous 
chemicals which are widely used at the construction sites and have been contributing to raise the 
levels of air pollution in the Region. The Committee hopes that the concerned agencies would also 
take the required steps to contain the air pollution contribution from these chemicals.   (Para 7.8)  
LANDFILL SITES 
Recommendation/Observation  
4.2 The Committee is unhappy to note the existing capacity of the Government of NCT of 
Delhi to treat the municipal solid waste scientifically is just about 54 per cent of the total 
requirement leaving a gap of 46 per cent to be bridged. This apathy of the civic bodies entrusted 
with the task of management of municipal solid waste is totally unwarranted. The Committee 
notes that there have been frequent incidents of landfill fires in Delhi during the last few years 
which spew toxic gases and have been adding to the rising pollution levels in Delhi. The laissez -
faire of the civic bodies of Delhi also gets reflected in the fact that the height of Ghazipur landfill 
site has reached as high as 2765 metres which is just 8 metres less than the height of the national 
monument Qutub Minar. Similarly, the other two landfill sites in Delhi have also been declared 
exhausted but the untreated waste is still being dumped there. The Committee is of the considered 
opinion that unprocessed municipal waste of 4800 TPD is a threat to the environment, ecology 
and flora and fauna of Delhi and NCR and there is urgent need for augmenting the capacity  to 
treat the municipal solid waste scientifically to the desired level. The Committee while taking note 
of the proposed capacity addition plan of the Government of NCT of Delhi by setting up new 
waste-to-energy plants and enhancing the processing capacity  of the existing plants hopes that 
the timeline fixed to complete the proposed action plan would be realised.                      (Para 8.2) 
4.3 The Committee had visited CSIR -National Environmental Engineering Research Institute 
(CSIR-NEERI), Nagpur in April, 2018. During its discussion with the representatives of NEERI, 
the Committee was informed that the NEERI had, in May, 2016, offered their expertise to deal 
with the issue of frequent fires on landfill sites in Delhi to the Government of NCT of Delhi  but 
they had not received any response to their communications. The Committee is surprised to note 
that despite the offer of NEERI to support Government of NCT of Delhi in the matter, no action 
has been taken thereon. The Committee also requested the Chie f Secretary, Government of NCT 
of Delhi to apprise the Committee of the action taken on the offer made by CSIR -NEERI, Nagpur. 
However, a response in the matter is still awaited. The Committee is of the view that considering 
the gravity of the situation, th e non-responsive attitude of the Government of NCT of Delhi is not 
the least desirable. The existing landfill sites in Delhi are adding to the pollution level in Delhi 
and require immediate attention of the Government.                                                         (Para 8.3) 
Further recommendation/Observations 
4.4 The Committee is perturbed to note that even after  a lapse of more th an two years 
since the Report of the Committee was presented in Parliament, the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change has failed to furnish any reply with regard to 
above mentioned  three (3) recommendations/observations of the Committee.  The said 
recommendations/observations of the Committee seem to have not been given due 
importance and weightage. This casual and insincere attitude of the Ministry is totally 

28 
 
unwarranted and uncalled for. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry should 
furnish a consolidated reply to recommendations/observations contained in the above paras 
at the earliest for the consideration of the Committee.  
  

29 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS 
Further recommendation/Observations 
 The Committee observes that the Ministry has only furnished the action taken by 
Municipal Corporations of Delhi along with other Departments/agencies of the NCT of 
Delhi.  The action taken by other respective Governments of NCR in the matter has not 
been furnished by the Ministry.  The Committee would again like to remind the Ministry 
that till the time p aving of unpaved roads/streets in the NCR Region is done along with the 
proper maintenance of the roads/streets, road dust would continue to remain an ar ea of 
concern and other efforts being made by various wings of these Governments to mitigate air 
pollution may not yield the desired results.  This issue must get due attention of all the 
concerned Governments and sincere efforts taken in this direction wo uld go a long way in 
addressing the problem of air pollution in the Region.  The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change must sensitise 
the concerned State Governments about the action to be taken in this regard.        (Para 3.3) 
The Committee notes that although the Ministry has responded regarding the 
inability of the Ministry of Railways to spare funds for pollution mitigation in Delhi and 
NCR, no response has been furnished in respect of Ministry of Civil Aviation.  After making 
recommendations/observations, the Committee expects a pointed reply from the Ministry in 
respect of the said recommendations/observations.  The Ministry should, therefore, furnish 
the response in respect of Ministry of Civil Aviation to the Committee at the earliest.  
                                                                                                                       (Para 3.6) 
The Committee is perturbed to note that even after a lapse of more than two years 
since the Report of the Committee was presented in Parliament, the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change has failed to furnish any reply with regard to 
above mentioned three (3) recommendations/observations of the Committee.  The said 
recommendations/observations of the Committee seem to have not been given due 
importance and weightage. This casual and insincere attitude of the Ministry is totally 
unwarranted and uncalled for. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry should 
furnish a consolidated reply to recommendations/observations contained in the above paras 
at the earliest for the consideration of the Committee.                                        (Para 4.4) 
 
  

30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_________________________ 
 
MINUTES 
_________________________ 
  

31 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 30 th November, 2021 in Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
             MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh -- Chairman 
              RAJYA SABHA 
2.  Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
3.  Shrimati Seema Dwivedi 
4.  Shri Joginipally Santosh Kumar 
5.  Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
6.  Shri Nabam Rebia 
             LOK SABHA 
7.  Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
8.  Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
9.  Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
10.  Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
11.  Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
12.  Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
13.  Shri Anurag Sharma 
14.  Shri Ram Shiromani 
            SECRETARIAT 
             Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
             Dr. (Smt.) Subhashree Panigrahi, Director 
             Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
             Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
             Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee.  
The Committee decided to take up the consid eration and adoption of the draft 348 th, 349 th, 
350th, 351st, 352nd, 353rd, 354th, 355th, 356th and 357th  reports of the Committee on the Action 
Taken by the Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 316th Report 
on 'Air Pollution in Delhi and National Capital Region'; the 324th  Report on „Status of Forests 
in India;  the 325th  Report on „An Expanded Role for the Department of Atomic Energy 
(DAE) in Cancer Treatment in India through An Enlarged Network of the Tata Memorial 
Centre (TM C)‟; and 351 st to 357 th Reports on the Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of the 
Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial Research; 
Science & Technology; Space; Environment, Forest and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, 
respectively. The Committee, then, considered the draft 348 th to 357th reports and adopted the 
same. 
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 1 st December, 2021.  The Committee also authorised the Chairman to 
decide the names of the Members for presentation/laying of the reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament.  
4. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10.25 a.m. 
 
 
 