  
 
  
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND         
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2025/ Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTY NINTH REPORT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH  
(DEMAND NO. 91) 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25th March, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha 25thMarch, 2025) 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
389 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website: https://www.sansad.in/rs 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTY NINTH REPORT 
 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2025-26) OF THE 
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH 
 (DEMAND NO. 91) 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25th March, 2025) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 25th March, 2025) 
 
 
 
  
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2025/ Phalguna, 1946 (Saka) 

 
C O N T E N T S 
  
      
  PAGES 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii)  
2. INTRODUCTION  (iii)  
 3. ACRONYMS  
 
(iv) 
4. REPORT 1-20  
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 21-23 
6. MINUTES           24-29 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
                                
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 26th September, 2024) 
 
 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita -    Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Narayanasa K. Bhandage  
3. Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
4. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
5. Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani 
7. Shri Sharad Pawar 
8. Shri Jairam Ramesh   
9. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
10. Vacant  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shrimati Sajda Ahmed 
12. Shri Alfred Kanngam S. Arthur 
13. Shri Pradyut Bordoloi  
14. Shri Phani Bhusan Choudhury 
15. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 
16. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
17. Shri Tapir Gao 
18. Adv K. Francis George  
19. Shri Eswarasamy K. 
20. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
21. Dr. Anand Kumar 
22. Shri Mohibbullah 
23. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
24. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
25. Shri Trivendra Singh Rawat 
26. Shrimati Himadri Singh 
27. Shri Tejasvi Surya  
28. Shri Durai Vaiko  
29. Shri Yaduveer Wadiyar 
30. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
31. Shri Akhilesh Yadav  
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
                                                 
 Nominated w.e.f. 23rd January, 2025. 

 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary 
Smt. Kusum Sudhir, Joint Secretary  
Shri Arun Kumar, Director  
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

 
INTRODUCTION  
 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been 
authorised by the Committee, present this ‘Three Hundred Eighty Ninth Report’ on 
Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. 
 
2.   The Committee considered the Demands for Grants (2025-26) pertaining to the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research in its meeting held on the 20th February, 
2023. It held detailed discussion with the Secretary and other officers of the Department 
of Scientific and Industrial Research.   
  
3.   The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research for providing the material and information, to enable it 
to examine the Demands for Grants of the Department for the year 2025-26. 
 
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the    
19th March, 2025. 
 
 
 
 
 (BHUBANESWAR  KALITA) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman,  
19th March, 2025  Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
Phalguna 28, 1946 (Saka)                                  and Technology, Environment, Forests and  Climate  Change, 
 Rajya Sabha . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 

 
ACRONYMS 
 
 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
APCTT Asian & Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology 
AESA Active Electronically Scanned Array 
APIs Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients  
A2K+ Access to Knowledge for Technology Development and Dissemination  
BIRD-CF Building Industrial R&D and Common Research Facilities 
CEL Central Electronics Limited 
CLAIM CSIR League for AI based Industrial Manifestation 
CRTDH Common Research and Technology Development Hubs 
CSIR Council of Scientific & Industrial Research  
DMRC Delhi Metro Rail Corporation 
DSIR Department of Scientific and Industrial Research  
EPC Engineering, Procurement, and Construction 
FIRST Fundamental & Innovative Research in Science of Tomorrow 
GSSF Generic Startup Support Facility 
HAL Hindustan Aeronautics Limited. 
IRD Industrial Research & Development 
KSMs Key Starting Materials 
MSDAC Multi-Section Digital Axle Counters 
MSME Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises 
NRDC National Research Development Corporation 
PACE Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research and Technology Development  
PDTC Programme for Development of Technologies for Commercialisation  
PIII Programme for Inspiring Inventors & Innovators 
PRISM Promoting Innovations in Individuals, Start-ups and MSMEs 
SPV Solar Photovoltaics  
SAF Sustainable Aviation Fuel 
TDF Technology Development Facility 
TSI Technology Scale-up Initiative 
 
(iv) 

1 
 
REPORT 
1.  INTRODUCTION 
1.1 The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) is one of the three 
Departments of the Ministry of Science and Technology. It was established in 1985, for the 
promotion of industrial research through indigenous technology promotion, development, 
utilization and transfer. The Department is entrusted with the following allocation of business:-  
(i) All matters concerning the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR). 
(ii) All matters relating to National Research Development Corporation (NRDC). 
(iii) All matters relating to Central Electronics Limited (CEL). 
(iv) Registration and Recognition of R&D Units. 
(v) Matters relating to UNCTAD and WIPO. 
(vi) National Register for Foreign Collaborations. 
(vii) Matters relating to creation of pool for temporary placement of Indian Scientists and 
Technologists. 
1.2. DSIR plays an instrumental role in accelerating the development of cutting-edge 
technologies by encouraging industries to significantly increase their investment in research and 
development. By facilitating the swift commercialization of laboratory innovations, DSIR 
effectively bridges the divide between scientific discovery and practical, real-world applications, 
ensuring that India remains at the forefront of technological progress. 
1.3. DSIR also functions through its attached autonomous institution, Council for Scientific and 
Industrial Research (CSIR) and the two public sector undertakings, National Research Development 
Corporation (NRDC) and Central Electronics Limited (CEL) to facilitate scientific and industrial 
research in the country. It also provides institutional host facilities to Asian & Pacific Centre for 
Transfer of Technology (APCTT). 
1.4. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment, Forests and Climate Change considered the Demands for Grants (2025-26) of the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research in its meeting held on 20th February, 2025. 
2. BUDGET ANALYSIS 
 
2.1 The following table shows the overall budgetary details of DSIR for the year 2024-25 (BE, 
RE & actual expenditure) and allocation made for the year 2025-26:- 
   (₹ in crore) 
 
Scheme 
 
B.E. 2024-
25 
 
 
R.E. 2024-25 
 
Actual 
(upto 
31.12.2024) 
 
 
% of 
Expenditure 
vis-à-vis R.E. 
 
 
B.E. 2025-26 
Establishment Expenditure 
of the Centre (Secretariat) & 
Contribution to Asian & Pacific 
Centre for Transfer of 
Technology (UN Body) 
25.61 24.56 18.08 73.62  
 
25.13 
 
Central Sector Schemes 
Industrial Research & 
Development 
16.50 10.38 4.75 45.76 16.50 

2 
 
(IRD) 
Assistance to PSEs for Other 
Scientific Research 
(CEL and NRDC) 
15.50 12.15 9 74.07 15.50 
Total 
(Central Sector Schemes) 
32 22.53 13.75 61.03 32 
 
Other Central Sector Expenditure (Autonomous Bodies) 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) 
 
National Laboratories 5835.80 5877.24 4231 71.99 6127.57 
Capacity Building and Human 
Resource Development 
430 426.21 290.85 68.24 473.08 
Total (CSIR) 6265.80 6303.45   4521.85 71.74 6600.65 
Grand Total  6323.41   6350.54 4553.68 71.71 6657.78 
 
 
2.2  The Committee notes from the above table 2024-25 R.E. allocation of the Department 
decreased under all the heads except a marginal increase under the head National Laboratories 
(CSIR). The Committee also observes that average utilization of R.E. allocation of the Department 
during 2024-25 is just 71.71%. The performance in respect of the Central Sector Schemes - 
‘Industrial Research & Development’ is far from satisfactory. The Department could spend an 
abysmal 45.76 % of its revised allocation under this head.  
2.3 The Committee notes with concern the sub-optimal utilization of funds under the 
Central Sector Scheme - ‘Industrial Research & Development’, as over half of the allocated 
funds remain unutilized as the current financial year enters its final quarter. In light of this, 
the Committee emphasizes the critical need for the Department to expedite expenditure and 
ensure the optimal deployment of resources within the remaining timeframe of the financial 
year. To preempt such inefficiencies in subsequent years, the Committee strongly advocates 
for the institutionalization of robust quarterly monitoring mechanisms. 
2.4 The Committee sought details of the budgetary allocation proposed by the Department vis-à-
vis the amount actually allocated to it for the year 2025-26. The Department informed that against a 
proposal of ₹ 7283.24 crore, an amount of ₹ 6657.78 has been allocated, which is about 8.59% 
lesser than its budgetary demand. Thus, here is an overall shortfall of ₹ 625.46 crore in the actual 
allocation to the Department. 
2.5 In response to a query about the likely impact of this shortfall in actual allocation over the 
proposed budget and the strategy of the Department for dealing with the challenges arising thereof, 
the Department submitted that:– 
 The B.E. demanded for IRD Scheme, [Promoting Innovations in Individuals, Start-ups and 
MSMEs (PRISM)] was ₹ 3.10 crore for the Financial Year 2025-26. However, only ₹ 1.50 
crore have been allocated under the scheme. This would substantially impact the operation 
of the scheme as the Department needs to fulfill the commitment of ongoing projects from 
the previous years and fund new projects. 
 
  CSIR constituent laboratories across the country have been grouped under the Theme based 
Clusters to perform their activities and synergize to achieve the objectives of bringing in 
sector-specific industry focus, align to stakeholder needs and enhance business focus. 
Although reduction in the projected allocation and actual budgetary allocation may 
potentially affect financial planning and participative performance of R&D projects in 
general and new future plans, CSIR internal resources would be utilized to supplement CSIR 
driven R&D projects. Further CSIR is collaborating with other Departments/ Ministries for 

3 
 
sponsoring its projects. 
 Budget reductions can have a significant impact on the implementation of various activities 
under the two schemes of NRDC, Programme for Inspiring Inventors & Innovators (PIII) 
and Programme for Development of Technologies for Commercialization (PDTC). Under 
PIII scheme, most of the funds are utilized for technology development and the projects 
have already been sanctioned and any delay in release of funds, which is done milestone-
wise, can result in delay of completion of the projects and may even lead to reduction in 
operation and achievement of targets. 
 
2.6 Recognizing the implications of the shortfall in allocation on the Department’s programmes 
and initiatives, the Committee asked about the absolute bare minimum increase needed to sustain its 
key programmes. The Department submitted that a minimum additional allocation of ₹363.92 crore 
over and above the B.E. 2025-26, is needed to meet its fund requirements. The below chart depicts 
the difference between proposed and actual allocation for 2025-26, along with bare minimum 
additional allocation required by the Department to sustain its key programmes. 
 
 
2.7 The Department informed that it has additional requirement of ₹363.92 crore to fulfill the 
commitments of ongoing projects and achieving targets for FY 2025-26. The reasons and 
justifications for additional fund requirement given by the Department are summarized in the table 
below:- 
 
(₹ crore) 
Scheme BE 2025-26 Bare Minimum 
Increase needed 
Reasons 
 Industrial Research & 
Development 
16.50 0.50  
( for PRISM) 
To fulfill the 
commitments of 
ongoing projects and 
achieving targets for FY 
2025-26 
 
Assistance to PSEs for 15.50 13.42  To fulfill the 
₹ 7283.24croreproposed₹ 6657.78 crore allocated₹ 363.92 crore additional required2000300040005000600070008000B.E. Proposed B.E. Allocated Rupees (in crores)B.E. proposed, B.E. allocated and additional bare minimum required

4 
 
Other Scientific Research 
(CEL and NRDC) 
(only for NRDC) commitments of 
ongoing projects and 
achieving targets for FY 
2025-26.  
 
CSIR 
(National Laboratories) 
6127.57 350  To contribute towards 
Sustainable 
Development Goals and 
Key Security STI 
demands through 
Indigenous Research. 
 
To meet out routine 
requirements of CSIR 
 
CSIR 
(Capacity Building and 
Human Resource 
Development) 
 
473.08 Nil Nil 
Total 6632.65 363.92 - 
 
2.8 During the meeting, the Department informed the Committee that in 2024-25, 62% of the 
allocated funds were spent on pensions and salaries, leaving only 38% for R&D and infrastructure. 
Within this, 7% supports capacity-building initiatives such as Junior Research Fellowships (JRF), 
Senior Research Fellowships (SRF), and PhD programmes. Therefore, only 31 per cent is available 
for research. This leaves minimal scope for addressing infrastructure deficits or scaling innovation. 
The Department has introduced new schemes to optimize resource use, including pilot plants for 
industry-ready technologies, repayable facility creation projects, and prioritized equipment 
upgrades. Despite these efforts, a funding shortfall persists, exacerbated by ageing infrastructure 
across CSIR’s 70 year old laboratories, necessitating urgent investments in R&D blocks, staff 
quarters, guest houses, and renovation of Director’s residences. The Department also informed that 
it projected a requirement of ₹7,210 crore but was allocated ₹6,600 crore, resulting in a deficit of 
₹600 crore. Of this, ₹363.92 crore has been identified as a bare minimum additional requirement to 
sustain critical R&D activities and infrastructure projects, with ₹350 crore earmarked for CSIR and 
₹16 crore for DSIR, NRDC, and CEL. However, the desirable allocation for the Department would 
be ₹600 crore to fully address the infrastructure gaps, support pilot plants for proof-of-concept 
initiatives, and establish next-generation research facilities.  
2.9 The Committee finds merit in the Department’s request for an additional budgetary 
allocation to the tune of ₹ 363.92 crore, over and above the provision made in B.E. 2025-26. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department may seek the requisite 
additional allocation from the Ministry of Finance at the R.E. stage.  
 
2.10 The following Chart shows the sector-wise distribution of the B.E. 2025-26 allocation (₹ 
6657.78 crore) of the Department:- 
    

5 
 
 
 
2.11 It can be observed from the above chart that out of the total B.E. allocations, more than 99% 
has been allocated to CSIR. The central sector schemes/projects of the Department, which 
comprise of two sub-heads ‘Industrial Research & Development’ and ‘Assistance to PSEs for 
Other Scientific Research’, together with establishment expenditures, constitute the remain portion 
of the total outlay.  
2.12 The Committee inquired about the major thrust areas of the Department and the strategy for 
utilizing the allocation in B.E. 2025-26. The Department submitted that in 2025-26, it will focus 
on the following thrust areas:– 
 CSIR has identified several major mission projects such as Loitering Munitions, Deep Sea 
Autonomous Underwater Vehicle, Microbiomes, Assessment and mitigation of geo hazard 
in the Himalayas, CAR-T Cell (ACT-CID), APIs and KSMs for Affordable Healthcare 2.0, 
CLAIM (CSIR League for AI based Industrial Manifestation), CSIR Hydrogen Mission 
Phase – II, Bioresource Conservation and Prospection and CSIR Seaweed Mission Phase-III 
which will be initiated from FY 2025-26; 
 NRDC will promote, develop and commercialize technologies/know how/ inventions/ 
patents/ processes emanating from various national R&D institutions; and 
 CEL will commercially exploit indigenous technologies developed by National Laboratories 
& other R&D Institutions in the country for in-house technology development and 
upgradation of products. Major thrust areas of CEL will be projects undertaken for 
Development of Fail Safe Multiplexer Systems for Railways and Development of 
Trans/Receive (T/R) modules for Indian Radar.   
2.13 The Committee analyzed the general trends in total B.E allocation towards the two major 
heads, viz., Central Sector Schemes/Projects and CSIR, since 2023-24. The following graphs depict 
these trends:    
0.86%99.14%Major budgetary allocationsOthers Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)Total Gross Budget -₹ 6657.78crore

6 
     2.14 It can be inferred from the above charts that for the Central Sector Schemes, the allocations have sharply declined since 2023-24 and have remain constant since then. However, in the case of allocations to CSIR, a general rising trend can be observed.   3.  CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES  3.1 The Department has two umbrella schemes, viz., ‘Industrial Research and Development’ and ‘Assistance to PSEs’.  The Committee was informed that, under Industrial R&D, the Department implements the following sub-schemes:- (i) Promoting Innovations in Individuals, Start-ups and MSMEs (PRISM), wherein financial assistance is extended to independent innovators for converting innovative ideas into demonstrable working models/prototypes/processes that may take the form of new or improved products, processes, or services and assist them to become incubatees/techno-entrepreneur.  (ii) Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research and Technology Development (PACE), wherein support is provided to industries and institutions for development and demonstration of innovative technologies. (iii) Building Industrial R&D and Common Research Facilities (BIRD-CF), wherein support is provided for creation of Common Research and Technology Development Hubs (CRTDH) for use by entrepreneurs and industries. 
45.033232B.E. 2023-24 B.E. 2024-25 B.E. 2025-26Trend in Central Sector Scheme Allocation
5675.516265.86600.65B.E. 2023-24 B.E. 2024-25 B.E. 2025-26Trend in allocation to CSIR

7 
 
(iv) Access to Knowledge for Technology Development and Dissemination (A2K+), wherein 
studies and conferences in up-coming areas of industrial research are taken up, besides 
undertaking a Technology Development and Utilization Programme for Women. 
 
3.2 The financial outlay with respect to B.E., R.E. and Actual Expenditure (AE) during the year 
2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-2025 is shown in the table below:- 
(₹ crore) 
Year CRTDH PACE A2K+ PRISM 
BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE BE RE AE 
2022-23 17.50 17.50 10.54 3.00 3.00 0.04 5.00 5.00 2.93 3.00 3.50 3.47 
2023-24 14.50 14.50 0.00 2.35 2.15 0.07 3.45 2.95 0.96 3.00 3.00 3.00 
2024-25* 11.70 5.00 2.24 0.70 1.34 0.09 2.60 2.60 1.78 1.50 1.44 1.40 # 
* till 31-12-2024             #Rs.0.80 crore through CNA; Rs.0.60 crore through DBT 
 
3.3 In response to a query of the Committee, the Department submitted that some of the 
achievements of these schemes during the year are:– 
 Two new technology development and demonstration projects were approved under PACE 
during FY 2024-25 and a tripartite agreement was also signed.  
 500 TRL 6 + level technologies were scouted and assessed and published as four 
compendiums as part of A2K+ studies. 
 Under PRISM, 10 new proposals were supported, 11 projects were successfully monitored 
and completed & 3 start-ups & incubatee firms were generated. 
3.4 The Committee expresses concern over the substantial gap between budgetary 
estimates and actual expenditures. The Committee observes that in several instances, the 
actual expenditure remains significantly lower than the budget estimates and even the revised 
estimates, indicating underutilization of allocated funds. Such underutilization may hinder 
the intended impact of these schemes and delay the realization of their objectives. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department take proactive measures to ensure 
effective fund utilization by addressing administrative bottlenecks, streamlining project 
approvals, and enhancing monitoring mechanisms. 
3.5 The Committee appreciates the achievements made under these schemes. However, the 
Committee believes that a more robust approach is necessary to scale up these achievements 
and expand the reach of these schemes. The Department should consider increasing outreach 
efforts to encourage wider participation from start-ups, MSMEs, and research institutions, 
ensuring that more innovators benefit from these programs. 
3.6 Under the umbrella scheme ‘Assistance to PSEs’, the Department provides support to 
NRDC and CEL. NRDC, established in 1953, is mandated to commercialize the technologies 
developed by all the research laboratories and institutes of CSIR and other public funded research 
institutes, universities including autonomous research institutions. It undertakes 
programmes/activities under two promotional schemes, viz., Programme for Inspiring Inventors & 
Innovators (PIII) and Programme for Development of Technologies for Commercialization 
(PDTC). PIII is planned to encourage the innovators in developing new innovative technologies & 
products as well as rendering technical and financial assistance for protection of inventions by filing 
IPR in India and abroad. To achieve this Corporation carries out various activities like awarding 
meritorious inventions, conduct awareness programmes, protection of IP’s, evaluation of 

8 
 
technologies, set up incubation facilities, conduct EDP programmes, etc. The major objective of 
PDTC is to provide support to lab scale technologies for making it acceptable by the industry 
through value-addition, dissemination of information of such developed technologies to industries 
and provide part of capital as seed fund.  
3.7 The financial outlay with respect to B.E., R.E. and Actual Expenditure (AE) during the year 
2022-23, 2023-24 and 2024-2025 is shown in the table below:-  
(₹ crores) 
Financial Year Scheme BE RE AE 
2022-23 PIII 5.50 5.00 3.50 
PDTC 5.00 5.00 4.31 
2023-24 PIII 8.50 8.00 4.25 
PDTC 4.00 4.00 4.00 
2024-25 PIII 9.00 8.60 6.75 
PDTC 3.00 2.40 2.25 
3.8 In response to a query, the Department informed that NRDC has proposed to take-up a new 
scheme viz. Start-up driven Technology Scale-up Initiative (TSI). By fostering collaboration 
between startups and Research Institutes (RI), the scheme aims to leverage existing research to 
catalyze the development and commercialization of new technologies. The proposed scheme will 
have the following two major components:  (i) Technology Development Facility (TDF) (ii) 
Generic Startup Support Facility (GSSF). Through initiatives like the Technology Development 
Facility (TDF) and the Generic Startup Support Facility (GSSF), the scheme will provide crucial 
resources and expertise to address the unique challenges faced by startups and women-led 
enterprises. By offering financial support, access to research facilities, mentorship, and intellectual 
property assistance, the scheme will seek to facilitate the seamless transition of innovative ideas 
into market-ready products. 
3.9 The Department also informed the Committee that NRDC has developed strong links and 
has networked with various R&D organisations in the country for marketing of their technologies 
and providing IPR related services. Its endeavour has resulted in transfer of technologies to about 
5100 entrepreneurs in India and abroad and has filed more than 2100 patents. The number of 
technologies licensed over the period is given in the table below:- 
 
Year 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25*  
No. of Technologies 
Commercialized 
70 20 41 27 
* till 31.12.2024 
3.10 The Committee enquired regarding details of revenue generated by NRDC and it informed 
that the activities of National Research Development Corporation are for promotion of innovation 
and as such no revenue is generated under the schemes & programme. However, the corporation 
generates its revenue under its commercial activities which are as follows:- 
A. Technology Transfer: The technologies acquired by NRDC get transformed through value 
addition and are offered to industries for commercial exploitation. The technology transfer is 

9 
 
facilitated by NRDC and the R&D organization to the industry for a consideration which forms 
the core revenue stream of NRDC.  
B. IP Consultancy: NRDC has the expertise and infrastructure to provide consultancy for the 
protection of intellectual properties originating from various sources. The services are provided 
to private industry, R&D institutes as well as to individual inventors. With the knowledge and 
the experience in handling IP, NRDC conducts various IPR training programs to stake-holders.  
C. Consultancy Projects: With its inherent strength in handling technology transfer, managing 
IP, supporting start-ups NRDC has undertaken several projects for providing support to various 
stake-holders. 
D. IPR Management: NRDC has the expertise and infrastructure to provide consultancy for the 
protection of intellectual properties originating from various sources. The services are provided 
to Pvt. Industry, R&D institutes as well as to individual inventors. NRDC is associated with 
several institutions such as NIOT, IITs, PGIMER, Chandigarh, NIFTEM, BEML, Indian Navy 
and NTPC to provide support for IPR management. 
3.11 The revenue generated from all the commercial activities of NRDC is given in the table 
below:  
Year 2021-22 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25*  
No. of Technologies 
Commercialized 
70.00 20.00 41.00 27.00 
Revenue earned from commercial 
activities (₹ lakhs) 
1144.66 649.76 1412.38 1155.00 
* till 31.12.2024 
3.12 The Committee acknowledges the vital role played by NRDC in facilitating the 
commercialization of technologies developed by CSIR, public-funded research institutions, 
universities, and autonomous research bodies. However, the Committee notes with concern 
the disparity between budgetary allocations, revised estimates, and actual expenditures across 
multiple financial years, particularly in the PIII scheme, where the actual expenditure has 
remained consistently lower than the allocated amount. The Committee recommends that the 
Department take necessary measures to ensure the optimal utilization of funds by enhancing 
project execution efficiency, streamlining approval processes, and addressing any institutional 
challenges that may be causing delays. 
3.13 The Committee welcomes the NRDC’s proposal to launch the Start-up Driven 
Technology Scale-up Initiative (TSI) with its two major components, namely, the Technology 
Development Facility (TDF) and the Generic Startup Support Facility (GSSF). Given the 
critical role of start-ups in driving technological innovation and economic growth, the 
Committee emphasizes the importance of fostering stronger linkages between research 
institutions and start-ups to accelerate the commercialization of innovative technologies. The 
Committee recommends that the Department provide adequate financial and infrastructural 
support to ensure the successful implementation of this initiative, particularly in addressing 
the unique challenges faced by start-ups and women-led enterprises.  
3.14 CEL is another PSE under the administrative control of the DSIR. It was established in 1974 
with an objective to commercially exploit the indigenous technologies developed by National 

10 
 
Laboratories and R&D Institutions in the country. It is carrying out commercial production as well 
as R&D in four fields: (i) Solar Photovoltaics (SPV) (ii) Railways Electronics (iii) Strategic 
Electronics (iv) Security & Surveillance Systems. It is the pioneer and leading manufacturer of SPV 
cells, modules and systems and Railway Safety Signaling Equipment. In the field of strategic 
electronics, it is the only indigenous manufacturer of phase control modules, which is a key element 
of phased array radar. 
 
3.15  The Committee enquired about the current product portfolio of CEL. The Department 
informed that CEL specializes in end-to-end manufacturing of technical ceramics, particularly 
ferrite-based components such as Phase Control Modules (PCMs), which are integral to defence 
systems like the Swathi Weapon Locating Radar and Troop Level Radar, with cumulative supplies 
exceeding ₹850 crore over 15 years. The company’s expertise extends to advanced defence 
applications, including the production of ceramic radar domes (radomes) for missile systems, which 
are placed on missile nose to primarily protect underlying electronics while maintaining technical 
requirement of the whole system. CEL further distinguishes itself through the indigenous 
development of critical import substitutes such as isolators, circulators, and Piezo Ceramics (PZT) 
for ammunition and civil applications, alongside strategic materials like Cadmium Zinc Telluride 
(CZT) substrates for advanced imaging systems in collaboration with DRDO. 
3.16 In the railway sector, CEL competes with private entities in manufacturing and upgrading 
digital axle counter systems, having supplied over 12,700 Single Section Digital Axle Counters 
(SSDAC), 6,100 High Availability SSDACs, and 10,700 detection points for Multi-Section Digital 
Axle Counters (MSDAC) since 2002. The company’s collaboration with Indian Railways includes 
the development of a Broken Rail Detection System for Delhi Metro, with potential for nationwide 
deployment. Concurrently, CEL has expanded its footprint in IT and smart infrastructure, delivering 
Integrated Security Solutions, IoT based systems for power and water management, and Blockchain 
driven recruitment automation platforms implemented in institutions such as AIIMS Delhi, UP 
Police Recruitment Board, and Delhi Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC). Notably, CEL has 
operationalized Smart Classrooms in 709 schools in Uttarakhand and established a production line 
for 65 and 75 inches Smart Boards, positioning itself as the sole PSU in this domain. Additionally, 
CEL’s legacy in renewable energy is marked by its pioneering role in developing country’s first 
solar cells and modules. The company continues to support the renewable sector through 
Engineering, Procurement, and Construction (EPC) services for solar projects, Project Management 
Consultancy, and maintenance of existing installations. 
3.17  The Committee also sought details of CEL's plans for technology development and 
innovation to maintain its competitiveness in the market. The Department informed that CEL has 
outlined a strategic roadmap for technology development and innovation to sustain its market 
competitiveness, anchored in proactive adaptation to emerging trends and collaborative 
partnerships. Recognizing the risk of technological obsolescence, particularly in defence 
applications, CEL is transitioning from legacy systems such as Passive Electronically Scanned 
Array (PESA) to advanced solutions like Active Electronically Scanned Array (AESA). This 
includes collaboration with a defence PSU to develop Transmit-Receive modules for AESA, which 
will replace the existing Phase Control Modules (PCMs) in phased manner, ensuring alignment 
with next-generation radar systems. To bolster innovation, CEL is strengthening ties with academic 
institutions and research organisations for technology transfers and joint development initiatives, 
particularly in defence and railway sectors. This collaborative framework supports the indigenous 
upgradation of existing products and the creation of new solutions tailored to dynamic market 
demands. In the IT domain, CEL is enhancing its Integrated Security and Surveillance Solutions 
through AI driven advancements, such as facial recognition, behaviour analysis, and real-time threat 
detection systems for smart cities, critical infrastructure, and corporate security. Concurrently, the 
company is expanding IoT-based security applications for power plants, transport hubs, and 
government facilities, alongside modernising CCTV technologies with higher resolution, cloud-

11 
 
based monitoring, and encrypted data protocols. Further, CEL is scaling its Smart Education 
portfolio by integrating AI-powered learning analytics into its smart board manufacturing line, 
enabling interactive and customized digital classrooms for educational institutions and corporate 
training programmes. The company is also prioritising e-learning platform development to broaden 
access to advanced educational tools.  
3.18 The Committee enquired regarding major challenges being faced by CEL and strategies 
being implemented to address these challenges. The Committee was informed that CEL had the 
mandate to commercialize technologies developed in the national laboratories. However, absence of 
any corresponding provision in the relevant guidelines/rules/provisions pertaining to those national 
laboratories creates an anomalous situation putting CEL in a disadvantageous situation. In the field 
of renewable energy, CEL despite being a promising initial player in the field of solar 
photovoltaics, has suffered huge losses to the tune of ₹ 280 crore cumulative in the last 10-11 years. 
Technological advancement in the area coupled with cheaper import products has dented the 
profitability and adversely affected the returns from the sector. While CEL’s defence, railway, and 
IT/security verticals remain profitable, these face risks of technological obsolescence, slow growth, 
and rising costs, exacerbated by competition from private and multinational entities. Despite 50 
years of operation, CEL’s turnover remains modest (₹150–340 crore), necessitating urgent strategic 
recalibration to avoid stagnation.  
 
3.19 To mitigate these challenges, CEL is pursuing a multipronged strategy. This includes 
deepening collaborations with national laboratories (CSIR, DRDO), defence PSUs (BEL, HAL), 
and State Governments to align with market needs and access emerging technologies. The company 
is diversifying its portfolio, leveraging its recent Mini Ratna status to expand into new domains 
such as AI driven surveillance systems, IoT based infrastructure solutions, and smart education 
technologies, including scalable smart board manufacturing with potential applications in IT 
hardware. Strategic partnerships with academia and industry aim to counter obsolescence through 
joint R&D and process modernization. CEL is transitioning from component manufacturing to 
subsystem and system-level supply to enhance revenue, while exploring Public Private Partnerships 
(PPP) for ventures like Tier III data centers. A proposed subsidiary is under consideration to 
streamline CSR activities, fostering community engagement in health, education, and skill 
development. Additionally, plans for public listing of shares, pending approvals, aim to raise capital 
for establishing an in-house R&D centre, ensuring sustained innovation. 
 
3.20 In its presentation during the meeting, the Department provided a brief overview of the 
financial turnaround of the company. CEL’s sustained operational excellence and improved fiscal 
performance were recognized through its elevation to "Mini Ratna" (Category-I) status. Over the 
period spanning FY 2019–20 to FY 2023–24, the company demonstrated robust growth, with its 
turnover rising from ₹246 crore to ₹344.03 crore, and projections indicating a further increase to 
₹500 crore in the current fiscal year. Concurrently, Profit Before Tax (PBT) surged from ₹6.36 
crore to ₹78.88 crore, reflecting enhanced operational efficiency and profitability. The net worth of 
the company also witnessed a substantial rise, escalating from ₹80.76 crore to ₹193.64 crore during 
the same period. In FY 2023–24, CEL contributed ₹11.87 crore as dividend to the Government of 
India, underscoring its renewed financial viability. Additionally, the company settled longstanding 
employee liabilities, disbursing ₹18 crore towards arrears of interest linked to the 2007 wage 
revision. These milestones collectively underscore CEL’s successful strides in stabilizing its 
financial health, aligning with national objectives of public sector revitalization and accountability. 
3.21 The Committee commends the Department for the successful revival of CEL, which 
was once a struggling PSU on the brink of disinvestment. The remarkable transformation of 
CEL stands as a testament to the potential of strategic interventions in revitalizing public 
sector enterprises. The Committee expresses its optimism that CEL will continue on this 
trajectory of growth and excellence, eventually attaining Maha Ratna status. CEL’s 

12 
 
resurgence serves as an exemplary model of how a well-executed turnaround strategy can 
reinvigorate a PSU, reinforcing its role in advancing national technological and industrial 
capabilities.  
3.22 In view of CEL’s strategic significance, the Committee strongly recommends that the 
Department provide consistent policy and financial support to enable CEL to overcome its 
current challenges and capitalize on growth opportunities. The Department should ensure 
that CEL receives adequate institutional backing to secure its position as a leading player in 
defence electronics, railway electronics, IT-enabled smart infrastructure, and renewable 
energy. The Committee further advises the Department to submit a detailed roadmap 
outlining the steps required to enhance CEL’s operational efficiency, financial viability, and 
technological competitiveness. Strengthening CEL’s capabilities will not only contribute to 
national self-reliance in critical technology sectors but also reinforce India’s public sector 
enterprises as key drivers of innovation and industrial growth. 
4. COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR)  
 
4.1  CSIR, established in 1942, functions as an autonomous entity under the administrative 
purview of the Department. Renowned for its pioneering Research and Development (R&D) 
capabilities across diverse domains of science and technology, CSIR operates as a modern R&D 
institution with a pan-India footprint. Its infrastructure comprises a robust network of 37 national 
laboratories, 39 outreach centres, 1 Innovation Complex, and 3 specialized units, reflecting its 
extensive engagement in scientific advancement. 
4.2 CSIR has two non-central sector schemes, viz., (i) National Laboratories Scheme; and (ii) 
Capacity Building and Human Resource Development. While the former covers a wide range of 
R&D and S&T aspects, latter deals with human resources and different awards. 
4.3 The list of national laboratories of CSIR along with their respective areas of research is 
given in the below table:- 
S. No. Name of the Institute Key Research Area 
1 CSIR-Centre for Cellular and Molecular 
Biology 
(CSIR-CCMB), Hyderabad 
Developmental Biology; Cell Biology; Molecular Biology; 
Disease Biology; Genomics and Genetics; Bioinformatics and 
Computational Biology; Biotechnology; Structural Biology 
2 CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute (CSIR-
CDRI), Lucknow 
Medicinal Chemistry; Pharmacology and Toxicology; Natural 
Products and Traditional Medicine; Molecular Biology and 
Biotechnology; Drug Delivery and Formulation; Infectious 
Diseases; Cancer Biology and Oncology 
3 CSIR-Central Food Technological Research 
Institute (CSIR-CFTRI), Mysore 
Food Processing and Preservation; Food Chemistry and 
Biochemistry; Food Microbiology and Safety; Food 
Biotechnology and Fermentation; Sensory Science and 
Consumer Research; Nutrition and Functional Foods; Food 
Engineering and Packaging 
4 CSIR-Central Institute of Medicinal and 
Aromatic Plants (CSIR-CIMAP), Lucknow 
Plant Breeding and Cultivation; Phytochemistry and Natural 
Product Chemistry; Pharmacology and Therapeutic 
Evaluation; Herbal Formulations and Product Development; 
Biotechnology and Molecular Biology; Conservation and 
Sustainable Utilization; Agrochemicals and Plant Protection 
5 CSIR-Institute of Genomics and Integrative 
Biology 
(CSIR-IGIB), Delhi 
Human  Genetics and Disease Genomics; Functional    
Genomics and Transcriptomics; Proteomics and 
Metabolomics; Microbial Genomics and Microbiome Studies; 
Systems   Biology   and Computational Biology; Biomedical 
Informatics   and   Data Science; Precision       Medicine and 
Personalized Healthcare 
6 CSIR-Institute of Himalayan Bioresource 
Technology 
(CSIR-IHBT), Palampur 
Medicinal and Aromatic Plants; Plant Biotechnology and 
Molecular Biology; Natural Product Chemistry; Agroforestry 
and Soil Conservation; Microbial  
Biotechnology; High-Altitude Crop Cultivation; Bioreource 

13 
 
Valorization and Entrepreneurship 
7 CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology 
(CSIR-IICB), Kolkata 
Drug  Discovery  and Development; Immunology and Host-
Pathogen; Structural Biology and Biophysics Interactions; 
Molecular Genetics and Genomics; Neurobiology and 
Neurodegenerative Diseases; Cell      Biology and Signaling 
Pathways; Cancer   Biology   and Oncology 
8 CSIR-Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine 
(CSIR-IIIM), Jammu 
Natural Products Chemistry; Medicinal Chemistry and Drug 
Discovery; Pharmacology and Drug Development; 
Bioinformatics and Computational Drug Design; Natural 
Product-Based Therapeutics; Phytopharmaceuticals and 
Herbal Medicines; Biotechnology and Bioprocessing 
9 CSIR-Institute of Microbial Technology (CSIR-
IMTECH), Chandigarh 
Microbial Genetics and Molecular Biology; Genomics and 
Functional Genomics; Enzyme Technology and Biocatalysis; 
Fermentation Technology and Bioprocessing; Bioinformatics 
and Computational Biology; Microbial Biotechnology for 
Healthcare and Agriculture; Antimicrobial Resistance and 
Infectious Diseases 
10 CSIR-Indian Institute of Toxicology Research 
(CSIR-IITR), Lucknow 
Molecular Toxicology; Environmental Toxicology; 
Computational Toxicology; Toxicogenomics and Biomarkers; 
Risk Assessment and Regulatory Toxicology; Alternative 
Methods to Animal Testing 
11 CSIR-National Botanical Research Institute 
(CSIR-NBRI), Lucknow 
Plant Taxonomy and Systematics; Plant Physiology and 
Biochemistry; Plant Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering; 
Medicinal Plants and Phytochemistry; Plant Ecology and 
Biodiversity Conservation; Phytoremediation and 
Environmental Biotechnology; Plant-Microbe Interactions 
and Symbiosis 
12 CSIR-Central Leather Research Institute (CSIR-
CLRI), Chennai 
Leather Processing Technology; Biotechnology and Enzyme 
Applications; Leather Product Engineering and Design; 
Leather Quality Assessment and Testing; Leather Waste 
Utilization and Pollution Control; Leather Conservation and 
Restoration 
13 CSIR-Central Electrochemical Research 
Institute 
(CSIR-CECRI), Karaikudi 
Energy Storage and Conversion; Functional Materials; 
Electrochemical Sensors and Biosensors; Electrochemical 
Synthesis; Environmental Electrochemistry; Corrosion 
Science and Engineering; Advanced Analytical Techniques 
14 CSIR-Central Salt & Marine
 Chemicals Research Institute CSIR-
CSMCRI), Bhavnagar 
Salt Chemistry and Technology; Marine Biotechnology; 
Desalination and Water Treatment; Marine Natural Products 
Chemistry; Environmental Science and Engineering; 
Sustainable Coastal Development; Renewable Energy from 
Marine Resources 
15 CSIR-Central Institute of Mining and Fuel 
Research (CSIR-CIMFR), Dhanbad 
Coal and Mineral Exploration; Mine Planning and Design; 
Rock Mechanics and Ground Control; Coal Beneficiation and 
Utilization; Environmental Impact Assessment; Mine Safety 
and Disaster Management; Clean Coal Technologies 
16 CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Technology 
(CSIR-IICT), Hyderabad 
Organic Chemistry; Catalysis and Chemical Engineering; 
Drug Discovery and Development; Materials Chemistry; 
Process Intensification and Green Chemistry; Agrochemicals 
and Crop Protection; Renewable Energy and Sustainable 
Technologies 
17 CSIR-Indian Institute of Petroleum 
(CSIR-IIP), Dehradun 
Refining Technology; Petrochemicals and Downstream 
Processing; Biofuels and Alternative Energy; Catalysis and 
Catalyst Development; Environmental Protection and 
Pollution Control; Process Optimization and Modeling; 
Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology 
18 CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory (CSIR-
NCL), Pune 
Organic Synthesis and Catalysis; Materials Chemistry and 
Nanotechnology; Polymer Science and Engineering; Catalytic 
Processes and Chemical Engineering; Sustainable Chemistry 
and Green Technologies; Analytical Chemistry and 
Spectroscopy; Drug Discovery and Medicinal Chemistry 
19 CSIR-North-East Institute of Science & 
Technology 
(CSIR-NEIST), Jorhat 
Natural Product Chemistry and Medicinal Chemistry; Organic 
Synthesis and Catalysis; Materials Science and 
Nanotechnology; Biotechnology and Bioengineering; 
Renewable Energy and Sustainable Development; 

14 
 
Environmental Science and Pollution Control; Traditional 
Knowledge and Ethnopharmacology 
20 CSIR-National Institute of Interdisciplinary 
Science & Technology (CSIR-NIIST), 
Thiruvananthapuram 
Materials Science and Engineering; Nanotechnology and 
Nanomaterials; Chemical Sciences and catalysis; 
Biotechnology and Biomedical Sciences; Environmental 
Science and Engineering; Process Engineering and 
Optimization; Energy and Sustainability 
21 CSIR-Advanced Materials and Processes 
Research Institute (CSIR-AMPRI), Bhopal 
Material Synthesis and Characterization; Advanced 
Manufacturing Techniques; Biomaterials; Functional 
Coatings; Environmental Remediation Technologies; 
Nanomaterials; Composite Materials 
22 CSIR-Central Building Research Institute 
(CSIR-CBRI), Roorkee 
Building Materials Research; Structural Engineering; Housing 
and Urban Development Energy-Efficient Buildings; Disaster 
Mitigation and Management; Heritage Conservation 
23 CSIR-Central Glass and Ceramic Research 
Institute (CSIR-CGCRI), Kolkata 
Glass Technology; Ceramic Engineering; Biomaterials; 
Nanomaterials; Advanced Functional Materials; 
Environmental Materials; Heritage Conservation 
24 CSIR-Central Mechanical Engineering Research 
Institute (CSIR-CMERI), Durgapur 
Renewable Energy Technologies; Advanced Manufacturing 
Technologies; Robotics and Automation; Sustainable 
Infrastructure Development; Agricultural 
Engineering; Automotive Engineering; Materials Science and 
Engineering 
25 CSIR-Central Road Research Institute (CSIR-
CRRI), New Delhi 
Bridge Engineering and Structures; Geotechnical 
Engineering; Flexible Pavements; Pavement Evaluation; 
Rigid Pavements; Traffic Engineering and Safety; Transport 
Planning and Environment 
 
26 CSIR-Institute of Minerals and Materials 
Technology 
(CSIR-IMMT), Bhubaneshwar 
Mineral Processing and Beneficiation; Extractive Metallurgy 
and Metal Extraction; Materials Synthesis 
and Characterization; Surface Engineering and Corrosion 
Protection; Biomaterials and Biomedical Applications; 
Nanomaterials and Nanotechnology; Environmental 
Remediation and Waste Utilization 
27 CSIR-National Aerospace Laboratories (CSIR-
NAL), Bengaluru 
Aircraft Design and Development; Propulsion Systems; 
Aerodynamics and Flight Dynamics; Aerospace Materials 
and Structures; Avionics and Control Systems; Unmanned 
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs); Space Technology 
28 CSIR-National Environmental Engineering 
Research Institute (CSIR-NEERI), Nagpur 
Air Pollution Control and Management; Water Resource 
Management and Treatment; Solid and Hazardous Waste 
Management; Environmental Biotechnology and Microbial 
Remediation; Environmental Impact Assessment and Risk 
Management; Climate Change and 
Adaptation; Environmental Policy and Regulation 
29 CSIR-National Metallurgical Laboratory (CSIR-
NML), Jamshedpur 
Alloy Development and Characterization; Materials 
Processing and Manufacturing Technologies; Extractive 
Metallurgy and Mineral Processing; Surface Engineering 
and Coatings; Welding and Joining Technologies; Materials 
Characterization and Testing; Advanced Materials For 
Specific Applications 
30 CSIR-Structural Engineering Research Centre 
(CSIR-SERC), Chennai 
Earthquake Engineering; Wind Engineering; Bridge 
Engineering; Structural Heath Monitoring; Advanced 
Materials and Construction Technologies; Performance-Based 
Design 
31 CSIR-Central Electronics Engineering Research 
Institute (CSIR-CEERI), Pilani 
Semiconductor Devices and Materials; Integrated Circuits 
(ICs) and System-on-Chip (SoC) Design; Microwave and RF 
Engineering; Optoelectronics and Photonics; Sensor 
Technologies; Signal Processing and Data Analytics; Power 
Electronics and Renewable Energy Systems 
32 CSIR-Central Scientific Instruments 
Organization (CSIR-CSIO), Chandigarh 
Optics and Photonics; Electronic Instrumentation; Biomedical 
Instrumentation; Sensors and Transducers; Imaging and 
Vision Systems; Instrumentation for Space and Defense 
33 CSIR-National Geophysical Research Institute 
(CSIR-NGRI), Hyderabad 
Seismology and Earthquake Studies; Geodesy and Geodetic 
Surveying; Geomagnetism and Paleomagnetism; Gravity and 
Magnetic Studies; Remote Sensing and 

15 
 
GIS Applications; Groundwater Exploration and 
Management; Geological And Tectonic Studies 
34 CSIR-National Institute of Oceanography 
(CSIR-NIO), Goa 
Physical Oceanography; Marine Geology and Geophysics; 
Marine Biology and ecology; Chemical Oceanography; 
Marine Technology and Instrumentation; Coastal Zone 
Management and Marine Resources; Marine Biotechnology 
and Blue Biotechnology 
35 CSIR-National Physical Laboratory  
(CSIR-NPL), New Delhi 
Metrology and Measurement Standards; Quantum Science 
and Technology; Nanotechnology and Nanomaterials; 
Materials Science and characterization; Environmental 
Monitoring and Analysis; Instrumentation and Sensing 
Technologies 
36 CSIR-National Institute of Science 
Communication and Policy Research (NIScPR), 
New Delhi 
Science Communication Strategies; Science Journalism 
and Media Studies; Science Policy Analysis; Science 
Education and Outreach; Science Diplomacy and 
International Collaboration; Science and Society Studies 
37 Fourth Paradigm Institute (CSIR-4PI), 
Bengaluru 
Big Data Research & Supercomputing; Al & Data Science 
Infrastructure; R&D in cyber security and privacy; 
Development of domain agnostic data science tools & 
techniques; Interdisciplinary Data Research; Data research in 
Earth System, Agriculture, Health, Engineering;  Synthesis of 
Modelling, Measurements, and Data Analytics 
 4.4 The Committee recognizes the pivotal role played by CSIR in driving research, 
innovation, and technological advancements across diverse domains. As one of the premier 
research organizations in the country, CSIR has contributed significantly to scientific 
breakthroughs, industrial applications, and the development of indigenous technologies that 
have strengthened national self-reliance. Its extensive research network, spanning multiple 
disciplines, has facilitated advancements in healthcare, engineering sciences, environmental 
sustainability, agriculture, and emerging technologies, thereby supporting India’s economic 
and strategic objectives. 
4.5 However, the Committee notes with concern that CSIR has substantial overlaps in 
research activities with other scientific institutions, including the Ministry of Earth Sciences, 
the Department of Biotechnology, the Department of Science and Technology, the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology, the Indian Agricultural Research Institute, etc.. 
This duplication of research efforts leads to fragmentation of resources, inefficiencies in 
execution, and a lack of cohesive direction in national scientific pursuits. The Committee 
strongly recommends that CSIR undertake a comprehensive restructuring to optimize its 
research priorities, ensuring a sharper focus on projects that are highly critical, have a 
substantial impact, and align with the country’s strategic interests. The Committee urges 
CSIR to realign its research portfolio by concentrating on areas of national importance where 
it can deliver unparalleled expertise and breakthrough innovations. Rather than engaging in 
research that overlaps with other institutions, CSIR should collaborate with relevant 
Ministries and research organizations to ensure synergy rather than redundancy. By 
leveraging its strengths in cutting-edge technologies, translational research, and industrial 
applications, CSIR can maximize its contribution to India's scientific and economic 
development. The Committee also recommends that CSIR establish a clear roadmap to 
prioritize high-impact research, streamline its organizational structure, and enhance its role 
as a leader in addressing national challenges. A well-defined and strategic approach will not 
only enhance CSIR’s efficiency but also position it as a key driver of India’s scientific and 
technological advancement in critical sectors. 
4.6 The Department informed that national laboratories of CSIR are grouped together under 
nine sector-specific theme based clusters, with each cluster under a separate directorate. The list of 
these thematic clusters is as follows:- 

16 
 
(i) Aerospace, Electronics, and Instrumentation & Strategic Sectors; (ii) Civil Infrastructure & Engineering; (iii) Earth, Oceanography & Water; (iv) Ecology, Environment & Sustainability; (v) Mining, Minerals, Metals, and Materials; (vi) Chemicals (including Leather) and Petrochemicals; (vii) Energy (Conventional and Non-Conventional) and Energy Devices (viii) Agri, Nutrition & Biotech; and  (ix) Healthcare 
 
4.7 During the meeting, the Department further informed that as part of its commitment for Viksit Bharat, it has selected one project each under the above mentioned nine themes. These nine projects are: (i) Phenome India for Predictive, Personalized, Participatory and Preventive Medicine (4PM) - Precision Medicine (ii) Assessment and mitigation of Geo-Hazard in Northeast & Himalayas (iii) Electrochemical recovery of critical, noble and transition metals from e-waste (iv) Commercial seaweed farming and elite seed preparation for commercial   applications (v) Preventive and supportive interventions using Gait Corrections for Orthopaedic complications with special emphasis on Indian women (vi) Dimethyl Ether (DME) Technology (vii) Sodium (Na) ion battery with cost effective NextGen Na ion battery cathode (viii) Commercialization of Sustainable Aviation Fuel (SAF) in India (ix) Processing (Beneficiation, Extraction, Refining)/Tapping of Critical Minerals/Elements   
4.8 The Department informed the Committee that it requires ₹100 crore in FY 2025-26 to 
execute these nine projects. Additionally, it is working on 12 need based R&D projects, for which 
₹120 crore is needed. The Department is also constructing two Science Experience Centres in 
Ahmedabad and Hyderabad, requiring ₹80 crore. Furthermore, it plans to establish four pilot plants 
for translational and industrial-scale demonstrations—one for Engineering Sciences, two for 
Chemical Sciences, and one for Biological Sciences. These pilot plants aim to support start-ups, 
MSMEs, and industries, particularly in advancing indigenous technologies, with an estimated 
requirement of ₹100 crore. 
4.9 The Department is advancing next-generation benchmark facilities through five critical 
initiatives, requiring a consolidated investment of ₹500 crore. First, it is prioritizing the 
establishment of a secured and centralized data center to safeguard CSIR’s research data, ensuring 
robust storage and cyber security. Second, it is driving the development of nuclear batteries in 
alignment with national objectives related to Small Modular Reactors (SMRs) and Indo-US nuclear 
collaborations. CSIR has already initiated work on all-solid-state batteries and is seeking funding to 
accelerate progress in this technology. Third, it is setting up an indigenous chip fabrication facility 
focused on micro-LED displays. The Department has proposed collaborating with the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology, aiming to match contributions and secure a total 
investment of ₹1,000 crore to strengthen India's global competitiveness in semiconductor 
manufacturing. Fourth, CSIR-National Physical Laboratory (NPL) is leading efforts in Indian 
meteorology and standardization by enhancing atomic clock precision, advancing quantum 
computing, and developing “Bharatiya Nirdeshak Dravya”—customized Indian standards for 
materials and measurements. Lastly, the Department is working on developing animal-free organoid 
models to replace animal testing with human cell-based alternatives, in line with ethical R&D 
practices and global trends. Despite CSIR’s existing capabilities, this project remains on hold due to 
funding constraints. 

17 
 
4.10 The additional fund requirements of CSIR for executing key R&D projects are summarized 
in the below table:- 
Sl. No.Key R&D Activities requiring additional funding support (CSIR) FY 2025-2026 (₹ in crore) 
1 Viksit Bharat Commitments  
100 
2 Need (Society & Market) Based R&D   
120 
3 Science Experience Centres to motivate Next-Generation Researchers   
80 
4 Pilot Plants for Translational & Industrial scale demonstration  
100 
5 Next Gen benchmark Facilities   
500 
Total 900 
 
4.11 The Committee commends the selection of key projects under Viksit Bharat, the 
establishment of pilot plants supporting start-ups and MSMEs and the initiatives taken for 
creation of next-generation benchmark facilities. The Committee strongly recommends that 
the Department proactively seek additional financial resources to complete these projects 
without interruption.  
4.12 In its presentation during the meeting, the Department informed the Committee about the 
urgent financial requirements of the National Aerospace Laboratory (NAL) in Bengaluru, which has 
recently made significant strides in indigenous aerospace technology. During the Aero India event, 
NAL successfully demonstrated the flight of the Hansa-NG, a two-seater aircraft. Given the 
laboratory’s contributions, the Department emphasized the need to strengthen and equip it 
adequately. The Department highlighted the necessity of establishing a National Wind Tunnel 
Facility to replace the 63-year-old wind tunnel, which has played a key role in testing satellites, 
including Chandrayaan-3. While the existing open trisonic wind tunnel remains operational, India 
still relies on foreign countries for satellite testing and certification, which risks exposing sensitive 
information. To eliminate this dependence, the Department proposed developing a closed-circuit 
trisonic wind tunnel within the country at an estimated cost of ₹3,100 crore. Both the Indian Space 
Research Organisation (ISRO) and the Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO), 
which regularly use the current facility, have supported this initiative. Although a cost-sharing 
model has been suggested, where each entity would contribute a portion of the funds, the 
Department recommended allocating the entire amount to a single organization such as CSIR to 
expedite the project. To emphasize its strategic importance, the Department removed this proposal 
from the regular budget and introduced it as CSIR-Aerospace Projects of National Importance 
(CSIR-APNI). 
4.13 The Department also requested ₹898 crore to develop the Saras Mk2, a 19-seater commuter 
aircraft, which has generated growing interest from Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) and the 
Indian Air Force (IAF). Additionally, it sought ₹759 crore to advance electric aerial vehicles, 
including converting the Hansa aircraft into an electric variant, e-Hansa, and establishing facilities 
for urban air mobility solutions such as the urban air taxi. The Department pointed out that while 
India has successfully electrified agricultural machinery like e-tractors and e-tillers, similar 
advancements in the aerospace sector require financial support. Furthermore, the Department 
proposed ₹1,021 crore for the development of indigenous civil and military systems in vehicles, 

18 
 
including four-seater aircraft and Regional Transport Aircraft (RTA), which are becoming 
increasingly necessary. The total financial requirement for all these projects amounts to 
approximately ₹5,800 crore.  
4.14  The fund requirements of CSIR for executing projects under CSIR-Aerospace 
Projects of National Importance (CSIR-APNI) are summarized in the below table:-  
 
 
 
S. No. Project Aims and Objectives Partners Estimated Cost 
(₹ in crore) 
1 National Wind 
Tunnel Facility 
 
To establish the largest 
Closed Circuit W/T and 
largest Blowdown W/T in 
the country to meet long 
standing aerospace needs 
CSIR 
DRDO 
ISRO 
3100.00 
 
2 19-seater 
commuter aircraft 
(SARAS Mk II) 
To deliver a unique 
aircraft meeting needs of 
the IAF and meet 
regional connectivity 
needs under UDAN 
Scheme 
CSIR 
HAL 
IAF 
898.79 
 
3 Electric Aerial 
Vehicles and 
National Flight 
Test Facilities 
 
To meet future needs of 
county in terms of 
electric vehicles for 
persistent surveillance, 
pilot training, last mile 
connectivity and test 
facilities for research 
NSCS 
MoCA 
E-Plane 
BEL 
DRDO 
759.64 
 
4 Development 
of Indigenous 
Civil and 
Military 
Systems and 
Vehicles 
 
 
 
 
To develop indigenous 
systems for current and 
future civil aircraft, 
engines for military 
vehicles, loitering 
munitions and establish a 
world class design house 
for civil aircraft in the 
country 
CSIR 
ISRO 
Private Industries 
1021.16 
 
Total 5779.59  
 
4.15 The Committee acknowledges the significant advancements made by the NAL, 
Bengaluru in the field of aerospace technology. Recognizing the strategic importance of 
NAL’s contributions, the Committee concurs with the Department on the need to strengthen 
and adequately equip the laboratory to further its research and development efforts. The 
Committee also notes the critical necessity of establishing a National Wind Tunnel Facility to 
replace the existing 63-year-old wind tunnel, which has played a pivotal role in satellite 
testing, including for Chandrayaan-3. The continued reliance on foreign facilities for satellite 
testing not only incurs financial costs but also exposes sensitive technological information. The 
Committee, therefore, supports the Department’s proposal to develop a closed-circuit trisonic 
wind tunnel within the country at an estimated cost of ₹3,100 crore. Given the regular use of 
this facility by ISRO and DRDO, the Committee recognizes the national importance of this 

19 
 
project and agrees with the proposal to allocate the full financial outlay to a single 
organization, such as CSIR, to expedite its implementation.  
4.16 The Committee acknowledges the Department’s request for funds to develop Saras 
Mk2, e-Hansa, urban air mobility solutions, and indigenous civil and military aviation 
systems, including Regional Transport Aircraft. Recognizing the growing need for regional 
connectivity, electrification in aerospace, and defense preparedness, the Committee 
emphasizes the importance of expediting these projects with adequate financial support. 
4.17 Given the total financial requirement of approximately ₹5,800 crore for these critical 
projects, the Committee strongly recommends that the Department seeks the necessary funds 
to ensure their seamless execution. Additionally, the Committee recommends that the 
Department closely monitor the progress of these projects, ensure effective coordination 
among stakeholders, and provide periodic updates on their implementation. Prioritizing these 
projects will not only enhance India’s self-reliance in aerospace technology but also contribute 
significantly to the nation’s scientific and industrial advancement. 
5.  HUMAN RESOURCE CHALLENGES 
5.1 The Committee sought the category-wise details of sanctioned strength, in-position strength 
and vacancies in the Department along with Autonomous Bodies under the Department.  . In 
response, the Department provided the following data:- 
Department of Scientific & Industrial Research (DSIR) 
Group Total 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Filled Vacant % of vacancies vis-à-
vis total sanctioned 
posts 
Group ‘A’ (Gazetted) 47 28 19 40.43 
Group ‘B’ (Gazetted) 13 11 2 15.38 
Group ‘B’ (Non-
Gazetted) 22 13 9 40.91 
Group ‘C’ 30 15 15 50.00 
Total 112 67 45 40.18 
Autonomous Institutions 
S. No. Name Total 
Sanctioned 
Strength 
Filled Vacant % of vacancies 
vis-à-vis total 
sanctioned 
posts 
1 Council of Scientific & Industrial 
Research (CSIR) 22080 9508 12572 56.94 
2 National Research Development 
Corporation (NRDC) 52 48 4 7.69 

20 
 
3 Central Electronics Ltd. (CEL) 494 214 280 56.68 
Total 22626 9770 12856 56.82 
Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR)  
Category Sanctioned 
Strength 
In-Position 
Strength 
Vacancy % of vacancies vis-à-
vis total sanctioned 
posts 
Group IV 6130 3387 2743 44.75 
Group III 3694 2222 1472 39.85 
Group II 3660 1177 2483 67.84 
Group I 2251 357 1894 84.14 
Non-Technical 6345 2365 3980 62.73 
Total 22080 9508 12572 56.94 
 
5.2 It can be seen from the above tables that nearly 40% of the positions in the Department and 
57% in its autonomous bodies are currently vacant. In case of CSIR, a massive 84% of the Group- I 
posts are lying vacant. 
5.3 The Committee also sought details of the staff hired on contractual basis. The Department 
apprised the Committee that at present a total number of 23 contractual staff, namely Data Entry 
Operators and Multi-tasking Staff has been hired for a period of one year. The Department also 
informed that as per the standing instructions of CSIR notified vide circular dated 11.04.1991 and 
25.04.2005; the security, cleaning, horticulture, housekeeping and maintenance jobs are to be 
outsourced and no regular recruitments are to be done for these works. Therefore, manpower is 
engaged on contract basis for these jobs as there are no regular posts for these purposes. Further, the 
vacancies against regular posts are being filled up on regular basis. The Department submitted that 
NRDC hired 13 contractual employees for 3 years duration with a provision of regularization based 
on the performance. As per NRDC, this approach is economical, provides for skill shortages, helps 
overcome unforeseen vacancies and bring in specialized knowledge and expertise. Similarly, CEL 
hired approximately 116 contractual employees since 2019.  
5.4 The Committee is shocked to witness such a staggering number of vacancies in the 
Department, particularly in Group-I category of CSIR. It is concerning to contemplate how 
CSIR continues its research with such a skeletal workforce. Expecting optimal results from an 
understaffed organization is unrealistic. Human resources are the most important asset of any 
scientific organization and CSIR is critically lacking precisely in that. The Committee 
strongly recommends that the Department urgently fills up all vacant positions, particularly 
the Group-I vacancies in CSIR, in mission mode. 
 
 
 

21 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 
BUDGET ANALYSIS 
 The Committee notes with concern the sub-optimal utilization of funds under the 
Central Sector Scheme - ‘Industrial Research & Development’, as over half of the allocated 
funds remain unutilized as the current financial year enters its final quarter. In light of this, 
the Committee emphasizes the critical need for the Department to expedite expenditure and 
ensure the optimal deployment of resources within the remaining timeframe of the financial 
year. To preempt such inefficiencies in subsequent years, the Committee strongly advocates 
for the institutionalization of robust quarterly monitoring mechanisms.                      (Para 2.3) 
 The Committee finds merit in the Department’s request for an additional budgetary 
allocation to the tune of ₹ 363.92 crore, over and above the provision made in B.E. 2025-26. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department may seek the requisite 
additional allocation from the Ministry of Finance at the R.E. stage.                            (Para 2.9) 
 
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES 
 The Committee expresses concern over the substantial gap between budgetary 
estimates and actual expenditures. The Committee observes that in several instances, the 
actual expenditure remains significantly lower than the budget estimates and even the revised 
estimates, indicating underutilization of allocated funds. Such underutilization may hinder 
the intended impact of these schemes and delay the realization of their objectives. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department take proactive measures to ensure 
effective fund utilization by addressing administrative bottlenecks, streamlining project 
approvals, and enhancing monitoring mechanisms.                                                        (Para 3.4) 
 The Committee appreciates the achievements made under these schemes. However, the 
Committee believes that a more robust approach is necessary to scale up these achievements 
and expand the reach of these schemes. The Department should consider increasing outreach 
efforts to encourage wider participation from start-ups, MSMEs, and research institutions, 
ensuring that more innovators benefit from these programs.                                         (Para 3.5) 
 The Committee acknowledges the vital role played by NRDC in facilitating the 
commercialization of technologies developed by CSIR, public-funded research institutions, 
universities, and autonomous research bodies. However, the Committee notes with concern 
the disparity between budgetary allocations, revised estimates, and actual expenditures across 
multiple financial years, particularly in the PIII scheme, where the actual expenditure has 
remained consistently lower than the allocated amount. The Committee recommends that the 
Department take necessary measures to ensure the optimal utilization of funds by enhancing 
project execution efficiency, streamlining approval processes, and addressing any institutional 
challenges that may be causing delays.                                                                            (Para 3.12) 
 The Committee welcomes the NRDC’s proposal to launch the Start-up Driven 
Technology Scale-up Initiative (TSI) with its two major components, namely, the Technology 
Development Facility (TDF) and the Generic Startup Support Facility (GSSF). Given the 
critical role of start-ups in driving technological innovation and economic growth, the 
Committee emphasizes the importance of fostering stronger linkages between research 
institutions and start-ups to accelerate the commercialization of innovative technologies. The 
Committee recommends that the Department provide adequate financial and infrastructural 
support to ensure the successful implementation of this initiative, particularly in addressing 
the unique challenges faced by start-ups and women-led enterprises.                         (Para 3.13) 

22 
 
 The Committee commends the Department for the successful revival of CEL, which 
was once a struggling PSU on the brink of disinvestment. The remarkable transformation of 
CEL stands as a testament to the potential of strategic interventions in revitalizing public 
sector enterprises. The Committee expresses its optimism that CEL will continue on this 
trajectory of growth and excellence, eventually attaining Maha Ratna status. CEL’s 
resurgence serves as an exemplary model of how a well-executed turnaround strategy can 
reinvigorate a PSU, reinforcing its role in advancing national technological and industrial 
capabilities.                                                                                                                         (Para 3.21) 
 In view of CEL’s strategic significance, the Committee strongly recommends that the 
Department provide consistent policy and financial support to enable CEL to overcome its 
current challenges and capitalize on growth opportunities. The Department should ensure 
that CEL receives adequate institutional backing to secure its position as a leading player in 
defence electronics, railway electronics, IT-enabled smart infrastructure, and renewable 
energy. The Committee further advises the Department to submit a detailed roadmap 
outlining the steps required to enhance CEL’s operational efficiency, financial viability, and 
technological competitiveness. Strengthening CEL’s capabilities will not only contribute to 
national self-reliance in critical technology sectors but also reinforce India’s public sector 
enterprises as key drivers of innovation and industrial growth.                                   (Para 3.22) 
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR) 
 The Committee recognizes the pivotal role played by CSIR in driving research, 
innovation, and technological advancements across diverse domains. As one of the premier 
research organizations in the country, CSIR has contributed significantly to scientific 
breakthroughs, industrial applications, and the development of indigenous technologies that 
have strengthened national self-reliance. Its extensive research network, spanning multiple 
disciplines, has facilitated advancements in healthcare, engineering sciences, environmental 
sustainability, agriculture, and emerging technologies, thereby supporting India’s economic 
and strategic objectives.                                                                                                      (Para 4.4) 
 However, the Committee notes with concern that CSIR has substantial overlaps in 
research activities with other scientific institutions, including the Ministry of Earth Sciences, 
the Department of Biotechnology, the Department of Science and Technology, the Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology, the Indian Agricultural Research Institute, etc.. 
This duplication of research efforts leads to fragmentation of resources, inefficiencies in 
execution, and a lack of cohesive direction in national scientific pursuits. The Committee 
strongly recommends that CSIR undertake a comprehensive restructuring to optimize its 
research priorities, ensuring a sharper focus on projects that are highly critical, have a 
substantial impact, and align with the country’s strategic interests. The Committee urges 
CSIR to realign its research portfolio by concentrating on areas of national importance where 
it can deliver unparalleled expertise and breakthrough innovations. Rather than engaging in 
research that overlaps with other institutions, CSIR should collaborate with relevant 
Ministries and research organizations to ensure synergy rather than redundancy. By 
leveraging its strengths in cutting-edge technologies, translational research, and industrial 
applications, CSIR can maximize its contribution to India's scientific and economic 
development. The Committee also recommends that CSIR establish a clear roadmap to 
prioritize high-impact research, streamline its organizational structure, and enhance its role 
as a leader in addressing national challenges. A well-defined and strategic approach will not 
only enhance CSIR’s efficiency but also position it as a key driver of India’s scientific and 
technological advancement in critical sectors.                                                                  (Para 4.5) 
 The Committee commends the selection of key projects under Viksit Bharat, the 
establishment of pilot plants supporting start-ups and MSMEs and the initiatives taken for 

23 
 
creation of next-generation benchmark facilities. The Committee strongly recommends that 
the Department proactively seek additional financial resources to complete these projects 
without interruption.                                                                                                         (Para 4.11) 
 The Committee acknowledges the significant advancements made by the NAL, 
Bengaluru in the field of aerospace technology. Recognizing the strategic importance of 
NAL’s contributions, the Committee concurs with the Department on the need to strengthen 
and adequately equip the laboratory to further its research and development efforts. The 
Committee also notes the critical necessity of establishing a National Wind Tunnel Facility to 
replace the existing 63-year-old wind tunnel, which has played a pivotal role in satellite 
testing, including for Chandrayaan-3. The continued reliance on foreign facilities for satellite 
testing not only incurs financial costs but also exposes sensitive technological information. The 
Committee, therefore, supports the Department’s proposal to develop a closed-circuit trisonic 
wind tunnel within the country at an estimated cost of ₹3,100 crore. Given the regular use of 
this facility by ISRO and DRDO, the Committee recognizes the national importance of this 
project and agrees with the proposal to allocate the full financial outlay to a single 
organization, such as CSIR, to expedite its implementation.                                        (Para 4.15) 
 The Committee acknowledges the Department’s request for funds to develop Saras 
Mk2, e-Hansa, urban air mobility solutions, and indigenous civil and military aviation 
systems, including Regional Transport Aircraft. Recognizing the growing need for regional 
connectivity, electrification in aerospace, and defense preparedness, the Committee 
emphasizes the importance of expediting these projects with adequate financial support. 
(Para 4.16) 
  
     Given the total financial requirement of approximately ₹5,800 crore for these critical 
projects, the Committee strongly recommends that the Department seeks the necessary funds 
to ensure their seamless execution. Additionally, the Committee recommends that the 
Department closely monitor the progress of these projects, ensure effective coordination 
among stakeholders, and provide periodic updates on their implementation. Prioritizing these 
projects will not only enhance India’s self-reliance in aerospace technology but also contribute 
significantly to the nation’s scientific and industrial advancement.                            (Para 4.17) 
 
HUMAN RESOURCE CHALLENGES 
 The Committee is shocked to witness such a staggering number of vacancies in the 
Department, particularly in Group-I category of CSIR. It is concerning to contemplate how 
CSIR continues its research with such a skeletal workforce. Expecting optimal results from an 
understaffed organization is unrealistic. Human resources are the most important asset of any 
scientific organization and CSIR is critically lacking precisely in that. The Committee 
strongly recommends that the Department urgently fills up all vacant positions, particularly 
the Group-I vacancies in CSIR, in mission mode.                                                          (Para 5.14) 
  

24 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
__________________________ 
 
MINUTES 
 
__________________________ 
  

25 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
(2024-25) 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:30 A.M. on Thursday, the 20th February 2025 in Committee 
Room ‘G-074’, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi-110001.  
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Damodar Rao Divakonda 
3. Shri Sharad Pawar 
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh 
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Alfred Kanngam S. Arthur 
7. Shri Pradyut Bordoloi 
8. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
9. Dr. Anand Kumar 
10. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
11. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva 
12. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade 
 
SECRETARIAT  
1. Smt. Kusum Sudhir, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Arun Kumar, Director 
3. Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
5. Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer  
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. He apprised the 
Members that in this meeting, the Committee will deliberate on the Demands for Grants for the 
Financial Year 2025-26, focusing on the Department of Biotechnology, followed by the 
presentations from Department of Space, Ministry of Earth Sciences and Department of Scientific 
and Industrial Research. 
3.         *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
4. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
5. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
6. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
7. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
8. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 

26 
 
9. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
10. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
11. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
12. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
13. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
14. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
15. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
16. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
17. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
18. The following representatives of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research then 
appeared before the Committee: 
1. Dr. (Mrs.) N. Kalaiselvi, Secretary, DSIR and Director General, CSIR; 
2. Shri Surinder Pal Singh, JS (Admin.), DSIR; 
3. Shri Mahendra Kumar Gupta, JS (Admin.), CSIR; 
4. Shri Chetan  Prakash  Jain,  JS&FA,  CSIR, DSIR; 
5. Dr. Anirban Pal, Chief Scientist & Head, CPD; 
6. Dr. S. Sathiyanarayanan, Former Chief Scientist & Head, CPD, CSIR;  
7. Shri G Mahesh, Head, SCDD & DGED; 
8. Shri Shailendra Pratap Singh, Sr. Deputy Financial Adviser, CSIR; 
9. Shri Chhering Tobden, Sr. DS, Policy Division; 
10. Cmde. Amit Rastogi, Chairman-cum-Managing Director, NRDC; 
11. Shri Subodh Chawla, DGM (TC & CVO), NRDC; 
12. Dr. Abhishek Kumar, Principal Scientist, CSIR; and 
13. Dr. (Ms.) Deepika Rohtagi, Scientist ‘E’, DSIR. 
 
19. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research 
and his team of officers and asked them to give a brief presentation on the Demands for Grants 
(2025-26). The Secretary began her presentation by providing an overview of DSIR, highlighting its 
three major components: the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), the National 
Research Development Corporation (NRDC), and the Central Electronics Limited (CEL). She 
explained that CSIR, being the largest component, consumes the majority of the budget allocated to 
DSIR. She then presented the budget trends over the last five years, starting from Rs. 4,250 crores 
in 2020 and reaching Rs. 6,350 crores in 2025. Despite the increase, she expressed concerns about 
the adequacy of the budget, given the growing manpower and activities within the organization. She 
pointed out that a significant portion of the budget is allocated to salaries and pensions, leaving only 
a limited amount for research and development (R&D). She elaborated on the challenges faced by 
CSIR, particularly in terms of infrastructure. She highlighted the need for additional funds to 
address critical infrastructure requirements, such as the construction of hostels, R&D blocks, staff 
quarters, and guest houses across various CSIR laboratories. She emphasized that these 
infrastructure projects are essential to support the recruitment of new scientists and to provide 
adequate facilities for existing staff. She projected a total requirement of Rs. 600 crores over five 
years to address these infrastructure needs. Additionally, she pointed out that the budget allocated 
for R&D is insufficient, with only Rs. 2,000 crores available out of the total budget of Rs. 6,600 
crores. She requested the Committee to recommend a minimum additional allocation of Rs. 350 

27 
 
crores to sustain critical R&D activities. Thereafter, she outlined several new schemes introduced 
within CSIR, including pilot plants, facility creation projects, and prioritized equipment. She 
explained that these initiatives are aimed at enhancing the capabilities of CSIR laboratories and 
ensuring that they can meet global benchmarks. She also highlighted the importance of need-based 
R&D, which focuses on addressing societal needs and industrial applications. She provided 
examples of projects such as the recovery of metals from e-waste, the development of sustainable 
aviation fuels, and the commercialization of sodium-ion batteries. Informing about the importance 
of promoting science and innovation among the younger generation through initiatives like the 
Science Experience Centre, she informed that CSIR has already made commitments under the 
Viksit Bharat initiative, with nine thematic groups working on various projects. These include 
precision medicine, geo-hazard mitigation, and the development of alternate fuels such as Dimethyl 
Ether (DME). She also highlighted the progress made in the field of sustainable aviation fuels, with 
CSIR successfully demonstrating the use of used cooking oil as a raw material for fuel production. 
She emphasized the need for a policy framework to support the collection and processing of used 
cooking oil on a larger scale. 
20. Thereafter, the Chairman and Members of the Committee raised several queries such as 
need for CSIR to focus on a few strategic areas rather than spreading its resources across multiple 
themes, need for CSIR to adopt a more focused approach and to develop a sustainable revenue 
model, roadmap to improve the efficiency of CEL, need for quantifiable data to demonstrate the 
impact of CSIR’s technologies on Indian industries and the economy, etc. 
21. The Secretary and other representatives of the Department of Scientific and Industrial 
Research, while presenting their views, also responded to some of the queries raised by the 
Chairman and Members of the Committee. The Chairman also directed the Secretary to furnish 
written replies to other queries/points/issues raised by him and other Members of the Committee, 
which could not be replied during the meeting, to the Secretariat.    
22. The representatives of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research then withdrew. 
23. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
24. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5:30 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________ 
 
***** Relate to other matters. 
  

28 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
(2024-25) 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
 
The Committee met at 3:30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 19th March, 2025 in Committee Room 
No. 4, First Floor, 'A' Block, PHA Extension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Bhubaneswar Kalita – Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Narayanasa K. Bhandage  
3. Ms. Indu Bala Goswami 
4. Shri Jairam Ramesh   
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar 
 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Pradyut Bordoloi  
7. Shri Phani Bhusan Choudhury 
8. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb 
9. Shri Vamsi Krishna Gaddam 
10. Shri Tapir Gao 
11. Adv K. Francis George  
12. Shri Mahesh Kashyap 
13. Dr. Anand Kumar 
14. Shri Mohibbullah 
15. Shri Jagdambika Pal 
16. Shri Jashubhai Bhilubhai Rathva  
17. Shri Trivendra Singh Rawat 
18. Shrimati Himadri Singh 
19. Shri Balwant Baswant Wankhade  
SECRETARIAT 
1. Dr. K.S. Somashekhar, Additional Secretary  
2. Smt. Kusum Sudhir, Joint Secretary  
3. Shri Arun Kumar, Director  
4. Shri Rajiv Saxena, Deputy Secretary 
5. Shri Deepak Bhoria, Under Secretary 
6. Shri Vaibhav Jain, Committee Officer                       

29 
 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. The 
Committee then took up consideration of the draft 387th,  388th, 389th, 390th, 391st, 392nd and 393rd 
Reports of the Committee on the Demands for Grants 2025-26, of the Ministries/Departments of 
Atomic Energy; Biotechnology; Scientific and Industrial Research; Science & Technology; Space; 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change; and Earth Sciences, respectively and adopted the same 
after some deliberations. The Chairman requested all the Members to give their 
suggestions/amendments/recommendations to be incorporated in the draft Reports by 5.00 p.m. of 
20th March, 2025. 
3. The Committee decided to present/lay the above mentioned Reports in both the Houses of 
Parliament on the 25th March, 2025.  
4. *  *  *  *  *  *  * 
5. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4:00 p.m. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________ 
 
***** Relate to other matters. 
 