PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/55th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:07]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
 TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1998-99)
FIFTY FIFTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1998-99)
OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 75)
(PRESENTED ON THE 10TH  JULY, 1998)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
JULY, 1998/ASADHA, 1920 (SAKA)
 
CONTENTS
    PAGES
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITIEE  
2. INTRODUCTION  
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITIEE  
4. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT -RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1998-99)
1.         Shri S.R. Bommai - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
 
 
 1. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
2. Shri Rahasbihari Barik
3. Shri Debabrata Biswas
4. Dr. D. Masthan
5. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty
6. Shri Lachhman Singh
7. Shri W. Angou Singh
8. Shri Prakanta

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/55th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:07]
9. Warisa Vacant @10. Vacant
@@11. Vacant
*12. Vacant
**13. Vacant
#14. Vacant
LOKSABHA
15. Shri Indra Nath Bhagat
16. Shri Ranjib Biswal
17. Shri Chengara Surendran
18. Shrimati Bhavana Chikhaliya
19. Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix '0' Souza
20. Shri M.C. Dhamotharan
21. Shri George Eden
22. Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
 
@ Shri Ram Ratan Ram was nominated w.e.f. 12th June, 1998 and ceased to be a Member of the Committeew.e.f. 4.th July, 1998 on expiry of
 his term in Rajya Sabha.
@@ Shri N. Abdul Khader ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 29th June, 1998 on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha ..
 * Shri G. Swaminathan ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 29th June, 1998 on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha.
** Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 4th July, 1998 on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha ..
# Shri Pranab Mukherjee ceased to be a Member of the Committee w. e.f. 29th June, 1998.
 
23.
        Shri K. Krishnamorthy
24.        Shri Charan Das Mahant
25.        Shri Janardan Prasad Misra
26.        Shri Rupchand Murmu
27.        Captain Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad
28.        Shri Prakash Vishwanath Paranjpe
29.        Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
30.        Shri S. Vijaya Rama Raju
31.        Shri Inderjit Singh Rao
32.        Shri Madhavrao Scindia
33. Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia
%34. Shri Maheshwar Singh
35.        Shri Virendra Singh
36.        Prof. Saifuddin Soz
37.        Shri Devji Bhai 1. Tandel
38.        Shri Prasad Baburao Tanpure
39.        Dr. C.P. Thakur
40.        Shri Ravi Prakash Verma
41.    Shri Suresh Warpudkar
42.    Shri Mukul Wasnik
*43.  Vacant $44.  Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri M.L. Taneja, Committee Officer
% Nominated w.e.f 26th June, 1998.
* Shri Ayanur Manjunath ceased to be a Member of the Committee due to change of nomination to the Committee on Labour and Welfare w.e.f.
 II th June, 1998.
$ Shri 8.M. Menasinakai ceased to be a Member of the Committee due to change of nomination to the Committee on Commerce w.e.f. 10th June,
 1998.
 
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to submit
 the report on its behalf, present this Report, on the Demands for Grants pertaining to the Department of Science and Technology (Ministry of
 Science and Technology) for the year 1998-99 (Demand No. 75)
2. In its meeting held on the June 23, 1998, the Committee considered the Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology on
 the basis of the documents made available to it and the submission made before it by the Secretary and other representatives of the Department of
 Science and Technology.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Department of Science and Technology for replying to the clarifications sought by the
 members and for placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of
 Science and Techno­logy.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on July 7th, 1998.
 
NEW DELHI S.R. BOMMAI
July 7, 1998 CHAIRMAN
 Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/55th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:07]
REPORT
 
The Ministry of Science and Technology is mainly responsible for formulation of policy and guide­lines on Science and Technology,
 promotion of new areas of S&T in which a number of Institutes Departments have interest and capabilities, scientific and technological surveys,
 R&D activities, inter­national scientific and technological cooperation, promotion of S&T and its application to the develop ­ment of the nation.
2. The Department of Science and Technology (DST) was established with the primary objective o( promoting new areas of Science and
 Technology (S&T) and to play the role of a nodal department for organising, co-ordinating and promoting S&T activities in the country. This
 Department is the nodal agency in regard to the formulation of policy statements and guidelines in the areas of science and technology. It also
 deals with the apex level science policy structures.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
3. The Secretary, Department of Science and Technology (DST) informed the Committee that the Department had asked for an allocation of Rs.
 1800 crores for the Ninth Plan period to meet the require­ment of the Department but the allocation was restricted to Rs. 1576 crores and this is
 also subject to review and restriction on yearly basis. This allocation is about 50 per cent more than the expenditure incurred during the Eighth
 Plan Period.
4. The Committee observes that this enhancement is practically at the Eighth Plan level as inflation cost has not been taken into account. The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that the Planning Commission may consider raising this outlay at the time of conducting mid-term ap­praisal
 of the Plan so that the projects and programmes administered by DST do not suffer due to paucity of funds.
5. The total outlay for DST for 1998-99 is Rs. 628.12 crores as against Rs. 562.86 crores in 1997-98 which was later revised to Rs. 617.43
 primarily for implementation of the recommendations of the Fifth Pay Commission and for implementation of the Swarnajayanti Fellowship
 Scheme under which a one­time grant of Rs. 50.00 crores was placed at the disposal of the Ministry for creation of a corpus (Annexure I). The
 Planning Commission made an allocation of Rs. 305.00 crores for the year 1998-99 out of which Rs. 12.00 crores are proposed to be transferred
 to the Ministry of Urban Development for incorporation in the Budget document of that Ministry for Capital Works to be executed during 1998-
99. The increase in Plan provision of 1998-99 as compared to RE 1997-98 is mainly due to the "Fund for Improvement of Science and Technology
 (FIST) Infrastructure in Universities & Related Institutions" for achieving India's quest for competitive advantage in the emerging new world for
 which an amount of Rs. 25.00 crores has been allocated.
6. Similarly, under Non-Plan, there are increases largely under the Survey of India (SOl); India Meteorological Department (IMD); Autonomous
 Institutes and Professional Bodies; Secretariat and Na­tional Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organisation (NATMO) mainly to cater to the
 enhanced level of expenditure under salaries, travelling expenses and other expenditures.
 
7. The budgetary allocation for Survey of India has been increased from Rs. 137.00 crores (R.E.) in 1997-98 to Rs. 148.57 crores in 1998-99 and
 and for the National Atlas and Thematic Mapping, Organisation, the total allocation is Rs. 7.20 crore which is Rs. 1.44 crores more than the Budget
 esti­mates of 1997-98. The quantum of assistance to scientific bodies has been placed at Rs. 105.17 crore which is at the previous level of Budget
 Estimates of 1997-98, and Rs. 1.56 crores more than the revised estimates of last year. In the current year, the payment to Technology
 Development Board against cess receipts, the non-Plan expenditure is being reduced from Rs. 70 crore to Rs. 50 crore. There is a quantum jump in
 the allocation made for Observatories and Weather Stations and is proposed to be kept at Rs. 50.09 crores against Rs. 39.58 crores in the Budget
 Estimates of last year. The allocation for other Meteorological Services has also been increased from Rs. 18.43 crore in BE of 1997-98 to Rs. 22.74
 crores in 1998-99, whereas the allocation for other programmes is being reduced from Rs. 9.78 crore in BE of 1997-98 to Rs. 6.33 crore in the
 1998-99 which is equivalent to the level of RE of last year.
SUPER CONDUCTIVITY PROGRAMME
8. The Committee while going through the various documents supplied to it to facilitate the exami ­nation of the demands found that there is no
 allocation indicated for the super conductivity programme and also there was no allocation for it in 1997-98 and this made the Committee to
 enquire from the Secretary of the Department if this Programme has been abandoned in view of making no allocations for it. The Committee was
 told that the programmes in the area of super conductivity have not been abandoned. The Department has reorganized support to R&D programmes
 and activities in this area are now funded and monitored under the Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) scheme. This was done as
 necessary infrastructure facilities and capabilities to conduct R&D activities in the area of super conductivity have been developed and such
 activities can now be implemented through project mode like other areas in science and engineering.
TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY TO INDUSTRIES AND COMMERCIALISATION OF INDIGENOUS TECHNOLOGY
 
9. In reply to a question about the steps being taken by the Department for revenue generation by way of transferring technology to industries and
 the breakthrough technologies which have been devel ­oped with the assistance of the Department during the last two or three years, the
 Committee was in­formed that the Department attaches a lot of importance to return on investment made for generating technologies. In order to
 encourage transfer of technology to industries, the Department attempts to associate industries with the researc9 programmes right from the
 beginning. In the area of Drugs and Pharmaceuticals industries like Dabur, SPIC, Zandu, Bharat Biotech, Ranbaxy have been associated. Two
 patents have been filed-one, "An antiangiogenic drug" was filed in India as well as in USA and the other on "Novel peptides for the treatment of
 cancer" was filed in India. Some instruments have also been developed and know how transferred to industries for commercial production.
10. The Committee recommends that more efforts need be made to transfer greater number of know how developed indigenously to industries.
11. In this regard, the Committee wanted to know about the role which the Technology Board is playing to accelerate the commercialisation of
 indigenous technologies and drafting/the imported technologies for wider application. The Committee was informed that during 1997-98 the
 Technology Development Board signed 20 agreements with 18 commercial enterprises for development and commercialization of indigenous
 technology. These 20 projects covered areas such as medical and health, engineering and electronics, chemicals and lubricants, agriculture and
 biotechnology, power cable, trans­port, environment and communication. The total cost of these projects was Rs. 143.84 crores including the loan
 assistance of Rs. 51.46 crores by the Board. The disbursement during the year amounted to
Rs. 30.14 crores, as the loan assistance is released in installments on the basis of assessment of the progress of the project by Project Monitoring
 Committees. The technology provided for these projects included National Laboratories, Academic Institutions and In-house R&D Units in the
 industry recognized by the Government. In addition, the Board/Project Evaluation Committees for evaluating the project applications had
 recommended financial assistance of Rs. 97.67 crores for 9 more projects. Further, 11 applications with the projected Board funding of Rs. 38.40
 crores had been referred to Project Evalua ­tion Committees for their evaluation. M/s Shantha Biotechnics Private Limited, Hyderabad, the first
 industrial enterprise to be provided with the Board's loan assistance, has launched India's first geneti ­cally engineered Hepatitis- B vaccine in
 August 1997 and the vaccine is available in the market.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY COUNCILS
12. The State S&T Councils have been set up in all States and Union Territories. The Department provides financial support for the scientific

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/55th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:07]
 posts and equipment like computers and communication systems. The Department regularly conducts regional meetings and annual review
 meetings with partici ­pation of the Planning Commission, Central Scientific Departments, State S&T Councils, Central Research Agencies like
 CSIR, ICAR and State Institutions in order to have better understanding regard­ing the functioning of various State S&T Councils and to review
 their programmes. The last regional meeting took place on the 5th and 6th June, 1998 at Gandhinagar, Gujarat.
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY POLICY MECHANISM
13. On a question on the revision of the Scientific Policy Resolution of 1958, in view of the New Economic Policy announced in 1991, the
 Committee was informed that the Scientific Policy Resolution does not require any major changes and is still valid. The Technology Policy
 Statement, however, re­quires some modifications keeping in view the changed scenario both at global and national level and the modifications
 required are under consideration.
14. The Committee is of the view that there is no need to have two different policies-one for science" and the other for technology. There can be
 no technology without science. Both these areas are clearly linked.
15. The Committee, therefore, recommends that attempts be made by the Department to pre­pare an update on the Science and Technology
 Policy.
16. As regards scientific structures which exist at the apex level to guide the Science and Technol ­ogy Policy, the Committee was informed that
 three tier mechanism to advise the Government on S&T policy matters has been set up consisting of a Cabinet Committee on Science and
 Technology under the Chairmanship of the Prime Minister; Scientific Advisory Committee to the Cabinet (SAC-C); and Com­mittee of
 Secretaries on Science and Technology. On a specific question about how many times these Committees have met during the past three years, the
 Committee was told that the Cabinet Committee on Science and Technology has not met so far, as the need for this was not felt. The Scientific
 Advisory Committee to the Cabinet (SAC-C) was constituted in June 1997. This Committee has met seven times and had held discussions on
 issues like improvement of working conditions of research fellows, fund for infrastructure in S&T in the academic sector, guidelines for
 implementation of Swamajayanti Fellow­ships, creation of National Botanical Gardens, programme to develop expertise in the area of taxonomy
 and modernisation of the patents, etc.
DRUGS AND PHARMACEUTICAL RESEARCH
17. The scheme on Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research was initiated by DST in 1994-95 for promoting R&D in drugs and pharmaceuticals
 sector. Under this scheme the financial support is provided to national laboratories and academic institutions for the research programmes which
 are conceived jointly by the industry and public funded R&D institutions. The programme aims at development of new mol-eculs leading to
 commercialisable technology towards new drug development, giving special thrust to the development of drugs for treatment of diseases prevalent
 in the Indian climatic zone, promoting R&D in all, systems. of medicines, bringing together the scientific expertise existing in the country in
 research institutions and industry on a joining platform in a project mode, establishment of mechanisms and linkages so as to facilitate the
 development of new drugs by the Indian Industry and the Research Institutes, creating state-of-the art infrastructure facilities on par with
 international standards for the benefit of the Indian Industry and other users on payment basis and any other activity which is incidental to the
 above objectives. During the year 1997-98,5 projects have been sanctioned for financial support involving an amount of Rs. 113.00 lakhs towards
 the first release of grants. Three of the projects are related to, the development of novel anti-mycotic agents, anti-cancer agents and new cardio-
vascular drugs. Two of the sanctioned projects involve synthesis of NCEs as potential antifungal agents and development of Tran mucosal drug
 delivery systems for anti ulcer-drug.
18. The Committee was informed that in the current year, the Department plans to continue efforts to support joint research projects for the drug
 development for diseases like Tuberculosis, Leprosy, Malaria, Filaria, Gastrointestinal disorders, Diabetes, Hypertension, Cardio-vascular
 disorders and other prevalent infectious diseases in particular acute respiratory infections, Encephalitis, Dengue Virus and food borne diseases,
 etc. Special emphasis is planned to be given towards development of novel drug delivery systems. Efforts towards" drugs development" based on
 traditional system of medicines will also be made. This will be carried out by development of new formulations and standardization testing of
 traditional formulations.
19. The Committee brought to the notice of the Secretary of the Department the vast biodiversity which exist in the country and particularly
 wanted to know whether the Department intends to develop drugs on the basis of traditional system of medicine and herbal medicine. The
 Committee was told that under the 'Drugs ~d Pharmaceuticals Research Programma' of the Department two research projects and a national
 facility have been commissioned. The research programme, jointly undertaken by the Dabur Research Foundation and the Delhi University
 envisages standardisation of the various Ayurvedic formu­lations such as Asawas and Arishthas. The research project of the Zandu
 pharmaceuticals and RRL, Jammu envisages validation of efficacy of some of the herbal formulations including Asvagandha, Satavari, etc. The
 objective of the national facility that has been set up at the Indian Institute  of Chemical Biology, Calcutta is to' screen the herbal extracts for their
 immuno-modulating potential. Apart from these research programmes and national facility, the Department has also initiated a survey on the
 medicinal plants in the State of Sikkim.
20. While the Committee appreciates that the Department has engaged itself in the development of drugs for the diseases which are peculiar to our
 country, the Committee would like the Department to consider development of drugs on the basis of traditional system of medicines and herbal
 medicines because . traditional medicines derived from plants and herbs are gaining popularity in other parts of the world, including the developed
 countries because of these drugs being safe and having no or little side-effects.
METEOROLOGY
21. India Meteorological Department (1M D) has been set up to provide forecasts and climatologically statistics for optimum operation and
 planning of weather-sensitive activities, such as agriculture and aviation; and to establish and maintain a large number of observatories and to
 provide instrumental and technical support to the acquisition of observational data. Apart from this, the Department is also working in the field of
 providing warning against severe weather phenomena such as tropical cyclones, heavy rain, snow, heat and cold waves, etc. and also monitor and
 locate earthquake and monitor seismic events risks. IMD is also responsible to carry out and promote research and development and impart
 training in various aspects of meteorology and allied disciplines. During the year 1996-97 eight Automatic Visual I Assessor (AVRA) were
 commissioned at national airports and the balance AVRA were received {or deployment at other airports. Ten X-band weather radars with digital
 processing facilities were commissioned. AMSS at Guwahati and Chennai were Commissioned. The Committee was informed that IMD had
 made efforts to receive and instal ten HFRT sets and seven RTT sets. The CWDS system under phase III was further extended to cover more
 vulnerable coastal districts. One new RMC at Guwahati was created for NE region. The network of Seismological Observatories was strengthened
 by establishing more observatories. The Seismological Telemetry Network in the National Capital Region is under progress. Modernisation of
 weather forecasting system at major forecasting offices at IMD (WAN System) is likely to be established. The Department proposes to upgrade
 the quality of the service and explore the new areas of development. As a part of modernisation, sophisticated Doppler Radars will be introduced
 in the cyclone detection network to enable more purposeful study of the devastating cyclones. IMD proposes to undertake a number of new
 projects/programmes during 1998-99 in the areas of Weather Forecasting Services, Instrumentation, Telecommunications, Agrimet, Space
 Meteorology and Hydrology. The programmes involves modernization augmentation of existing facilities i.e., procurement of S-Band Doppler
 Radars. BREWER Ozone Spectrophotometer, High Speed Wind Recorders, etc. with a view to enhancing the quality of forecast.
22. In the current year's budget, a sum of Rs. 131.35 crores has been allocated to the Meteorology sector as against Rs. 111.84 crores allocated
 last year at the RE state under this head. The Committee hopes that the new initiative which would be taken up by the Department in the area of
 meteorol ­ogy in view of the significant enhancement in the budgetary support under the head 'Meteorology' would enable the Department to
 upgrade and modernise its existing facilities and initiate new projects and programmes which would ensure more accuracy in the weather

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/55th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:07]
 forecasting work done by the Department.
FUND FOR IMPROVEMENT OF S&T INFRASTRUCTURE IN UNIVERSITIES AND RELATED INSTITUTIONS (FIST)
23. In recent years great concern has been expressed about the lack of infrastructural facilities for imparting good quality higher education and
 conducting advanced research. As a result of the ongoing efforts, departments in the universities and related institutions have made some impact on
 the develop ­ment of teaching and research. These university departments are now in a stage to be identified for selective strengthening of their
 infrastI1lcture for post-graduate education and research. It is also neces­sary to extend such infrastructural support to other higher technical
 education institutions and medical education institutions. Considering all these factors, a major new programme named Fund for Improve­ment of
 S&T infrastructure in universities and related institutions (FIST) has been envisaged. The De­partment has made a provision of Rs. 25.00 crores
 for the year 1998-99 under the Fund for Improvement of Science and Technology (FIST) infrastructure in Universities and related Institutions. The
 purpose of the FIST scheme would be to provide basic infrastructure and the enabling facilities and environment for promoting R&D in new and
 emerging areas and attracting fresh talent. The basic infrastructure would cover modem instrumentation facilities, access to information system and
 netw6rking and other infrastructural facilities like space, electricity, water and library facilities. The Committee was informed that the Department
 pleaded its case for allocation of Rs. 100 crore; before the Planning Commission for the FIST programme but it was restricted to Rs. 25 crores
 which C0.JiStitute only the one-fourth of the allocation demanded.
24. The Committee is convinced of the usefulness of the programme and, therefore, recommends that keeping in view the large number of
 universities and other institutions engaged in research and development work in frontier areas of science, the Planning Commission may consider
 providing higher allocation to the Department under this head at the RE stge. The Committee would also like that the Institutions! Universities for
 support under the FIST programme be selected through a transparent mechanism.
 
 
SWARNAJAYANTIFELLOWSHIPSSCHEME
25. 'The Committee found that an allocation of Rs. 50.00 crores under the Swarnajayanti Fellowships Scheme was made at the revised estimates
 during 1997-98 plan outlay and no allocation has been made for the current year. The Department explained that the amount is being kept in an
 interest bearing deposit account in PL Account. The rate of interest to be allowed on the deposit is at the rate of 13 per cent per annum which is
 expected to ensure an interest receipt of -Rs. 6.50 crores for the year 1998-99. The Fellowships will be awarded every year out of the interest
 earned. No provision was, therefore, made in the 1998-99 plan outlay. The Committee was informed that in response to the advertisement for short
 listing of the fellowship 765 applications were received and after the first screening only 65 were left in the fray, and in the second screening the
 number was reduced to 24, which ultimately resulted in final selection of 11 fellowships.
26. Looking at the response to the advertisement inviting applications under the Swaranajayanti Fel­lowship Scheme, the Committee is of the
 view that in future the Department should provide adequate publicity to the scheme through newspapers, radio and television so that more
 applications are received for the Fellowship.
SELF-EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMME FOR WOMEN
27. The Department has started a number of projects for generating self-employment of women.  During the year 1997-98, 26 projects were
 supported by the Department. These projects include produc­tion and marketing of mushroom, training in modem sericulture activities, orchid
 farming for rural women, etc. A list of projects is given at Annexure-II. The Department has also started coordinated projects on horticulture in
 Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Orissa, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Delhi and Tripura also for the benefit of women, wherein they are trained in
 processing and preservation technology. The detail of coordinated projects is placed at Annexure-III,
28. The Committee would like the Department to generate more such programmes which should lead to development, self-employment and income
 generation of women and other weaker section of society.
29. Outlining the broad strategy for S&T development, the Committee was given an account of the activities which the Department proposes to
 undertake during the Ninth Plan period. The Proposed Programme include: i) Promotion of advanced research in frontier areas, ii) Improvement of
 infrastructure facilities for R&D, iii) Encourclgemant to young outstanding scientists, iv) Improvement of S&T educa­tion and training, v)
 interaction of ST in all development activities, vi) use of S&T in mission mode projects, vii) Joint R&D projects with industry, viii) Fiscal
 incentives for conducting research, ix) Commercialisation of research results, x) support to information technology, and xi) priority in society
 related programmes.
R & D EXPENDITURE
30. The Committee noted with concern that while R&D expenditure per capita and as percentage of Gross National Product has been growing
 over the years in the developed countries, national expenditure on research and development in relation to Gross National Product in India, was
 declining. The Committee was told that according to the latest official statistics, the expenditure on R&D in India as percentage of Gross National
 Product has been around 8 per cent during the past few years. However, in absolute terms, India's R&D expenditure has increased from Rs.
 3974.17 crores in 1990-91 to Rs. 6821.02 crores in 1994-95.
31. The Committee observed that there is not only a need for higher allocation in the field of R&D work, but also the Government should think in
 tenns of giving fiscal incentives to private companies and industrial units, like income-tax rebate, who spend a part of their earnings towards R&D
 work.
PATENTING OF SCIENTIFIC INVENTIONS, PRODUcrs AND PROCESSES
32. The Committee wanted to know about the linkage between the Department of Science and Tech ­nology and the Council of Scientific and
 Industrial Research in regard to the patenting of scientific inventions, products and processes and the steps taken by the Department to strengthen
 the area of patenting.
33. The Committee was informed that a patent facilitating Cell (PFC) has set up to provide a single window facility for facilitating protection of
 inventions of Indian scientists, particularly from the univer­sity sector. Scientific agencies like the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research,
 Department of Atomic Energy, Defence Research and Development Organisation, Department of Space, ICAR, etc. have their outfits to protect
 inventions emanating from their laboratories and institutions. However, university scientists do not have any mechanism to protect their inventions.
 PFC extends full technical and financial support for protecting inventions emanating from universities either through Government support or their
 own funds. PFC is also open to extend the facilities to State level institutions supported by patent information centres at State levels by involving
 the State S&T Councils to make necessary facilities within the easy reach of scientists spread over the whole country.
34. PFC has developed necessary expertise and a small infrastructure as essential ingredients needed for providing services like patent search
 facilities, development of databases on Indian patent applications, patents granted in India and elsewhere and setting up of a panel of patent
 attorneys. A major imitative has been under-taken to orate awareness about intellectual property rights, especially patents among Indian scientists,
 R&D managers and policy makers. 35 such workshops have been held so far in different parts of the country. In all, academicians from about 80
 universities- have attended these work­shops. PFC has also filed 36 patent applications including 6 in foreign countries. Most of these
 applica ­tions are from the University sector. The CSIR has its full fledged set up for protecting the inventions. The experts from CSIR and
 scientists from other organisations along with patent attorneys are faculty members for the workshops of the DST. Many projects which may lead to
 patentable inventions are provided support through Patent searches, etc.
35. Patent Information Cell has been receiving requests from State Governments and universities for setting up Patent Information Centres. Each
 agency receiving support under the scheme will have to sign a Memorandum of Understanding with TIFAC. One such centre has been set up at

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/55th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:07]
 West Bengal State Council for Science and Technology, Calcutta and second at the MP State Council of Science and Technology, Bhopal. Other
 such centres have been planned in Chandigarh, Jaipur and Imphal.
36. The Committee recommends that Patent Information Centres be set up a Chandigarh , Jaipur and Imphal at the earliest possible. The
 Department sould also explore the possibility of setting up one such centre in any of the Southern States.
COOPERATION IN S&T BETWEEN INDIA AND CIS COUNTRIES
37. In response to a question about utilization of the services of the scientists belonging to Common­wealth of Independent States (CIS), the
 Committee was informed that scientists from Russia and other CIS countries are visiting India for joint work on the identified projects as well as for
 discussions and work related to technology transfer. While in all cases, local hospitality of such visiting scientists is met by the Indian side, in select
 cases, the international airfare is also being provided. Five Russian scientists were awarded the ILTP Fellowships, a scheme instituted this year, to
 work in Indian institutions. Three research fellows from Kazakhstan were provided with international fare and full hospitality during their stay at
 the Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research at Bangalore . More than 30 spe­cialists from CIS countries were invited to ARC-I,
 (International Advanced Research Centre for Powder Metallurgy and New Materials), Hyderabad on contract basis with international fare and
 attractive re­muneration to work on specific technology development programmes. Two lectures, one each by emi ­nent Indian and Russian
 scientists, were organised under Bose-Lomonosov Lecture Series, a scheme introduced this year. The Joint Council for ILTP (Integrated Long
 Term Programme of Cooperation in Science and Technology between India and Russia) in its eighth meeting held in Moscow on May 14-15, 1998
 recommended the establishment of a Technology Clearing House supported by Technology Plat­forms to facilitate industrial realisation of results
 of ILTP projects as well as available accomplishments of the two countries. A bi-monthly publication 'Technology Route', which is aimed at
 disseminating information about relevant Russian technologies to Indian industries, was also instituted.
38. After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology and assessing the progress of various important
 programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs. 628.12 crores, as sought by the
 De­partment of Science and Technology, for the year 1998-99 under Demand No. 75, may be ap­proved.
 
NEW DELHI S.R. BOMMAI
July 7, 1998 Chairman
 Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
 
 
 
___________________________________________________________________________
MINUTES
___________________________________________________________________________
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 23rd June, 1998 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
    1.  Shri S.R. Bommai - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
 2.    Shri Rahasbihari Barik
 3    Shri Debabrata Biswas
4.
        Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty
5.        Shri Ram Ratan Ram
6.        Shri Lachhman Singh
LOK SABHA
7.        Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix 0' Souza
8.        Shri M.C. Dhamotharan
9.        Shri Charan Das Mahant
10.       Shri Janardan Prasad Misra
11.       Shri Prakash Vishwanath Paranjpe
12.       Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
13.       Shri Mukul Wasnik
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri M.L. Taneja, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVFS OF THE DEPARTMENTOF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
1.        Prof. V.S. Ramamurthy, Secretary
2.        Shri Rahui Sarin, JS & FA
3.        Dr. A.P. Kulshrestha, Adviser
4.        Dr. Laxman Prasad, Adviser
5.        Dr. N.K. Sehgal, Adviser
6.        Shri V. Rao Aiyagari, Joint Adviser
7.        Dr. R.K. Midha, Joint Adviser
8.        Shri S.v. Singh, Joint Adviser
9.        Dr. P.K.B. Menon, Joint Adviser
10.       Ms. Sudha Shrotria, Deputy Secretary
11.       Miss Renu C. Deshpande, COA
12.       Dr. R. Saha, Director
13.       Shri R.P. Singh, Under Secretary
14.       Shri S. Chatterjee, P.S.O.
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE TECHNOLOGY DEVEWPMENT BOARD
Shri S.B. Krishnan, Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE TECHNOLOGY INFORMATION FORECASTING & ASSESSMENT COUNCIL
Shri Y.S. Ranjan, Executive Director

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/55th%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:07]
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE INDIA METEOROLOGICAL DEPARTMENT
Dr. B. Lakshmanaswamy, Addl. Director General
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE SURVEY OF INDIA
Lt. Genl. A.K. Ahuja, Surveyor General of India
2. The Committee took up for consideration the Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Department of Science & Technology. The Secretary in the
 Department briefly explained for the benefit of Members the budgetary allocations on different heads as also the functioning of the Ministry. The
 Members then sought clarifications on points relating to the. Demands for Grants.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.15 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on the 24th June, 1998.
 
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 7th July, 1998 in Room No. 67, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
      1.    Shri S.R. Bommai - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.        Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3.        Shri Rahasbihari Barik
4.        Shri Debabrata Biswas
5.        Shri Lachhman Singh
LOK SABHA
6.        Shri Ranjib Biswal
7.        Shrimati Bhavana Chikhaliya
8.        Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix D'Souza
9.        Shri K. Krishnamoorthy
10.       Shri Rupchand Murmu
11.       Shri Prakash Vishwanath Paranjpe
12.       Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
13.    Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 14.   Shri Suresh Warpudkar
15.  Shri Mukul Wasnik
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Director
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary
Shri M.L. Taneja, Committee Officer  
2. The Committee took up consideration of the draft 55th, * * * and * * * Reports on the Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Departments of
 Science & Technology, * * * * and * * * and * * * * the reports" were adopted.
3. The Committee  authorised * Chairman and in his absence Shri Lachhman Singh to present the reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Mukul
 Wasnik and in his absence Shrimati Bhavna Chikhaliya to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.25 A.M. to meet again at 10.00 A.M. Qne 9th July, 1998.
""*Relates to other matter.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 