PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Three Hundred Thirteenth Report of the Department-
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2018-19) of
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd January, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd January, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2019/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)
321
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Three Hundred Thirteenth Report of the Department-
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2018-19) of
The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd January, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd January, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2019/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ ( i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-25
Chapter I Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Ministry .................................................................................... 2-15
Chapter II Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Ministry’s replies............................. 16-23
Chapter III Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee.............. 24
Chapter IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final Replies
of the Government are still awaited................................................. 25
5. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 27-30
6. A NNEXURES ........................................................................................................... 31-38

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2018-19)
(Constituted on 1st September , 2018)
1. Shri Anand Sharma ––  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri Anil Baluni
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
6. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
7. Dr. Raghunath Mohapatra
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani
9. Shri Sharad Pawar
10. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
15. Kumari Sushmita Dev
16. Shri Ninong Ering
17. Shri Laxman Giluwa
18. Dr. K. Gopal
19. Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar
20. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
21. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
22. Shri Daddan Mishra
23. Shri Chirag Paswan
24. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
25. Shri Hari Narayan Rajbhar

(ii)
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Vikram Usendi
29. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
#30. Vacant
#31. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
1. Shrimati  Sunita Sekaran, Joint  Secretary
2. Shri T. N. Pandey,  Director
3. Shri S. Rangarajan,  Additional Director
4. Shri Mohd. Salamuddin,  Additional Director
5. Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
# Shri Raghu Sharma and Shri Nagendra Singh ceased to be  members of the Committee consequent upon their resignation
from the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 21st December, 2018.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present  the Report on
its behalf, present this Three Hundred Twenty-first Report on Action Taken by the  Ministry  of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change on the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred and
Thirteenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate  Change, which was presented/laid in both the Houses of Parliament on 13th March,
2018.
2. There were 25 Recommendations/Observations in the Three Hundred and Thirteenth Report of the
Committee. Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations  of the Committee were received
from the Ministry on 20th June, 2018.
3 In the meeting held on the 27th December, 2018,  the Committee considered the draft Report and
adopted the same.
New Delhi ;          ANAND SHARMA
27th December, 2018 Chairman,
Pausa 6, 1940 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.

(iv)
ACRONYMS
A TR : Action Taken Report
CAF : Compensatory Afforestation Fund
CAG : Comptroller and Auditor  General
CETP : Common Effluent Treatment Plant
CPCB : Central Pollution Control Board
CPREEC : C. P. R. Environmental Education Centre
CT : Computed Tomography
DSS : Decision Support System
EFC : Expenditure Finance Committee
ETF Bn. : Eco Task Force Battalion
FPM : Forest Fire Prevention and Management
GST : Goods and Service Tax
ICZM : Integrated Coastal Management
MIS : Management Information System
MoEF&CC : Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
NCMP : National Common Minimum Programme
NGOs : Non-Governmental Organisations
NITI : National Institution for Transforming India
NRCP : National River Conservation Plan
NTCA : National Tiger Conservation Authority
PCCs : Pollution Control Committees
R&D : Research and Development
RE : Revised Estimate
SPCBs : State Pollution Control Boards
STP : Sewage Treatment Plant

REPORT
The Action Taken Report (A TR) of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change on the recommendations/observations contained in Three Hundred
Thirteenth Report of the Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2018-2019) of the Ministry of Environment,
Forest & Climate Change ‘. The Report was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha
on the  13th  March, 2018.
2. Action Taken Note (ATN) has been received from the Ministry of Environment, Forest & Climate
Change in respect of all the twenty-five recommendations/ observations contained in the Three Hundred
Thirteenth Report. This has been categorized as follows:-
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
Para:- 3.4, 4.5, 8.5, 8.6, 8.15, 9.6, 9.7, 10.7, 11.9, 12.8, 12.14, 15.6, 15.9, 16.2 and
17.3.
(T
OTAL – 15)
Chapter II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view
of the Government’s replies:
Para:- 3.3, 7.5, 7.6, 8.9, 9.3, 9.9, 11.8, 12.13 and 14.4.
            (TOTAL – 9)
The Committee is convinced with the replies furnished by the Ministry and, therefore, does not want
to pursue above-mentioned recommendations further.
Chapter III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee:
Para:-  (TOTAL -  Nil)
Chapter IV: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are
still awaited:
Para:- 13.2.
(TOTAL - 1)
3. The Committee desires that the Department should furnish the updated information regarding the
paragraph mentioned in Chapter IV of the Report.
4. The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the succeeding pages.
1

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE IN 2017-18
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 As regards the umbrella scheme wise expenditure, the Committee notes that till 31st January, 2018 the
Ministry has been able to utilise only 68.85% the RE allocation leaving nearly 31% of the allocation to be
utilised during the last two months of the financial year. In case of ‘Environmental Protection, Management
& Sustainable Development’ and ‘National Coastal Management Programme’ the utilisation percentage is
as low as about 42%, the reason for which has been attributed as non release of funds. Although the
Secretary is his presentation before the Committee on 12th February, 2018, expressed hope that they would
be able to spend the entire money allocated to them by the end of the financial year, the Committee is
apprehensive of the same in view of the utilisation trend of the Ministry during the last few years.   The
Committee recommends that the Ministry should increase the pace of expenditure of funds in the initial and
middle months of the financial year, as per the guidelines of Ministry of Finance, so that they are not left to
spend the larger chunk in the last quarter of the financial year. Further, that would also enable then to seek
higher allocations from Ministry of Finance at RE stage for the schemes and programs which the Ministry
has in mind to execute in the future. (Para 3.4)
Action Taken
1.2 Overall the expenditure against umbrella scheme wise expenditure during financial year 2017-18 was
`  crore 1617.02 crore (98.15% of RE allocation). Under both the umbrella schemes-‘Environmental Protection,
Management & Sustainable Development’ and ‘National Coastal Management Programme’100% amount
was released by the Ministry against reallocation to the implementing agencies.
1.3 Recommendations of the Committee regarding increased pace of expenditure in the initial and middle
months of the financial year have been noted for compliance. Ministry will ensure that the bulk of budgetary
allocation for the financial year 2018-19 is released in the initial and middle months of the financial year to
enable seeking higher allocations from Ministry of Finance at RE stage.
BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE YEAR 2018-19
Recommendation/Observation
1.4 The Committee observes that the BE 2018-19 of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change has been retained at 
` 2675.42 crore against the projected demand of ` 3170.44 crore i.e. ` 495.02
crore less than proposed by the Ministry. As such, the budget of the Ministry has not seen any increase over
the allocation of 2017-18. The Committee feels that the request of the Ministry for additional funds of
2

3
` 1400 crores for six proposed activities is fully justified and recommends that the Ministry should be
provided enhanced allocation at RE stage to cater to the requirements of the Ministry. The Committee also
recommends that on its own part, the Ministry should make all out efforts to ensure that the allocation made
at BE is utilised to the maximum in its schemes/programmes and the physical targets are on schedule so that
it is on a firm ground to seek additional funds at the RE stage. (Para 4.5)
Action Taken
1.5 The observations of the Committee are noted and Ministry will make all out efforts to ensure that
budgetary allocation for financial year 2018-19 is optimally utilized for achieving the envisaged targets under
the schemes/programmes so that Ministry can request additional funds at RE stage.
1.6 Outcome–Output Monitoring Framework is being strengthened and indicators developed for monitoring
the physical and financial performances of the schemes/programmes.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION, MANAGEMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation/Observation
1.7 The Committee is perturbed to observe the unsatisfactory trend of utilisation of funds for ‘Pollution
Abatement’ during the last few years.
  As per the documents furnished by the Ministry, in 2016-17 to the BE
allocation of ` 20.00 crore for this scheme was reduce to ` 9.60 crore at RE stage and the Ministry could
utilize only ` 6.22 crore during the year. This trend of reduction in allocation at RE stage and unsatisfactory
utilisation of funds seems to reflect that pollution abatement is not among the priority areas of the Ministry.
The rising environmental pollution in the country not only results into a number of pollution related human
diseases and health conditions but negatively impact our ecology too. The scenario of environmental pollution
in the country is indeed very grim and has been affecting one and all. This Committee, NGOs and Civil
Society members are regularly holding meetings, seminars, workshops with different stakeholders to make
common people aware of the menace of pollution. In such a scenario, reduction and underutilisation of
funds for pollution abatement is not the least desirable. (Para 8.5)
Action Taken
1.8 During 2016-17,the allocation for the scheme Pollution Abatement was reduced from `  20.00 crore to
`  9.60 at RE stage out of which `  6.22 crore were utilized. There were various reasons for underutilization
under the pollution abatement scheme which include:
(i) Non-receipt of competitive proposals meeting criteria for funding under the scheme;
(ii) Amount available for funding under the scheme not attractive to investors;
(iii) Non-receipt of utilization from state organizations and state boards. Further, the scheme was
under restructuring and the focus was on funding ongoing projects.
1.9 During 2017-18, the Budget Estimate of `  21.29 crore was revised with allocation of `  7.50 crore at
RE stage and `  7.45 crore (99.3%) was utilised. The reduction in the allocation at RE stage is due to the
following reasons:

4
(i) No new proposals were received from the weaker SPCBs/PCCs as per existing guidelines.
(ii) Non receipt of Utilization Certificates from the SPCBs for releases made in the past years for
ongoing projects.
(iii) No new proposals on CETP and CT being taken up under these schemes.
1.10 Action being taken to improve utilization of funds:
* In order to ensure timely and judicious release of funds under Pollution Abatement to various
SPCBs/PCCs/Agencies, efforts have been made to ensure that their utilization certificates/statement
of expenditure is submitted well within time. Letters have been written to the concerned
organizations to expedite the pending Utilization Certificates.
* The issue of pending utilization certificates and settlement of accounts is being taken up with the
concerned organizations to ensure timely submission of the requisite documents so that the
release of funds is not stopped in the Ministry despite availability of funds in the Ministry.
1.11 Further, draft EFC is in process as per directives of Ministry of Finance to improvise Pollution Abatement
Scheme.
Recommendation/Observation
1.12 The Committee further notes that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change has decided
to discontinue some plans under this scheme and come up with another comprehensive scheme on pollution
abatement. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should introspect its performance under this scheme
during the last few years and take all necessary measures to ensure that in future funds allocated for the
reframed scheme are optimally utilised and all physical targets achieved. (Para 8.6)
Action Taken
1.13 The scheme had an allocation of `  60.0 crore in the 12th Plan and tentative liabilities arising out of
ongoing projects for Common Effluent Treatment Plants(CETP) was `  40.00 crore, out of which `  35.51
crore released. However, upon the recommendation of the Evaluation Committee on the Review of Plan
Scheme in 2016, it was decided to discontinue the scheme after funding support to the existing on-going
projects. The details of on-going projects with total cost, funds released and liabilities is placed at  Annexure-
I. Only `  3.5 crore has been released against the outlay of `  14.00 crore. in the year 2017-18 as the State
Share was not released by the State Government, as per the CETP guidelines.
1.14 Based on the assessment for the requirement of funds for ongoing CETP projects, allocations of
`  13.00 crore and `  13.50 crore has been proposed in the draft EFC for the year 2018-19 and 2019-20
respectively to ensure complete funding support for on-going CETP projects.“Development and Promotion
of Clean Technology and Waste Minimization Strategies” has been discontinued since 2017-18 and Ministry
is making efforts to complete all the ongoing projects under the Scheme.  Further, draft EFC is in process
to improvise Pollution Abatement Scheme.

5
Recommendation/Observation
1.15 The Committee notes the financial challenge faced by CPCB due to subsummation of Water Cess in
GST. CPCB is required to pay its committed expenditure to SPCBs/PCCs to implement their programme in
the States, which does not seem to be a possibility in the current scenario. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that adequate budgetary support may be provided to CPCB to enable it to smoothly and effectively
discharge its mandate. (Para 8.15)
Action Taken
1.16 Recommendation of the Committee has been noted. It is submitted that during current financial year an
allocation of ` 100 crore has been made to CPCB at the Budget Estimate stage. Out of this, an amount of
` 35 crore has been earmarked to SPSBs/PCCs. Requirement of additional funds to CPCB, if any, shall be
assessed at the Revised Estimate Stage.
DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR ENVIRONMENTAL AW ARENESS, POLICY, PLANNING AND
OUTCOME EV ALUATION
(i) R&D Conservation and Development
Recommendation/Observation
1.17 The Committee notes that the prime reason for reduction for funds at RE stage for this programme was
approval of the scheme after 7 months of the financial year had already gone by, which indicates a very
casual and lackadaisical approach of the Ministry. Research and Development are extremely important for
moving ahead in any field and in the current environmental scenario in the country, the importance of
research and development for a scheme relating to environmental awareness policy and planning cannot be
over-emphasised. If funds are reduced at RE stage due to late approval of schemes, then there is certainly a
need for introspection on part of the Ministry. Further, the Ministry has been able to utilise only 35% out of
the drastically reduced allocation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change must take urgent remedial measures, pay due importance to the research and
development activities and ensure that funds allocated for the purpose are not underutilised. (Para 9.6)
Action Taken
1.18 The R&D Scheme for Conservation and Development is an important component of Decision Support
System for Policy and Planning of the Ministry’s programmes and activities. The key objectives are for
addressing environmental problems and measures for conservation and protection of environment by building
indigenous capacities and strengthening manpower in multi-Disciplinary aspects of environment and new
and emerging areas of environment and ecology which are of priority and concern to the Ministry.
1.19 The outcome of the Scheme is expected to generate information for taking policy decisions, preparedness
and basis for international negotiations, supporting basic and applied research in environment, ecology and
related fields and to facilitate database management on Research projects undertaken under the Scheme on
relevant thematic areas of the Ministry.

6
1.20 The SFC Document 2017-2020 has been prepared for R&D for Conservation & Development after
rationalisation of the Scheme dropping certain sub-scheme components such as Biosafety (shifted to
Biodiversity Conservation), Assistance to Botanical Gardens (shifted to Botanical Survey of India), Taxonomy
Capacity Building (shifted to Botanical and Zoological Survey of India under Conservation & Survey) and
merging the sub-scheme National Natural Resource Management System (NNRMS) with R&D Scheme.
The thematic are “Use of Remote sensing and geospatial technologies for inventory, assessment and
management of natural resources” of NNRMS has been included as one of the thematic areas of R&D
Scheme.
1.21 The late start of the revised Scheme in November 2017 has led to shortfalls in utilisation of funds. As
a result the BE allocation for 2017-18 was reduced. Rs 6.98 crore released out of RE allocation of Rs 7.0
crore during 2017-18. Since the scheme is now revised, Ministry will ensure improved performance during
2018-19.
Recommendation/Observation
1.22 The Committee also tried to assess the physical performance of the Ministry under this programme.
However, the Committee was surprised to note that the background notes provided to the Committee did not
contain any details of the physical performance of the programme during the last three years i.e. objectives
targets and achievements under this program. In absence of any such information, the Committee cannot
asses the physical performance of the Ministry under this programme. The Committee had commented upon
non-furnishing of information to the Committee in its 300th Report also. The Committee would like to
reiterate that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should invariably provide all the
relevant information to the Committee in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants of the
Ministry so that the Committee’ s examination is not hindered in the absence of any such information.
(Para 9.7)
Action Taken
1.23 The revised R&D Scheme on Conservation and Development was approved in November, 2017. It is
reiterated that the Ministry has accorded high priority for this scheme and 8 thematic areas given below have
been identified for projects to be funded under the Scheme:
(1) Biodiversity Conservation
(2) Ecosystems Conservation & Management (Mountain, Forest, Coastal, Wetlands, Pastoral, etc)
and  Evaluation of Ecosystem Services. Human-wildlife Interface. Alien and invasive species
(3) Socio-economic issues of environment and sustainable development.
(4) Conservation and Management of Landscapes and Ecologically sensitive areas including issues
of sustainable livelihoods.
(5) Sustainable Management of Natural Resources
(6) Climate Change: Vulnerability & Risk Assessment, Process, Mitigation and Adaptation

7
(7) Pollution prevention - Clean Technologies and Processes, Cleaner Production, 3Rs, Resource
Efficiency, Waste Minimisation and Management, Environmental health, etc.
(8) Use of Remote sensing and geo-spatial technology for inventorisation, assessment and monitoring
of country’s natural resources such as land, water, forests, wetlands, glaciers etc. for environmental
conservation and protection.
1.24 The research projects funded under the Scheme on these thematic areas will enable the Ministry to
build database for finding practical solutions to problems of environmental protection and management to
generate information and knowledge from outcome of R&D projects used for developing policies, strategies,
action plans and in better management and conservation of natural resources.
1.25 The Scheme’s outcome has been revised to align with Ministry’s mandate and objectives for conservation
and protection of environment. Also, for transparency and for ensuring that the outcomes–outputs are
available on the website of Ministry, an MIS portal has been newly developed for the revised Scheme. All
applications will be received online. The Ministry has also prepared a 2-V olume Compendium on 83 completed
projects of XIIth Five-Year Plan. A similar exercise is on currently for XIth Five-Year Plan. Both the
Compendiums will also be uploaded on MIS Portal for all wide publicity and public access of these projects.
The non-submission of progress of projects is regretted. The details in three years are:
Financial Year Projects approved/ Projects completed Ongoing projects reviewed
newly sanctioned and monitored
2014-15 14 25 32
2015-16 16 12 35
2016-17 21 5 63
NATIONAL RIVER CONSERV ATION PROGRAMME (NRCP)
Recommendation/Observation
1.26 The Committee is of the opinion that the reasons cited by the Ministry for non-completion of targets set
are not tenable. The Ministry has fallen too short of the targets and among the reasons submitted by the
Ministry are slow progress of work and delay in release of Central funds, which speaks volumes about the
sincerity of the Ministry in implementing the programme. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
needs to take immediate remedial measures and ensure that there is no delay in release of funds, both at
Central and State level, so that the schemes of national importance do not suffer and targets set are achieved
in a time bound manner. The Ministry must also impress upon the State Governments to ensure timely release
of their corresponding share of funds and also to remove other bottlenecks at the state level to ensure
physical achievements of the targets set. (Para 10.7)
Action Taken
1.27 Central share of funds for sanctioned projects under National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) are

8
released in phases to the respective State Governments based on physical and financial progress achieved,
release of its corresponding share by the State Government together with submission of relevant Utilization
Certificates (UCs). However, it has been observed that in some cases there are delays by the State Governments
in transfer of Central and State share to the implementing agencies, resulting in delay in implementation of
projects and non-achievement of targets. The matter is being pursued with the respective State Governments
to ensure speedy implementation of the NRCP works and achievement of targets.
1.28 It may be mentioned that the budget utilisation for NRCP in 2017-18 is 99.9% ( ` 173.34 crore against
allocation of `  173.50 crore). Sewage treatment capacity of ` 53.00 mld was targeted to be created under
NRCP during the year 2017-18, against which 26.19 mld has been created in 7 STPs during the year. The
balance capacity could not be created due to slow progress of work, delay in release of Central funds and its
corresponding share by the Government of Nagaland to the implementing agency and other local issues in
case of 25.43 mld STP at Gangtok, the alignment for which has changed due to earthquake, heavy rain and
landslides leading to change in sewer alignment and land acquisition issue for the same. The matter is being
rigorously pursued with the respective State Governments and both these STPs will be completed in the
current financial year (2018-19).
NATIONAL COASTAL MANAGEMENT PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
1.29 In 2017-18, the performance of the programme is no better as the Ministry has been able to utilise only
42.32% of the RE allocation i.e. 
` 64.54 crore of the drastically reduced RE allocation of ` 152.50 crore.
The Committee has time and again expressed the view that delay in execution of projects escalates the cost
of the projects, whereas timely completion of programmes not only augments the performance of any
organisation physically as well as financially but also helps reduce the overhead costs. Since the project has
now been granted extension of time upto 31st December, 2018, the Committee recommends that Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change should take all necessary steps to ensure that the programme is
completed as per the revised schedule and the allocation for the programme is utilised optimally. The
Ministry should also monitor the progress of the programme through a robust monitoring mechanism to
ensure that the timelines for the programme are met. (Para 11.9)
Action Taken
1.30 During the year 2017-18 an amount of ` 152.50 crores was earmarked for National Coastal Management
Programme and entire amount was released by the MoEF&CC during the year 2017-18.
1.31 The CCEA approved a revised overall cost of ` 1580.10 crore in July, 2015. Due to Dollar exchange
rate variance with respect to saving of about ` 75.00 crore is available under the project. Hence MoEF&CC
extended the project period till December 2018 with a total project cost of `1655.10 crore. There is no
increase in the project cost with regard to the approved project components. The extension of the project is
sought for utilisation of savings available due to Dollar variation under the ICZM Project to undertake
activity under Beach Development and pollution management activities in line with Swacch Bharat Abhiyan

9
and pollution abatement in coastal states and UTs and to complete some activities like Solid Waste Management
at Paradeep, Marine Research Conservation and Information Centre at Somnath Gujarat and preparatory
activity of Phase-II.
1.32 All the major activities envisaged under National Coastal Management Programme have been successfully
completed (Details of activities completed is placed at Annexure-II). There are some components which are
under progress for reasons elaborated earlier.
1.33 Regular review meetings are held under the chairmanship of Additional Secretary MoEF&CC. Besides
this the World Bank and Ministry of Finance is also reviewing the progress of the Project regularly. Preparatory
activities of Phase-II of all the 13 coastal states/UTs have been initiated. Tender for beach beautification and
pollution abatement in 3 coastal states namely Gujarat, Diu and Maharashtra has been already awarded and
tenders for Odisha, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala and Karnataka have been floated, for remaining States Tenders
will be floated shortly.
NATIONAL MISSION FOR A GREEN INDIA (GIM)
Green India Mission-National Afforestation Programme (GIM-NAP)
Recommendation/Observation
1.34 One of the mandates of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change is afforestation and
regeneration of degraded forests. The Committee is happy to note that the forest and tree cover of the
country has increased by 8,021 sq. kms. and that dense forests have increased by 1.36 per cent. The Committee
observes that the same report also shows that the forest cover has decreased in the year 2017 as compared to
the report of 2015 in the North-Eastern States i.e. Mizoram, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura and
Meghalaya. The forests in these areas are rich in forest carbon and the declining trend of forests in these
areas could have been avoided. The Committee also feels that a lot more needs to be done to increase the
forest/tree cover to 5 million hectares as per the objectives of the Mission. The Committee recommends that
the Ministry should make all out efforts in this regard so that the pace of increase of forest cover in the
country continues in future too and also take necessary steps to arrest the declining trend in the North-
Eastern states. (Para 12.8)
Action Taken
1.35 GIM activities were started in the FY 2015-16, so far fund amounting to `157.64 crore have been
released under GIM to nine States for carrying out GIM activities.
1.36 Special attention is being given towards increasing forest cover in the North-Eastern States. An amount
of ` 30 crore was allocated for the North-Eastern Region heads for implementation of GIM for the period
2015-16 to 2017-18. However, the total amount released for the North-Eastern States is ` 52.47 crore. The
National Afforestation Programme implemented by NAEB (National Afforestation and Eco-Development
Board) stands merged with Green India Mission. MoEF&CC, however, also finalizes and communicates the
annual Afforestation targets under 20 Point Programme for Point 51 (a) – Land Covered under Afforestation

10
and Point 51(b) – Number of seedlings planted in lakhs, for all the States/UTs. These targets are fixed
annually for all the States with the objective of increasing forest cover in the country. Afforestation covers
an area of 17,41,135 ha– Point 51(a) and distribution of 11317.38 lakhs seedlings – Point 52(b) have been
fixed as targets for the States for 2018-19 under 20 point programme. The State/UTs-wise details are
enclosed in Annexure-III.
(ii) Intensification of Forest Management (Forest Fire Prevention and Management)
Recommendation/Observation
1.37 On the one hand, the Ministry claims of having taken a number of measures for stringent monitoring
and evaluation of its schemes/programmes, and on the other hand the Ministry is unable to provide the
details of physical achievements in respect of schemes, funds for which were released nearly 11 months ago.
The Committee has time and again expressed the view that a strong and potent monitoring mechanism is
extremely important for achieving the set objectives and implementation of the schemes. The Committee
would like to reiterate the recommendation in this respect made in its 283rd Report on Demands for Grants
(2016-17) of the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change to undertake a review of its
administrative and monitoring mechanism and strengthen the same to ensure that funds allocated for important
schemes/programmes are not underutilised and objectives of the schemes are achieved. (Para 12.14)
Action Taken
1.38 Schemes in Ministry operate under eight umbrella Schemes (Four Centrally Sponsored Schemes and
four   Central Sector Schemes) listed as under:
Centrally Sponsored Schemes:
1. National Mission for a Green India
1.1 Green India Mission–National Afforestation Programme
1.2 Intensification of Forest Management
2. Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats
2.1 Project Tiger
2.2 Project Elephant
2.3 Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats
3. Conservation of Natural Resources and Ecosystems
3.1 Conservation of Corals and Mangroves
3.2 Biodiversity Conservation
3.3 Conservation of Aquatic Ecosystems

11
4. National River Conservation Programme
4.1      National River Conservation Programme
Central Sector Schemes:
1. Environmental Knowledge and Capacity Building
1.1 Forestry Training and Capacity Building
1.2 Eco-Task Force
2. National Coastal Management Programme
2.1      National Coastal Zone Management Programme
2. Environment Protection, Management and Sustainable Development
2.1 Pollution Abatement
2.2 Hazardous Substances Management
2.3 Climate Change Action Plan
2.4 National Adaptation Fund
2.5 National Mission on Himalayan Studies
3. Decision Support System for Environmental Policy, Planning and Outcome Evaluation
3.1 Environmental Education, Awareness and Training
3.2 Environmental Information Systems
3.3 Centres of Excellence
3.4 R & D for Conservation and Development
3.5 Environment Impact Assessment
3.6 International Co-operation
1.39 All Schemes have their own mechanisms for monitoring according to their outputs and outcomes.
Evaluation is done on regular basis through review meetings, performance reports, external assessment,
physical verification etc.
1.40 Scheme performances are intensively monitored to assess the impact of outcomes in tandem with the
implementing agency, State Forest Department, and support organizations. Monitoring of progress and
funds released under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes is done by the concerned State/Union Territory
Governments. The State/UT Governments submit utilization certificate and physical progress report
periodically to the Scheme Managers/Ministry, where possible with photographs to show the physical progress.

12
1.41 Moreover, MoEFCC along with NITI Aayog is in the process of monitoring outcomes and outputs for
all Schemes through an MIS web portal for regular assessment.
MAN-ANIMAL CONFLICT AND RELOCATION OF TIGERS
Recommendation/Observation
1.42 The Committee is of the view that inspite of the steps initiated by the Ministry, the cases of man-animal
conflict are rising and it still remains an area of concern. The Committee recommends that in addition to the
steps initiated, the Ministry should undertake a scientific study on the possible movement of monkeys,
elephants, tigers etc. from their natural habitat to suitable alternate habitation which may lead to reducing
the number of human-animal conflicts. (Para 15.6)
Action Taken
1.43 The suggestion of the Committee has been noted and appropriate action will be taken. The steps taken
by the Project Elephant Division for mitigation of human elephant conflict in the country are given below.
(i) The Centrally Sponsored Scheme “Project Elephant” is being implemented for protection and
development of elephant and their habitats to reduce the conflicts with an increased outlay.
(ii) All the elephant states have been directed to implement the Guidelines for Management of Human
Elephant Conflict issues by the Ministry on 6.10.2017. This is expected to reduce the conflict
situation to a great extent.
(iii) Activities are being undertaken for Protection of elephants against poaching and control of illegal
trade of elephant tusks and other products/derivatives in collaboration with SFDs, WCCB and
NGOs.
(iv) Habitat improvement and providing connectivity through corridors are being undertaken by states
to overcome effects of fragmentation of habitat and improvement of genetic stock of Indian
Elephants in the country.
(v) International cooperation measures with elephant range countries and international organizations
dealing with conservation and welfare of elephants in the Asian Region.
(vi) Meetings/workshops are being conducted with stakeholders like Ministry of Railways, State
Forest Department, NGOs, Elephant Experts and other stakeholders for prevention of accidental
deaths and human-elephant conflicts.
(vii) As part of awareness campaign, the GajYatra Campaign has been launched by the Ministry in
collaboration with Wildlife Trust of India and shall be extended throughout the country for creating
awareness for prevention of Human Elephant Conflict and conservation of elephants in the country.
In so far as Project Tiger  is concerned, there is a multi-pronged strategy to deal with conflict as
follows:

13
(i) Material and logistical support: Funding support through the ongoing Centrally Sponsored Scheme
of Project Tiger is provided to tiger reserves for acquiring capacity in terms of infrastructure and
material, to deal with tigers dispersing out of source areas. These are solicited by tiger reserves
through an Annual Plan of Operation (APO) every year which stems out from an overarching
Tiger Conservation Plan (TCP), mandated under Section 38 V of the Wildlife (Protection) Act,
1972. Inter alia, activities such as payment of ex-gratia and compensation, periodic awareness
campaigns to sensitize, guide and advise the general populace on man-animal conflict, dissemination
of information through various forms of media, procurement of immobilization equipment, drugs,
training and capacity building of forest staff to deal with conflict events are generally solicited.
(ii) Restricting habitat interventions: Based on the carrying capacity of tigers in a tiger reserve, habitat
interventions are restricted through an overarching TCP. In case tiger numbers are at carrying
capacity levels, it is advised that habitat interventions should be limited so that there is no excessive
spillover of wildlife including tigers thereby minimizing man-animal conflict. Further, in buffer
areas around tiger reserves, habitat interventions are restricted such that they are sub-optimal
vis-a-vis the core/critical tiger habitat areas, judicious enough to facilitate dispersal to other rich
habitat areas only.
(iii) S tandard Operating Procedures (SOPs):The National Tiger Conservation Authority has issued
following three SOPs to deal with man-animal conflict which are available in public domain:
(a) To deal with emergency raising due to straying of tigers in human dominated landscapes
(b) To deal with tiger depredation on livestock
(c) For active management towards rehabilitation of tigers from source areas at the landscape
level
1.44 The three SOPs inter alia include the issue of managing dispersing tigers; managing livestock kills so
as to reduce conflict as well as relocating tigers from source areas to areas where density of tiger is low, so
that conflict in rich source areas does not occur.
Recommendation/Observation
1.45 The Committee is happy to note the increasing trend in the tiger population in the country. However, in
some of the areas they are over-populated and in other areas they fall short of required members.
  The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should identify the areas where translocation of tigers
can be carried out and take necessary action in this regard. This will also, to an extent, solve the problem of
man-tiger conflict in certain areas where tigers are spilling out of their natural habitat. (Para 15.9)
Action Taken
1.46 The NTCA, based on genetic evaluation have formulated a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) on
active management towards rehabilitation of tigers from source areas at the landscape level which, inter
alia, informs on translocation of tigers from high density areas to areas with low tiger densities.

14
1.47 In accordance with this SOP, tiger re-introduction is planned at the Buxa Tiger Reserve, West Bengal,
Satkosia Tiger Reserve, Odisha and Western part of Rajaji Tiger Reserve, Uttarakhand.
TIGER CONSERVATION AREAS
Recommendation/Observation
1.48 The Committee feels that the concerns raised in the above para are applicable to the tiger conservation
areas in India too. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take all necessary measures to
ensure that tiger conservation areas in the country meet global standards and poaching of tigers is effectively
checked. (Para 16.2)
Action Taken
1.49 India is in fact, setting the global standards in tiger conservation. In a global survey, it has been
assessed that tiger conservation in India has the following highlights:
(1) All sites surveyed in India have management plans.
(2) 49 out of 50 tiger reserve have a score ranging from 82% - 100%.
(3) Forest outside tiger reserves (where intensity of tiger conservation specific management is far
less  intensive) scored 57% to 88%.
(4) The Indian Management Effectiveness Evaluation of Tiger Reserves (MEETR) has been highlighted
as a specially designed tool for tiger conservation areas under the Protected Areas Management
Effectiveness (PAME).
(5) Project Tiger has been highlighted as an investment in the effective management of tiger
conservation areas for many decades, besides a concerted effort to recover tigers in India based
on the need to provide safe havens through a network of tiger reserves.
(6) Out of the 72 sites surveyed in India only 17 were found to be below 75% benchmark. This
included only one tiger reserve namely Indravati which is plagued by left wing extremism which
hampers day-to-day management.
(7) sites, largely forest divisions were between 51%-61%; 5 were between 61%-70% and 4 were
between 71%-74%.
NON-SETTLEMENT  OF  AUDIT  PARAS
Recommendation/Observation
1.50 The Committee is constrained to note that some of the Audit Paras of the Ministry are yet to be settled
even after 3 to 5 years.
  The Committee is of the view that the Audit Paras must be settled at the earliest and
for this purpose, the Ministry must submit satisfactory replies to the Audit so that they are settled at the
earliest and do not get entangled in repetitive submission of revised ATNs. The Committee, therefore,

15
recommends that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should take necessary action
accordingly for early settlement of the Audit Paras pertaining to that Ministry . (Para 17.3)
Action Taken
1.51 Recommendations of the Committee have been noted for compliance. At present only seven CAG
paras are pending for settlement. Out of above seven audit paras, three audit paras are in final stage of
settlement and on remaining four audit paras, the reply is being submitted on the comments made by
statutory auditor on the Action Taken Notes (ATNs) submitted earlier by the Ministry.

16
CHAPTER – II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLIES
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE IN 2017-18
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 The Committee notes that there was no reduction in the BE allocation provided to the Ministry by the
Ministry of Finance during 2017-18 at RE stage i.e. 
` 2675.42 crore and that the Ministry was able to spend
71.67% i.e. `  1917.60 crore upto 31st January, 2018. With only two months left for the completion of the
financial year, nearly 28% of the allocation is yet to be utilised. (Para 3.3)
Action Taken
2.2 Against the BE and RE allocation of `  2675.42 crore the expenditure up to 31st March, 2018 is
`  2645.57 crore. Overall, the Ministry utilized 98.88% of the Budgetary Allocation during the financial
year 2017-18.
ECO-TASK FORCE SCHEME
Recommendation/Observation
2.3 The Committee observes that the Eco Task Force Scheme serves the twin objectives of ecological
regeneration in difficult terrains of the country as well as promotion of meaningful employment to
ex-servicemen. In a physical performance review of the scheme, the Ministry has proposed continuation of
6 existing Battalions in States of Jammu & Kashmir, Rajasthan, Uttarakhand and Assam. The Committee is
not satisfied with this submission that that the impact of plantation on ecological balance is not possible to
be measured in numerical terms. This observation, in the opinion of the Committee, seems to be evasive.
(Para 7.5)
Action Taken
2.4 Eco-Development Force (EDF) Scheme was initiated in 1982 to restore the ecological balance by
carrying out ecological restoration of difficult and highly degraded terrains. Under the scheme, Eco Task
Force battalions (ETF) are created by Ministry of Defence, on the request of the respective State Government.
The scheme has twin objectives of ecological regeneration of difficult areas and promotion of meaningful
employment to Ex-Servicemen. At present six battalions have been raised in the States of Uttarakhand (127
bn & 130 bn), Rajasthan (128 bn), Assam (134 bn  & 135 bn) and Jammu & Kashmir (129 bn), by Ministry
of Defence for which the establishment cost is reimbursed by Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change.
2.5 Under the scheme the ETF battalions carry out plantation and other restoration activities on the land
16

17
provided by the State Government. The scheme, thus, not only facilitates enhancement of green cover,
especially in challenging settings, but also brings about increase in the value based plants including fruit
trees, takes up soil moisture conservation measures to prevent soil erosion and improve hydrology of the
area, The measures also enhance availability of grass and leaf fodder resulting in healthy cattle population
and increased livelihood opportunity for the local people.
2.6 The ecological restoration activities under the scheme bring about improvement in ecological services
and provide both tangible and intangible benefits. The tangible benefits like increase in green cover; enhanced
employment and income avenues are measurable. However; the intangible benefits like improved greenery
and aesthetics of the area, cleaner air, a healthy and clean environment etc. are not quantifiable. The computable
tangible benefits and indeterminable intangible outcomes generated under the scheme are derived by people
and are useful for local people living in and around the plantation sites.
Recommendation/Observation
2.7 The Committee notes that a substantial amount is also being incurred on the scheme on a yearly basis.
The Ministry has not indicated that whether it has any mechanism to monitor the implementation of the
scheme and raising of plantation cover in the remote and difficult terrains. The Committee recommends that
the Ministry must draw a mechanism to ensure that the plantation work is actually carried out in remote and
difficult terrains and the objectives of the scheme are fully achieved. (Para 7.6)
Action Taken
2.8 The work done by the ETF Bn is closely supervised by senior officers of Territorial Army Hq. Further,
quarterly progress reports of afforestation and restoration activities taken up in the State is submitted by
each ETF battalion regularly. These reports are duly verified and authenticated by the respective Divisional
Forest Officer and Commanding Officer of the ETF Bn. Moreover, the Ministry also undertakes third party
evaluation of various activities done by ETF Bn. Therefore, a mechanism is in place to ensure that the
objectives of the scheme are fully achieved. The performance of the ETF Bn is regularly monitored through
the existing mechanism.
ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION, MANAGEMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Development and Promotion of Clean Technology and Waste Minimization Strategies
Recommendation/Observation
2.9 While the Committee cannot make any assessment of the physical performance under this programme
in 2016-17 in the absence of any data being furnished to the Committee, the Committee notes with concern
the reasons cited by the Ministry for underutilisation of funds under this programme in 2017-18, which are
purely administrative in nature and could have been avoided by proactive approach and strict monitoring.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should revisit its performance under this
programme and ensure that the funds are not underutilised due to such administrative and procedural lapses.
(Para 8.9)

18
Action Taken
2.10 The recommendations of the Committee are noted. “Development and Promotion of Clean Technology
and Waste Minimization Strategies” has been discontinued since 2017-18 and Ministry is making utmost
efforts to monitor and complete all the ongoing projects under the Scheme. Physical performance under
Clean Technology during 2016-17 is as follows:
* Five Project Monitoring Committee meetings on ongoing projects were organized to review the
projects.
* Financial support of ` 1.42 crore was released under ongoing projects
* Three projects were completed and workshops were organized under these projects for
dissemination of the project outcomes.
During the last five years, the following projects have been completed:
* Derivation of engine fuel from waste plastics and its performance evaluation by Annamalai
University, Tamil Nadu
* Development of Fly Ash Based Geo polymer Concrete Pre-Cast elements by Annamalai University
* Effective removal of arsenic from ground water by Central Salt and Marine Research Institute.
Waste minimization through co-composting of on and off-farm wastes for sustainable crop productivity
and soil health by Annamalai University, Tamil Nadu.
DECISION SUPPORT SYSTEM FOR ENVIRONMENTAL AW ARENESS, POLICY, PLANNING AND
OUTCOME EV ALUATION
Recommendation/Observation
2.11 The Committee notes that the Ministry has been able to spend only 67.35% of the allocation under the
scheme during 2017-18 upto 31.1.2018. The performance of the Ministry under this scheme has not been
impressive during the last two financial years as the Ministry was not able to satisfactorily utilise the
allocations made. Underutilisation of the funds also raises doubts about the achievements of the physical
targets set under the various programmes under the scheme too. (Para 9.3)
Action Taken
2.12 The umbrella Scheme, “DSS for Environment Awareness Policy, Planning and Outcome Budget” has
following Schemes/Programmes:
(1) Centres of Excellence
(2) Environmental Information System
(3) R & D for Conservation and Development
(4) Environmental Education, Awareness and Training

19
(5) Environmental Impact Assessment
(6) International Co-operation
2.13 Overall, the expenditure during 2017-18 was 76.97% of BE and 90.23% of RE. The physical progress
of programmes is detailed below:
Centres of Excellence:
* As per the revised Scheme, all institutions of excellence in the country including all existing
Centres of Excellence can apply for financial assistance in project mode under relevant thematic
areas. The Centres of Excellence Scheme will fund specific projects, research, study, activity of
priority/concern or urgency in identified thematic areas assigned by MoEF&CC vis-a-vis objectives
and mandate of the Ministry.
* During 2017-18, 10 new projects of the Salim Ali Centre for Ornithology and Natural History
(SACON) were approved. An amount of ` 12crore was released to SACON. In addition, an
amount of ` 1.91 crore was released to CPREEC, Chennai for 2017-18. Thus the total fund
released during 2017-18 is ` 13.91 crore.
* In order to effectively evaluate and monitor the scheme, an MIS-Portal is also under preparation
for transparency, establishing a database monitoring, evaluation and review of the projects in
meeting Outputs-Outcome vis-a-vis Ministry’s mandate and objectives.
ENVIS:
* The expenditure incurred in FY 2017-18 was ` 20.22 crore which was around 88% of the
budget. The envisaged financial and physical targets under the scheme were broadly achieved.
R&D for Conservation and Development:
* The scheme was revamped and the revised Scheme after detailed deliberations was approved in
November, 2017. ` 6.98 crore released out of RE allocation of ` 7.0 crore during 2017-18. The
Ministry has accorded high priority for R&D Scheme on Conservation and Development and the
outcomes of the revised Scheme will be aligned to ongoing programmes and Schemes of the
Ministry.
Environmental Education, Awareness and Training:
* The allocations for the Environment Education, Awareness and Training (EEAT) scheme is utilized
for creating environment awareness among masses, schools students through implementation of
programmes namely National Green Corps (Ecoclubs), National Nature Camping, National
Environment Awareness Campaign  and Seminars/Symposia/Workshops.
* Around 85% of RE allocation released during 2017-18. Directorate of Advertising and Visual
Advertising (DAVP) could not utilize full funds given for airing of video spots and radio spots.

20
Also, funds could not be utilized because the Science Express Climate Action Special Train did
not operate in 2017-18.
International Cooperation:
* Around 90% of RE allocation released during 2017-18 towards the achievement of the scheme
objectives.
Environment Impact Assessment:
* Around 86% of RE allocation released during 2017-18 towards the achievement of the scheme
objectives.
Environmental Impact Assessment
Recommendation/Observation
2.14 The Committee noted that the Ministry had not furnished the details of the physical targets/achievements
under the programme ‘Environmental Impact Assessment’  in the various documents submitted to the Committee
in connection with the examination of Demands for Grants 2018-19 of the Ministry. As regards the financial
performance under the programme, the Committee observed that under this programme too, the financial
performance of the Ministry has not been impressive. In 2017-18, the BE allocation for the programme of
` 5.40 crore had been reduced to ` 4.50 crore at RE stage out of which the Ministry had been able to utilise
only 2.29 crore i.e. only 50.89% upto 31.1.2018. Although the Ministry has not furnished any details
relating to the physical performance of the programme, the low utilisation reflects the physical performance
under the programme too. The Committee further noted that the financial performance of the programme
has not been satisfactory during 2015-16 and 2016-17 too since the Ministry could utilise only 55.35% and
79.62% respectively of the allocation made during the two years.
  The Committee therefore, recommends
that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change must take due cognizance of the facts placed
before it by the Committee and make all out efforts to ensure that there is no underutilisation of funds by the
Ministry and the physical and financial targets are achieved to the fullest extent. (Para 9.9)
Action Taken
2.15 Ministry is putting its best efforts to bring transparency and efficiency in processing and disposal of
applications for environment clearances. The initiatives taken by the Ministry, inter alia,  include online
system of processing of environmental clearances; introduction of Short Messaging Service (SMS)
functionality for Project proponent; auto alert system; separate module to track the progress of recommended
projects; etc. Ministry is in the process of introducing online processing of Environmental Clearance (EC)
applications which inter-alia will also include online generation of agenda, minutes and EC letter. In view of
aforesaid efforts, the number of days taken in granting EC has come down substantially from 600 days
(before 2014) to 200 days (between May 2014 and May 2017) which is now 140 days. During FY 2017-
2018 MoEFCC has accorded 523 EC.

21
2.16 The Commi ttee has noted that the utilization of funds in the year 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 are
55.35%, 79.62% and 87% respectively (with respect to RE). Efforts were made to efficiently utilize the
funds and only 13% of the funds (in the last three years) were surrendered with respect to RE. Around 86%
of RE allocation released during 2017-18 towards the achievement of the scheme objectives. In this regard,
it is also informed that the funds are used for the smooth functioning of the Division, conducting Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) meeting to consider the proposals for granting Environmental Clearance, for
conducting various studies/workshops/training programs and paying the lawyers fee for different court
cases.
NATIONAL COASTAL MANAGEMENT PROGRAMME
Recommendation/Observation
2.17 The Committee observes that the NCMP , which was originally approved with a cost estimate of
` 1155.63 crore with time frame upto March, 2015 has, after repeated time extensions, been revised to
` 1655.10 crore with time extension upto 31st December, 2018, which reflects upon the tardy physical progress
of the scheme during the last few years. (Para 11.8)
Action Taken
2.18 National Coastal Management Programme was initiated in 2010 with a total cost of ` 1155.63 crores
which was revised in 2015 with a total cost of `  1580.10 crores with the approval of EFC and CCEA. The
project being implemented is the first of its kind and there was no precedence to refer whenever any issues
faced. All the major activities envisaged under National Coastal Management Programme are completed.
Except some components which are under progress or yet to be taken up under Phase-I of the Project. The
main reasons for these components not achieving the time target was primarily due to land acquisition delay,
non-responsive bids, State and Assembly elections and natural calamities including flooding and cyclone in
Chennai and Odisha etc.
(ii)  Intensification of Forest Management (Forest Fire Prevention and Management)
Recommendation/Observation
2.19 The Committee observes that the Ministry could utilise only 
` 26.79 crore upto 31st January, 2018 out
of the reduced BE allocation of ` 45.25 crore during 2017-18, which comes to 59.20 percent and can in no
way be termed as satisfactory. The Committee is also constrained to note that the Ministry has failed to
provide the details of the physical achievements under the scheme to the Committee, which, as per the
background note furnished by the Ministry, are yet to be received from States/UTs. It is further astonishing
to note that the funds for the scheme were released nearly 11 months ago i.e. in April, 2017. This reflects
very poorly on the monitoring mechanism of the Ministry as well. (Para 12.13)
Action Taken
2.20 As per the direction of this Ministry, the erstwhile Intensification of Forest Management Scheme was
revised and replaced as Centrally Sponsored ‘Forest Fire Prevention & Management’ Scheme. The EFC

22
memo in this regard was submitted on 23rd March, 2017 and the final approval for the FPM scheme was
communicated to this Division only on 20th November, 2017. After the approval of the FPM Scheme
operational guidelines for the same was prepared and circulated to all States/UTs within three weeks for
submission of Annual Plan of Operations (APO). Further, the amount released under the FPM Scheme as on
31.03.2018 is `  34.80 crore which is 69.60% of BE and 76.91% of RE.
2.21 As the money under the FPM Scheme is being given to State /UT Forest Departments for undertaking
various forest fire prevention & management measures, the complete details regarding the physical
achievements for particular financial year will be received during the next financial year along with the
proposal for APO.
2.22 The monitoring and evaluation mechanism of the FPM scheme as per its operational guidelines is as
follows:
(i) The Ministry will arrange for periodic monitoring and evaluation of the Scheme through its
officials, Regional Offices/Autonomous organisations of the Ministry & State Forest Departments.
It will also conduct third party monitoring and evaluation through credible organisations/
independent consultants/NGOs preferably every year. However, the third party evaluation will be
carried out at the end of three year period.
(ii) The State Forest Departments shall be responsible for regular monitoring and review of the
achievements under the scheme.
(a) States/UTs shall furnish Quarterly Progress Report (QPR) on progress of implementation
of the scheme, in due format for every quarter of the year.
(b) A State level Monitoring Committee shall be formed in each State/UT under the Chairmanship
of PCCF (HoFF) with Nodal officer for the scheme as its Member Secretary, for periodic
monitoring, review and evaluation work. The monitoring and review report of a year should
invariably accompany the AWP of the subsequent year.
FRAMING OF RULES FOR CAMPA FUNDS
Recommendation/Observation
2.23 The Committee observes that after seeking repeated extensions, the Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change has finalised the draft Compensatory Afforestation Fund (CAF) Rules and soon the
rules will be in public domain. The Committee hopes that the draft CAF Rules also address the concerns of
the Committee expressed in its 300th Report regarding not giving any scope for mis-utilisation or embezzlement
of the funds by the States or any other stake holders as well as a stringent monitoring mechanism for the
utilization of the funds. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should, as intimated by the
Ministry, notify the CAF (Accounting Procedure) Rules separately positively before 3rd August, 2018.
(Para14.4)

23
Action Taken
2.24 The Draft Compensatory Afforestation Fund Rules 2018 was published in gazette on 17th February,
2018 for comments/suggestions from public and other stakeholders.  After compilation and due incorporation
of the comments, the draft CAF Rules 2018 will be sent to the Ministry of Law & Social Justice for vetting
before notification.

CHAPTER – III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
Nil
24

CHAPTER – IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED
CUTTING OF TREES IN HIMACHAL PRADESH
Recommendation/Observation
4.1 The Committee takes strong exception to the massive cutting of trees in Himachal Pradesh for a
Highways expansion project which is not only causing irreparable damage to the ecology of the hilly State
but the entire environment of the region, including flora and fauna, carbon sink etc. has been affected. The
Committee is of the view that there are global best practices regarding construction of highways and
environment, forest covers and wildlife have always been factored for preservation before any project is
cleared. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should submit an assessment report on the damage
caused to the environment due to the cutting of trees in Himachal Pradesh for the consideration of the
Committee. Further, to maintain the ecological balance of the area, adequate number of trees should be
planted in the area and the Committee should be informed of the steps taken to replenish the environment of
the area. (Para 13.2)
Action Taken
4.2 Minimum numbers of trees are felled as per the requirement under the supervision of the State Forest
Department. As per the guidelines, Compensatory Afforestation is stipulated by the Central Government
while approving the proposals for diversion of forest land for non-forestry uses and it shall be done over
equivalent area of non-forest land and where non-forest land is not available, Afforestation may be carried
out over degraded forest land twice in extent of the area being diverted.
4.3 The cases involving diversion of forest land for up to one hectare, plantation of ten times the number
of trees likely to be felled will have to be carried out by way of CA.
4.4 Regarding assessment report on damage caused to the environment due to the cutting of trees, matter
has been referred to the Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE) and State Government
of Himachal Pradesh for doing the needful and inform the Ministry vide letter No. F. No. 11-84/2018-FC
dated 16th May 2018.
25

MINUTES

V
FIFTH  MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 27th December, 2018 in Committee Room No. 4, ‘A’
Block, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi.
MEMBERS  PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri Anil Baluni
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
5. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar
8. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
9. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
10. Shri Daddan Mishra
11. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
12. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
13. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He informed the
Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 317th, 318th, 319th, 320th,
321st, 322nd and 323rd reports of the Committee on Action Taken by  the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in reports of the Committee on Demands for
29

30
Grants (2018-19) of the Ministries/Departments of Biotechnology; Science and Technology; Scientific and
Industrial Research; Space; Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Atomic Energy; and Earth Sciences
respectively. The Committee, then, considered the draft 317th to 323rd reports and adopted the same.
3. The Committee decided to present/lay its 317th to 323rd reports in both the Houses of Parliament on
the 2nd January, 2019. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to decide the names of the Members
for presentation/laying of the reports in both the Houses of Parliament.
4. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3.25 P.M.

31
ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
Major On-going Projects under Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETP)
(`  in Lakhs)
Sl. Name of the CETP T otal State MoEF& MoEF& Funds yet
No. Projects Share CC CC to be
Cost Share Share released
released
so far
1. Kondapali CETP, Andhra 650.00 162.00 45.00 20.00 25.00
Pradesh
2. 12 MLD CETP unit-V at 1470.00 412.50 367.50 41.31 326.37
Mandia Road Industrial Area,
Pali, Rajsthan
3. 12 MLD CETP unit-VI at 1340.00 345.00 335.00 41.31 293.87
Punayata Road Industrial
Area, Pali, Rajasthan
4. Palsana (upgradation), Surat, 5731.00 1432.00 1500.00 1366.00 134.00
Gujarat (50 MLD)
5. 15 MLD CETP, BahadurKe 51 11.00 562.50 1 125.00 500.00 625.00
Road, Ludhiana, Punjab
6. 40 MLD CETP, Punjab 5540.00 750.00 1500.00 - 1500.00
Dyers Association Ludhiana,
Punjab
33

34
ANNEXURE–II
Major activities envisaged under National Coastal Management Programme
Component Physical Output (Major)
All the components and the sub components at National Level (NPMU)
and at the three SPMUs are under various stages of implementation. Physical
output of the major components are as follows:
National Component * Aerial Photography of the entire coast of India is completely. (78000
sq km) The World Bank has indicated that this work is first of its
kind, largest ever in the World Bank projects.
* Photogrammetric work of western coast (41000 sq km) and for
eastern coast (37000 sq km) is completed.
* Hazard line mapping for West Coast and East Coast is completed.
* Sediment cell mapping of entire coast is completed.
* ESA mapping of entire coast is completed.
* Shoreline change map of entire coast is completed.
* Establishment of 4 Data Centres is under process: Bidding process
in going on.
* Preparatory activities of Phase-II of all the 13 coastal states/UTs
have been initiated. PPR from Gujarat, Odisha, Maharashtra, Tamil
Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Lakshadweep received.
* 14 number of training/workshop/seminar conducted pertaining to
ICZM
* SICOM-Delhi and NCSCM – Chennai: two professional bodies are
set up.
State Component - Gujarat * 15670 ha mangrove plantation in Gujarat is completed.
* Coral transplantation in 1000 sq km is completed in Gujarat.
70 mld STP at Jamnagar is operational in Gujarat and around 5 lac
population of city will get benefitted.
* Capacity Building of Gujarat Pollution Control Board and GEER
Foundation: 5 years data of 18 stations are collected. Protocols of
monitoring (Bio chemical monitoring ogGoK) is prepared and
published. New 13 stations are being monitored and will be completed
by December 2017.
34

35
Component Physical Output (Major)
* Establishment of Marine Research and Conservation Interpretation
Centre at Somnath (First time in India): Bidding process is going
on.
* Livelihood activities carried out that involve formation of CBOs,
SHGs, EDCs comprising 11 members of each village and 50% are
female members.  During the Mission, the World Bank has indicated
that 42627 families get benefitted from the Entry point activities
carried out during the project.
State Component - Odisha * Successful installation of GEO Tubes in Pentha village (505 mt) to
prevent coastal erosion and to save the life and property of 58 villages
including 6883 ha crop land.
* 14 multipurpose cyclone shelters in Odisha are completed and already
put to use and handed over to Cyclone Shelter Management and
Maintenance committee which is going to provide refuge to at least
14,000 villagers at the time of natural disaster and alternatively are
being used for community halls, Anganwadi centres, SHG training,
schools etc in normal days.
* Deployment of sensors at 10 strategic locations to monitor the water
quality on real time basis in Chilika lake is completed (first time in
Asia)
* Establishment of Solid Waste Management at Paradeep: Bidding
process is going on.
* Regional Coastal Process Study has been completed for 484 kms
of Odisha Coast for the first time in India and will be used for
ICZM plan and shoreline Management Plan.
* Alternative Livelihood activities have been carried out which involves
formation of CBOs, SHGs, EDCs. The World Bank has indicated in
their report that overall project has directly benefitted 50,100 persons
in terms of livelihood of which 33,795 are women beneficiaries.
Project has indirectly benefitted 5,38,599 persons of which 2,69,299
are women.
SPMU- West Bengal * 100% electrification work in Sagar Island in West Bengal is completed
and around 34036 households shall get benefitted, so far WBSEDCL
has provided over 31050 service connections.
Construction of 25 Multipurpose cyclone shelters in vulnerable
coastal village are going on and will prevent villagers from loss of
life and live stock due to cyclones and storm surges.

36
Component Physical Output (Major)
* 20 km storm water drainage in Digha has been completed and
population of around 20,415 people in Digha will get benefitted.
* Renovation of sanitary sewerage scheme in Digha: 11.33 km sewer
line laid. Construction of 6.7 MLD STP along with Sewage Lifting
Station completed. Trial run is under progress and population of
around 20,415 people will be benefitted.
* Alternative Livelihood activities through SHG’s coastal communities,
CBOs have been carried out. The World Bank has indicated in their
report that livelihood component of the project has so far directly
benefitted over 41,000 individuals of which nearly 29,000 are women
members.

37
ANNEXURE-III
Targets of Afforestation/Tree Planting under 20 Point
Programme (TPP) for the year 2018-19
Sl. No Name of State/UT                                              Target- 2018-19
Point 51 (a) Point 51 (b)
1          2 3 4
1. Andhra Pradesh 226180 1470.17
2. Arunachal Pradesh 30 0.20
3. Assam 45 0.29
4. Bihar 65140 423.41
5. Chhattisgarh 1 16760 758.94
6. Goa 150 0.98
7. Gujarat 187250 1217.13
8. Haryana 33700 219.05
9. Himachal Pradesh 15480 100.62
10. Jammu and Kashmir 9760 63.44
11. Jharkhand 15570 101.21
12. Karnataka 67310 437.52
13. Kerala 18890 122.79
14. Madhya Pradesh 42050 273.33
15. Maharashtra 69410 451.17
16. Manipur 9770 63.51
17. Meghalaya 2850 18.53
18. Mizoram 4455 28.96
19. Nagaland 1155 7.51
20. Odisha 282755 1837.91
21. Punjab 4100 26.65
22. Rajasthan 76315 496.05
23. Sikkim 3225 20.96
24. Tamil Nadu 56890 369.79
25. Telangana 276870 1799.66
37

38
1          2 3 4
26. Tripura 8360 54.34
27. Uttarakhand 19570 127.21
28. Uttar Pradesh 1 15830 752.90
29. West Bengal 7805 50.73
30. A&N Islands 1320 8.58
31. Chandigarh 170 1.11
32. D&N Haveli 240 1.56
33. Daman & Diu 10 0.07
34. Delhi 1560 10.14
35. Lakshadweep 10 0.07
36. Puducherry 150 0.98
Total 1741135 1 1317.38
Point 51 (a) - Area covered (ha)
Point 51 (b) – No. of seedlings planted (number in lakhs)