PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
SIXTY-SECOND REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FIFTY-EIGHTH 
REPORT OF THE DEPARTl\1ENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS ON THE DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (1998-99) OF THE DEPARTMENT 
OF ELECTRONICS 
(PRESENTED ON DECEMBER 22ND, 1998) 
(LAID ON DECEMBER 22ND, 1998) 
•.\ 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER , 1998/AGRAHAYANA, 1920 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
1. COMPOSITION OF nrE CoMMITTEE 
2. INTRODUCTION 
3. REPORT OF niE COMMITTEE 
4. MrNuTEs oF nrE MEETING oF nrE CoMMITTEE 
PAGES 
(i)-(ii) 
(iii) 
1-4 
5-7 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1998-99) 
I,\ ' Shri S.R. Bommai - Chairman 
RAJY A SABIIA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Rahasbihari Barik 
4. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
*5. Shrimati Saroj Dubey 
**6. Slui Oscar Fernandes 
@7. Shri Ram Chandra Khuntia 
8. Dr. D. Masthan 
9. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty 
10. Shri Lachhman Singh 
@@11. Shri Raj ·Mohinder Singh 
12. Shri W. Angou Singh 
$13. Shri B .P. Singhal 
14. Shri Prakanta Warisa 
$$15. Vacant 
LOK SABIIA 
16. Shri Indra Nath Bhagat 
17. Shri Ranjib Biswal 
18. Shri Chengara Surcndran 
19. Shrimati Bhavana Chikhaliya 
20. Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix D'Souza 
21. Shri M.C. Dhamotharan 
22. Shri George Eden 
23. Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya 
24. Shri K. Krishnamoorthy 
25. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
26. Shri Janardan Prasad Misra 
• nominated 1v.c.f. 27th July, 1998 vice Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi ceased to be a Member of the Committee 
w.c.f. 4th July, 1998 on expiry of his term in· Rajya Sabha. 
•• nominated 1v.e.f 17th July, 1998. 
@nominated w.c.f. 17th July, 1998 vice Shri Pranab Mukherjee ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 
29th June, 1998. 
@@nominated w.e.f. 11th August, 1998 vice Shri G. Swaminathan ceased to be a Member of the Committee 
w.c.t: 29th June, 1998 on expiry o~ his term in Rajya Sabha. 
$nominated w.c.f. 15.th September, 1998 vice Shri Ram Ratan Ram who was nominated w.e.f. 12th June, 1998 
and ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 4th July, 1998 on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha. 
$$ Shri N. Abdul Khader ce<Jsed to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 29th June, 1998 oo expiry of his term 
in Rajya Sabha. 

27. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
28. Captain Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 
29. Shri Prakash Vishwanath Paranjpe 
30. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pra~nanik 
31. Shri S. Vijaya Rama Raju 
32. Shri lnderjit Singh Rao 
33. Shrimati Vijaya Raje Scindia 
%34. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
35. Shri Virendra Singh 
36. Prof. Saifuddin Soz 
37. Shri Devji Bhai J. Tandel 
38. Shri Prasad Baburao Tanpure 
39. Dr. C. P. Thakur 
40. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
41. Shri Suresh Warpudkar 
42. Shri Mukul Wasnik 
**43. Vacant 
% *44. Vacant 
%$45. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Director 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary 
Shri Roshan Lal, Committee Officer 
% nominated w.e.f. 26th June, 1998. 
•• Shri Madhavrao Scindia ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.c.f. 16th December, 1998. 
% • Shri Ayanur Manjunath ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 11th June, 1998. 
%$ Shri B.M. Menasinakai ceased to be a Member of the Comm ittee w.e.f. lOth June, 1998. 

' INTRODUCfiON 
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having 
been authorised by the Committee to submit the report on it!\ behalf, present this Sixty-second 
Report, on the Action Taken by the Department of Electronics on the recommendations contained in 
the Fifty-Eighth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Department of 
Electronics . 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Electronics on 
the recommendations contained in the Fifty-Eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Science and Technology. Environment and Forests on the Demands for 
Grants (1998-99) of the Department of Electronics which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on lOth 
July, 1998. 
2. There arc 7 recommendations contained in the Fifty-Eighth Report of the Committee . Action 
Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee, were received from Q1e Department on 19th 
November, 1998. 
3. In the meeting held on 18th December, 1998 the Committee considered the draft Action 
Taken Report and adopted the same. 
NEW DELHI; 
December 18, 1998 
S. R. BOMMAI, 
Chairman, 
Commillee on Science and Technology, 
Environment and Forests. 

REPORT 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of 
Electronics on the recommendations contained in the Fifty-Eighth Report of the Depart­
ment-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment 
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (1998-99) of the Department of Electronics which 
was presented to the Rajya Sabha on lOth July, 1998. There are 7 recommendations 
contained in the Fifty-Fourth Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the 
recommendations of the Committee, were received from the Department on 19th 
November, 1998. 
On scrutiny of the Action Taken Report as received from the Department of 
Electronics, the Committee finds that all the 7 recommendations have been fully im­
plemented. 
The Committee's recommendation, action taken thereon and comments of the Commit­
tee on the acti'on taken by the Department of Electronics are given in the succeeding 
paragraphs:-
RECOMMENDATION 
Apart from many sources for the funding of the Technology Development Council 
Projects, the Committee learnt that the Central Government Departments have also been 
advised by the Planning Commi ssion to allocate 2 to 3 per cent of their outlay to promote 
Information Technology. The Committee recommends that the Department should con­
stantly interact with various MinistrieS'Departments of the Government to monitor that the 
allocation made by them to promote information technology is being used in the right 
direction. The. Committee feels that in the absence of such a monitoring agency no checks 
can be imposed on the diversification of these funds for other purposes. 
(Para 13) 
Action Taken by the Department: 
. 
As a sequel to the advice of the Planning Commission to all MinistrieS'Departments to 
allocate 2-3% of their Budget to promote Information Technology, Department of 
Electronics has written to all Ministries/Departments to make a separate subhead for IT. 
DOE has nominated its senior officers to function as Nodal officers to assist Ministries/ 
Departments in identifying applications of IT in their sector. The Government has also 
constituted a High Powered Committee under the Chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary for 
improving administrative efficiency by using IT. 
Comments: 
The Committee notes the . reply. 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee notes with satisfaction that due to the efforts of the Department, Indian 
software export has made a tremendous progress and has jumped to a level of. US$ 1.6 billion 
in 1997-98. The Committee is, however, constrained to observe that the Department has 
made relatively less progress in the hardware sector and recommends that definite plans/ 
schemes be chalked out for steady promotion and integrated development or' hardware in 
the country for domestic as well as export market. 
(Para 1)) 

Action Taken by the Department: 
DOE has prepared a document titled-Indian IT Vision 2010: Action Plan, which 
elucidates plans/schemes for steady promotion and integrated development of hardware in 
the country for domestic as well as export market. This document covers important areas of 
Infrastructure, Skill Development, and Education, Finance and Marketing, Promotion and 
Application Development, Technology, R&D, Policy Support and Indigenous Manufacture 
for self reliance. The National Task Force on IT and Software Development set up by the 
Prime Minister's office vide Gazette Notification No. F. 360/31/C/10/98 ES. II dated 
22.5.98 has made 108 recommendations on the Information Technology Action Plan vide 
Resolution No. IT-TF/5/98 dated 25th July, 1998. The said Task Force has also set up a 
panel on Development, Manufacture and Export of Information Technology Hardware. The 
panel has prepared a report emphasising the need for local manufacturing of Hardware for 
domestic as well as for export market. With the implementation of recommendations of the 
Task Force, the production of Electronics hardware will substantially increase. 
Comments: 
The Committee notes the reply and would like the recommendations of the Task Force to 
be expeditiously implemented. 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee observes that the manpower development for software export should be 
considered a priority area. Everything possible must be done to launch comprehensive 
programmes for updating the technological skills and knowledge of our software profession­
als so that India could compete in international software market with other world leaders in 
the area. 
(Para 17) 
Action Taken by the Department: 
The Department of Electronics has set software export target of US$10 billion for terminal 
year (2001-02) of the Ninth Plan. In order to achieve this target, National Software 
Capability Enhancement Programme (Soft-Cap) has been approved by the Committee of 
Secretaries for implementation by the DOE and M/o HRD. 
2. The Soft-Cap programme broadly covers increasing of intake capacity for computer 
courses at leading institutions, starting of bridge computer course for students from other 
disciplines, training of teachers, conducting specialised courses in Software Engineering, 
Project Management, International Marketing etc., Strengthening of STP Infrastructure, 
ERNET Project, Distance Learning and Quality Assurance aspects in Software develop­
ment. 
3. Further, the following measures have also been initiated towards development for 
Human Resource Development for Software Exports:-
Programme on Quality Assurance through Standardisation Testing and Quality Certifi­
cation (STQC). 
Part-funding to State initiated projects sponsored Institutes for setting up of STPs and 
development of Information Technology to meet growing requirements of computer 
professionals in the country. 
Comments: 
The Committee would like to know the yearly targets set to achieve US $10 billion mark 
by the end of the Ninth Five Year Plan. 

RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee recommends that all out efforts be made by the Department to see that 
the outlay earmarked for ruraVsocial sector during the current year for programme 
implementation of watershed development projects is fully utilised and the benefits of the 
schemes percolate down to a large segment of rural population . 
(Para 21) 
Action Taken by the Department: 
The above recommendations of the Committee have been noted for implementation . 
Comments: 
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee would like to know as to how the lfunds 
are to be spent during the year? How much amount has been spent as on 31st October, 1998 
with corresponding figures for the previous year? 
RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee recommends that Department should make concrete efforts for the 
utilisation of funds allocated for various schemes like Health, Electronics , Hi-tech Power 
Electronics , IPR Promotion Programme and Environmental Management in Electronks fully 
during the year 1998-99. 
(Para 22) 
Action Taken by the Department: 
The above recommendation of the Committee have been noted for implementation. 
Comments: 
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be kept informed about the full 
utilisation of the funds allocated for the purpose giving full details as to how fund s, scheme­
wise are to be spent and actual expenditure incurred so far . 
RECOMMENDATION 
Since the 'India IT Vision 2010: Action Plan' covers a wide range of activities which aim 
at making India a world leader in the software market and making India self-reliant in the 
field of Information Technology , the Committee would like the Plan to be implemented with 
focussed attention of the Department . The Department may, therefore , consider appointing 
a high level Committee which should periodically review the progress of the projects 
initiated and targets achieved under the Plan. 
(Para 27) 
Action Taken by the Department: 
The National Task Force on Information Technology and Software Development was set 
up by the PM's office vide Notification No. F. 360131/cll0/98 -ES. II dated 22.5.98 to 
formulate the draft of a National Informatic Policy to enable India to emerge as an 
Information Technology Superpower within the next 10 years. The Task Force has in its first 
report , submitted in July, 1998, made 108 recommendations on the Information Technology 
Action Plan for removing bottlenecks in the existing policy and procedures fo1r achieving a 
pre-eminent status for India. The Task Force has taken into consideration man·y of the issues 
included in the document INDIA IT VISION 2010. 
The Task Force has not yet suggested any institutional framework for implementation of 
the IT Action Plan. However DOE as the Nodal Department for development and 
promotion of IT and Electronics in the country, has initiated action for implementation of 
recommendations of the Task Force. All concerned Ministries/Department have been 
requested to take action on related points and also nominate a Nodal Officer of the level of 
Joint Secretary for implementation of the IT Action Plan and preparing : Action Taken 
Report. 
Comments: 
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee would however like to impress on the 
Department of Electronics for expeditious implementation of the recomnnendations. 

RECOMMENDATION 
The Committee would like the Department to finalise its future programme with regard to­
the ET&T. Either this venture be closed down as recommended by the Disinvestment 
Commission or a well thought out diversification plan should be prepared for the revival of 
the company. Uncertainty with regard to its future would prove costly to the public 
exchequer. 
(Para 36) 
Action Taken by the Department: 
The Capital Restructuring proposal has been consideted by the Disinvestment Commis­
sion, which has recommended that the ET&T Corporation Ltd. should discontinue all its 
operations with immediate effect. The recommendations of Disinvestment Commission have 
b-een considered by Core Committee of Secretaries under the Chairmanship of Cabinet 
Secretary and it has decided that ET&T should be wound-up with the approval of the 
Cabinet. Further action is being taken accordingly. 
Comments: 
The Committee would like that necessary action be completed within a given time frame 
to wind up ET&T after taking the approval of the Cabinet. 
NEW DELHI; 
December, 18, 1998 
S. R. BOMMAI, 
Chairman, 
Committee on Science and Technology, 
Environment and Forests. 

MINUTES 

XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Friday, the 18th December, 1998 in Room No. 62, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri S. R. Bommai-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Rahasbihari Barik 
4. Shri Oscar Fernandes 
"{< 5. Dk. Y. Radhakrishna Murty 
6. Shri Lachhman Singh 
7. Shri W. Angou Singh 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Indra Nath Bhagat 
9. Shri M. C. Dhamotharan 
10. Shri Janardan Prasad Misra 
11. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
12. Captain Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 
13. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
14. Prof. Saifuddin Soz 
15. Shri Prasad Baburao Tanpure 
16. Dr. C. P. Thakur 
17. Shri Ra.vi Prakash Verma 
18. Shri Mukul Wasnik 
SECRETARIAT 
Slui Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri H. K. Chanana, Director 
Shri D. P. Ahuja, Under Secretury 
Shri Roshan Lal, Committee Officer 
2. The Committee took up consideration of the draft '~**, *** and Sixty-second Reports 
on the Action Taken by the Departments of ***, *'~* and Electronics on Committee's •••, 
**'~ and Fifty, eighth Reports on Demands for Grants (1998-99) respectively and adopted the 
same with minor amendments. 
3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri Lachhman ·Singh to 
present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Captain Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad and in his 
absence Shri Prasad Baburao Tanpure to lay the Reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha. 
4. * * * 
5. * * • 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.50 p.m. to meet again at 4.00 p.m. on 22nd 
December, 1998. 
••• Relate to other matters. 