19th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/19threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1995-96)
 
NINETEENTH REPORT
 
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1995-96) OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
 (Demand No.88)
(Presented on April 28, 1995)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 1995/Vaisakha, 1917 (Saka)
 
CONTENTS
1.       COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 2.       INTRODUCTION
 3.       REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4.       MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1995.96)
 
 
RAJYA. SABHA
 
                   1.   Syed Sibtey Razi-Chairman
                   2.   Dr. M. Aram
                   3.   Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
                   4.   Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
                   5.   Shri K. Rahman Khan
                   6.   Prof. M.G.K. Menon
                   7.   Shri Suresh Pachouri
                   8.   Shri N. Giri Prasad
                   9.   Shri Satchidananda                 ~
                 10.   Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
                 11.   Dr. Ranbir Singh
                 12.   Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 
 
                 LOKSABHA
 
 
                  13. Shri E. Ahamcd
                  14. Shri P.C. Chacko
                  15. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia

19th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/19threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
                  16. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
                  17. Shri Sharad Dighe
                  18. Shrimati Saroj Dubey
                   19. Shri Oscar Fernandes
20. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
21. Shri P. Kumarasamy
22. Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
23. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
24. Shri M.V.V.S Murthy
25. Shri Harpal Panwar
26. Shri Balraj Pasi
27. Shri Bhim Singh Patel
28. Shri Chandresh Patel
29. Shri Vijay Naval Patil
30. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
31. Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
32. Shri Rama Chandra Rath
33. Shri M.G. Reddy
34. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
35. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
36.Shri Harchand Singh
37.Shri Ram Prasad Singh
38.Shri K.G, Shivappa
39.Shri Bapusaheb Thite
40.Kumari Sushila Tiriya
41.Kumari Frida Topno
42.Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satis:h Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
_______________________________________________________________________________________________
 
INTRODUCTION
 
1. the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by
 the Committee to submit the Report on its behalf, present this Nineteenth Report, on the Demands for Grants pertaining
 to the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1995-96 (Demand No. 88)
2. In its meetings held on April 4 and 5, 1995 the Committee considered the Demands for Grants of the Department
 of Ocean Development on the basis of the documents made available to it and the submission made before it by the
 Secretary and the other representatives of the Department.
 
3. The Committee thanks the officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the Hon'ble
 Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of
 the Department of Ocean Development.
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on April 27, 1995.
 
New Delhi; SYED SIBTEY RAZI

19th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/19threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
April 27, 1995 Chairman,
Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment and Forests.
 
 
REPORT
 
The Department of Ocean Development .has been assigned the role of a nodal department for organising, co-
ordinating and promoting ocean development activities in the country. It functions as a focal point, in conjunction with
 other concerned agencies, to promote institutional capabilities in important and relevant areas where these are lacking.
 The major programmes and projects of the Department are: scientific expeditions to and research on Antarctica; deep
 sea-bed exploration (Poly-metallic Nodules Programme); surveys of marine areas for living and non-living resources;
 Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS) and modelling; Marine Satellite Information Service
 (MARSIS) island development; marine instrumentation and systems; marine research and development; training of
 specialised manpower and building up necessary infrastructural facilities for ocean related activities. The proposed new
 schemes of the Department are: setting up of Marine Aquaria/Oceanaria; deployment of data buoys in the Exclusive
 Economic Zone (EEZ); and acquisition of coastal research vessels.
 
2. To enable the Department to pursue its programmes during 1995-96, a financial outlay of Rs. 65.94 crores has
 been proposed, which has a Plan component of Rs. 52 crores and No~-Plan component of Rs. 13.94 crores. There has
 been an overall increase of Rs. 6.94 crores in the budgetary outlay over that of the year 1994-95, out of which Rs. 6
 crores are in the Plan sector and Rs. 94 lakhs are in the Non-Plan sector. The notable areas for which provision of
 higher allocations has been made are: oceanographic research vessels; Antarctic research; assistance for research
 projects, seminars, symposia, etc.; data buoys programme; Coastal Zone Monitoring and Prediction System
 (COMAPS); Marine instrumentation; international obligations; and coastal research vessels. On the other hand, the
 areas for which the outlay has been reduced are: Marine Satellite Information Service; island development; National
 Oceanographic Data and Information System; Exhibitions and fairs; and National Institute of Ocean Technology. The
 Comparative figures of allocations for various programmes of the Department for the years 1994-95 and 1995-96 are
 given in Annexure.
 
3. The Secretary of the Department in his presentation before the Committee explained the thrust of the programmes
 undertaken by the Department; and the broad spectrum of activities for which allocations have been proposed in the
 Demand for Grants of the Department for the year 1995-96. According to him, the essential schemes/areas have been
 divided into 3 categories: Ocean Science and Technology Programmes, international obligations; and infrastructure
 build-up. There has been a steady improvement in the allocations during the last 3 years, and the expenditure on
 Science and Technology Programmes has over the years shown substantial improvement. During 1995-96, Science &
 Technology Programmes have been given higher allocations than international obligations and infrastructure. Both the
 oceanographic research vessels, namely, ORV Sagar Kanya and FORV Sagar Sampada have been revamped by
 inducting new instrumentation. The expenditure on Antarctica expeditions has been brought down as part of the
 Department's strategy without in any way affecting the nature of scientific objectives of the programme. The projected
 increase in the expenditure on Antarctica research during the year 1995-96 is on account 6f the decision to pay for the
 logistic and other support provided by the Ministry of Defence, which was provided earlier free of cost. This enhanced
 budgetary outlay also takes into account the expenditure to be incurred in connection with the Antarctic Study Centre
 and proposed setting up of laboratories for polar science in Phase-II of the Programme. Be Department has
 progressively reduced the number of logistic personnel and increased the  scientific component on the Antarctic
 expeditions.
 
4. Referring to the Polymetallic Nodules Programme, the Secretary stated that the mining programme has been re-
oriented with 3 separate committees being constituted to look after survey, metallurgy and mining, respectively. A
 programme for the next 3 years has been drawn up and the Expenditure Finance Committee has accorded its approval
 to this programme. The Multi-beam bathymetry survey in 1985-90 was in respect of 1,35,000 sq. kms and during 1990-
95 it will be of 1,73,450 sq. kms. "lhe collection of nodules for the period 1985-90 was to the tune of 12 tonnes whereas
 during 1990-95 it would be 47 tonnes. In so far as sea bottom photography is concerned, it would be 80,000 deep tow

19th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/19threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
 photos during the period 1990-95 as compared to 1985-90 when it was virtually nil. The number of pilot plant
 campaigns completed during 1990-95 would be 10 as compared to 1985-90 when it was nil.
 
5. The Committee was informed by the Secretary about the progress made in some other programmes. The ORV
 Sagar Kanya has carried out 7 scientific cruises in different disciplines of Oceanography in the Indian Ocean relating to
 physical iand chemical parameters, some of them part of international programmes. The Sagar Kanya also has done the
 work for seismic survey for oil exploration. The cruises~ of Sagar Sampada have been helpful in identifying new
 fishing grounds for ribbon fish, lizard fish barracuda and deep sea lobster apart from significant studies on the living
 resources and oceanography in the EEZ. The MARSIS programme has progressed very well in making use of satellite
 remote sensing of ocean data, comparing this with sea truths, in using this for defining Potential Fishing Zones and
 disseminating this information; in developing Coastal Zone package is being developed for coastal information. Under
 the Coastal maps etc. GIS Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS), which is an important programme of the
 Department in the area of marine environment, the number of monitoring stations has been increased from 59 to 77 and
 special emphasis is being laid on monitoring of highly polluted areas for which 32 locations are specially dedicated. An
 important conclusion from the studies conducted thus far is that the marine environment of India does not suffer from
 pollution except in a few areas such as the Mahim Creek area of Bombay etc. where untreated municipal sewage and
 discharge from industries constitutes a problem. The coastal maps are an essential component for sea level monitoring
 and modelling for which Survey of India is the executing agency. The Department has embarked on a project for
 generating contour interval maps of great importance when floods occur-as these enable a reasonable assessment of
 areas likely to be inundated. This is however expensive. The Department has had to spend between Rs, 1.5---2.0 crores
 for maps at contour level of 0.5 meters, on a scale of 1:25,000 for a small stretch of coast between Machilapatnam and
 Nellore in Andhra Pradesh. While the allocation for R&D projects has been raised from Rs. 2 crores to Rs. 3 crores,
 this amount is not sufficient to give required thrust to the basic research.
 
6. The Committee, .while considering the Demands for Department of Ocean Development, had in its 11
th  Report
 noted Grants (1994-95) of the that the allocations for the Department during the first 3 years of the 8th Five Year Plan
 had been such that out of the total Plan outlay approved for the Department for the entire 8th Five Year Plan, only a
 meagre sum of Rs. 2 crores would be left for the Department to pursue its programmes/ activities during the remaining
 2 years of the 8th Plan Period. The C6mmittee had accordingly posed a question to the Department as to how, in such a
 situation, it would manage its activities during the years 1995-96 and 1996-97. It was then clarified by the Department
 that the matter had been taken up with the Planning Commission which had assured that the requirement of the
 Department will be considered at the time of finalisation of Annual Plan(s) based on the Performance in the previous
 years. The Committee, therefore, asked the secretary of the Department as to what demands had been projected by the
 Department at the time of mid-term appraisal of the 8th Plan by the Planning Commission. It was explained that,
 during, the mid-term appraisal by the Planning Commission, the Department had projected a demand of Rs. 64.47
 crores for 1995-96 and Rs. 63..14 crores for 1996-97 which amounted to a total of Rs. 128 crores for the remaining
 period of the Eighth Five Year Plan. Against this the Department has been allocated Rs. 52 crores in the Plan sector for
 1995-96, The Department would, however, need substantially higher allocations for 1996-97 in order to carry out the
 priority programmes like National Data Buoys Programme, Assistance to Universities and Research Institutions and
 Coastal Information System. The Committee is happy to note that the Plan allocation for the year 1995-96 for the
 Department of Ocean Development reflects a satisfactory trend and that the budgetary outlays from the year 1992-93
 onwards have progressively increased notwithstanding the Plan outlay of just Rs. 130 crores for the entire 8th Plan
 Period. But, if the annual rate of inflation is borne in mind, the allocations appear to reflect ~a static level. Considering
 that against the projected demand of Rs. 64.47 crores for the year 1995-96 an allocation of Rs. 52 crores has been
 made. The Comm4ttee is not sure how the Department could expect a substantially higher allocation than this amount
 for the year 1996-97 to carry out its priority programmes when it has itself projected only a demand of Rs. 63.61 crores.
 The Committee feels that the Department must clearly demarcate its priority areas to attract higher allocations in the
 last year of the 8th Plan. In its Eleventh Report the Committee had observed that there should be no ambiguity or
 uncertainty about the Department's future financial outlay, so that the Department has a clear perception about its future
 planning and programme~ and the initiatives it has to undertake. The Committee wishes to reiterate this point.
 
7. The Committee has looked into the utilisation of budgetary allocations by the Department. It is happy to note that
 the position in respect of utilisation during the year 1994-95 has been better as compared to the years 1992-93 and

19th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/19threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
 1993-94 and there does not appear to have been any major surrenders of money. In so far as percentage-wise
 distribution of funding outlay for different major programmes of the Department is concerned, the Committee noted
 that a major chunk viz. 35% has gone to meet international obligations in the area of Poly-Metallic Nodules and for
 Antarctica research, followed by 29% for technology-related, 21% for society-related activities, 9% for basic research
 and manpower and 3% each on new initiatives/research vessels and administrative activities. During the year 1995-96,
 while the extent of funding for international obligations is pegged to be virtually at the same level viz. 34%, the major
 difference is that this whole amount would go in meeting the expenditure on Antarctic expeditions and research. The
 Poly-metallic Nodules Programme has now been brought under the Head 'Technology-Related'. The share of
 percentage-wise distribution for society-related programmes has been increased from 21% to 29% during the year
 1995-96 whereas for technology-related programme it has come down from 29% in 1994-95 ,to 22% in 1995-96. There
 would be a marginal increase in the percentage share of new initiatives/research vessels from 3% to 4% and decrease
 fr0m 3% to 2% in administrative expenditure during the year 1995-96. The Committee appreciates that the thrust of the
 Department is gradually shifting to society-related programmes such as Marine Satellite Information System, Coastal
 Zone Monitoring and Prediction System, Sea Element Monitoring & Modelling System, development of islands areas,
 communications, information network and acquisition of coastal research vessels. But this thrust has not to be at the
 cost of development of technologies and oceanographic research. The Committee feels that the programmes of the
 Department which are targetted at benefiting the coastal community which constitutes a significant segment of our
 society, have no doubt been given priority, but these programmes can not make major progress unless matching
 technologies are developed. The Secretary of the Department has conceded that the budgetary allocations for basic
 research do not reflect a priority for this sector and there is imperative need to substantially enhance budgetary outlays
 for R&D projects in the ocean sciences. The Committee appreciates that with a modest Plan outlay of Rs. 52 crores, the
 bulk of which would go on Committee programme of Antarctica research, Poly-Metallic Nodules Programme, Data
 Buoys Programme and in acquiring coastal research vessels, the Department has very limited options, especially when
 it is borne in mind that against the projected demand of Rs. 656.05 crores by the Department for the entire 8th Five
 Year Plan at 1992 prices, only Rs. 130 crores had been approved; of course, during the first 4 years of the 8th Plan
 actual allocations have been to the tune of Rs. 180 crores but this is a far cry from Rs. 656 crores. The Committee
 would, therefore, like to emphasise that, keeping in view the importance of an area like our marine environment,
 budgetary allocations of the Department, particularly for R&D projects and basic research, should be given greater
 priority. Some of the programmes of the Department like Coastal Zone Mapping, installation of Coastal Bathymetry
 System, MET--Ocean Data Buoys Network, National Ocean Information System, in the opinion of the Committee, are
 not getting the necessary coverage for want of financial allocations.
8.A related question was put to the Secretary of the Department about the feasibility of the Department augmenting
 its resources for technological development through external funding. The information given to the Committee was that
 the Department has made efforts to mobilise money through external funding, but the results have not been too
 encouraging. There is, however, a possibility of NORAD funding for its Data Buoys and sea bed mining programmes.
     
      9. The Committee had, in the course of examination of the Demands for Grants of' the Department for the year
 1994-95, earlier noted that a substantial expenditure was being incurred by the Department for chartering/renting of ice-
breaker ship for Antarctica expeditions, and its two oceanographic research vessels, namely ORV Sagar Kanya and
 FORV Sagar Sampada, seemed to have outlived their life and needed replacement. The Department's plan was to
 acquire a multi-purpose vessel which would be useful for the Antarctica expedition, and could also be utilised for
 oceanographic research during the intervening period. The Department had drawn up necessary specifications and even
 floated a global enquiry to ascertain the availability of such a ship which could be modified to the country's
 requirements. The anticipated cost of this multi-purpose vessel was expected to be in the Vicinity of Rs. 75 crores. The
 Department was also exploring the possibility of having such a vessel on lease basis. The Committee was, therefore,
 interested in knowing, the progress towards acquiring this multi-purpose vessel, which could serve the purpose of both
 Antarctica expeditions as well as Oceanographic research and result in substantial savings over a period of time. The
 Committee was informed that the specifications of the proposed multi-purpose, vessel were put out floated through our
 embassies, and as per the advice of the Indian Embassy in Moscow, a delegation also visited Russia to explore the
 possibility of getting an existing vessel which can be modified to suit our needs. So far, there is, only one such
 Antarctic vessel which is being examined in consultation with the technical experts. The Department has also to look
 into the financial aspect of an outright purchase or of going in for a lease. The Committee feels that a major part of
 budgetary allocations for Antarctica research every year is being spent on chartering of an ice-breaker ship and the
 Department's efforts to acquire such a vessel have yet not been successful. There are a number of countries engaged in

19th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/19threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
 research in Antarctica who must be using vessels of this nature, and the Department has been encountering little
 difficulty in chartering such vessels. The Committee fails to understand the reasons for the Department failing to
 acquires multi-purpose vessel even after floating a global inquiry. The Committee, therefore, recommends that vigorous
 efforts be made in this direction and the multi-purpose yessel/ice breaker ship be acquired expeditiously to obviate the
 possibility of escalation in its cost in case the matter is delayed any further. Such a purchase will call for increased
 finance allocations for the Department during this plan period.
 
10. The new schemes which are to be initiated by the Department relate to: (i) setting up of a marine
 acquarium/oceanarium; (ii) Data Buoys Programme for which the budgetary outlay has been enhanced from Rs. 0.10
 crores to Rs. 2.20 crores; and (iii) acquisition of coastal research vessels. The Committee has noted that these schemes
 are not entirely new, as budgetary provision for all of them had been made in the outlay for 1994-95, though none of
 these could take off in that year. Responding to a query from the Committee about the progress made in regard to
 setting up of oceanarium, the Secretary of the Department stated that the project involved an investment of about Rs.
 100 crores and, therefore, participation by the private sector was considered necessary. A national and global inquiry
 was floated by Engineers India Ltd. inviting proposals from the private sector to set up the oceanarium at Goa on a
 Build, Own, Operate and Maintain (BOOM) basis. No response has been received from any private parties. The
 feedback received revealed that more informations about the sites in Goa, particularly on the ecology, accessibility,
 infrastructural facilities available, likelihood of approvals other tourist attractions nearby, tourist flow and likely
 number of local visitors, etc. are required by the private parties in order to work out the economic viability of the
 proposal. It was also pointed out that there would be need for Government to participate in the project. These issues are
 being examined by the Department, and after collecting all the required information, it is proposed to invite fresh
 proposals. The bidders will be provided with the above information.
 
11. Explaining the importance of the Data Buoys Programme, the Secretary of the Department stated that the Met
 Ocean Data Buoys will provide reliable, time series, in situ data on critical oceanographic and meteorological
 parameters for understanding oceanic processes around India, which are important for exploration and sustainable
 development of living and non-living ocean resources, sea truth support for satellite data, etc. The Department has plans
 for taking up the implementation of the data buoy programme, and has moved NORAD for financial assistance. The
 financial assistance may be in ~e form of part credit and part loan. The provision of Rs. 2.2 crores in the financial year
 1995-96 is for meeting the Xocal (Indian) expenditure.
12. As regards the coastal research vessels, which would be needed for monitoring the health of marine environment
 of the country, and monitoring marine pollution along the coastal waters, as also to promote research on near shore
 phenomena e.g. coastal circulation, the information given to the Committee was that the vessels are under construction
 and the stipulated time for the delivery is April, 1996.
 
13. The Committee found that in the Budget estimates for 1995-96, the allocations for Marine Satellite Information
 Service (MARSIS), National Oceanographic Data and Information System, National Institute of Ocean Technology and
 Island Development have been reduced as compared to the allocations for these programmes during the year 1994-95,
 whereas the allocations for Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System and assistance for research projects,
 seminar, symposia, etc. have been increased. The Committee wanted to know the reasons for these variations. It was
 clarified by the Department that the actual requirement for 1995-96 for MARSIS, according to EFC approval, is Rs.
 480 lakhs; against this a Budget provision of Rs. 400 lakhs has been made. The reduced outlay is due to delay in
 launching of the American Sea Star Satellite. Similarly, as regards the National Oceanographic Data and Information
 System, during the year 1994-95, strengthening of 11 out of 13 National Marine Data Centres was completed with a
 budget estimate of Rs. 1 crore. During 1995-96, funds are required to strengthen the remaining two Data Centres and to
 meet the recurring expenses of the created Data Centres, which will need a lesser requirement in the year 1995-96. Data
 is at present exchanged between Government institutions and agencies, and large scale selling of data to private sector
 is yet to commence; but matters relating to security aspects of Data release are being sorted, out in consultations with
 Defence. The reduction in the Budget allocation for the National Institute of Ocean Technology for 1995~96 is due to
 tapering of non-recurring expenditure and infrastructure development. The Institute would, nevertheless, be able to
 continue to work on wave energy coastal zone processes and marine instrumentation during the year 1995-96 as
 targetted.
 
14. Explaining the reasons for the enhanced allocations for the Coastal Ocean Monitoring Prediction System

19th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/19threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
 (COMAPS) and assistance for research projects etc., the Secretary of the Department submitted that a project for
 development of a mathematical model to study the dynamics of pollutants in the Thane Creek is in progress; and in
 order to validate the model, data on physical and chemical parameters are needed for which an additional requirement
 of Rs. 65 lakhs is proposed in the Budget of 1995-96. The increase in the Budget estimates from Rs. 2.30 crores in
 1994-95 to Rs. 3.80 crores in 1995-96 under the Head 'Assistance for Research Projects, Seminars, Symposia, Etc., is
 due to the new thrust being given to increase the assistance to universities and other research institutions for human
 resource development in the area of marine sciences and technology. The Committee feels that the reasons for
 reductions in allocations on the earlier indicated 3 programmes of the Department are quite understandable. It is of the
 view, however, that MARSIS, COMAPS, data buoys programme, support for research and development and for human
 resource development in the area of marine sciences and Island Development programme are all priority areas calling
 for greater thrust and financial allocations. Ocean Sciences is an emerging area which needs to be given necessary
 support and attention. Educational institutions particularly in the Coastal Zone which have the Infrastructure for
 relevant research in ocean sciences need to be given an impetus. The Committee also notes that the Scientific
 Departments are exempt from consultation with UPSC and the Committee would, therefore, like the Department of
 Ocean I Development to expedite filling up of posts including absorption of those on contract basis.
 
15. The Committee would like to reiterate its earlier view that the Department of Ocean Development cannot just
 carry out some marine related programmes that the agencies of government are not handling. It is the nodal department
 to lay down ocean policy and to promote an integrated, coordinated approach to the whole area of marine science and
 technology and exploration and utilization of marine resources. The Committee would like to see the Department play
 this role effectively.
 
New Delhi;
April 27, 1995
SYED SIBTEY RAZI
Chairman,
Committee on Science & Technology
Environment and Forests
 
 
MINUTES
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT- RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING      
 COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
XXlX
TWENTYNINTH MEETING
 
The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 1.35 p.m. and again from 3.00 p.m. to 4.55 p.m. on Tuesday, the 4th April,
 1995 in Committee Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1. Syed Sibtey Razi -- Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.   Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
3.   Prof. M.G.K. Menon
4.   Shri Suresh Pachouri
5.   Shri Satchidananda
6.   Dr. Ranbir Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
7. Shri E. Ahamed

19th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/19threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
8. Shri Sharad Dighe
9. Shri Oscar Fernandes
10. Shri Harpal Panwar
11. Shri Balraj Pasi
12. Shri .Vijay Naval Patil
13.Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
14.Shri Ram Prasad Singh
15. Kumari Sushila Tiriya
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
Representatives of the Department of Science and Technology and some other Government Bodies/Organisations
 
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri Y.S. Rajan, Advisor
Dr. U. 'Trivedi, Advisor
Dr. A.P. Kulshreshtha, Advisor
Dr. A.K. Chakraborty, Advisor
Shri S.B. Krishnan, JS & FA
Dr. R.K. Midha, Joint Advisor
Shri V.R. Aiyagari, Joint Advisor
Dr. Laxman Prasad, Joint Advisor
Dr. (Mrs.) Kamla Kumar, Joint Advisor
Maj. Genl. S.P. Mehta, Surveyor General of India
Dr. N. Sen Roy, DG, IMD
Dr. V.B. Kamble, Additional DG, IMD
Dr. S.K. Mishra, Director, NCMRWF
Smt. Meenakshi Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shri R.P. Singh, Under Secretary
 
Representatives of the Department of Ocean Development and some of the Scientific Organisations/Laboratories
 
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri J.V.R. Prasada Rao, Joint Secretary
Shri S.W. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Dr. S,A.H Abidi, Director
Shri H.P. Rajan, Director
Shri B.N. Krishnamurthy, Director
Shri S.K. Das, Director
Dr. B.R. Subramanian, Director
Dr. V.S. Rao Chintala, Principal Scientific Officer
Dr. M.D. Zingde, Scientist In-charge, NIO, Bombay
Dr. V.P. Kamboj, Director, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow
Prof. M. Ravindran, Executive Director, National Institute of Ocean Technology, Madras
Shri Narayanan Pillai, Principal Scientist, Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, Cochin,
Dr. Hardayal Singh, Director, Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur
Smt. Suchitra Goswami, Deputy Secretary
Shri Prabh Das, Deputy Secretary

19th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/19threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
Shri S.T. Chari, Head, Water Resources Division, National Remote Sensing Agency, Hyderabad
Dr. P.K. Sen, Senior Manager, Engineers India Ltd., New Delhi
Dr. G.K. Patnaik, Scientist, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow
Dr. Dasgupta, Scientist, Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur
Shri B.K. Mukhopadhyaya, Under Secretary
Shri Mahesh Kumar, Under Secretary
 
2. In the forenoon session, the Committee took up for consideration the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
 Department of Science and Technology. The Secretary of the Department briefly explained for the benefit of the
 Members the allocations on different activities projects of the Department as proposed in its Demands for Grants. The
 Members then sought clarifications from him and other representatives of the Department on various points relating to
 the Demands for Grants.
3. In the afternoon session, the Committee took up for consideration the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
 Department of Ocean Development. The Secretary of the Department assisted by other officials gave an overview of
 the allocations as proposed tot its different activities projects in the Demands for Grants and the Members sought
 necessary clarifications relating thereto.
      
       4. The discussion on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Departments of Science
and Technology and Ocean Development remained inconclusive.
 
       5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.                                                                             i
      
       6. The Committee then adjourned lit 4.55 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on
Wednesday, the 5th April, 1995.
XXX
THIRTIETH MEETING
 
The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 1.28 p.m. and again from 3.00 p.m. to 4.53 p.m. on Wednesday, the 5th
 April, 1995 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1. Prof. M.G.K. Menon - in the Chair
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
      2.Dr. M. Aram
      3.Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
      4.Shri Suresh Pachouri
      5.Shri Satchidananda
      6.Dr. Ranbir Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
     7. Shri E. Ahamed
     8. Shri P.C. Chacko
     9. Shri Sharad Dighe
   10. Shri Oscar Fernandes
   11. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
   12. Shri Harpal Panwar
   13. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
   14. Shri Harchand Singh

19th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/19threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
   15. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
   16. Kumari Sushila Tiriya
   17. Kumari Frida Topno
 
     SECRETARIAT
 
     Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
     Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
     Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary                  
     Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
     Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
Representatives of the Department of Science and Technology and some Government Bodle Organisations.
 
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri Y.S. Rajan, Advisor
Dr. A.P. Kulshreshtha, Advisor
Dr. A.K.Chakraborty, Advisor
Shri S.B. Krishnan, JS & FA
Dr. R.K. Midha, Joint Advisor-
Shri V.R. Aiyagari, Joint Advisor
      Dr. Laxman Prasad, Joint Advisor
      Dr. (Mrs.) Kamla Kumar, Joint Advisor
      Maj. Genl. S.P. Mehta, Surveyor General of India
      Dr. N. Sen Roy, DG, IMD
      Dr. S.K. Mishra, Director, NCMRWF
Smt. Meenakshi Gupta, Deputy Secretary
Shri R.P. Singh, Under Secretary
 
Representatives of the Department of Ocean Development and some of the Scientific Organisations Laboratories
 
Dr. P. Rama Rao, Secretary
Shri J.V.R. Prasada Rao, Joint Secretary
Shri S.W. Oak, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Dr. S.A.H Abidi, Director
Shri H.P. Rajan, Director
Shri B.N. Krishnamurthy, Director
Shri S.K. Das, Director
Dr. B.R. Subramanian, Director
Dr. V.S. Rao Chintala, Principal Scientific Officer
Shri Prabh Das, Deputy Secretary
Smt. Suchitra Goswami, Deputy Secretary
Dr. M.D. Zingde, Scientist In-charge, NIO, Bombay
Dr. V.P. Kamboj, Director, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow
Prof. M. Ravindran, Executive Director, National Institute of Ocean Technology, Madras
Shri Narayanan Pillai, Principal Scientist, Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute,
Cochin
Dr. Hardayal, Singh, Director, Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur
Shri S.T. Chari, Head, Water Resources Division, National Remote Sensing Agency,
Hyderabad.
Dr. P.K. Sen, Senior Manager, Engineers India Ltd., New Delhi
Dr. G.K. Patnaik, Scientist, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow
Dr. Dasgupta, Scientist, Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur
 

19th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/19threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
2. In the forenoon session, the Committee took up further consideration of the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
 Department of Science and Technology. The Secretary of the Department assisted by other officials, supplemented
 some of the points earlier made before the Committee on the subject in its meeting held on the 4th April, 1995 and
 replied to the clarifications sought by the Members.
 
3. In the afternoon session, the Committee took up further consideration of the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
 Department of Ocean Development. The" Secretary of the Department assisted by other officials replied to the
 clarifications sought by the Members in its meeting held on the 4th April, 1995.
 
4. The discussion on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Departments of Science and Technology and Ocean
 Development was concluded.
 
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 4.53 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 6th April, 1995.
 
VI
SIXTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 27th April, 1995 in Room
No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1. Syed Sibtey Razi - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.   Dr. K. Rahman Khan
3.   Prof. M.G.K. Menon
4.   Shri. W. Kulabidhu Singh
5.   Dr. Ranbir Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
6. Shri P.C., Chacko
7. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
8. Shri Sharad Dighe
9. Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
10. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
11. Shri M.G. Reddy
12. Shri Harchand Singh
13. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
14. Shri Bapu Saheb Thite
15. Kumari Frida Topno
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee o Officer
 
            2. The Committee took up consideration of its draft Nineteenth Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of

19th Report of Committee on S & T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/19threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:59]
 the Department of Ocean Development and after some discussion, adopted the same with minor amendments.
 
            3. The Committee decided to present this Report to both the Houses of Parliament on the 28th April, 1995. The
 Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Prof. M.G.K. Menon to present this Report to the Rajya Sabha
 and Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik and in his absence, Kumari Frida Topno to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok
 Sabha.
           
            4. The Committee thereafter took up for consideration its draft Twentieth Report on the Annual Report (1993-
94) of the Department of Ocean Development with reference to Marine Satellite Information Service (MARSIS);
 Pollution Monitoring Programme Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS) and National
 Programme for Identification of Marine Bioactive Substances for use as Drugs and after some discussion, adopted the
 Same unanimously.
5. The Committee decided to present this Report to both the Houses of Parliament on the 3rd May, 1995. The
 Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Dr. Ranbir Singh to present this Report to the Rajya Sabha and
 Shri Ram Prasad Singh and in his absence, Shri Jitendra Nath Das to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 10.34 a.m.
 
 