PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/120threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED-TWENTIETH REPORT
 
ON
ACTION  TAKEN   BY  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF  SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH ON  THE
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED –THIRTEENTH REPORT OF THE
 DEPARTMENTRELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
(2003-2004) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 4TH  FEBRUARY, 2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 3RD   FEBRUARY, 2004)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
FEBRUARY, 2004/ MAGHA, 1925 (SAKA)
 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Website: http://parliamentofindia.nic.in
                                                 
 
C O N T E N T S
 
   
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. INTRODUCTION
3. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE   
4. MINUTES OF THE MEETING 
                                                               
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2004)
1. Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri C. Apok Jamir
3. Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
4. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
5. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
6. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
7. Shri B.P. Singhal
8. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
9. Smt. Savita Sharda
10. Smt. S. G. Indira
11. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
12. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
13. Shri T. S. Bajwa
14. Shri Lalit Suri
15. Vacant
LOK  SABHA
 
16. Smt. Margaret Alva

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/120threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
17. Shri Nihal Chand Chouhan                   
18. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
19. Chowdhary Talib Hussain
20. Adv. Suresh Ramrao Jadhav (Patil)                  
21. Shri G.J.Javiya
22. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
23. Shri C. Kuppusami
24. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
25. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
26. Shri Rupchand Murmu
27. Shri S. Murugesan                               
28. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                       
29. Shri B.K. Parthasarathi
30. Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
31. Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
32. Shri Shriniwas Patil
33. Prof. R.R. Pramanik
34. Shri Naresh Puglia                               
35. Shri Ganta Sreenivasa Rao       
36. Prof. I.G. Sanadi
37. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
38. Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
39. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
40. Shri Vishvendra Singh  
41. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
42. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
43. Shri Balram Singh Yadav
44. Vacant
45. Vacant
 
SECRETARIAT
 
      Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
      Shri S. N. Sahu, Director
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
 Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred-twentieth Report on
 the Action Taken by the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred-
thirteenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research.
      2.   The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research on the
 recommendations contained in the One Hundred-twentieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of the Department of Scientific & Industrial
 Research which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2
nd May, 2003.
      3.   There were Twenty-one recommendations and one observation contained in the One Hundred-thirteenth Report of the
 Committee.  Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Department  on 30
th July, 2003. 
      4.   In the meeting held on 23rd January, 2004, the Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report and adopted the same.
 
NEW DELHI;
 January 23, 2004
C.RAMACHANDRAIAH
 Chairman,
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
 Environment & Forests
 
 
R E P O R T
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/120threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
 Recommendations contained in the One Hundred-thirteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of the Department of Scientific and
 Industrial Research which was presented/laid to both Houses of Parliament on 2 nd May, 2003.  There were twenty-one
 Recommendations contained in One Hundred- thirteenth Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the Recommendations of
 the Committee were received from the Department on 30th July, 2003.
The Committee’s Recommendation, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the action taken by the
 Department of Scientific and Industrial Research are set out in the succeeding paragraphs: -
NATIONAL LABORATORIES
Recommendation
The Committee appreciates the Department for carrying out research in many frontier areas of science and technology.  It
 notes with satisfaction the laudable claim of the CSIR that science is one of the areas, which can bring leadership and meet the kind
 of objectives that India has set for itself.  However, it is of opinion that the Department should make efforts to raise funds from
 Industry by successful transfer of technologies.  There is also a need for wider dissemination of technologies so that there is a greater
 interface between Industry & R&D laboratories
(Para 21)
Action Taken by the Department
Department at the outset is thankful for the encourging remarks and appreciation received from the Parliamentary Standing
 Committee.  The Committee is informed that CSIR laboratories periodically organises lab-industry get together. Department also
 shares the concern of the Committee as how to raise further funds from industry through transfer of technologies. CSIR would like to
 apprise the Committee that in order to address the issue, CSIR Society, had constituted a Committee under the Chairmanship of Shri
 H.S. Singhania an eminent industrialist for suggesting further measures for enhancing CSIR – industry interface. Several suggestions
 to deepen CSIR-industry interaction now has been made by the Committee. The Recommendation interalia include stronger customer
 orientation, customisation of products and services, shifting to relationship models of business, exchange of business management
 personnel from laboratory to industry and vice-versa etc. The Recommendation of the Committee is being processed for their
 acceptance and these would be implemented.
In addition to above the department through its Public Sector Enterprise, National Research Development Corporation
 (NRDC) generates revenues by transferring/licensing technologies to industry assigned to it by R&D laboratories and other sources.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Recommendation of the Committee constituted by CSIR Society would be
 accepted and implemented for augmenting CSIR- Industry interface.
 
NATIONAL S&T HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation
The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation made in 86
th Report that there is a need for reviewing and
 strengthening/revamping the existing S&T support systems in the universities and other educational institutions.  The Committee is
 of the view that an agreement be reached with various financial institutions for providing loans to those research scholars for setting
 up their own enterprises.
 (Para 25)
Action Taken by the Department
During the Tenth Plan, CSIR has initiated a new activity titled as Entrepreneurship support to Research Scholars, under HRD
 scheme.  The basic aim of initiation of this activity is to inculcate the spirit of entrepreneuriship into young talented scholars.  Its
 implementation would not only enable scholars to complete doctoral programme but also help them in making use of this knowledge
 by establishing linkages with those industry which requires technological knowledge as a base and thus realise value through such
 joint efforts.  The success gained by them could encourage them to setup their own enterprises. The proposal is being processed for
 consideration by the Government during the year.
The Department of Science and Technology has been implementing a programme called ‘Fund Improvement of S&T
 Infrastructure in Universities and higher Educational Institutions (FIST) for the past few years. A total of 459 science departments in
 various universities and other higher educational institutions have been given funds for strengthening the infrastructure in their
 teaching and research laboratories.
A high-level Committee has been constituted to draft an action plan for implementing the Recommendation contained in
 Science and Technology Policy 2003 in key areas like human resource development and basic research which would also include the
 existing S&T support system in the universities and other educational institutions.
Comments
The Committee appreciates the attempts made by CSIR for upgrading the S&T support system through various HRD schemes
 and hopes that the Recommendation contained in S&T policy 2003 will be implemented soon.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/120threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY & TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT (IP & TM)
Recommendation
The Committee commends the Department for emerging as a pioneering institute to achieve number one position in Indian &
 Foreign patent filings.  The Committee hopes that the Department would maintain its position.  Earlier Basmati rice was patented and
 some NGOs filed PILs in courts to activate the Government to take appropriate action.  The Committee hopes that CSIR will remain
 vigilant in future to safeguard our age-old indisputable rights to our traditional knowledge
(Para 30)
 
Action Taken by the Department
While acknowledging the appreciation received from the Committee, CSIR would continue to make efforts to remain at
 number one position in Indian and foreign patent filings and also try to retain its first position in PCT filings from developing
 countries.
In order to safeguard India’s undisputable rights in Traditional Knowledge, CSIR is contributing in major ways in developing
 Traditional Digital Library so  that it could be of use to Patent Examiners the world over. The digitalised information available on the
 internet would help them to examine the claim made by the applicant with respect to known traditional knowledge and then prevent
 them for granting wrong patents to the applicant on documented Traditional Knowledge of India as it already exists in public domain.
Additionally, CSIR is also making efforts to integrate Traditional Knowledge with Modern Knowledge and protect such
 inventive work nationally and internationally so as to safeguard Indian interests globally. CSIR has also developed and patented a
 method for fingerprinting of herbal formulation. Its use would help in checking on adulteration/poor quality and thus overcoming the
 problems of marketing substandard herbal materials.
Comments
The Committee notes with satisfaction the steps taken by CSIR with regard to patent and digital library.
R&D MANAGEMENT SUPPORT
Recommendation
The Committee observes that although CSIR initiates good works in various fields for the development of our country and
 indeed the mankind, these accomplishments have not been made known to the people.  It notes with satisfaction that efforts are being
 made to establish CSIR brand equity among the public.  To reach out to the people for making them aware of the important role
 played by CSIR, publicity through electronic and Print Media must be made.  Even the organization of exhibitions in rural areas
 displaying activities of the CSIR must be made for the benefit of our people.
(Para 34)
The Committee has been given to understand that due to personal efforts of one of its Members the Minister of Information &
 Broadcasting has approached the Minister of Science & Technology to find out as to how the Ministry of I&B could be of use to
 provide publicity for the scientific and technological programmes.  The Committee also understands that the Minister of I&B has also
 extended all cooperation in this regard.  The Committee therefore recommends that the Director General of CSIR must seize this
 opportunity and assist the Minister of Science & Technology in sending plans for giving wide publicity to its various programmes
 and activities.
(Para 34 A)
Action Taken by the Department
The awareness efforts have been given a boost during the Diamond Jubilee Year of the CSIR, when a large number of
 activities were taken up centrally as well as by each of the CSIR labs to make public aware about the scientific activities &
 achievements. Corporate advertisements by the CSIR HQrs. on important occasions, like Republic Day, Independence Day, National
 Technology Day, National Science Day, and days of importance to CSIR as a whole (Foundation Day, Bhatnagar Awards Function,
 World Patents Day, etc) were brought out by CSIR. More resources under publicity to enhance awareness activity are allocated. A
 short film on CSIR’s achievement was made and shown on the national channel of Doordarshan as a part of the live coverage of
 main function organized in Vigyan Bhavan, New Delhi, on the occasion of CSIR Diamond Jubilee, on 26 September 2002. Also, a
 country-wide awareness promotional programme is already launched during CSIR Diamond Jubilee year celebration, 52 places
 across the country have been identified where exhibition would be put up. These include the capitals of all states having CSIR
 laboratories/centres, and other important cities.  Efforts are being made at each place to publicise with a view to achieve the
 maximum possible participation of the local populace so as to realise maximum value from the efforts.
In the first place CSIR is endeavouring to develop necessary audio-visual software at CSIR. Already 20 themes have been
 selected on which CSIR proposes to prepare a five to seven minute film on each one of them. The film would address CSIR’s
 capabilities & services and depict its manifold activities.  Some of these activities relate to societal issues viz.: drugs for the poor,
 national water security, civil construction, and environment issues, rural industry, employment generation technologies. Other
 activities of the CSIR focusing attention on the technological prowess of CSIR will also be shown. Once the software is in place with
 the CSIR, efforts will be made to give wide spread publicity by utilising audiovisual media & help of the Ministry of Information &
 Broadcasting.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/120threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
Comments
The Committee is happy to note that the CSIR has taken important steps to promote and spread public awareness about the
 programmes and policies with regard to scientific activities and achievements. Further it hopes that it will widen the publicity work
 so as to make people aware of its useful activities for our country and get feedback from them so that these could be improved upon
 to face future needs and challenges.
 
INFRASTRUCTURE RENOVATION & REFURBISHMENT
Recommendation
The Committee feels that the state-of-art infrastructure/laboratories are extremely important to further augment and enrich our
 capabilities in the fields of science and technology so as to face the increasing challenges thrown up by intense research activities in
 many scientific and technological institutions across the globe.  The infrastructure should be seen as a strategic national resource and
 funding should be given on a continuing basis to maximize their effectiveness, improvement & relevance for our scientific
 community.  The Infrastructure should also be developed keeping in view the future advances in science & engineering.  The
 Committee also feels that high speed internet access facility be established as vast amount of scientific data is available on the
 internet.  This will enable our scientists to have faster access to scientific data bases.
 (Para 38)
Action Taken by the Department
During the Tenth Plan, CSIR has initiated the scheme on Infrastructure Renovation & Refurbishment. It aims to renovate
 CSIR labs for various R&D programmes to enable them to undertake modern R&D activities. Through IT infrastructure renovation,
 it is proposed to connect all CSIR labs with LAN and internet connectivity on leased line – 2 Mbps. CSIR also has a plan to establish
 a Data Centre for secure e-enabled services and E-enabled MIS  application. For carrying networked R&D programmes the
 laboratories would be equipped with state of art IT facilities.
 
Comments
The Committee commends the efforts of the CSIR for renovating and refurbishing its infrastructure by extensively using
 information and communication technologies and hopes that the ongoing plans in this regard would be implemented soon.
 
TECHNOLOGY PROMOTION, DEVELOPMENT & UTILISATION PROGRAMME
Recommendation
The Committee feels that the merging of these programmes would not in any way effect the importance of these schemes and
 that they would continue to do the commendable work of transfer of technology for commercial exploitation.  The Committee also
 feels that such efforts of the CSIR would further encourage the entrepreneurship among our scientists and contribute towards
 technological self-reliance.  However the Committee recommends that greater attention must be paid by the DSIR to ensure that our
 industrial enterprises take necessary and important steps for augmenting their contributions to R&D.  Our expenditure for R&D as
 percentage of G.D.P. has fallen from 0.98 during 1958-59 to 0.8% during 21
st Century.  Out of it 80% is contributed by the
 government and only 20% comes from industry.  In almost all the developed countries contribution to R&D as percentage of GDP is
 3%.  Out of it industry contributes 80% and the government only 20%.  Our vision is to make India a developed country by the
 2020.  While the Committee strongly recommends that at least during the first quarter of the Tenth Five Year Plan contribution to
 R&D as percentage of GDP must target 1%  and the percentage contribution of industry to it must rise substantially.  In the age of
 innovation and competition, it is appropriately said  that “real temples of India have to be industry”.  For this to happen their
 contribution to R&D has to be bolstered.  Money spent in R&D is not an expenditure but an investment for the future.  It is also
 important that the know-how is sold to industry on competitive bids to extract the best return.
(Para 41)
Action Taken by the Department
The suggestion of the Committee to raise National R&D allocation to 1% of GDP is in tune with the S&T policy of the
 country. The Department continuously endeavours to encourage industry to enhance its cooperation, make use of fiscal incentives,
 announced by the Government from time-to-time and through other support measures for R&D.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
 
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT BY INDUSTRY (RDI)
Recommendation
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the activities of the CSIR is broad based and wide-ranging.  It has taken laudable
 steps to augment R&D facilities in industry.  It is important that such facilities are further enhanced and bolstered by the industries
 themselves to augment their scientific and technological abilities so that they stand on their own for upgrading their knowledge base.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/120threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
 It would also enable them to successfully compete in the national and international arena. In the age of geo-economics research and
 development will only open new vistas of technological innovations and help our industries to successfully meet the challenges of the
 present and future.  The Committee recommends that CSIR must redouble its efforts to realize this objective in practice and in full
 measure.  The Committee observes that closer coordination among research laboratories should be obtained for producing better
 products, which would eventually reach the end users of such products.
 (Para 49)
Action Taken by the Department
The DSIR has a scheme on recognition of in-house R&D units of industry. Through this scheme DSIR continues to support &
 augment R&D facilities and set up R&D units which would enable them to come up and even compete in the national and
 international arena successfully. The DSIR through its scheme on Programme Aimed at Technological Self Reliance (PATSER)
 supports research, development, design and engineering projects, jointly undertaken by R&D laboratories and industries for
 development of new and improved products and processes. These initiatives of DSIR are in line with the Committee’s observations
 and would be further pursued.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES
A.        NATIONAL RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NRDC)
Recommendation
The corporation continued to pursue the programme of Development and Promotion of Technologies appropriate for rural
 areas. The programme is aimed at bringing the key elements of innovation chain e.g. development on a carefully selected basis, of
 new and innovative technologies for the rural areas, demonstrating them under actual field conditions and stimulation of interest
 through publications and mass media.  The publicity through DD needs a quantum jumps & the CSIR should be ready with the
 required software so that as & when Information Broadcasting Ministry extends its cooperation, no time is lost in going on the air
 with their publicity material.
(Para 55)
Action Taken by the Department
The National Research Development Corporation has been promoting the various developed technologies indigenously
 through schemes under its Technology Promotion Programme (TPP). Development and promotion of Rural and Household
 technologies is one of such schemes of the TPP through which the Corporation has been propagating the technologies suitable for
 rural people. NRDC has set up 55 rural Technologies Demonstration cum-training Centre in many parts of India wherein various
 appropriate technologies suitable for rural masses are being demonstrated and large number of users from the rural areas trained. The
 Corporation would now strengthen the various RTDT centres with new technologies, machineries and equipments and apprise them
 of those new technologies, which are being developed so that new business can be generated through self-employment.  This is in
 tune with the suggestion made by the Committee. In line with Committee’s observation regarding quantum jump in publicity through
 Doordarshan, the Department plans to develop a Doordarshan capsule for demonstration of new and innovative technologies,
 appropriate for the rural areas and public at large.
Comments
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department is starting various technology promotional schemes and aiming at
 publicising these schemes through audio-visual medium. 
 
Recommendation
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the National Research Development Corporation in acting as a link between
 scientific laboratories and industrial establishments for transferring technologies.  However, the Committee feels that a lot needs to
 be done to reach out to our people living in rural areas.  In fact it is aptly said that rural areas are thirsting for Science & Technology.
 By developing appropriate technology for rural areas and transferring them for the benefit of our people a silent revolution can be
 ushered in for improving the living conditions of our teeming millions.
The Committee poignantly observed that we have yet to produce a prototype of a modern bullock cart for our farmers that
 could be more sturdy, far less strenuous for the bullock as well as passengers, distinctly faster & safer on roads.  Director General of
 CSIR, in one of his interviews, some time back had observed that “I do not believe that indigenous science and technology, barring
 very few notable exceptions, has contributed as much to economic development as one would have desired”.  Therefore it
 recommends strongly that more attention must be given to produce appropriate technologies for use in rural areas.  The Committee
 strongly feels that the living and working conditions of our people in thousands of villages across the country have to be improved by
 making their hut roofs fireproof and longer-lasting.  Besides, it emphasizes that their hygienic conditions have to be improved so as
 to ensure them proper sanitation and better atmosphere for prevention of diseases.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that
 appropriate technologies may be used in rural areas for achieving these objectives.
(Para 57)
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the National Research Development Corporation, through transfer of technology

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/120threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
 and other activities have earned Rs.33.51 lakhs (slightly over 3 million).  In a country of India’s size profit of Rs.3 million is just a
 peanut.  Therefore the Committee recommends that transfer of technology must take place at a faster pace so that greater revenue
 generation is ensured.  Only after achieving this we can realize the goal of making CSIR less dependent on government funds.  The
 Committee further recommends that transfer of technology in areas such as defense, nuclear energy, biotechnology, aerospace,
 electronics and computer should be such that it takes care of the problems of obsolescence.
(Para 58)
Action Taken by the Department
The Corporation has been licensing technologies, indigenously developed, to industry as a part of the commercialisation
 effort. The Coropration’s earning from licensing of technologies is in the form of lumpsum premium (technology fee) and the
 recurring royalty for a certain period. Corporation has arrangements with the various R&D organisations, for assignments of
 technologies to it and then negotiate & licences them to various industries/enrepreneurs. The earning is shared by the R&D
 organisations and the Corporation. The major portion of its receipts (on an average 70%) is given to the research institutes.
 Therefore, the net receipt of Rs. 33.51 lakhs during the year 2001-2002 is not a true reflection of the gross revenue generated through
 technology licensing and commercialisation. The Corporation since its inception has licensed technologies to more than 4500
 industries/enterpreneurs. The Committee would be happy to note that many of the Corporation’s licensees are now producing goods
 of international standard and  some of their products are even marketed abroad leading to a substantial foreign exchange earnings for
 the country. Corporation is facing newer challenges due to changed scenario. While Corporation is making sincere efforts to meet
 them, it is important to note that to meet these challenges, it would have to maintain the level of profits. Committee would be happy
 to know that the total earning of the Corporation during 2001-02 was Rs. 407.58 lakhs out of which Rs. 283.65 lakhs was from
 technology licensing during the year. The Corporation would continue to generate mechanism & make efforts to increase the
 earnings for the year 2003-2004.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
POLLUTION MONITORING MITIGATION SYSTEMS & DEVICES
Recommendation
The Committee feels that all pollution monitoring devices should be site specific as the causative agents in different areas are
 diverse and every anti pollution process must have measurable parameters to monitor its efficacy.  The Committee observes that
 pollution in the country has become acute and it is being seen as a challenge to the scientists to come up with new scientific tools to
 monitor and review the existing health based ambient quality standards.  The Committee observes that the department should
 coordinate with Pollution Control Boards in various states so that effective action is taken to sharply curb & finally prevent pollution
 in the country.
As far as the presence of arsenic content in water is concerned the Committee was informed that Bangladesh has developed
 some technology to rectify it.  The Committee recommends that CSIR may study that technology with a view to adopting it for our
 country’s benefit.
( Para 61)
Action Taken by the Department
The Central Pollution Control Board has the nodal responsibility to monitor and control pollution. They have informed that the
 present monitoring system does include assessment of water and ambient air quality.
For monitoring of water quality, 784 locations on rivers, lakes and ground water have been identified. In respect of ambient air
 quality monitoring, 290 locations in 94 cities/towns have been identified. The parameters being monitored for assessing the quality of
 water and ambient air are based on sources identified discharging waste into recipient environment. The devices used for monitoring
 are general and site specific as well. For example, for ambient air quality monitoring, high/low volume samplers are used for carrying
 out monitoring of criteria pollutants such as RSPM, SO
2 and NOx.
Special devices are used to monitor critical pollutants like VOC, PAH and BTX. To monitor the source emissions, from
 stationary sources (industries), stack monitoring devices and on-line monitors are used. However, devices used in the country for
 monitoring purposes are not completely indigenous and still number of devices are being imported. Efforts would be made to
 promote indigenous firms and institutions to manufacture equipment as per Indian conditions considering sites where monitoring are
 to be carried out and pollutants to be measured.
As far as CSIR is concerned, at NEERI all pollution monitoring devices are site specific & are being used substantially &
 extensively to identify and quantify pollution parameters of sources which are specific to sites: Antipollution process has certain
 measureable parameters which are determined by the regulatory authorities to monitor its efficacy. Pollution Control Boards are
 consulted in any pollution prevention and control assignment in the country taken by NEERI. It is true that the pollution levels in the
 country are increased and, NEERI is determining both ecotoxicity as well as genotoxicity of relevant pollutants in order to evolve
 health risk based ambient quality standards.
ITRC will coordiante with CPCB for manning use of bioremediation technologies developed as these have measurable
 parameters for monitoring their efficacy. CSIR has given a major thrust on the environmental health issues and ITRC has initiated a
 programme to develop new scientific tools for assessment of the genotoxicity. As observed by the Committee, it will intensify its
 efforts in this direction. As far as review of the health based ambient quality standards is concerned, information generated in this

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/120threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
 area from R&D studies are provided to the Ministry of Environment and Forests and Ministry of Health who prescribe the quality
 standards.
CSIR laboratories closely interacts with the Pollution Control Boards and provides the necessary expertise whenever required
 by them. For example, in recent past ITRC has carried out the identification of the sites for the disposal of the hazardous waste for
 the UP Pollution Control Board.
National Physical Laboratory is concerned with the issues on quality of monitoring of pollutants affecting ambient air quality
 and related health issues.
The following programs are being pursued/prepared as part of the activities of this laboratory:
Preparation of the national inventory of strength of sources and sinks of greenhouse gases and experimental determination of
 certain emission factors.
Study of the effect of anthropogenic pollutants on formation, frequency and longevity of fog in and around Delhi.
Developing compact polymeric thin film sensors for detection of certain toxic gases.
Monitoring of surface ozone, a secondary pollutants, not among the pollutants currently monitored by the CPCB’s network of
 ambient air quality monitoring.
A new major facility for monitoring polluting gases is likely to be established.
Committee may be happy to know that, NPL is coordinating a multi-laboratory programme on preparation and dissemination of
 Certified Reference Materials of various materials including of water for quality assurance and control. It has developed a certified
 reference material of Arsenic in water also which is being widely used for assessing the quality of water. It was also used in project
 on "One year village level trial of arsenic removal tablet developed by SOES Jadavpur university and CSIR collectively under Rajeev
 Gandhi National Drinking Water Mission Programme" for precise and accurate measurements.
NEERI has developed the techniques for assessment of arsenic in water. In addition, technology for abatement of arsenic has also
 been developed. CSIR has also initiated a programme on containment of arsenic in groundwater and NEERI was involved in the
 exercise. NEERI has also examined the arsenic problem in Bangladesh. 
 
Comments
            With the rapid growth of environmental degradation and ecological imbalance, the steps taken by the Department to monitor
 & control various kinds of pollution are noteworthy. 
ASTHMATIC & ALLERGIC DISORDERS MITIGATION MISSION
Recommendation
The Committee is pained to note that the percentage of Asthma patients of all ages has risen sharply.  It is assuming
 dimensions of a wide spread public health disaster.  There is a need to create awareness about the symptoms of the disease for early
 detection and cure.  The research should focus on the medicines, which are affordable to all classes in society.  The publicity of the
 medicine already discovered by the CSIR is grossly inadequate.  Special attention  needs to be focused on allergic Asthmas.
 (Para 65)
Action Taken by the Department
CSIR is focusing on Mission Mode Programme on Asthma. Research projects for developing early diagnosis and therapeutic
 modalities for asthma and allergic disorders are being undertaken. CSIR through one of its organisation (IICB) and the Institute of
 Genomics and Integrative Biology (IGIB), Delhi has initiated the following programmes to be carried out by several  CSIR
 laboratories.
(i)
                  Identifying and characterizing pollens which cause allergy and asthma for creating mass awareness;
(ii)                Studying the genetic and biochemical components of asthma. The polymorphisms in genes that are associated with
 asthma are being investigated. The biochemical properties of allergens are being studied;
(iii)               Using lung surfactant proteins (SP-A and SP-D) for developing therapeutic modalities for Allergen Broncho Pulmonary
 Aspergilosis (ABPA) disorder;
(iv)              Providing regular workshops to physicians from all over the country for better management of asthma and allergic
 disorders;
(v)                Preparing allergenic extracts for immunotherapy;
(vi)              Screening plant extract & extract of other sources (micro or insects) to identify new anti-microbial agents;
(vii)             Special projects have been given to identify new drug targets in M. Tuberculosis; and
(viii)           Identification of potential drug target using in silico approach.
In order to honour the Committee’s commitments relating to Asthma & ASMON, CSIR during the year has made ample
 publicity about ASMON – the herbal therapeutic of bronchial Asthma.  There has been a separate panel/poster on ASMON as a part
 of the CSIR Diamond Jubilee Exhibition and advertisement with the theme on ASMON is also being given at each venue of the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/120threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
 exhibition in various parts of the country.  A large number of visitors to the exhibition with specific queries on ASMON are being
 helped with proper literature and addresses of the availability of the therapeutic at different places across the country.  A special
 advertisement was also published last year in the leading newspapers on the occasion of the World Asthma Day.
 
Comments
 The Committee commends the various initiatives and actions taken by the Department in combating various health hazards
 with special reference to ABPA disorders as well as creating awareness on Asthma and ASMON.
NEWER SCIENTIFIC HERBAL PREPARATIONS FOR GLOBAL POSITIONING
Recommendation
The Committee feels that intensive efforts should be made for acceptance of herbal medicines as complementary to modern
 mainstream medicines.  Besides, the committee feels that a regular watch has to be kept on those agencies who patent our traditional
 formulations and claim them as their own.  The Committee appreciates the observation of the Director General of CSIR who while
 replying to clarifications of members said that world wide attention is being focused on digital, herbal and spiritual ethos of which
 India has an abundant reserve.  The Committee entirely endorses the point that if our scientists apply themselves with dedication to
 harness these reserves twenty first century would be an Indian century. In fact Eric Hobsbwam in his book A New Century has
 written that India might surpass many other countries in the world and emerge as a  great country primarily because of the originality
 of her scientific and technological traditions which date back thousands and thousands of years.  At the same time the Committee
 feels that a check should be exercised on quacks in the healing profession specially those people who pose as doctors after having
 attained a degree in Ayurveda and misuse their positions to prescribe mainstream allopathic medicines or vice-versa.  The graduates
 in Ayurveda should be given the nomenclature of Ayurvedacharya & not doctor.
(Para 68)
Action Taken by the Department
CSIR through NISCAIR is already active in creation of a digital library in traditional knowledge, the project entitled
 Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL). It is a collaborative project between NISCAIR and Department of Indian System of
 Medicine and Homoeopathy, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and has been implemented at NISCAIR. About 36,000
 formulations mentioned in 14 authentic Ayurvedic texts listed out in Indian Drugs and Cosmetics Act have been transcribed in five
 international languages which are English, French, German, Spanish and Japanese. Images of the original Slokas, which have been
 transcribed, will also be included along with the references. The objective of creating TKDL is the defensive protection of traditional
 knowledge or in other words the database shall prevent the bio-piracy of traditional knoweldge. In all likelihood these database
 would act as a bridge between the codified traditional knowledge existing in Sanskrit and Hindi and the patent examiner at global
 level. It will serve as a non-patent online literature for use by the patent examiners. The transcription work on 36,000 formulations
 has been completed. However, the verification and validation work carried out by Eminent Ayurveda Experts is likely to be
 completed by August, 2003. Once validated the database will be available to patent examiners so as to prevent the misappropriation
 of the data use signing of the non-disclosure agareement by the patent offices and to prevent the misappropriation of the data.
The Department of Indian System of Medicine & Health has been requested to look into the concern of the Committee on
 quacks and also on graduates passing in Ayurveda for being given the nomenclature of Ayurvedacharya etc.
Comments
The efforts of the Department are commendable.
Recommendation
The Committee is heartened to note that the CSIR has entered into a strategic alliance with Arya Vaidya Sala and the Central
 Council of Research in Unani Medicine for revitalizing these ancient systems of medicines and making them relevant to our modern
 life and problems.  The Committee is satisfied to note that modern biological tools, techniques, processes and focused R&D are being
 applied to prepare herbal formulations.
The Committee discussed the severe handicap of Indian medicine systems which have to seek validation through western
 allopathic systems.  Evidently India, China & the orginators of Unani Systems of medicine have to fight together in all international
 fora including WHO.  The region specific systems of medicine get their validation from their ancient scriptures and if field trials
 establish their success they require to be validated all over the world on the basis of their conforming with their textual versions.  It is
 veritable  humiliation to the millennium old systems of ancient medicines to force them to pass the strait-jacket test systems of
 western pharmacology. Just as homeopathy has never had to pass through those validation procedures for getting world recognition
 as a valid system of medicine similarly validation of a system of medicine in India & China should get world recognition if they
 fulfill the conditions  laid down by the founders of their indigenous systems of medicines.  This calls for a concerted drive at world
 forums and the Committee recommends that CSIR is best suited to become the bulwark of this Campaign.
(Para 69)
Action Taken by the Department
CSIR has already started action with respect to the investigation and validation of the formulation selected on the basis of their
 past track record in ancient system of Medicine. CSIR in its 10
th Five Year Plan have initiated projects such as “Development of
 Newer scientific formulation for their global positioning”. These projects are being investigated using modern tools for the following

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/120threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
 broad purposes.
(i)                  Establishing Mechanism of action;
(ii)                Validation of safety;
(iii)               Validation of efficacy
These investigations are pursued keeping in mind the strength of the formulations in ancient scriptures. Services of modern
 Clinicians, Molecular Biologists and Toxicologists are being involved besides ancient medicine practitioners. Keeping in view the
 above we also believe that CSIR is ideal organization to undertake the compaign as suggested.
We are thankful to the Committee that the initiative taken by CSIR for entering into agreement has been reconized as well as
 appreciated. CSIR is now trying to develop new herbal preparations. Indian System of Medicine is endowed with a wealth of
 knowledge created through observation, sustained practice and well conceived principles and while doing so it has taken into account
 the foundation and principles of health care enshrined in ancient Indian Scriptures wherein India propagated a holisitic vision of
 health carrying the Philosphy of health beyond the currently held vision of physical, mental and social well being. Realising this
 potential that India can become a player in discovering new therapautics for world health care on a sustained basis and also with a
 view to overcome the major constraints of funds and time required to discover modern drugs CSIR developed and followed special
 strategy based on India’s biodiversity and use of the knowledge base to develop new polyherbal preparations for treating not
 symptoms but specific disease. CSIR is thus partnering them to design & develop, new herbal formulations.  The basis of efficacy of
 these new herbal preparation would be their multiple action and synergy amongst various molecules.
Comments
The Committee notes with satisfaction the actions started by CSIR with regard to the Ancient Systems of Medicine, which are
 holistic and preventive.  It also notes with satisfaction that modern methods are being applied to these ancient systems to make them
 more effective.
DEVELOPING NEW GENERATION FUELS & LIBRICANTS
Recommendation
The Committee appreciates the Department for venturing into the development of new fuels.  The Committee feels that there is
 a need for adoption of wide variety of new generation alternative fuels as this would, apart from curbing the consumption of
 petroleum, help in reduction of pollution in our cities and towns.  The Committee would like the Department to develop fuels from
 waste matter and other non-bio-degradable substances which otherwise cause environmental degradations.
The Committee finds that similar research is being carried out by the Research & Development center of Indian oil
 Corporation at Faridabad.  It would be appropriate if the Department coordinated with them so as to prevent the duplication of
 research.
(Para 71)
Action Taken by the Department
The suggestion of the Committee is well taken. CSIR through its various laboratories and particularly through IIP has
 established close linkages with IOC(R&D). Such projects will be jointly coordinated in the area of new fuels particularly hydrogen &
 bio-fuels. R&D activities would also be focussed to develop fuels from wastes.
Comments
The Committee expresses its satisfaction with the reply and it would further like to see the redoubling of the efforts to produce
 alternative fuels so that the growing energy needs of the country can be met.  Assurances of the Department focus attention on R&D
 activities for development of fuels from waste products are encouraging.
SETTING UP A WORLD CLASS DRUG RESEARCH INSTITUTE
Recommendation
The Committee commends the challenging vision of the Department to set up a world-class drug research center. The
 Committee feels that the new center should aim at developing drugs for a wide range of diseases especially tuberculosis, Kala azar,
 AIDS, Hepatitis, Asthma by inter-alia intensive interaction with all varieties of Indian & Folk systems of medicine. Besides, the
 Committee feels that the new institute should go for manpower training and research to help pharmaceutical companies to improve
 the quality of their formulations. For example, in the budget for 2003-2004 government has given some incentives for Glucometers,
 but the prices of insulin are very high. Diabetes is spreading like an epidemic. India has been described as the future diabetic capital
 of the world. The Committee feels that the Department should make persistent efforts not only to produce insulin in our country by
 recombinant method so that its cost is reduced and it is made affordable for poor people, but also to create Ayurvedic cheaper
 formulations to treat diabetes for curing it and not just controlling it.
(Para 73)
Action Taken by the Department
Established in 1951 and committed to development of new drugs, pharmaceuticals and cost-effective process technologies
 against diseases prevalent in the country, CDRI made real impact in the Indian Health Care by developing a blood schizontocidal
 antimalarial marketed as E-mal; an antirelapse antimalarial as Aablaquin ; a non-steroidal oral contraceptive as Saheli and for use in
 dysfunctional uterine bleeding as Sevista and three economically viable process technologies for I-ephedrine, Dextropropoxyphene
 and a antimalarial Arteemether. Other significant achievements are a strong knowledgebase comprising 8000 research publications,
 more than 500 patents filed in India and abroad and about 1000 Ph.Ds spread over the Academic and Pharmaceutical sector nation-

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/120threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
wide holding prestigious positions in the best multinational pharma companies.
New drug discovery research and development being a multifaceted and multidisciplinary activity, the institute has since been
 actively involved in various research activities ranging from understanding of host-pathogen interactions, identification of new
 targets and designing bioassays rational drug design mechanism of action and admetox profiling of new drug molecules for
 development of safe and effective drugs. This has led the institute to acquire expertise, infrastructure and a strong knowledgebase not
 only to work in areas of current thrust but also take-up challenging problems likely to affect developing countries especially India in
 near future.
The suggestions/observations put forth by the expert Committee in the above report have been given due consideration to a
 major extent not only in the vision document prepared in respect of ‘Setting-up a world-class drug research Institute’ at Sitapur Road,
 Lucknow, but have also been incorporated in the on-going R&D programs at the Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that adequate efforts would be made in making cheaper medicines using indigenous
 systems.
DEVELOPING NEW BUILDING CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
Recommendation
The Committee is of the opinion that new construction materials should be less energy intensive for building economical
 dwelling units for millions of our people. As large parts of our country live in villages, locally available material may be used to
 produce technologies for construction of houses & the technologies need to be region-specific.
(Para 75)
Action Taken by the Department
Building materials and technologies developed by Central Building Research Institute (CBRI) for construction of houses and
 other buildings is based on  use of locally available materials and manpower with low energy consumptions.  These Technologies are
 relevant to different geo-climatic regions of the country depending upon the availability of materials and skills of the region.  As
 desired by the Committee, under a new network programme of CSIR, full cognizance of the energy and use of local materials has
 been taken.  The major objective of the project is the development and application of low alternative/new building construction
 materials from conceptual to commercialisation through use of energy efficient and environment friendly building materials
 processes and construction technologies with emphasis on value addition to agro industrial wastes for sustainable development.  The
 project envisage to provide materials for building economical dwelling units to cater to the masses in difficult regions of the country.
Comments
The Committee observes with satisfaction the fact that building materials and technology developed at CBRI takes into
 account the different geo-climatic regions and different local needs.
INFECTIOUS DISEASED HANDLING STORAGE & RESEARCH FACILITIES
Recommendation
The Committee feels that the new storage and handling facilities should be of world-class standard. The Committee hopes that
 this facility would conduct basic research for controlling infectious diseases to reduce the risk of morbidity. The Committee hopes that
 the Department would conduct periodic review of such facilities to properly maintain their standards. The Committee emphasizes the
 need for adopting measurable parameters for effective monitoring of the progress being made in this direction.
(Para 79)
Action Taken by the Department
CSIR has been at the fore front of finding new diagnostics and therapeutic methods for controlling infectious organism and
 disease caused by them. CSIR is initiating a programme during the Tenth Plan to create adequate infrastructural storage & handling
 facility in number of CSIR laboratories. These facilities once created would enable CSIR for implementation of appropriate safety
 guidelines and enhance the speed of ongoing basic research carried on infectious microorganism at these facilities to be accelerated
 through networking.
Comments
The Committee is satisfied that the methods and techniques devised by the department to control and eliminate various
 infectious diseases are of immense significance and beneficial to the masses.  It further suggests that the Department should take
 utmost care for the maintenance of laboratories and promotion of basic research.
GIVING SPECIAL AWARDS TO THE UNEDUCATED PEOPLE WHO DISPLAY THEIR GENIUS IN SCIENTIFIC FIELD
Recommendation
The Committee observes that innovative ideas on scientific aspects not only come from urban educated people but also from
 persons who are not educated and who hail from rural areas.  Scientific discovery of excellence gives rise to technological innovations
 of excellence.  The Committee therefore recommends that the Department should create special awards for the uneducated people
 who apply their genius in scientific fields and make important discoveries.  There is also need for publicity about the quality testing
 facility so that people at large avail of it.
(Para 86)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/120threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
Action Taken by the Department
Department is operating a scheme known as Technopreneur Promotion Programme (Tepp) essentially to tap the vast
 innovative potential of the citizen of India. It promotes individual innovators to become technology based entrepreneurs. Through
 Tepp financial support to individual innovators irrespective of whether they are educated or not but having original ideas is provided
 to convert their ideas to working models/prototypes etc. So far four inventors who were farmers, artisans were supported for their
 products. Department is bringing out hand out and brochures providing information on the quality testing facilities available at
 various National Laboratories with a view to making organisations aware of the facilities.
Comments
 The Committee notes the reply and would like to see more programmes in the lines of Techno Promotion Programme (Tepp),
 to encourage and nurture the innovative potential of the individual entrepreneurs in the country.
NATIONAL SCIECNE & TECHNOLOGY HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation
The Committee feels that the amount is not at all enough for developing human resources for science and technology and
 therefore recommends that substantively higher allocations must be made for the above scheme.
Interest and awareness among students for science and technology has to be sustained. The Committee feels that, Science
 Cafes, in the pattern of Cyber Cafes, may be opened in different localities and educational institutions. Exposure to scientific works
 and activities in such cafes would encourage the youth of our country to show more interest in science. The Committee strongly
 recommends that some time (at least five minutes) may be allocated in the chaupal programme of Doordarshan to show the activities
 of CSIR for promoting people’s awareness about them. The Ministry of I&B has already indicated its enthusiastic willingness to
 provide all help in this direction. The Committee would like to know the quantifiable impact that the scholarship scheme has
 produced. It is hoped that individual record of progress of scholarship holders is being maintained & there is provision to terminate
 the scholarships of indifferent students. If there is no such specific mechanism in place, it would be desirable to introduce one. That
 alone will ensure optimum, benefit from the investment made.
(Para 89)
Action Taken by the Department
The Department would take up the matter at RE stage with the Ministry of Finance and request them to consider enhancement
 in the budgetary support to the scheme on S&T human resource development.  In the mean time the department is working out the
 exact requirement to meet the shortfall.
In the Tenth Plan, CSIR under the scheme on S&T Human Resource Development, has planned to adopt school & colleges to
 raise the standard of science teaching.  The suggestion of the Committee to open science  cafe is accordingly being considered to be
 dovetailed in the scheme.
CSIR is happy to inform that the scholar scheme which has been in operation since 1950 & 1983 has so far supported about
 90,000 JRF, SRF, Research Associates & Senior Research Associates. These scholars have published quality papers in Science
 Citation Index Journals and thus been able to contribute in generation of new  knowledge.
Checks & balances have been built in.  The progress of these fellows are evaluated and monitored every year through peer
 reviews. Rigorous monitoring is also undertaken at the end of two years while the fellows are considered for upgradation.
Comments 
The Committee notes the reply with satisfaction and hopes that vigorous efforts would be undertaken to create quality human
 resources in the fields of science and technology.
 
 
MINUTES
I
FIRST MEETING
 
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Friday, the 23 rd January, 2004 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
46. Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
47. Shri C. Apok Jamir
48. Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
49. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
50. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
51. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/120threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
52. Shri B.P. Singhal
53. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
54. Smt. Savita Sharda
55. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
56. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
57. Shri T. S. Bajwa
58. Shri Lalit Suri
 
LOK  SABHA
 
59. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
60. Chowdhary Talib Hussain
61. Shri G.J.Javiya
62. Shri C. Kuppusami
63. Shri Rupchand Murmu
64. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                       
65. Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
66. Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
67. Shri Shriniwas Patil
68. Prof. R.R. Pramanik
69. Shri Ganta Sreenivasa Rao       
70. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
71. Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
72. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
73. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
74. Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
                        SECRETARIAT
           
            Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
            Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer
 
2.         The Chairman welcomed the Members of the newly reconstituted Committee.  He stated that the Report on Dal Lake and
 some of its important recommendations received wide publicity and informed the Members that six major newspapers of our country,
 4 English and 2 Hindi dailies covered them extensively.  The Chairman and Members applauded the officers and staff of the
 Committee for rendering valuable service in drafting such reports which have been very well received by mass media.
3.         The Committee took up consideration of the draft ***, 120
th, ***, ***, *** and *** Reports of the Committee on the Action
 taken by ***, Department of Scientific & Industrial Research, ***, ***, *** and *** on the recommendations contained in the ***,
 One Hundred-thirteenth, ***, ***, *** and *** Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of the concerned
 Ministries.  After discussing each of the Reports, the Committee adopted them. 
4.         The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri ­­­Manoj Bhattacharya or Shri Lalitbhai Mehta to present the
 Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Shriniwas Patil and in his absence Smt. Jayaben Thakkar to lay the Reports on the table of the
 Lok Sabha.
5.         The Chairman expressed his thanks and gratitude to the Members for their assistance and cooperation in carrying out the work
 of the Committee successfully.  He also appreciated the efforts of the officers and staff of the Committee Secretariat for their role in
 doing valuable research and unearthing information from various sources for the purpose of using them in the Reports of the
 Committee which have been noteworthy from the point of view of richness of information and style of presentation.
6.         The Committee then adjourned at 03.30 P.M.
_____________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matter.
 
 
 