121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE &
 TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED-TWENTY FIRST REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
 ONE HUNDRED-TWELFTH  REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON THE 
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2003-2004)OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 4TH  FEBRUARY, 2004)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 3RD   FEBRUARY, 2004)
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
FEBRUARY, 2004/ MAGHA, 1925 (SAKA)
                                                                      Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Website: http://parliamentofindia.nic.in
 C O N T E N T S
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                    
 
INTRODUCTION                                                                                                       
 
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
                                                                                
 
ANNEXURE                                                                                                               
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING                                                                         
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2004)
----------
 
1. Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri C. Apok Jamir
3. Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
4. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
5. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
6. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
7. Shri B.P. Singhal
8. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
9. Smt. Savita Sharda
10. Smt. S. G. Indira
11. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
12. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
13. Shri T. S. Bajwa
14. Shri Lalit Suri
15. Vacant
 
LOK  SABHA
 
16. Smt. Margaret Alva
17. Shri Nihal Chand Chouhan                   
18. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
19. Chowdhary Talib Hussain
20. Adv. Suresh Ramrao Jadhav (Patil)                  
21. Shri G.J.Javiya
22. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
23. Shri C. Kuppusami
24. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
25. Shri Madhusudan Mistry
26. Shri Rupchand Murmu
27. Shri S. Murugesan                               
28. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                       
29. Shri B.K. Parthasarathi
30. Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
31. Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
32. Shri Shriniwas Patil
33. Prof. R.R. Pramanik
34. Shri Naresh Puglia                               
35. Shri Ganta Sreenivasa Rao       
36. Prof. I.G. Sanadi
37. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
38. Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
39. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
40. Shri Vishvendra Singh  
41. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
42. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
43. Shri Balram Singh Yadav
44. Vacant
45. Vacant
                                                                                                                                                               
SECRETARIAT
 
      Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
      Shri S.N.Sahu, Director
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment
 & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Twenty-first
 Report on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the recommendations contained in One Hundred-

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
twelfth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of the Ministry of Environment & Forests.
2.         The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the
 recommendations contained in the One hundred-twelfth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
 on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of the Ministry of Environment &
 Forests  which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2
nd May, 2003.
3.         There are twenty-seven recommandations contained in the One Hundred-twelfth Report of the Committee.  Action Taken
 Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Department on  29th August, 2003.
4.         In the meeting held on 23 rd January, 2004 the Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report and adopted the
 same.
 
January 23,2004
NEW DELHI
C. RAMACHANDRAIAH,                                                                                                  
 Chairman,
Parliamentary Standing Committee on  Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
R E P O R T
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the
 recommendations contained in the One Hundred-twelfth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
 on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of the Ministry of Environment &
 Forests which was presented/laid to both Houses of Parliament on 2
nd May, 2003.  There are twenty-seven recommendations
 contained in One Hundred-twelfth Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee
 were received from the Department on 29
th August, 2003.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the action taken by the
 Ministry of Environment & Forests are set out in the succeeding paragraphs: -
REASONS FOR SHORTFALL IN OUTLAYS AND UTILISATION
Recommendation
          The Committee recommends that at R.E. stage curtailment of funds for the Ministry may be avoided so as to enable the
 smooth and unhindered implementation of programmes and policies of  the Ministry. The Committee also recommends that the
 programmes and policies may be effectively and substantially implemented at the ground level so as to get the desired result.
(Para 7)
Action Taken by the Ministry
This has been the constant endeavour of the Ministry to achieve 100% utilization of plan funds and to ensure effective
 implementation of various schemes and programmes.
A stringent review mechanism has been put in place where by the Secretary (E&F) reviews progress of plan expenditure
 every week.   The institution of the nodal officers from the Ministry for each state has helped to bring in coordinated efforts
 with the State Governments.
Ministry also makes efforts to obviate any cut in plan allocation at RE stage. However, the final decision rests with the
 Ministry of Finance and they take into account several factors such as overall availability of financial resources, competing
 demands of the various Ministries/Departments, the requirements of the different State Governments etc.  However a copy of
 the recommendations is being forwarded to Ministry of Finance for appropriate action.
Comments
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply and observes that there is an urgent need to review the whole planning and
 budgetary process in the Ministry effectively so that realistic physical and financial targets are projected in the budget and
 planned projects are not hampered due to drastic cut at R.E. stage. The Ministry should also take up the matter seriously with
 the Ministry of Finance not to reduce the budgetary allocation at R.E. stage.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION OF TAJ MAHAL
Recommendation
The protection of the Taj Mahal has been a major priority and constant efforts are required to save the monument. The
 Committee feels that concerted effort should be taken for the protection of the Taj which suffered substantial damage due to
 pollution. The Committee recommends that instead of involving multiple agencies for the protection of Taj, a constituent body
 be formed which would be responsible for coordination with all allied agencies, supported by a strong legal framework for
 effective implementation of the policies undertaken.

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
(Para 12)
Action Taken By The Ministry
The  Ministry has constituted a Taj Trapezium Zone (TTZ)  Pollution (Prevention & Control) Authority to monitor the
 progress of  implementation of various schemes for protection of the Taj Mahal and conservation and improvement of the
 environment in TTZ.  Further, Mission Management Board set up by the Government of U.P. under the chairmanship of Chief
 Secretary (U.P.) is monitoring the programme of implementation of projects in the TTZ area.
Comments
            While the Committee notes the reply, it appears that all efforts of the Ministry fails to make any significant improvement
 in the protection of Taj Mahal from environmental hazard.
NATIONAL RIVER CONSERVATION PLAN INCLUDING GANGA ACTION PLAN
Recommendation
The Committee observes that for any plan or programme regarding cleaning of rivers of such a magnitude as Ganga, to
 succeed, it is necessary to have a meticulous planning. Any delay in its execution is bound to result in the plan going awry.
 More so, because the parameters regarding the size of the population and the extent of urbanization etc., which would have
 been taken into account at the stage of planning, are subject to rapid changes in a country like India. Hence, timely execution is
 crucial for such programmes or else we would suffer severe consequences of contamination of our rivers on  the  banks of
 which our civilization began and flourished.
(Para 22
)
Action Taken by the Ministry
These observations are being taken into account and noted for compliance. The parameters regarding size of population
 & extent of urbanization are in-built in the detailed project reports (DPR) submitted by the State Govts.   The design parameters
 of the facilities take into account the future projections of population and pollution load etc.   The notable achievements of
 National River Conservation Plan are as under :
Of the 261 schemes sanctioned, 259 schemes have completed in 25 towns of  Uttaranchal, U.P, Bihar & West Bengal at a
 cost of Rs. 452 crore under GAP Phase-I.
Of the 35 Sewage Treatment Plants (STP), 33 STPs having a capacity of  865 million litres per day (MLD) have been set
 up under GAP Phase-I.
Length of polluted river stretch reduced from 740 kms. to 437 kms between Rishikesh (U.P) & Rajmahal (Bihar) due to
 implementation of GAP Phase-I.
The water quality results of River Ganga at polluted stretches namely Kanpur, Allahabad,  Varanasi, Patna indicate  a
 decreasing trend of pollution levels from 1986 to 2002.
Of the 33 Sewage Treatment Plants, 29 STPs having a capacity of  738 MLD have been set up under YAP Phase-I.
252 schemes have been completed in 21 towns of  Haryana, Delhi & U.P at a cost of  Rs. 680.10 crore, with Rs. 660.06
 crore assistance coming from Japan Bank for International Co-operation (JBIC).
A Cost Benefit Analysis of GAP Phase-I  carried out by Harvard Institute of  International Development indicated that in
 terms of  both the time taken and cost involved, GAP compares favorably with those of  other major rivers of the world like
 Thames, Rhine & Danube.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply and desires that a copy of the report of the Harvard Institute of International Development
 may be supplied to the Committee. The Committee notes that mere establishment of Sewage Treatment Plants is not enough.
 They have to function round the year. It has been observed that in the absence of adequate power supply, the plants do not
 function. Therefore, the Committee had recommended for the establishment of generator sets in these plants.
NATIONAL RIVER CONSERVATION PLAN INCLUDING GANGA ACTION PLAN
Recommendation
The  Committee is constrained to observe that even after nearly two decades of Ganga Action Plan (GAP)-I, the
 pollution levels at various places in the River has more or less remained the same.  It is seen that every programme failed to
 achieve its stipulated objectives and proved ineffective. The Committee feels that a strong administrative will is needed to
 implement such plans.
(Para 23)
Action taken by the Ministry

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
On completion of Ganga Action Plan Phase-I, the water quality of river Ganga has shown improvement over the pre-
Ganga Action Plan period water quality.   It is observed that in 1986, the bio-chemical oxygen demand (BOD) which is an
 indicator of pollution of river water quality was ranging from 5.5 to 15.5 mg/l (as against a standard of less than 3 mg/l) in the
 critical stretch of Ganga from Kannauj to Varanasi.  As against this, the value of BOD in 2002 in the stretch of Kannauj to
 Kanpur and Allahabad to Varanasi is (1.20 to 4.90 mg/l) and (2.50 to 8 mg/l) respectively.  Similarly, dissolved  oxygen (DO)
 levels which indicate the health of the river, were in the range of 5.9 to 6.6 mg/l (as against a standard of greater than 5 mg/l) in
 1986 in the Allahabad – Varanasi stretch and in 2002 the range improved to 7.5 to 13.0 mg/1. To address the pollution problem
 of  Ganga fully, the GAP-I has been further extended to GAP-II  and merged in NRCP to cover river Ganga & its main
 tributaries namely Yamuna & Gomti 
As far as river Ganga is concerned, only about 35% of the pollution load has been tackled under GAP Phase-I.  Works
 for tackling additional pollution load of about 30% are in hand under GAP Phase-II.   However, there is still a gap of  nearly
 35% which could not be addressed so far due to shortage of funds in the Plan. 
Comment
The Committee notes the reply and expresses its concern that 35% of pollution load is yet to be tackled by the Ministry.
 Delay in such cases will certainly increase the pollution level. The Ministry should chalk out a proper planning and project a
 realistic demand for funds to the Planning Commission.
NATIONAL RIVER CONSERVATION PLAN INCLUDING GANGA ACTION PLAN
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that punitive action should be taken against the defaulting distilleries and industrial units
 which are responsible for the problem. The Committee also recommends that a programme to monitor the performance should
 be introduced and it should be reviewed quarterly. The Committee also feels that the non-availability of funds in the Tenth Plan
 would become a major constraint to effectively address the problem of cleaning rivers. The Committee has been apprised that
 the Ministry of Environment and Forests has written a letter to the Prime  Minister to augment the Tenth Plan outlay to
 undertake the remaining works of river pollution in Ganges.The Committee  observes that efforts for cleaning of our rivers
 must not be restrained by lack of availability of  funds.
Tests of pollution levels to be carried out in the presence of 2 to 5 Members of the Standing Committee. In the light of rusty red
 water at  Sangam at  Prayag  in  February 2003, the degree of decrease in pollution of Ganga looks unreal and question arises as to the
 spots that are chosen to test the waters.
(Para 24)
Action taken by the Ministry
For preventing pollution of rivers and lakes, industries discharging waste water along the rivers and lakes have been
 identified.  Eight Hundred and Fifty One (851) units were identified in August, 1997 which were then not having requisite
 pollution control facilities.  The rigorous persuasions were made with the industries through State Pollution Control Boards.  As
 of now, (31.3.2003), 238 units are closed and 608 units have provided requisite treatment/disposal facilities after issuance of
 directions.  The units providing such facilities encompass all categories of industry including distilleries.  Five units are still
 defaulting and matter in respect of  03 units are in Hon’ble Courts and action have been taken against the remaining 02 units.
 The State Pollution Control Boards are taking measures to continuously monitor these units.
In respect of prevention of pollution of river Ganga, a total of 187 units (GAP Phase I  & II) were identified.  Out of 
 these 187 units, all the operating 133 units have installed requisite effluent treatment facilities (ETP) and 54 are closed.  Out of
 the 133, efforts are on to increase the efficacy of the ETPs in 125 units while 8 are not achieving the prescribed standards due to
 inadequacies in design and operation of treatment plants.  Hence, these units have been directed to ensure effective operation
 and to improve their treatment plants.
            CPCB on February 10
th, 2003 issued directions under section 18(1)(b) of the Water (Prevention and  Control of
 Pollution) Act, 1974 to the U.P.State Pollution Control Board which includes;
(i)                  Ensure that the effluent from the industries along with the river Ganga and its tributaries concerning your State is
 (a) not discharged into these water bodies during non-monsoon months, and (b) discharged only after complying
 with the standards during the monsoon season;
(ii)                Ensure that all theMunicipal authorities concerning the river Ganga and its tributaries in your State, treat their
 effluent to comply with the prescribed norms before discharging into these water bodies; and
(iii)               Ensure that regular monitoring is conducted of the river Ganga and its tributaries concerning the State at least once
 in a week.
SPCBs  (including U.P.) are regularly monitoring the performance of industries under the environment surveillance
 programme.

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
A survey to relocate/confirm the monitoring locations in Allahabad-Varanasi stretch of river Ganga was conducted in
 April, 2003 in which officials from NRCD/MOEF, CPCB and UP Jal Nigam participated. The number of monitoring stations
 are proposed to be enhanced from 10 to 13.   The vulnerable stretches requiring intensive water quality monitoring have been
 identified and the necessary process is being strengthened.
CPCB identified industrial effluent as one of the possible reasons for the red colour of water at Sangam in Feb, 03. In
 order to minimize the colour of the effluent generated from tanneries, distilleries, pulp & paper and textile industries, the
 Ministry is interacting with the CSIR laboratories for R&D studies.
Presently, there is a gross budgetary support (GBS) of Rs. 1417 crore for NRCP in the X Plan which is quite inadequate. 
 With the inclusion of  new projects of  conservation of river Gomti at Lucknow, river Musi at Hyderabad and the YAP Phase-
II, the Planning Commission has agreed to revise the GBS from the present  Rs. 1417 crore to Rs. 1825 crore at the time of 
 mid- term review of the X Plan.  The total requirement of funds for the remaining critical works of river Ganga & Yamuna
 alone is estimated at Rs. 2000 crore. Planning Commission has been requested to consider upward revision of the outlay of
 NRCP at the time of mid-term appraisal of the X Plan (from Rs. 1825 crore) so that remaining works of  these rivers amounting
 to about Rs. 500 crore (out of a total requirement of Rs. 2000 crore) can be accommodated in the X Plan.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and observes that the Ministry has not responded to its recommendation that the tests of
 pollution level is to be carried out in the presence of two to five Members of the Standing Committee.
YAMUNA ACTION PLAN
Recommendation
The Committee is deeply perturbed to note that the Yamuna water at Delhi continues to be stinking and dirty. It notes
 with concern that waste  is still dumped in the Yamuna river through drains. The Committee notes with anxiety that cleaning  of
 sewerage has become erratic and the functioning of the sewage treatment plants have been stalled due to frequent power cuts or
 some other reason. These STPs cannot afford to be dysfunctional for even a minute and the Committee would like to know  the
 arrangements for captive gensets. It also noted with concern about the lack of public awareness and public participation in the
 cleaning of rivers. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that the cleansing  of Yamuna has to go beyond cosmetic  measures
 like removal of slums along the banks and greening of banks. Perhaps the more concrete  solution is to prevent the drainage
 wastes from entering the river and to ensure the increase of the flow of fresh water.  The Committee would also like to  know if
 the Delhi Government/Central Government have obtained an extension of time from the Supreme Court for compliance of its
 order which was to be implemented by 31.3.2003 or are the Governments responsible for non-compliance, therefore,
 committing contempt of the Supreme Court.
(Para 34)
Action taken by the Ministry
            Yamuna Action Plan has been  implemented in Delhi  at a cost of Rs. 180 crore, (where only 2 sewage treatment plants,
 each of 10 million litres per day (mld) capacity, 4 mini sewage treatment plants, and  10 micro sewage treatment plants of a
 total capacity of 10 mld were  constructed besides about 960 community toilet complexes).  However, the expected level of
 improvement in river water quality is yet to be achieved.  GOI had posed a project of YAP –II at an estimated cost of Rs. 2000
 crore to JBIC. But due to constraint of resources, JBIC has committed an assistance of Rs. 624 crore (for Delhi, Haryana and
 UP out of which Rs. 387 crore is for Delhi).  The major  focus under YAP-II shall be on sewerage works in Delhi.   While a
 capacity to treat 135 mld of sewage will be created, 624 mld of sewage treatment capacity is to be rehabilitated. Out of 91 km.
 of trunk sewer which is defunct due to settlement/siltation, 30 km. is proposed  to be rehabilitated under this project.  In
 addition, YAP-II will also address the programme of capacity building of implementing agencies.  Public participation  and
 water quality management programme to assess the efficacy of the project will receive a special focus.   The works under YAP-
II are envisaged to take a completion period of  5 years to be completed by September, 2008. 
In addition, Government of Delhi is also implementing projects for abatement of pollution of river Yamuna in Delhi
 through their own resources.  An amount of Rs. 630 crore has been spent by Government of Delhi on these projects during the
 IX Plan. Government of Delhi is constructing 15 CETPs in 21 industrial estates to create a capacity of 180 mld.   The STPs  
 constructed by Delhi Jal Board are being provided with captive power generation sets in future.   Remaining works proposed to
 be executed for abatement of pollution of river Yamuna are envisaged to be taken up under YAP Phase-III.
10 cumecs of fresh water is to be released by the riparian states as per directions of the Supreme Court for augmentation
 of flow of water in the river at Delhi.  Central Water Commission is monitoring the release of the fresh water by the respective
 states as per their share. Government of Delhi has requested Supreme Court to extend the time limit for restoration of water
 quality to the desired level by 31.3.2005.
Comments
One of the problems relating to the pollution of River Yamuna may be lack of minimum flow of water. The Ministry,
 along with devising ways and means to ensure keeping a minimum flow of 10 cumecs of fresh water in the river has to take

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
 other measures so that pollution in the catchment areas is drastically reduced.
YAMUNA ACTION PLAN
Recommendation
The Committee is also of the view that the Ministry in coordination with the  State Government of Uttar Pradesh,
 Haryana and Delhi should plan a strategy for augmentation of water resources in the upper stretches of the Yamuna and for
 conserving water both for domestic  and irrigational purposes.
(Para 35)
Action taken by the Ministry
In recognition of the need for adopting an integrated approach for river conservation, the National River Conservation
 Directorate initiated preliminary work for devising projects to treat rivers as eco-systems in their own right.  Towards this end
 preparatory work had been initiated in 2002.   Following projects as model projects in the broader theme of augmentation of
 river flows in the upper catchment areas of river Yamuna have been identified.
(i)   Model project on conservation of upper catchment areas of river Tons, a major tributary of river Yamuna.
(ii)  Model project for integrating wetlands with the flood plains of river Yamuna.
The proposed approach would involve the components of afforestation, soil conservation, engineering treatments, bio-
diversity status, public participation etc.
A High Power Committee (HPC) was constituted in January, 1998 under the chairmanship of Member (Environment),
 Planning Commission for outlining the short term and long term measures for maintaining a minimum flow of 10 cubic meter
 per sec. in Delhi stretch of river Yamuna.  As per the HPC, the ratio in which the riparian States of Yamuna are to discharge
 fresh water flow in the river for maintaining a 10 cumecs level are as under : 
            Haryana        :    56.7%
            UP                :     28.7%
            Delhi            :        4.6%
            Rajasthan     :        5.2%
            H.P               :       4.8%
The commitment of  10 cubic metres discharge of additional flow in river Yamuna in Delhi stretch is not being fulfilled
 by the riparian States.  The States have been impressed upon to release their share of  flow in river Yamuna which is being
 monitored by Central Water Commission.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply and suggests that the Ministry should further take up the matter with the riparian States to
 release the additional flow of water in River Yamuna which has not been released by the concerned States.
GENERAL OBSERVATION
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that the present status of the river cleansing programmes is not satisfactory and under
 these circumstances it would not be possible to achieve the target of cleaning  all the rivers by 2007. All the phase-wise
 programmes need to be monitored and the Measure of Performance (MOP) should be introduced to review the cleaning
 activities.
(Para 36)
Action taken by the Ministry
Cleaning of major rivers by 2007 and others by 2012 is a monitorable target  for the Ministry of Environment & Forests
 in the X Plan.   The Ministry is making all efforts in this direction inspite of  fund & various other  constraints. 
The progress of implementation of schemes under NRCP is monitored by both the State Govts. &  the Central Govt. and
 through Planning Commission.   This is done by periodical review of  physical/financial progress reports of schemes,
 completion status of schemes, capacity created for treatment of sewage in  terms of  million litres per day.
Comments
While the Committee notes the reply, it suggests the Ministry to strengthen their monitoring and evaluation mechanisms
 for achieving the goals and objectives of the schemes/programmes.
GENERAL OBSERVATION

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
Recommendation
The Committee therefore feels that efforts at the government and community levels must be redoubled to clean our
 rivers.
(Para 38)     
Action taken by the Ministry
             The Ministry is placing major focus on the  participation of communities and civil societies in river cleaning progammes.
 Various programme have been included in NRCP and YAP-II pertaining to public participation. All States were requested in the last
 NRCA meeting held on 16.6.03 to give much more importance to this aspect.
Comments
            The Committee is of the view that innovative measures have to be taken for encouraging the active participation of
 people through community, NGOs network and district council in river cleaning programmes.
GENERAL OBSERVATION
Recommendation
Our rivers  have been revered throughout  ages. Our tradition invested divinity with our rivers. Pages of our mythologies
 show as to how norms were prescribed to keep the water of the Ganges clean. The Committee observed that the Bramhanda
 Purna prohibited thirteen actions to maintain the purity of  the Ganges. Some of these are (i)  defecations (ii) ablutions (iii)
 discharge of waste water (iv) throwing of used floral offerings (v) rubbing of filth (vi) body shampooing (vii) frolicking (viii)
 acceptance of donations into the rivers (ix) obscenity (x) discarding or cleaning  of garments (xi) beating and swimming across.
 The Committee recommends that  many of these can be  incorporated by the Ministry in their norms for prohibiting activities to
 keep the Ganges clean.
(Para 39)
Action taken by the Ministry
            Most of these concepts are being addressed in the present projects being implemented under the Plan.  However, the
 States will be impressed upon to follow these tenets meticulously.
Comments
The Committee hopes that its recommendation will be pursued by the Ministry in right earnest. The text of the
 Brahmanda Puran both in the original Sanskrit and translations in different languages may be prominently displayed in river
 banks for generating awareness among our people.
 
WILDLIFE CONSERVATION
Recommendation
The Committee is happy to note that at present , there are 27 tiger reserves covering an area of 0.38 lakh sq  km in 17
 States. However, there is need to strengthen  anti-poaching camps, mobile squads, capacity building of frontline staff in
 intelligence gathering and detection and successful prosecution of cases. Necessary infrastructure in this regard has to be
 strengthened. About one lakh sq  km area is covered under the Project Elephant. But the Committee is constrained  to observe
 that there has been considerable increase in human-elephant conflict and crop raiding  by elephants. Therefore, the main thrust
 in the Tenth Plan should be on protecting existing elephant habitat from further degradation and fragmentation, identifying and
 protecting corridors, mitigation of human-animal conflict and arranging for training and skill development of manpower for
 proper management of elephants.
(Para 46)
Action taken by the Ministry
Tiger Reserves
Under the ongoing Central Sector Scheme of Project Tiger, 100% funding support has been provided to tiger reserves for
 strengthening anti poaching camps, deploying mobile squads, capacity building of frontline staff in intelligence gathering and
 detection  for successful prosecution of cases.  An amount of Rs.224.29 lakhs has been released to the States during the current
 financial year (2003-04)  for these inputs.
Release of Funds to Tiger Reserves during 2003-2004
(Rs. in Lakhs)
Sl.No. Item of Work Amount Released (2003-04)
A. Protection work  

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
i)
ii)
Anti Poaching Camps
Mobile Squads / Strike Force / Legal Support /
Court Case
207.29
17.00
                                                                 Total 224.29
 
Project Elephant
(A)              It is true that there has been some increase in human-elephant conflict and crop raiding by elephants in some States.
 Project Elephant has, therefore, initiated a programme for protection of prime elephant-habitats and corridors by
 setting up Elephant Reserves. Project Elephant has identified 26 Elephant Reserves covering about 61,200 sq.km
 area and harbouring over 16,400 elephants. 19 Elephant Reserves have so far been notified by the state governments
 and the remaining Reserves are likely to be notified during 2003-04.
(B)
              The problem of human-elephant conflict is being tackled by constructing elephant-proof barriers (trenches and
 electric fencings), deploying trained elephants (kunkis) and specially equipped squads, distributing crackers and
 searchlights among villagers and by capturing or eliminating problematic elephants. Ex-gratia relief is also paid to
 the victims of depredation. During 2002-03, Government of India provided Rs 2.60 Cr for anti-depredation
 measures and Rs 1.69 Cr for ex-gratia relief to different states as central assistance under Project Elephant.
(C)
              Project Elephant has initiated a programme for training and skill-development of the forest staff, mahouts and
 veterinarians for proper management of elephants. During 2002-03, 77 forest officers attended Training of Trainers
 programmes organized by the Wildlife Institute of India at Bandipur (Karnataka), Buxa (West Bengal) and
 Kaziranga (Assam). Training programmes on chemical immobilization techniques and power fencing were attended
 by 42 and 75 forest officials respectively. Refresher courses on elephant-health management were also organized at
 Guwahati (Assam) and Trichur (Kerala) which were attended by 50 veterinarians from 12 States.
Comments
Due to increase in the incidences of poaching, the Committee feels that it is imperative  to provide full complement of
 the staff by filing up all the vacant posts on a priority basis. The field staff shall be provided with mobility, effective
 communication network and fine arms.
Regarding escalation in incidences of man-elephant conflict, the States shall endevour to provide timely compensation to
 farmers for destruction of their crops and loss of human life and property.
WILDLIFE CONSERVATION
Recommendation
Shortage  of water in forest areas due to drought or any other reason compel animals to enter the villages to quench their
 thirst.  In the process they destroy the crops and kill people. The Ministry normally gives compensation  to the affected persons.
 The Committee feels that the way of compensation is not the solution to the problem. The Committee recommends that water
 pools may be created in the forests. Such pools may help in avoiding man-animal conflicts.
(Para 47
)
Action taken by the Ministry
            Financial assistance is provided to the State Governments under the Centrally Sponsored Schemes of “Assistance for
 Development of National Parks and Sanctuaries”, “Project Tiger” and “Project Elephant” for various developmental works
 including, interalia, construction of water holes and soil-moisture conservation works that lead to better availability of water
 and impounding of water, etc. so that there is an increase in the availability of water in the Protected Areas (PA) which helps in
 reducing the man-animal conflict caused by scarcity of water. The efforts are aimed at providing water holes as per the
 prescriptions of management plans.
Rs. 36.94 crores were provided to the State Governments under the scheme “Assistance for Development of National
 Parks and Sanctuaries” for development of National Parks and Sanctuaries during 2002-03. Further, during the year 2002-03
 additional grants were also provided to three states that had requested assistance of Government of India to tackle the situation
 of drought in PAs, viz., Gujarat: Rs. 23.29 lakhs, Karnataka: Rs. 28.00 lakhs and Rajasthan: Rs. 136.79 lakhs.
            Under the scheme “Project Elephant” financial support is provided to the State Government for augmenting water
 resources for elephants. During 2002-03, an amount of Rs. 47 lakhs was provided as central assistance under Project Elephant
 to various states for artificial waterholes and water-conservation measures.
            Under the scheme “Project Tiger” also assistance is provided to augment the water resources in tiger reserves. Water
 development works like creation of water hole, desilting of ponds, developing check dams etc. are taken up in the tiger reserves

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
 for the welfare of wildlife during the pinch period. An amount of Rs. 64.80 lakhs has been released to States for the same
 during the current financial year.
Release of Funds to Tiger Reserves during 2003-2004
(Rs. in Lakhs)
Sl.No. Item of Work Amount Released
  2002 - 2003 2003 – 2004
i)
ii)
iii)
iv)
 
 
 
Water Facilities
Water Holes
Creating Ponds
Check Dams
 
 
47.10
36.00
15.20
12.05
_______
Total    110.35
---
23.80
14.00
27.00
_______
             64.80
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
FOREST CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT AND REGENERATION
Recommendation
In view of the steady depletion of forest resources and increasing deforestation, the Committee is of the view that the
 active and willing participation of local communities is necessary for the success of any forest regeneration programme.  In the
 absence of any direct benefit and sufficient authority for the local community, there would be very little incentive for them to
 participate in any  activity of the Ministry. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Joint Forest Management (JFM) 
 programme should be vigorously pursued by involving women and tribals to protect and regenerate degraded forests. Moreover
 non-timber forest produce should also be properly regenerated, harvested, processed and marketed for improving the economy
 of forest-dwellers.
      (Para 53)
Action taken by the Ministry
The steady depeletion of forest resources is being tackled through National Afforestation Programme (NAP), A central
 Sector Scheme being implemented by the Ministry.  NAEB is the Nodal Agency for the implementation of this Programme. 
 The implementation of NAP is through the decentralized set up of Forest Development Agencies (FDAs), which are Federation
 of  Joint Forest Management Committees.  NAP, therefore is indirectly promoting the policy of Joint Forest Management
 through FDAs.  However, the availability of funds under the National Afforestation Programme is a major limiting factor in
 eliciting JFMC’s greater participation under the Programme.
In accordance with the National Forest Policy, 1988, Ministry of Environment & Forests is vigorously pursuing the
 involvement of communities in regeneration of degraded forests through Joint Forest Management (JFM) programme on care
 and share principle.  In this regard, the Ministry of Environment & Forests continuously liaise with the State Governments on
 this matter and had also issued guidelines from time to time to empower the committees and also to make this programme a
 success.  The guidelines issued in February 2000 emphasize the meaningful participation of women in JFM.  It clearly states
 that at least 50% members of the General Body should be women and in the Executive Committee, it should be 33%.  These
 guidelines envisage involvement of people including tribal to protect and regenerate the forests including non-timber forest
 produce.  So far more than 72,000 JFM Committees have been constituted in the country for the protection and regeneration of
 degraded forests.  In order to involve the people in planning and decision making process, Forest Development Agencies
 (FDAs) are being constituted in all the States.  These FDAs are the confederation of Joint Forest Management Committees and
 are empowered to take decision on regeneration of forests, choice of species and other employment generation activities.  The
 Ministry on 24
th December 2002 further issued the guidelines on empowerment, transparency, proper regeneration, marketing,
 and value addition for Non Timber Forest Produce so that the collector and gatherer of the NTFPs get maximum return on their
 products.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
FOREST CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT AND REGENERATION
Recommendation

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
      The Committee recommends  that the rural people, particularly, women and the tribal community have an intimate
 knowledge of forest products, their species, their growth characteristics, utility, medicinal value, etc.  They are also well
 informed about the species that need to be planted in a given locality to satisfy specific requirements  of fuel, fodder, timber,
 and other non-wood forest products. This knowledge should be utilized under the JFM for the larger cause of environmental
 protection and benefit of the community. The progress made in measurable terms should be reported to Parliament in the
 Department’s Annual Report on the success  of JFM scheme on these specific points. This will be an important step for
 empowerment of these people. There is also need to give thrust  to it during the Tenth Plan. However, its strengths and
 weaknesses need to be identified.
(Para 54) 
Action taken by the Ministry
In order to seek participation of local villagers, the joint forest village management committees are involved in
 formulation of micro-plan of the forests under JFM. At this stage participatory rural appraisal (PRA) is also undertaken, which
 also elicits indigenous knowledge. Since such microplan is prepared locally on the basis of PRA, the process of incorporation of
 indigenous knowledge is also facilitated. The Government of India, National Afforestation & Eco-development Board also
 provides funds for formulation of such micro plans of JFM forests through forest development agencies (FDAs) under the
 National Afforestation Programme. An advisory has also been sent recently vide Ministry’s letter no.3-13/2003-B-I dated
 14/08/2003 to all States to incorporate and use local traditional knowledge though micro-planning and implementation (copy of
 the letter enclosed – Annexure I).
In addition, the National Afforestation & Eco-development Board is commissioning a national level study on JFM,
 which also has a component on use of traditional knowledge in selected states. This study would, thus, help the State forest
 departments to promote forest management based on such indigenous knowledge.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
FOREST CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT AND REGENERATION
Recommendation
The Committee was given to  understand that one of the goals of the Ministry is to increase the forest cover of the
 country upto 25%  by 2007  and 33% by 2012. The Committee appreciates the goal set out by the Ministry but is of the view
 that a blanket approach should not be adopted in this regard. Some States already have a forest cover in excess of 33% and
 complain about hampering of development activities due to thick forest cover. Therefore, the policy of increasing forest cover
 should be implemented only in those states which are short of the stipulated target so that a balanced proportion of forest cover 
 can be maintained in all parts of the country.
(Para 55)
 
Action taken by the Ministry
This recommendation of the Committee has a policy dimension.  As far as Ministry is concerned it is clarified that the
 afforestation programame is being taken up only in the degraded forest areas and fringe villages.  Therefore the quality of the
 forest and in turn the forest is being improved within the recorded forest area only, which otherwise cannot be diverted for
 development works without the approval of the competent authority under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
            The productive and protective nature of forests transcends geographical boundaries.  In order to maintain this nature of
 forests, one of the most important goals of the Ministry is to increase the forest cover of the country upto 25% by 2007 and 33%
 by 2012.  The developmental activities in any state are not hampered because of the thick forest cover.  The diversion of forest
 land for non-forestry activities under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980, for various developmental projects like Power,
 Irrigation, Drinking water supply, Roads, Railway Lines etc. is considered on the merits of the case. India is committed to the
 concept of sustainable management of its forest resources and tree wealth.  The proportion of the country’s geographical area
 under forest/tree cover is one of the basic criteria to judge sustainability. The National Forest Policy, 1988 envisages that
 national goal should be to have a minimum of one third of total land area of the country under forest/tree cover. In the hills and
 in the mountainous region, the aim should be to maintain two third of the area under such cover in order to prevent erosion and
 land degradation and ensure the stability of the fragile ecosystem.
            Forest is on the Concurrent List of the Constitution. It is true that the forest cover in some of the states is more than
 national goal, but the national goal has not been achieved so far. The Ministry of Environment & Forests is trying to achieve the
 national goal enshrined in the National Forest Policy, 1988 in a holistic way with a full support to the forest rich states by
 assisting them in strengthening the institutional framework like Joint Forest Management Committees, Forest Development
 Agencies and funding through various centrally sponsored schemes. Simultaneously, efforts are being made on promoting tree
 plantation both outside and inside the forest areas in those states which are deficient in forest/tree cover.  The efforts are being
 made on both the forest rich and deficient states, as we have to take a holistic picture at the national level. While the focus has

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
 to be on forest deficient states but the forest rich states can not be excluded altogether as these states also require improvement
 in the density of forest cover and rehabilitation of degraded/barren lands.
Comments
            While the Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry in achieving national goal of 33% forest cover,
 simultaneously it must be ensured that forest rich states do not feel punished due to their large forest cover and developmental
 activities should not be blocked/hampered or delayed by the policies of the Ministry.
FOREST CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT AND REGENERATION
Recommendation
The  Committee has noted that there was a programme in the 1980s when  women used to do social forestry and grow
 and supply seedlings for which they were paid. The Ministry has withdrawn this scheme and given it to forest contractors. The
 Committee recommends that it should be restored to women Self Help groups.
(Para 56)
Action taken by the Ministry
The Committee’s reference appears to be in the background of the “Decentralized Peoples’ Nurseries” a Centrally
 Sponsored Scheme which was in force till the beginning of the 8
th Five Year Plan.  The relevant records reveal that the National
 Development Council had taken a decision in December, 1991 to transfer a large number of Centrally Sponsored Schemes to
 the States during 1991-92.  Accordingly, the above mentioned  Scheme was transferred by this Ministry along with the
 budgetary allocations, to the States in the year 1992-93.  Therefore any restructuring of the Scheme will have to be done by the
 State Governments.
The State forest departments have been advised vide Ministry’s letter No. 3-13/2003-B-I dated 14/08/2003 to involve
 women’s self help groups (SHGs) in raising of nurseries for supply of seedlings under the National Afforestation Programme
 projects funded by the Government of India, National Afforestation & Eco-development Board (copy of the letter enclosed –
 Annexure II).
Comments                                                                                             
The Committee commends the efforts made by the Ministry in directing all state forest departments to involve women’s
 self help groups in the supply of seedlings. However, it recommends the Ministry to get quarterly report from all states forest
 departments so that under performing states can be monitored. It also recommends that action taken reports in this regard from
 the State Governments may be obtained to monitor their activities.
NATIONAL AFFORESTATION & ECO DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
Recommendation
The Committee notes that active involvement  of people in the development of the forestry sector has to be further
 strengthened. The destruction and depletion of forests will not only lead to loss of our vegetation but will also result in
 widespread deterioration of environment with fatal consequences to the very existence of all forms of life.  There is, however,
 much to be done in this area as the phenomenon of cutting of trees, removal of precious timber and forest fires continues
 unabated.  The problem cannot be overcome unless a consciousness is built among the people that the forests belong to them
 and they belong to the forests and the feeling of alienation among the tribals and local population goes.   The Committee feels
 that the local population (including tribals) residing in the forest areas should be actively associated with the management of
 forests and allowed to share its products without in any way compromising the preservation of our national forests. If this
 happens, many of the ills currently afflicting our forests will disappear. The Ministry should devise steps to inculcate among
 them a sense of belonging and commitment to forests. People performing outstanding work in their area should be suitably
 rewarded and honoured at an appropriate forum.
(Para 60)    
Action taken by the Ministry
JFM is a voluntary action programme.  The Ministry has issued guidelines for implementation at the State level with a
 view to promoting JFM.  The latest set of guidelines has been issued in December, 2002 (No.22-8/2000-JFM(FPD) dated
 24.12.2002).  The guidelines, inter-alia , emphasize the need of inculcating a sense of empowerment in the local community
 participating in JFM by signing an MoU with the Forest Department.  For sustainable harvesting of Non Timber Forest Produce
 (NTFP) by the local people, the guidelines lay stress on capacity building of JFM committees for non-destructive harvesting,
 institutional reforms, storage and marketing relating to NTFP with involvement of Panchayat and State Forest Corporation. 
 The suggestion of awarding people doing outstanding work in promoting JFM and protecting forest would basically require
 action by the State Forest Department.
            Ministry of Environment & Forests gives due regards to the involvement of people for the protection and management of
 the degraded forests and therefore, is actively pursuing the Joint Forest management Programme.  Since this programme is

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
 based on care and share principle, therefore, it automatically inculcates the sense of belonging among the masses.  Further, the
 December 2002 guidelines direct the States to have a MOU with the JFM committees, which will ensure further sense of
 belonging.
In so far as suitably rewarding people is concerned,  the JFMCs/ Village Forest Committees are already eligible with
 other village level institutions to be nominated for Indira Priyadarshini Vrikha Mitra Award (IPVM). In the recent past Gram
 Van Samiti, Jhabua (MP), Village Forest Protection and Management Committee, Salukhera (Udaipur, Rajasthan), Kahleta
 Village Forest Committee (Haryana), Village Forest Protection Committee, Ushkara (J&K), Bhuan Van Suraksha Samiti, Puri
 (Orissa), amongst others have received the Award.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply and observes that a large numbers of tribals feel alienated and this sense is assuming
 alarming proportions.
 
NATIONAL AFFORESTATION & ECO DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
Recommendation
      The Committee also recommends that the vacancies of forest guards need to be filled immediately in order to strengthen the
 manpower requirements of the forest Department to enforce forest protection at the ground level.
(Para 61)
Action taken by the Ministry
The Ministry is seized of the fact that a number of posts including that of forest guards are lying vacant. However, the
 cadre of forest guards is borne on the establishment of the state governments. Accordingly the action for filling-up vacancies in
 this cadre will have to be initiated by the state governments. Considering the need for urgent action in this matter, the Ministry
 has taken up this matter at the level of Minister with the state governments (copy enclosed – Annexure III). The state
 governments are being requested for sending a report on action taken and also to speed up the process of recruitment in case
 vacancies have not been filled-up so far.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
NATIONAL LAKE CONSERVATION PLAN
Recommendation
The Committee is  perturbed to note that a big project which could play a significant role in restoring the environmental
 health of the country is suffering due to apathy and the lackadaisical attitude of the Central and State Governments. It was
 started in 1994, but little seems to have been done for cleaning of lakes and a lot of  time has been spent either in finalizing
 contracts or preparing action plans or discussing cost factors.  The Committee feels that lakes are critical in sustaining the
 environmental health of our cities. Acting as a huge reservoir, they not only provide water but also recharge and replenish the
 ground water. Lakes also play an important role in preventing floods. Besides, their importance from the point of view of
 beauty, and aesthetics are well acclaimed. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry come out with a
 comprehensive approach and execute all its programmes with seriousness and commitment. Otherwise our lakes will very soon
 be garbage dumps. When lakes dry up during continuous droughts like in Rajasthan today it is suggested that programme for
 desilting and deepening of the bed of those lakes needs to be taken up on a war footing, if necessary with the help of Army
 Engineering Corps.
(Para 64)
Action taken by the Ministry
            The National Lake Conservation Plan (NLCP) was conceptualized in 1994.  After obtaining the pre-feasibility reports
 from the State Governments for 10 identified lakes, the NLCP was posed for approval  by the Cabinet Committee.  The
 Ministry was however, directed to seek external assistance.  No external funding agency evinced any interest.  The Government
 of  India’s approval to lake conservation was accorded in June, 2001.  Since then 22 lakes have already been approved for
 taking up conservation measure at an estimated cost of  about  Rs. 137 crore.  So far an expenditure of Rs.1.90 crore has been
 incurred on NLCP.  The site specific conservation measures include sewage diversion and treatment, desilting, deweeding,
 insitu lake conservation measures like bioremediation on constructed wetland, lake beautification and lake front development,
 low cost sanitation, public participation etc.
The scope of work under NLCP has been enlarged during the X Plan by including conservation of rural lakes along with
 urban lakes.  All State Governments have been asked to prioritise and send proposals for lakes in their States.  Depending upon
 the pollution status and the availability of funds, these shall be included under NLCP.  During the last meeting of  NRCA held

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
 on 16.06.03, it was decided that National Lake Conservation Plan shall receive the same priority as the rivers. 
The outlay for NLCP for X Plan period was originally approved as Rs. 150 crore but was enhanced to Rs. 220 crore in
 October, 2002 to include the outlay for 5 lakes of  Nainital District.
 Comments
            The Committee hopes that efforts of the Ministry will help in achieving its stipulated targets under the programme.
NATIONAL LAKE CONSERVATION PLAN
Recommendation
Moreover, the Committee feels that the pollution in lakes determines the people’s attitude towards the maintenance of
 lakes. People living alongside lakes, have started treating their lakes as garbage bins and this negligence of lakes by them is
 very dangerous. Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry to evolve ways and means to create awareness among
 people about the benefits of lakes. In this connection, it should disseminate information through short documentaries and take
 the help of the local media in spreading the message of preservation of lakes in local languages.
(Para 65)
Action taken by the Ministry
Public awareness and public participation are part of lake conservation projects.  Also, lake beautification measures
 involve participation and contribution from the local population for sustainability of the conserved lakes.
People’s participation is envisaged through formation of action groups, awareness workshops and organizing awareness
 activities at school level.
Comments
            The Committee is not satisfied with the reply.  Mere formation of action groups or awareness workshops does not
 indicate spread of environmental awareness.  The Committee would like to know the detailed activities undertaken under the
 programme.  Moreover, it suggests the Ministry to get feedbacks from the local people about the success of its activities.
INDUSTRIAL AND HAZARDOUS WASTE
Recommendation
Though the Committee  appreciates  the efforts being taken by the Ministry for handling of industrial & hazardous waste,
 it proposes that parameters to assess the impact of measures adopted should be evolved  to enable the country to know their
 effect vis-à-vis the money being invested in this highly important programme. It is hoped that the Department shall be able to
 let the Committee know of the nature and periodicity of such monitoring.
(Para 69) 
Action taken by the Ministry
            In the case of Treatment, Storage and Disposal Facility (TSDF) projects, the grant from the Central Government is
 sanctioned to the concerned body of the state government which is either the State Pollution Control Board or the concerned
 State Industrial Development Corporation. The grant is governed by the provisions of a MOU which is entered into by the
 Ministry of Environment & Forests with the State body to whom the grant is   released and the operator of the TSDF. The MOU
 contains adequate provisions to ensure that the grant is utilized properly and that the project is implemented as per the schedule.
Beside the MOU, a monitoring committee also is  constituted by the owner/operator of the TSDF for each of the TSDFs
 supported by the Ministry of Environment & Forests in which two members  from the Ministry are included.  The monitoring
 committee meets every quarter and provides advice and guidance to the project and overseas the overall implementation of the
 project.
            Further, the progress of implementation as well as functioning of the TSDF is reviewed in the Ministry by an internal
 monitoring committee chaired by Joint Secretary of the Ministry.
            Parameters have been developed to assess the performance  of the TSDFs.  These are covered under the
 consent/authorization mechanisms as per the provisions of the Water Act, Air Act and Environment (Protection) Act.  In case
 the TSDFs do not meet the effluent and emission standards and other conditions stipulated by the concerned SPCBs in the
 consents/authorization as per their regular monitoring procedures, necessary action is taken by the State Boards under the
 provisions of the relevant Acts.  Central Pollution Control Board also monitors the status of compliance by TSDFs.
            The Regional Offices of the Ministry located at Bangalore, Bhubaneshwar, Bhopal, Lucknow, Chandigarh and Shillong
 regularly monitor the compliance of conditions stipulated in the environmental clearances issued by the Ministry for various
 developmental activities. As per the conditions stipulated, the industries are required to treat the wastes generated by them to
 meet the prescribed standards before disposing of the same. The Ministry is also implementing a scheme of registration of units
 having environmentally sound management facilities for reprocessing of hazardous wastes such as, used oil, used lead acid

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
 batteries and non-ferrous metals wastes. The implementations of the conditions stipulated in the registration letter are also
 regularly monitored by the regional offices and monitoring reports are submitted to the Ministry. Normally six-monthly
 progress reports regarding compliance with the conditions are submitted by the industries to the Regional Offices. The Regional
 Offices inspect the industries to verify the compliance of the conditions and submit the reports to the Ministry.  In case
 compliance to the conditions is not satisfactory, the Ministry takes necessary action against the industry. 
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
BIO-MEDICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT
Recommendation
      The Committee feels that the scientific management of medical waste is being  dangerously neglected in the country. The
 staff charged with the responsibility for sanitation and cleanliness in hospitals and other medical units seem to be ignorant of
 the regulations for Bio-medical waste (BMW) disposal. Hoards of broken needles, soiled cotton  and bandages, laboratory
 tested blood/urine/stood samples, leftover plaster of Paris coats, abandoned organs, used utensils, instruments and containers
 lying right in the precincts of hospitals have been noticed by people. Even these wastes have been shown to the M.Ps. The
 Committee observes that in some parts of the country many incinerators installed to dispose of medical waste are dysfunctional.
 In U.P. alone out of 33 incinerators, 31 are not functioning. The Committee recommends that responsibility has to be fixed for
 the negligence which cause such a state of affairs and deterrent action taken against the officers responsible for the running of
 incinerators. The Committee, therefore, recommends that  persons in small and big nursing homes and all hospitals heed to be
 trained regarding this aspect. A  capsule one or two day course  should be run each month in all leading Government hospitals
 of the country and not only staff but the hospital  in-charge must also be  made to attend these courses at the end of which
 proper certificate should also be awarded  to trainees. Taking into account the mushrooming growth of nursing homes the
 Committee recommends that a proposal may  be considered to link the opening of nursing homes with their capacity to treat
 and manage biomedical wastes. Medical waste management cannot be left only to the Municipalities. Open discussions should
 also be held among technical experts people’s  representatives and representatives of hospitals and nursing homes for evolving
 a strategy and method for proper disposal of BMW. In addition to these measures, a recycling industry bases on hospital waste
 needs to be dealt with in an exemplary fashion.
(Para 71)
Action taken by the Ministry
For ensuring safe handling and disposal of hospital wastes, the Ministry has notified Bio-medical Waste (Management &
 Handling) Rules, 1998.  For the benefit of small hospitals and clinics who cannot afford to set up individual facilities, common
 facilities have been set up.  In all, 48 such facilities have been set up in the country and 6 are under construction.
            As per the data submitted by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) there are 67 incinerators in UP (19 with single
 chamber and 48 with double chambers).  Their performance is regularly monitored by the UP State Pollution Control
 Board(UPPCB) and the CPCB.  The Ministry has written to the CPCB to take up the matter with UPSPCB and to ensure proper
 functioning of the incinerators installed for bio-medical waste disposal in hospitals and also to take up the matter with the
 management of the concerned hospitals and to take deterrent action against the personnel responsible for non-functioning of
 such incinerators.  The CPCB has also been requested to closely monitor the functioning of these incinerators.
The Ministry has also written to the CPCB, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and the Director General of the Health
 Services requesting them that while granting funds to various agencies for organizing the requisite training programmes in the
 area of bio-medical waste management, emphasis should be given for training the concerned personnel in small and big nursing
 homes and all Government hospitals in the country including hospitals incharges in the relevant aspects.  
With regard to the training aspects,  the Central Pollution Control Board and State Pollution Control Boards conduct
 training courses and workshops regularly for training the concerned personnel.  So far, the following actions have been taken:
§
         Central Pollution Control Board conducted a two days workshop in association with the Andhra Pradesh State Pollution
 Control Board at Hyderabad during February 25-26, 2003.  The main objective of the workshop was to develop guidelines
 for establishing Common Bio-medical Waste Treatment Facilities.  The participants were from SPCBs, common treatment
 facility operators and major hospitals.
§         Two workshops on hospital waste management were also organised by Central Pollution Control Board during November,
 1999 and December, 2000 at Delhi and Lucknow respectively.  The participants were mainly officials of State Pollution
 Control Board’s (SPCBs)/Pollution Control Committees (PCCs)/Municipal Bodies/Engineering Departments/Major
 Hospitals of the country.
§         Central Pollution Control Board funded the following SPCBs along with the required technical inputs to conduct workshops
 on hospital waste management.  The participants were mainly officials of SPCBs/ PCCs/ Municipal Bodies/Engineering
 Departments/Major Hospitals of the respective states.  The SPCBs involved were:

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
o       Gujarat State Pollution Control Board, during October, 2002.
o       Chatishgarh Environment Protection Board, during June, 2002.
o       Jammu & Kashmir State Pollution Control Board, during April, 2002.
o       Tamil Nadu State Pollution Control Board, during February, 2001.
o       Assam State Pollution Control Board, during January, 2001.
o       HP State Pollution Control Board, during October, 2000.
§         Various other awareness/training programmes organised by the NGOs/institutions like Institute of Rural Development,
 Jaipur, EMTRC, Delhi, Centre for Management Development, Thiruvananthapuram, IMA Noida, etc. were co-funded by
 Central Pollution Control Board.
§         Reputed NGOs like Shrishti, Sulabh International, etc. regularly organise training programmes for the class III & IV
 employees in various hospitals.  In this regard, Central Pollution Control Board with the assistance of Sulabh International
 brought out posters on awareness of bio-medical waste management which has been circulated in different hospitals. 
 Necessary inputs, as and when required, with reference to the Rules and technological requirements are provided by the
 Central Pollution Control Board.
§
         To impart necessary training, Central Pollution Control Board also utilizes the services of known experts in this field from
 reputed institute like AIIMS, Tata Memorial Hospital, Lady Hardinge Medical College & Hospital and Escort Heart
 Institute, etc.
The Ministry also supports various training programmes conducted by NGOs, SPCBs and other organizations with
 regard to implementation of Bio-Medical Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 1998, as and when specific proposals in this
 regard are received by the Ministry.
Comments
            The Committee commends the steps being taken by the Ministry in managing Bio-medical waste.  However, it is of the
 view that Ministry should prevail upon, in coordination with the States as well as Central Government, all health care
 establishments to have their own Bio-Medical Waste Treatment Facility or they should have an arrangement with service
 provider authorized by State Pollution Control Board.
ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION, TRAINING AND RESEARCH
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that talented persons may be encouraged with remunerative schemes and attractive pay
 scales to do research on environment issues. Besides, Ministry should also consider introducing research scholarships to school
 leaving students in order to motivate them to join frontier areas of research in the field of environment. These initiatives may
 help in accelerating the pace of environmental research for the development of a strong knowledge base and its application for
 society at large.  Efforts should also be made to include environment as a formal subject in the schools/professional
 management courses.
(Para 76)
 
Action taken by the Ministry
The Ministry of Environment & Forests supports research in multidisciplinary aspects of environment protection,
 conservation and development in identified thrust areas. The primary objectives are to develop strategies, technologies and
 methodologies for better environment management and also create infrastructure and a pool of trained manpower to shoulder
 the responsibility of environment management in the country. Environmental Research particularly aims at attempting solutions
 to the practical problems of resource management and provides necessary inputs for the twin objectives of conservation of
 Natural resources and restoration of environmental quality.
            The environmental research in the Ministry of Environment & Forests is being supported under following programmes /
 Schemes:
            (i) Environment Research Programme (ERP)
            (ii) Ecosystem Research Scheme (ERS)
            (iii) Research Programme for Eastern and Western Ghats
            (iv) Pitambar Pant National Environment Fellowship Award
            (v) B.P. Pal National Environment Fellowship Award for Biodiversity
            Talented persons are encouraged to do research in frontier and multidisciplinary aspects of environment. The Ministry

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
 has recently revised the emoluments and other conditions of the research personnel working on research projects funded by the
 ministry. Efforts have been made to accelerate the pace of environmental research for the development of strong knowledge
 base and its application to society at large.
            The Pitambher Pant Environmental Fellowship has been instituted to encourge and recognize excellence in research
 related to environment sciences through talented individuals, who devote themselves all time to R&D pursuit in the field of
 environmental sciences.
Dr. BP Pal Fellowship award on bio-diversity has been instituted in the honour of the great scientist, Dr. BP Pal to attract
 talented individuals to work on a specific issue of environment which would enhance our understanding for conservation and
 management of bio-diversity.
The fellowship provides lot of encouragement to the scientists to work in the specific fields of environmental sciences.
 The emoluments & other benefits provided under the fellowship are as fellow:
The revised provisions for the Fellowships Award are Rs. 26,000/- p.m. and allowances or last pay drawn and
 allowances whichever in higher for in service candidates who opt the award on a whole time basis. In case of retired persons/
 pensioners or if the awardee desires to work on part time basis, the fellowship amount will be Rs. 10,000/- p.m. over and above
 the retirement benefits/pension/normal salary as the case may be. In either case the fellowship amount will be tax-free as per the
 existing income-tax rules/guidelines. In addition, an amount of Rs. 1,00,000 per annum will be paid to the Fellow for meeting
 secretarial and contingent expenditure and shall also be entitled to engage one Research Associate or one SRF as per existing
 government norms/ rules.
Education is a State Subject and the responsibility of imparting environment education rest entirely on the State
 Governments. Environmental concepts have already been infused in the school curriculum / text books in all the States.
 Ministry has conducted a nation wide study to check the level of infusion of environmental concepts in the existing school
 curriculum and effectiveness of its delivery. The study covered the textbooks for all classes (standards I to XII) in all
 States/UTs. The study recommended that there is an urgent need for strengthening the infusion of environmental concepts and
 proper teaching of those concepts. On the basis of the study and with a view to strengthening the infusion, the Government has
 taken up a pilot project in eight States to revise the textbooks of standards VI to VIII, with the assistance of the World Bank.
 Government has taken another initiative to infuse environmental concerns into professional and management courses. An
 expert group with representation from management institutions, Industry, UGC and AICTE has been setup to workout a
 strategy. Five workshops were organised on the issue at IIM Bangalore, IMT Ghaziabad, IIM Ahmedabad, IIT Powai and
 Jadavpur University, Calcutta. The effort is aimed at faculty skill development, building a resource base and evolving a
 collaborative curriculum development.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
ENVIROMNENTAL EDUCATION, TRAINING & RESEARCH
Recommendation
The Committee observed that the organizations like Botanical Survey of India, Zoological Survey of India and other
 organization under the control of Ministry of Environment and Forests should be given more autonomy in implementing their
 plans.
(Para 77)
Action taken by the Ministry
The Botanical Survey of India and Zoological Survey of India are subordinate offices of this Ministry, headed by
 Directors. The Directors have autonomy in respect of the scientific work to be carried on by them. The Directors also have been
 given all the financial powers to operate the funds allotted to them under revenue heads, though the capital works are executed
 through Civil Construction Unit of this Ministry. The entire service matters of all the employees including the cadre control of
 all group C & D are being handled by the Directors. The recruitment to Group A and B posts is handled by UPSC.. The
 postings and transfers etc. of the officials are being done by the Directors, thus having autonomy to function and ensure that the
 scientific work is carried on smoothly.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
ENVIROMNENTAL EDUCATION, TRAINING & RESEARCH
Recommendation
The Committee observes that at the local level there is hardly any programme for environmental education, awareness
 and training. Therefore, it recommends that such programmes may be started for educating and sensitizing people about
 environmental issues and making them conscious about their own roles in protecting nature and environment. 

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
(Para 78)
Action taken by the Ministry
Environmental Education, Awareness and Training plays a significant role in encouraging and enhancing people’s 
 participation in activities aimed at conservation, protection and management of the environment, essential for achieving
 sustainable development. The Ministry, therefore, accords very high priority for the promotion of non-formal environment
 education and creation of awareness among all sections of the society through diverse activities using traditional and modern
 media of communication.
 Some of the major activities undertaken in this regard are as follows;
National Environment Awareness Campaign (NEAC)
The NEAC was launched in mid 1986 with the objective of creating environmental awareness at the grass-root level in
 campaign mode. It is multi-media campaign which utilizes conventional and non-conventional methods of communication for
 disseminating environmental messages to a wide range of target groups. Under this campaign,  financial assistance is provided
 to registered NGOs, schools, colleges, universities, research institutions, women and youth organizations, army units, State
 Government Departments etc. from all over the country for organizing/conducting awareness raising activities. These activities
 which include seminars, workshops, training programmes, camps, padyatras, rallies, public meetings, exhibitions,
 essay/debate/painting/poster competition, folk dances and songs, street theatre, puppet shows, preparation and distribution of
 environmental education resource materials etc.,  are followed by action like plantation of trees, management of household 
 waste, cleaning of water bodies etc. Diverse target groups encompassing students, youth, teachers, tribals, farmers, other rural
 population, professionals and the general public are covered under NEAC. More than 8,000 organisations participated in the
 campaign in 2002-03 covering almost all the districts in the country.
National Green Corps (Eco-clubs)
The main objectives of this programme are to educate children about their immediate environment and impart
 knowledge about the eco-systems, their inter-dependence and their fragile balance.     This   awareness  is created through visits
 tonature sites and to mobilize youngsters by instilling in them the spirit of scientific inquiry into environmental  problems and
 involving them in the efforts of environmental preservation.
A programme of raising “National Green Corps” through the Eco clubs was, therefore, lunched during 2001-2002.
 Under this programme, Eco-clubs are set up in 100  schools in each District of the country .More then 50,000 Eco-clubs have
 been set up so far in the country. This programme is being implemented in all the States/UTs the State/UT Govt.  The
 Government of India provides financial assistance for establishment of Eco clubs @ Rs.1000 per Eco-club. It also assists the
 States for teacher training and resource materials.
Every year more than 20 lakh children participate in National Green Corps programme.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.  The financial assistance should be enhanced from Rs.1000/- to Rs.5000/-.  One NGO,
 the Foundation for Research and Training on Environmental Management, Noida has organised training programmes for school
 teachers in different parts of the Country to  promote values and ideas among them concerning sustainable development.
 Ministry may explore the possibilities of using the services of such NGOs in promoting environmental education among
 teachers and school children.   In the context of orders of the Supreme Court to make environmental education compulsory for
 students in schools and colleges, the Ministry may find it useful to take such a step.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS
Recommendation
For effective implementation of the policies and programmes of the Ministry the Committee feels that instead of
 bureaucrats more and more technocrats and scientists should be associated.
(Para 81)
Action taken by the Ministry
The Ministry has a balanced composition of bureaucrats, technocrats, and scientists.  The manpower in subordinate
 offices of the Central Pollution Control Board, Botanical Survey of India, Zoological Survey of India is pre-dominantly
 scientific and technical with a miniscule of non-scientific personnel in Group ‘A’ category of posts.
            At the Ministry level, the mandate of the Ministry merits a judicious harmonization between policy-makers, planners ,
 and administrators with long-term vision, and ability to synthesise and synergise on the one hand ,  and scientists and
 technocrats with scientific and technical expertise on the other hand.  The number of scientists, technocrats, and Indian Forest
 Service Officers taken together on the posts in the range of Secretary to Under Secretary is far in excess of policy-makers,
 planners and administrators.

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
Comments
            The Committee notes the position.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS
Recommendation
An absurd implementation of a rule to conserve the seacoast from pollution was brought to the notice of the Committee.
 The Construction of toilets along the sea coast is prohibited by rule. Not even mobile toilets are permitted. The result is that
 people defecate along the beaches thus leading to stink & high pollution on the beaches. This  rule evidently needs to be
 reviewed immediately. The objective is to prevent pollution of beaches and not just enforce the rules rigidly thus defeating the
 very objective.
(Para 82)
The Committee was informed about toilets on the Goa beaches. It was informed that funds have been released for the
 construction of toilets from the MPs funds but permission has not been granted to construct them.  The Committee therefore
 recommends that immediate action may be taken in this regard and construction  of toilets should be permitted to maintain
 cleanliness of beaches. Alternatively mobile toilets in  sufficient numbers should be placed in all beaches of the country where
 people throng in large numbers.
(Para 83)
Action taken by the Ministry
For the purpose of protecting and conserving the coastal environment the Ministry of Environment & Forests, has issued
 a Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) Notification, 1991.  This notification regulates all developmental activities within the CRZ
 area.  Further, based on eco-sensitivity of the area and the extent of development in the CRZ area the said notification
 categorizes the CRZ area into four categories namely, CRZ-I, II, III and IV.  The CRZ-I comprises ecologically sensitive areas,
 the built-up areas are categorized as CRZ-II, the rural areas are classified as CRZ-III and the islands of Lakshadweep and
 Andaman are classified as CRZ-IV.
As per the provisions of the Coastal Regulation Zone Notification, 1991 as amended from time to time, construction of
 toilets is permitted in Coastal Regulation Zone-I areas for traditional inhabitants of Sunderbans Bio-sphere Reserve Area, West
 Bengal  Coastal Regulation Zone-II areas and in Coastal Regulation Zone III areas for the use of local inhabitants. 
 Construction of toilets is also permitted in Coastal Regulation Zone-IV areas  categorized as Coastal Regulation Zone-II and III
 areas as per the above.
Comments
            The Committee suggests the Ministry to ensure that any toilet construction project which confirm the terms & conditions
 of CRZ notification may not be stalled due to any procedural hassle and such project should be seen as an attempt to maintain
 cleaniness and aesthetics of the beaches.  The Ministry should come out with a comprehensive approach and execute its
 programme with seriousness & commitment.
 
ANNEXURE
Annexure-I
 
Government of India
Ministry of Environment & Forests
National Afforestation & Eco-development Board
 
14th August 2003
 
To
The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests
All States/UTs
 
Subject: Formulation of micro plans under JFM: use of indigenous knowledge.
 
Sir,
            The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests in its 112
th Report has
 recommended that the traditional knowledge of the rural people, particularly women and tribal community, on forests should be
 utilized under the JFM for the larger cause of environmental protection and benefit of the community.

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
           
            In this regard it may be recalled that micro-plans are formulated in consultation with local villagers for joint management
 of forests under JFM.  The National Afforestation & Eco-development Board, through Forest Development Agencies (FDAs)
 provides funds for regeneration of degraded forests under the National Afforestation Programme (NAP).  This also includes
 provision for preparation of micro-plans after a detailed PRA.  It is envisaged that this PRA will bring forth and document local
 knowledge about environment and forests, their protection and management, and forest products.  The knowledge needs also to
 be incorporated in the micro-plans.
           
            It will be appreciated if suitable instructions are given to the FDAs and departmental personnel/staff to give adequate
 emphasis on documentation and use of “traditional knowledges” while conducting PRAs and preparation of micro-plans under
 NAP.  Suitable training should also be given to the field functionaries, including village JFM committee members, sensitizing
 them towards the importance of local knowledges, and their documentation and use.  Funds for the purpose are provided in the
 projects sanctioned under NAP.
 
Yours faithfully
 
 
(Jagdish Kishwan)
Inspector General of Forests
14.08.2003
 
Copy: Forest Secretary, All States/UTs.
Annexure-II
 
Government of India
Ministry of Environment & Forests
National Afforestation & Eco-development Board
 
14
th August 2003
 
To
The Principal Chief Conservator of Forests
All States/UTs
 
Subject: Involvement of women Self-Help Groups (SHGs) in raising of nurseries  .
 
Sir,
            The Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests in its 112
th Report has
 recommended that nurseries operated by women’s groups should be promoted for the larger cause of forest development.
           
            It may recalled that there is ample opportunity for the structured involvement of rural.  Women’s groups under the
 National Afforestation Programme (NAP) which provides for plantation and development of degraded forests.  Under the
 current Forests Development Agency (FDA) structure of planning and fund flow for the NAP, it is possible to involve local
 women SHG for nursery-raising with a view to utilizing the planting material in the NAP projects, SHGs should also be
 assisted in procuring financial support from other rural development programmes like Swa Shakti Project, etc. which promote
 formation of rural women SHGs and their skill up-gradation.
 
            Suitable instructions may please be given to the territorial CCFs/CFs/DFOs and othe field functionaries to promote
 women SHGs for raising of nurseries on the above lines.  The same may please be incorporated in the view project proposals of
 the FDAs under the NAP.
           
           
Yours faithfully
 
 
(Jagdish Kishwan)
Inspector General of Forests
14.08.2003
 

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
Copy: Forest Secretary, Rural Development Secretary, All States/UTs.
                               Annexure-II
 
 
T. R. BAALU                                                                                                      MINISTER
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
NEW DELHI-110001
 
 
D.O. NO. 6-1/2002-WL-I
 
Dear Thiru Nara Chandrababu Naidu garu, Vanakkam,
 
            During the last meeting of Indian Board for Wildlife held on 2
nd January 2002, Hon’ble Prime Minister had expressed
 serious concern on the status of wildlife conservation in the country.  He emphasized that one of the reasons for declining
 standards in wildlife protection was the large number of vacant posts, adequate training and lack of infrastructural facilities to
 the filed staff.  The Stage Governments were urged to take necessary and immediate action in this regard.
           
I understand that power of appointment and placement of front line field staff still vests with the territorial wing.  As a
 result, many vacant posts either remain unfilled or disinterested staff are posted much to the discomfort of the Park Directors. I
 therefore, request you to delegate the power of appointing field staff to the officials of wildlife wing of the State.  Such an
 action would go a long way in the effective control of poaching and illegal trade in wildlife products.
 
            With regards,
 
 
Yours sincerely,
 
 
(T. R. BAALU)
 
Thiru. Nara Chandrababu Naidu,
Hon’ble Chief Minister of Andhra Pradesh,
Hyderabad
Note:   The letter was addressed to all the Chief Ministers.
 
MINUTES
 
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Friday, the 23 rd January, 2004 in Committee Room ‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
46. Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
47. Shri C. Apok Jamir
48. Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
49. Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
50. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
51. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
52. Shri B.P. Singhal
53. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
54. Smt. Savita Sharda
55. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
56. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh

121st Report Of SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/121streport.htm[29-08-2018 16:28:55]
57. Shri T. S. Bajwa
58. Shri Lalit Suri
 
LOK  SABHA
 
59. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
60. Chowdhary Talib Hussain
61. Shri G.J.Javiya
62. Shri C. Kuppusami
63. Shri Rupchand Murmu
64. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                       
65. Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
66. Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
67. Shri Shriniwas Patil
68. Prof. R.R. Pramanik
69. Shri Ganta Sreenivasa Rao       
70. Dr. Bikram Sarkar
71. Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
72. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
73. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar
74. Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
           
            Shri S.N. Sahu, Director
            Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer
 
2.         The Chairman welcomed the Members of the newly reconstituted Committee.  He stated that the Report on Dal Lake and
 some of its important recommendations received wide publicity and informed the Members that six major newspapers of our
 country, 4 English and 2 Hindi dailies  covered them extensively.  The Chairman and Members applauded the officers and staff
 of the Committee for rendering valuable service in drafting such reports which have been very well received by mass media.
3.         The Committee took up consideration of the draft ***, ***, 121
st, ***, *** and *** Reports of the Committee on the
 Action taken by ***, ***, Ministry of Environment & Forests, ***, *** and *** on the recommendations contained in the ***,
 ***, One Hundred-twelfth, ***, *** and *** Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2003-2004) of the concerned
 Ministries.  After discussing each of the Reports, the Committee adopted them. 
4.         The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri ­­­Manoj Bhattacharya or Shri Lalitbhai Mehta to
 present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Shriniwas Patil and in his absence Smt. Jayaben Thakkar to lay the Reports on
 the table of the Lok Sabha.
5.         The Chairman expressed his thanks and gratitude to the Members for their assistance and cooperation in carrying out the
 work of the Committee successfully.  He also appreciated the efforts of the officers and staff of the Committee Secretariat for
 their role in doing valuable research and unearthing information from various sources for the purpose of using them in the
 Reports of the Committee which have been noteworthy from the point of view of richness of information and style of
 presentation.
6.         The Committee then adjourned at 03.30 P.M.
_____________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matter.