142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
                                          DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED FORTY-SECOND REPORT
 
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-2006)
OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 83)
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 25TH APRIL, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 25TH APRIL, 2005)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2005/VAISAKHA, 1927 (SAKA)
 
E-Mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Web site: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
C O N T E N T S
        1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                     
        2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                                 
       3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                        
                                                                                            
       4.SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                                                                           
        5.ANNEXURE                                                                                                                                       
        6.MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              
                            
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2004)
----------
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Dr.Prabha Thakur
4. Shri Jaswant Singh
5. Shri Dilip Singh Judev
6. Dr Biplab Dasgupta
7. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav
8. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
9. Smt. Kum Kum Rai
10. Shri Birabhadra Singh
LOK  SABHA
11. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
12. Shri Jasubhai D. Barad            
13. Shri Sujan Chakraborty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhery
15. Shri Mohan S. Delkar              
16. Shri Anantrao Gudhe

142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
17. Shri Babubhai Katara
18. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik           
19. Shri Brahmananda Panda
20. Smt. Neeta Pateriya
21. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                        
22. Shri K.C.Singh Baba   
23. Smt. Jayaben  Thakkar
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                              
25. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh                           
26. Shri D. Venugopal
27. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
28. Shri V.Aruna Kumar
    *29.Shri Rakesh Singh        
    #30.Shri Shivajirao A.Patil
  @31. Shri Francis Fanthome
 
_____________________________________________________________________
    * Nominated w.e.f. 13
th August, 2004.
    #  Nominated w.e.f. 20th August, 2004.
   @ Nominated w.e.f. 25th February, 2005.
 
SECRETARIAT
      Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary
      Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B. Rai, Under Secreatary
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTRODUCTION
 
      I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
 Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Fourty-
second Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of
 Scientific and Industrial Research (Demand No.83).
 
2.  In the meeting of the Committee held on the 30
th March, 2005 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of
 Scientific and Industrial Research gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought
 clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
 
3.  The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the
 Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the
 Department of Science & Technology.
 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 20
th April, 2005.
 
NEW DELHI;
April 20, 2005 
P.G.NARAYANAN,
Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REPORT
 
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) is a part of the Ministry of Science and Technology with
 the mandate of indigenous technology promotion, development, utilization and transfer. Establishment of the Council of
 Scientific & Industrial Research in 1942 was a landmark event in the quest for using science and technology for national

142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
 reconstruction.
 
2.         The primary endeavour of DSIR is to encourage industry to increase their share in country’s R&D expenditure, support
 a larger cross section of small and medium industrial units to develop state-of-the art globally competitive technologies of
 high commercial potential, catalyze faster commercialization of lab-scale R&D, enhance the share of technology intensive
 exports in overall exports, strengthen industrial consultancy & technology management capabilities and establish user
 friendly information network to facilitate scientific & industrial research in the country.  It also provides a link between
 scientific laboratories and industrial establishments for transfer of technologies through National Research Development
 Corporation (NRDC) and facilitate investment in R&D through Central Electronics Limited (CEL).
 
3.         The above objectives are sought to be achieved through the following during Tenth Plan :
(i)
                    Technology Promotion, Development and Utilization (TPDU) Programmes.
(ii)                  National Research Development Corporation (NRDC)
(iii)                 Central Electronics Limited (CEL)
(iv)                Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)
 
4.         Other activities assigned to the Department are:
(i)
                  Matters relating to International R&D collaboration involving industrial companies and industrial R&D
 centres.
(ii)                International Cooperation/Collaboration agreements with other countries relating to industrial R&D with the
 concurrence of the Ministry of External Affairs.
(iii)               Matters concerning domestic technology, particularly the promotion of ventures involving the
 commercialization of such technologies other than those under the Department of Science & Technology.
(iv)              Matters relating to Technology Trade including exports of Technology and Technical Consultancy Services, in
 close cooperation with the Ministry of Commerce.
(v)                Matters relating to technical, engineering and management consultancy organizations and services.
 
5.         The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research in the Ministry of Science and Technology provides the
 administrative link between the Government of India and the CSIR Society.
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
 
6.         The approved outlay for the 10
th five-year plan (2002-2007) has been kept at Rs.2575.00 crores as against Rs.1356.23
 crores for the 9th Plan (1999-2002). The Department during the 10th Five year Plan proposes to operate six schemes based on
 zero base Budgetary (ZBB) review.  Five  of  the  Schemes  are ongoing  schemes  of the Ninth  Five Year  Plan and  a new
 scheme on
 
Infrastructure Renovation and Refurbishment is being implemented from the Tenth Five Year Plan.  The detailed breakup is
 given below:
                                                  
TENTH PLAN APPROVED OUTLAY (2002-07)
                                                                (Rupees in Crores)
CSIR 2430
Department of Scientific & Industrial Research 145
Total 2575
 
 
7.         The Department has been allocated Rs.1557.00 crores (Rs.846.00 crores under plan and Rs.711.00 crores under Non-
Plan) for the year 2005-06 as against Rs. 1264.04 crores in B.E. and Rs. 1266.47 crores in the R.E. of the year 2004-2005.The
 details of the budgetary allocations for the programmes of DSIR during the year 2005-2006 are given in Annexure. The
 breakup of the financial allocation of CSIR, DSIR and Public Sector enterprises is given below:
 
FINANCIAL SUMMARY FOR 2005-06 PLAN & NON-PLAN
                                                                                                                (Rupees in Crores)
 Plan Non-Plan Total
 Demands
Made
Approved Demands
Made
Approved Demands
Made
Approved

142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
A. CSIR 935.00 797.53 765.85 705.90 1700.85 1503.43
B. DSIR 23.97 27.47 5.47 4.90 29.44 32.37
C. PSE 24.50 21.00 0.20 0.20 24.70 21.20
Total 983.47 846.00 771.52 711.00 1754.99 1557.00
 
 
8.         In the Tenth Plan under the scheme on National Laboratories CSIR has created major and innovative knowledge
 network across & beyond CSIR laboratories.  In pursuing this, some            well-focused programmes/projects were identified
 and formulated with a view to synergise competencies developed in laboratories and implement them in a network mode. 
 Besides, the scheme on New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative has progressed well and has matured as a
 model of Public-Private-Partnership in the Tenth Plan.  The Intellectual Property and Technology Management Scheme has
 also created a movement of (Intellectual Property) IP protection and valorization.  In addition the Central Electronics Limited
 is seeking to upgrade its capacity from 2 MW to 10 MW of Solar Photovoltaic (SPV), Under Technology Promotion,
 Development and Utilisation (TPDU) Programme.  The enhancement is proposed to be utilized for enhanced activities under
 various components like technology development & demonstration projects in frontier areas; setting up of technology and
 innovation management centers setting up of product design centers, consultancy clinics, technology incubators and
 consultancy parks; information support systems for industrial research and development.
 
9.         In reply to a query by the Committee regarding the quarterly expenditure as well as total expenditure for the financial
 year 2004-2005, the Department furnished the following information:-
           
(Rs. In crores)
 
1
st quarter                                      415.20
2nd quarter                                         1.04
3rd quarter                                     527.56
4th quarter
(upto February 2005)           1.96
                                                __________
                                    Total:    Rs. 945.76
                                                __________
10.       The Department also stated that since major portion of the budgetary allocation was for grant-in-aid to CSIR and there
 was almost negligible expenditure during the second quarter as no amount was released during this quarter to CSIR.  In the
 third quarter the balance grant which had become due was released after obtaining necessary utilization certificate of
 expenditure.  It was further stated that fourth quarter grant would be released to CSIR in March, 2005.
 
11.       The Committee finds that pace of expenditure for the fourth quarter of   2004-2005 is not uniform and there is a lot of
 variation in them.  The Committee is not convinced with the reply of the Department in this regard and is of the considered
 view that the Department needs to evolve a mechanism to maintain  uniform pace of expenditure, to the extent possible,
 throughout the year.     
                                   
COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH (CSIR)
 
12.       The Council of Scientific & Industrial Research (CSIR), a premier autonomous Research & Development
 organization, is a multi-disciplinary, multi-locational set-up, comprising 38 laboratories and 47 regional centres, has
 completed sixty-three years of its existence. Nourished, fostered and supported, since its inception, CSIR is now recognized
 internationally as an institution, which is moving speedily towards achieving global excellence without diluting local
 relevance. In India, it symbolizes a culture that links science with society through technology and industrial infrastructure.
 
13.       The detailed functions assigned to the CSIR are as follows:
(i)
                  Promotion, guidance and coordination of scientific and industrial research in India, including the institution and
 financing of specific researches;
(ii)                Establishment or development and assistance to special institutions or departments of existing institutions for
 scientific study of problems affecting particular industries and trade;
(iii)               Establishment and award of research studentships and fellowships;
(iv)              Utilization of the results of the researches conducted under the auspices of the Council towards the development
 of industries in the country and the payment of a share of royalties arising out of the development of the results of
 researches to those who are considered as having contributed towards the pursuits of such research;

142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
(v)                Establishment, maintenance and management of laboratories, workshops, institutes and organizations to further
 scientific and industrial research and to utilize and exploit for purposes of experiment or otherwise any discovery
 or invention likely to be of use to Indian industries;
(vi)              Collection and dissemination of information in regard not only to research but also to industrial matters generally;
(vii)             Publication of scientific papers and journals; and
(viii)           Any other activity or activities to promote generally the objectives of the Department.
 
14.       As the nation’s strongest holder of intellectual property rights (IPR), CSIR leads the way for protecting traditional
 knowledge strength while adding to the new IPR capital. CSIR was ranked the first amongst major Patent Cooperation Treaty
 (PCT) applicants from developing countries.  CSIR has also continued to promote excellence in science and it  has nurtured
 and supported human technology from 16 to 65 years of age, through numerous schemes on human resource for scientific
 research.  CSIR helped usher India into a scientific milieu, creating and nurturing talent in science, innovation and
 Technology.
 
15.       The creation of major and innovative knowledge networks across and beyond CSIR laboratories, is a key feature of
 CSIR’s performance.  CSIR’s massive network on ‘bio-active molecules’ launched three years ago began the process of
 leveraging the benefit of networking, by bringing together 20 CSIR laboratories and several other institutions.  This
 philosophy has been carried forward with vigour. Most of the programmes for the Tenth Plan have been formulated with
 networking of resources and capabilities as the major component.
 
16.       This year also saw an all-time high in CSIR’s journey so far as science papers, patents and earnings are concerned.  In
 terms of science papers, CSIR published 2188 papers in Science Journals. In terms of patents, it was granted 195 US
 patents(69% of the patents granted to Indians in India). CSIR’s external cash flow was Rs 287.00 crores in terms of its
 earnings.
 
17.       The guiding principle for CSIR during the Tenth Five Year Plan is to provide scientific industrial R&D that maximizes
 the economic, environmental and societal benefits for the people of India.  The Tenth Five Year Plan of CSIR and the Annual
 Plans have been formulated with the background of 8% growth rate envisaged by the Planning Commission and Government
 policy to invest 2% of GDP on Science & Technology.
 
 18.      In the Tenth Plan, CSIR seeks to foster the organizational values of Excellence in science; Global competitiveness in
 technology based on high science; Local relevance in tune with socio-cultural and economic ethos of the people; and
 Innovation ranging in all the spheres of activities from science to technology management to financing.  These principles
 coupled with detailed analysis on strength, weakness, opportunities and threats carried out by CSIR laboratories were taken
 into consideration in deriving the opportunities for CSIR in the market place as well as for socio-economic development.
 
19.       CSIR seeks to usher India into a scientific milieu, creating and nurturing talent in science, innovation and technology.
 It spawned many organizations, many disciplines and  most importantly  has  served  as  a nursery and  training  ground  for
 most of India’s
talented scientists and technologists. CSIR operates six Plan schemes, namely:
(i)
                  National Laboratories;
(ii)                National S&T Human Resource Development;
(iii)               Intellectual Property and Technology Management;
(iv)              R&D Management Support;
(v)                New Millennium India Technology Leadership Initiative (NMITLI); and
(vi)              ICT Infrastructure, Renovation and Refurbishing.
 
20.       The key feature of CSIR’s programmes during the Tenth Plan is the creation of major and innovative knowledge
 networks across and beyond CSIR laboratories. They have been classified as follows:
(i)         Steering Committee identified Network Programmes in Mission mode
(ii)        CSIR Working Group identified Network Programmes
(iii)       CSIR Core Programmes
(iv)       Programmes for Building up Core Competences & Housing for Scientists
(v)        Ongoing Commitments
(vi)       Infrastructure Renovation & Refurbishment (Civil)
(vii)      Common Minimum Programme – CSIR Inputs & Linkages
 
21.       The Committee appreciates that the CSIR is striving towards undertaking a wide gamut of research and developmental
 activities in the area of high technology, which would help in projecting India as a forerunner amongst scientifically advanced

142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
 nations. The Committee, however, feels that emphasis of CSIR should be dissemenation of new technologies from the
 laboratories for the benefit of the common man.
 
NATIONAL LABORATORIES
 
22.       National Laboratory scheme is operated through 38 National Laboratories and 47 field Centres. The research
 programmes/project/activities of the National Laboratories have been categorized into thirteen major socio-economic sectors
 viz.  Aerospace, Biology and Biotechnology, Chemicals, Earth Resources and Natural Hazards Mitigation, Ecology &
 Environment, Electronics and Instrumentation, Energy, Food & Food processing, Health Care, Drugs & Pharmaceuticals,
 Housing & Construction, Information Dissemination and Products, Leather, Materials, Metals, Minerals and Manufacturing.
 
23.       Basic research is the major source of advancement of knowledge in science and provides the foundation for
 development of newer generic technologies for the future. CSIR has to continuously upgrade its core competencies and
 research areas to be planned so as to provide the needed strength for successfully competing in emerging technologies for the
 years to come. The core competencies to be continuously developed are in the areas of aerospace science & technology,
 modern biology and biotechnology, chemistry, geophysics, oceanography, material science, computer aided studies, expert
 system, parallel computation etc. Since the CSIR infrastructure was built or acquired more than thirty years ago, selective
 refurbishment and renovation of existing infrastructure will be carried out during the 2005-2006.
 
24.       The Committee has also been informed that the budgetary allocation  of                  Rs.1054.43 crores for 2005-2006 is
 to meet the ongoing and new commitments of the 38 National Laboratories and its out reach centers which undertake
 scientific & industrial R&D to maximize economic, environmental and societal benefits for the people of India.  In the Tenth
 Plan CSIR seeks to foster the organizational value of excellence in science, global competitiveness in technology based on
 high science local relevance in tune with socio-cultural and economic ethos of the people and innovation ranging in all
 spheres of activity from S&T to management to financing.  During the Tenth Plan CSIR is implementing several programmes
 in network mode and this increase is essentially to provide support to the approved projects during the Tenth Plan. The Non-
plan increase of  Rs. 8.86 crore is to partly meet normal increase under salary and other maintenance expenditure.
 
25.       The Committee commends the efforts of the Department to keep pace with the new technologies and to project the
 country as a technologically developed nation. The Committee feels that keeping in view the fact that the CSIR infrastructure
 was built or acquired more than thirty years ago, building of new infrastructure and renovation of the existing ones are of
 utmost importance and should be taken up in right earnest.
 
RESEARCH SCHEMES, SCHOLARSHIPS AND FELLOWSHIPS
26.       The Committee has been informed that the CSIR has always strived towards promoting and fostering the upgradation
 of the stock of qualified, highly specialized scientists/engineers and technologists in Research and Development in all the
 disciplines of Science and Technology in the country by encouraging and promoting research in the universities and
 institutions of higher learning and support organizations and by supporting organizations to hold symposia/seminars and
 conferences for promotion of scientific temper.
 
27.       The Committee has been further informed that CSIR is highly concerned with the gradual declining interest in science
 education and R&D as a career amongst young talents. To reinstate the glory of science amongst youngsters, various
 programmes and activities are being taken up through a true Team India Parternership, which involves participation from
 eminent scientists and experts from academia, in-house industrialResearch and Development. In order to promote interest,
 excitement and excellence in science education at school and undergraduate levels, each CSIR laboratory has a plan to adopt
 at least one school and one college in its sphere of influence. The laboratory provides its facilities for project work and
 experimentations as well as carrying out student guidance and motivational programmes.
 
28.       In reply to a question regarding the efforts made by the Department to stimulate interest among the new generation
 towards basic sciences, the Committee has been informed that the Department through CSIR is operating a scheme on
 National Science & Technology Human Resource Development through which it provides support to foster, sustain and help
 in upgradation of the stock of the highly specialized scientists, engineers and technologists required for R&D, in diverse
 disciplines of S&T, in the country. The scheme has provided support to the academic community for research schemes, award
 of fellowship and scholarship to young generation towards basics and other sciences. Every year the support is extended to
 new inductees. Around 1200 Junior Research Fellows, 400 Senior Research Fellows, 100 Research Associates and 100 Senior
 Research Associates are inducted, besides support also provided to the existing fellows. A programme to attract the best
 young school children towards science through hand holding was launched in the year 2000 through a CSIR programme on
 Youth Leadership in science where top 100 students of class X level are invited to CSIR laboratories to see the excitement of
 science through live experiments. Besides, in order to promote interest  excellence in science education at school and

142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
 undergraduate level, each CSIR laboratory will adopt at least one school & one college in its sphere of influence. 
29.       The Committee notes that most of the schlorships/fellowships are provided to students at the higher level i.e. PhD/
 Research levels. The Committee recommends that schlorships/fellowships may be provided at the entry level i.e. graduation
 level and may be increased for students in Post-graduate level to stimulate interest among the new generation towards basic
 sciences. The Committee also recommends that the number and amount of fellowships/scholarships should be increased over
 a period of time. The Committee feels that for the development of science there is a need to improve the opportunities for
 well-trained scientists and young talents to pursue innovative research, to educate the next generation toapply science in areas
 of importance for the health, prosperity and security of the nation.
 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY AND TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT
30.       The objective of the scheme is to enhance the volume and value of Intellectual Property (IP) generated by CSIR and to
 share the best innovation and technology management practices organizationally and with the Indian S&T community at
 large. The volume of IP rights secured by CSIR has greatly increased over the time. The major task, however, is to realize
 adequate and appreciable value from the IPR.
 
31.       It is also felt that necessary skills and knowledgebase of those in CSIR engaged in the IPR game need to be
 refurbished, particularly, in some still unresolved issues such as  ‘traditional knowledge’, ‘genomic sequences’, ‘copyright on
 the Net’ etc. It is proposed to advise the policymakers appropriately on the new development and changes proposed in
 international IP rights arena.
 
32.       It has been informed that CSIR’s  position in IP rights arena is quite noteworthy. CSIR has made Intellectual Property 
 as its pursuit, for it continued to be at number one position securing Patents in India and abroad. During 2001-2004, CSIR
 was granted 390 patents in USA, a feat unmatched by any other Indian firm or organization in the country and it has filed
 1223 Foreign and 827 Indian Patents. It is thus by far the largest patent holder in India and ranked at first position along with
 Samsung in PCT filing from developing countries in the year 2002 and ranked third in 2003. It is expected that CSIR would
 be able to file 400 patents in India and 500 patents abroad during 2004-05.
 
33.       For the first time, CSIR instituted the Diamond Jubilee Invention Awards for school going children upto the age of 18.
 A two tier rigorous selection procedure was followed and fourteen inventions were selected for five categories of prizes. To
 protect IP rights, provisional patent applications have been filed for these inventors.
 
34.       In order to refurbish skills within CSIR community a series of awareness workshops/ training courses were organized.
 Significant ones were Capacity building in the area of IP management, Conference cum workshop on the theme Leveraging
 Intellectual Property for Organizational Strategy, advanced IP training program on Negotiating, Contracting and Valorization
 of IP, and International seminar on International Enactments and Practices on Intellectual Property Rights.
 
35.       To expose the participants to the world's current practices on IPR and to enable them to plan their strategies in the new
 IPR regime, the joint effort brought together a team of internationally renowned experts. The seminar provided a unique
 opportunity to the participants to closely interact with Experts from different establishments like Patent County Court, U.K.,
 European Patent Office and Patent Attorneys of leading IPR firms from USA, UK and Japan.For the first time in the country,
 CSIR organized a Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) Users' Meet bringing together users, stake holders and administrators of
 PCT on a single platform to debate as to how users of PCT from developing countries can make the best use of PCT system in
 a cost effective manner.
 
36.       In reply to a question regarding six fold increase under the head ‘Intellectual Property and Technology Management’
 in B.E. 2005-2006 at Rs. 30.00 as compared to R.E. 2004-2005 where the allocation was Rs. 5.00 crores; the Committee has
 been  informed that the increase in allocation has been sought to meet expenses towards capturing, filing, maintenance and
 prosecution of IP generated from the CSIR laboratories/institutes.
 
37.       The Committee commends the CSIR for achieving number one position in securing Patents in India and abroad and
 hopes that the CSIR would strive towards safeguarding the country’s interests, specially keeping in view the efforts made by
 foreign organizations to encroach upon our traditional base.      
 
NEW MILLENIUM INDIAN TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP INITIATVE (NMITLI)
 
38.       The NMITLI scheme envisages to catalyze innovation centered scientific and technological developments as a vehicle
 to attain for Indian economy a global leadership position in selected niche areas in a ‘Team India’ partnership. NMITLI

142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
 therefore looks beyond present day technologies and seeks to build, capture and retain for India a leadership position in the
 global arena based on technology by synergising the best competencies of publicly funded R&D institutions, academia and
 private industry. With over 50 private sector companies and over 150 institutes and laboratories networked together, NMITLI
 is the largest public-private partnership in India today.
 
39.       The scheme involves two types of projects viz. (i) nationally evolved and (ii) industry originated. Presently, NMITLI
 projects are spread in, but not limited to the core areas of agriculture & plant bio-technology, bio-technology, drugs &
 pharmaceuticals, bioinformatics, chemicals, materials, information technology & communication, energy and miscellaneous.
 NMITLI is seeking to look beyond these areas for project development.
 
40.       The Committee recommends that a special cell may be set up to coordinate and pool the knowledge gained in the CSIR
 laboratories and the private sector companies and disseminate it through direct interactions with the industry or through the
 print and electronic media. Efforts may also be made to ensure that there is no duplication in the research work carried out in
 the CSIR laboratories and the private sector companies so that country’s scarce resource is not wasted.
 
INFRASTRUCTURE RENOVATION AND REFURBISHMENT
 
41.       The CSIR has translated the S&T goals into viable, low risk and profitable choices. These are multi-location/multi-
institution programme with well-defined tasks. The tasks identified in each programme and their linkages form a matrix of
 inter-related milestones and activities with identified inter-disciplinary teams at different locations/institutions. Managing
 information and computational requirements at various levels in the execution of these milestones/activities is the key to
 success. Therefore, effective and timely access to computing resources across laboratories/disciplines becomes imperative in
 the management of these milestones/activities.
In order to expedite research through network approach the vital components are:
(i)         Strengthening of computation and data resources'
(ii)        ICT support to S&T programmes and R&D areas
(iii)       Inter-laboratory networking
(iv)       Cross boundary information and compute resource sharing
(v)        Information access (intra and inter) laboratory
(vi)       Utilisation of generated knowledge
(vii)      ICT Infrastructure in Labs
(viii)      Monitoring and assessment of CSIR Networked Projects
(ix)       E-enabled uniform system for business development, inventory control, purchases, personnel management and human
 resource development
(x)        Information system to support insight to the R&D issues
 
42.       These requirements necessitate that CSIR set-up an efficient Scientific Knowledge Management System by creating a
 CSIR wide Grid consisting of functional virtual Grids related to areas of concern. These virtual sub-Grids may consist of
 labs/institutes, where specialists and data together form a complete resource in an area of research. These may be managed
 and used systematically to conduct globally competitive R&D.
 
43.       In reply to a question regarding financial allocation for ‘Infrastructure & Renovation and Refurbishment’ for the year
 2005-06, the Department has informed that the allocation during the current year is  Rs.30.00 crore as against a provision of
 Rs.10.00 crore in B.E 2004-05 and R.E. of Rs.1.00 crore for 2004-05.  This allocation is for the Information and
 Communication Technology (ICT) Infrastructure, renovation & Refurbishment of National Laboratories.  The ICT
 Infrastructure & Renovation and Refurbishment is a new scheme of the Tenth Plan for which a detailed proposal has been
 prepared for consideration of the appraising agencies and awaiting their approval.  After seeking “in-principle” approval from
 the Planning Commission, the same would be considered by the Expenditure Finance Committee during next year.  It is
 expected that the proposal would get approved during the financial year 2005-06 and the annual allocation would be fully
 utilized.  The scheme aims to build the basic ICT infrastructure and grid to access and share the resources to support the
 researchers and work on real time and online basis.
 
44.       The Committee feels that India needs the most advanced infrastructure and laboratories for carrying out cutting edge
 research in various fields. The infrastructure should be seen as a strategic national resource and funding should be given on a
 long-term basis so that the modernization becomes a continued process for effectiveness and improvement in our scientific
 growth.  The Committee is also of the view that the laboratories at the graduate/post-graduate level should be upgraded so
 that interest can be generated among the young students for further research.
 
TECHNOLOGY  PROMOTION,  DEVELOPMENT  AND UTILIZATION PROGRAMMES

142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
 
45.       Technology Promotion, Development and Utilization Programmes (TPDU) essentially endeavours to encourage
 industry to increase their share in country’s R&D expenditure, support a larger cross section of small and medium industrial
 units to develop state-of-the art globally competitive technologies of high commercial potential, catalyze faster
 commercialization of lab-scale R&D, enhance the share of technology intensive exports in overall exports in the next five
 years, strengthen industrial consultancy and technology management capabilities and establish user friendly information
 network to facilitate scientific and industrial research in the country.
 
46.       The broad objectives of TPDU Programmes are:
                        (i)   To promote and support industry efforts towards R&D.
                      (ii)   To encourage R&D system-industry cooperation.
                     (iii)   To support industry for technology development, demonstration and absorption of imported technology.
                    (iv)   To build indigenous capabilities for development and commercialization of contemporary products and processes
 of high impact.
                      (v)   To evaluate the status and performance of technology in selected sectors/areas.
                    (vi)   To facilitate effective transfer and management of technology.
                   (vii)   To promote international technology trade including export of technology projects, services and technology
 intensive products.
                 (viii)   To promote and strengthen consultancy capabilities for domestic use and export requirements.
                    (ix)   To support and use mechanisms, both national and international, towards transfer of technology, both within and
 outside the country.
                      (x)   Generate endogenous capacities for the development and utilization of digital information resources for providing
 inputs to scientific & industrial research in the country.
 
47.       In reply to a question regarding the reasons for the reduced allocation at R.E. stage during the year 2004-2005, the
 Committee has been informed that after the Expenditure Finance Committee approved the TPDU programme in March 2004,
 the operationalization of new scheme at the level envisaged at the time of Budget preparation took time. The financial
 progress in the first two quarters of the year was on the lower side, as the focus during the period was on conceptualization
 and evaluation of different components of the new programme. It involved organization of meetings of experts, to identify
 areas of operation, setting up and organization of meetings, technical advisory committees, advertising of programmes for
 inviting proposals, preparation of brochures, evaluation of the on-going projects, etc.  Thus the expenditure upto the third
 quarter was less.  In the fourth quarter only one-third of the B.E. has been allowed to be spent as per the instructions of the
 Ministry of Finance.  The R.E. was, therefore, reduced to                   Rs. 10.23 crores.
 
48.       The Committee feels that the Department should initiate action to coordinate the research work undertaken by the
 CSIR laboratories and the industrial houses and an atmosphere of co-operation should be generated so that both stand to
 benefit from each  other’s expertise.
 
DEVELOPING NEW GENERATION FUELS
 
49.       The Committee has been informed that CSIR has initiated research activities in the areas of new alternate fuels. 
 Through a network programme on Developing new generation fuel and lubricants, research activities are directed towards
 development of Gas to Liquid Technologies for Dimethyl ether and Fischer Tropsch Fuels; Liquid Fuels and Ethanol
 Production from Biomass; Catalysts for Atmospheric Residue Processing; Performance Evaluation of New Generation
 Automotive Fuels to meet emission norms.
 
50.       Under Hydrogen fuel the research activities are on Thermo-catalytic conversion of Biomass to Hydrogen;
 pyrolysis/decompositon of methane to Hydrogen; application of Hydrogen in Internal Combustion(IC) engine by developing
 Compressed Natural Gas(CNG) Hydrogen Blend and Hydrogen-Ethanol blend.
 
51.       A project on PEM (Proton Exchange Membrane) based fuel cells was initiated under NMITLI with focus on (i) Fuel
 processor for the production of hydrogen; (ii) Cell stack assembly; and (iii) Control & instrumentation systems.  One-
demonstration unit of 5KW based on H
2  reformer with Liquefied Petroleum Gas LPG as fuel has been installed at National
 Chemical Laboratories.  Efforts are on to develop other types of fuel cells.
 
52.       In the area of Biofuels the activities are conversion of non-edible oils like Jatropha curcas, Salvadora, Pongamia,
 Mahdhuca Indica etc. to methyl ester (biodiesel) and its performance evaluation on IC engines; chemical transesterification of
 Oils to Bio Diesel and recovery of By-product; process development of biodiesel (ethyl esters) of jatropha curcas and its
 evaluation on IC engines and field trials on diesel cars; recovery of hydrocarbons from biomass & their conversion to liquid

142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
 fuels; pyrolysis of Biomass and Biomass to Ethanol; diesel Blends and Emulsions; gas to liquid Fuels.
 
53.       With reference to Jatropha, the Secretary, DSIR has informed that National Botanical Research Institute (NBRI) is
 promoting model plantation at various sites; making genetic selection for superior strains that have high seed output and high
 oil content; and optimization of extraction, storage, filtration and purification of oil.  It is also developing site-specific strains
 and extraction of biofuel.
 
54.       The Central Salt and Marine Chemicals Research Institute has successfully cultivated elite varieties of Jatropha
 Curcas on marginal land to assess practically realizable seed yields.  Orchards are simultaneously being raised in Orissa
 (Huma & Mohuda villages) and Gujarat (Chorvadla village) to make elite germplasm available in sufficient quantity so that
 cultivation can subsequently be taken up in larger (100-200 hectares) tracts of wasteland.
 
55.       A simplified process has also been developed for production of biodiesel from the oil complying with Euro 3
 specifications for free fatty acid methyl ester.  The biodiesel has been evaluated at Daimler Chysler AG and found to be
 matching to all specifications.  Two C-class Mercedes Benz cars with our neat biodiesel are successful running.   The
 biodiesel in neat form and also as blend was evaluated in tractor engine by Massey Ferguson.
 
56.       A project on “Genetic Improvement of Jatropha curcas for Drought Tolerance and Oil Yield” has been initiated under
 the NMITLI Scheme that aims at selection and improvement of J. curcas germplasm for developing plant types characterized
 for higher survival, adaptability to drought and salinity, high seed and oil yield and optimization of low-cost agro-
technologies for different agroclimatic regions.  This will help address the major issue for making jatropha oil an economically
 feasible alternative to petroleum diesel.
 
57.       The Committee notes that the research regarding biofuels is still at a research stage and commercial production is yet
 to begin. However, the initiative taken by the Department to produce biofuel, specially from ‘Jatropa Curcus ‘ plant is
 commendable in view of the fact that large tracts of wasteland in the country can be utilized and the farmers can benefit a lot
 from the commercial production of this plant. The Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts should be made towards
 early commercialization of the technology, which will benefit the farmers as well as the consumers.  
 
NATIONAL GEOPHYSICAL RESEARCH INSTITUTE (NGRI), HYDERABAD
 
58.       The Committee is happy to learn that NGRI is developing a special groundwater management strategy for coastal fresh
 water aquifers, endangered by saline incursion and in certain industrial belts for mitigation of groundwater pollution.
 
59.       The Committee is further happy to know that NGRI under a global attempt has taken a lead to prepare a Seismic
 Hazard Map covering the entire Himalayan Belt and Seismically active regions of India, under Global Seismic Hazard
 Assessment Programme (GSHAP).
 
60.       Apart from this, NGRI as a premier institute is handling considerable original researches in engineering geophysics,
 redox-history of the planet and in several important areas of radioactive and geochemical properties of earth.
 
61.       The Committee, however, has noted that in a few prominent areas where research is necessary to understand the
 anatomy of earth’s inner core, the Institute has not so far undertaken any scientific investigation which are as follows:
a)
                  Heat generating capacity of Radiogenic isotopes of potassium which may  power convection in the core of the
 earth and drive the magnetic field in the earth’s crusts;
b)                  The earth’s dynamo action; and
c)                  Geo-neutrino picture of earth’s interior for its better comprehension.
 
62.       The Institute has stated that since geo-neutrino study is not within the purview of NGRI’s research activities, the
 Institute has not attempted any research work in this field.  The Committee, however, sees no reason why such an important
 study has not been kept within the purview of the research activities of the Institute while in other parts of the world the study
 of geo-neutrino imaging of earth crusts is being given primary importance.  The Committee feels that geo-neutrino imaging
 can give vital information about earth’s core that may prove to be extremely useful for Institute’s preparation of Seismic
 Hazard Map on which the Institute has already taken a lead under a global attempt.
 
63.       Moreover, some neglected areas like the understanding of the heat generating capacity of Radiogenic Isotopes and
 greater understanding about earth’s dynamo action may be of considerable help for the Institute to establish a perfect
 intelligibility of the anatomy of earthquake and its accurate prediction which is still eluding the scientists the world over.
 

142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
64.       The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that feasibility should be explored by the Institute to direct its
 research activities to the following fields which are hitherto remained neglected:
i)                    Understanding of earth’s dynamo action;
ii)                   Geo-neutrino imaging of earth’s interior; and
iii)                 Understanding of heat generating capacity of Radiogenic Isotopes of potassium for a clear intelligibility of the
 anatomy of heat flow from core to mantle, driving convection motion in the outer core that could be linked with generation of
 earthquake.
 
NATIONAL RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (NRDC)
 
65.       The Committee has been informed that the National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) was established in
 December 1953 as a company, under Section 25 of the Companies Act to commercialise the Research and Development
 results of publicly funded R&D institutions as well as to promote the growth of indigenous technology.  The Corporation
 provides comprehensive technology transfer services and acts as a catalyst for transforming innovative research into
 marketable industrial products. NRDC is a unique organization in that and it is the only public enterprise wholly dedicated to
 transfer of technologies from R&D laboratories to industry. During the past five decades of its existence, the Corporation has
 developed strong links and network with various R&D organizations in the country as well as abroad for transfer of
 technologies.  Its operations cover the entire spectrum of industrial technologies ranging from chemicals to metallurgy,
 mechanical engineering, electrical engineering, electronics, biotechnology and so on.  Its promotional and commercial
 objectives are:
                              (i)      Promotion and commercialization of inventions;
                            (ii)      Commercialisation of Laboratory Know-How;
                           (iii)       Financing Technology development;
                          (iv)      Development and Commercialisation of Rural Technology;
                            (v)      Promotion of Export of Technology; and
                          (vi)      Dissemination of Information on Technology Transfer.
 
66.       The Committee has been informed that the budgetary Plan allocation for NRDC is Rs. 1.00 crore for the year 2005-06. 
 It is a premier organization engaged in development, promotion and also acts as a catalyst for transforming innovative
 research into marketable industrial products. Keeping in view the specialized activities of NRDC, the Committee feels that
 the present allocation is too meagre. The Committee, therefore recommends that the Plan allocation should be substantially
 increased from the present Rs. 1.00 crore to at least Rs. 4.00 crores.
PROMOTION OF SCIENTIFIC TEMPER
67.       The Committee has been informed that the CSIR has been organizing, from time to time, training and demonstration
 programmes, workshops, exhibitions and participating in “Kisan Melas’, to disseminate its developed and available
 ‘knowledgebase’.  It would further accelerate these efforts through self-motivated training programmes at identified village &
 taluk levels in association with concerned developmental agencies. In addition, CSIR also published 2188 papers in journals
 for promotion of Scientific temper.
68.       In a country where a sizable population is barely literate, inculcating a scientific temperament and rational outlook is
 not an easy task. However, to improve the quality of life of the people and removing backwardness and superstitious thinking,
 science popularization is of utmost importance. Therefore, the Committee feels that the Department should not only focus on
 the transfer of technologies but also disseminate basic scientific knowledge to the people through various popular media like
 Television, Documentary Films, frequent melas and demonstrations throughout the country.
69.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research and assessing the
 various programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs.1557.00
 crores, as sought by the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research for the year 2005-2006 under Demand No.83, may be
 approved.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS
 
1.         The Committee finds that pace of expenditure for the fourth quarter of   2004-2005 is not uniform and there is a lot of
 variation in them.  The Committee is not convinced with the reply of the Department in this regard and is of the considered
 view that the Department needs to evolve a mechanism to maintain  uniform pace of expenditure, to the extent possible,
 throughout the year.                                                              (Para 11) 

142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
 
2.         The Committee appreciates that the CSIR is striving towards undertaking a wide gamut of research and developmental
 activities in the area of high technology, which would help in projecting India as a forerunner amongst scientifically advanced
 nations. The Committee, however, feels that emphasis of CSIR should be dissemination of new technologies from the
 laboratories for the benefit of the common man.                    (Para 21)                                                                            
                    
3.         The Committee commends the efforts of the Department to keep pace with the new technologies and to project the
 country as a technologically developed nation. The Committee feels that keeping in view the fact that the CSIR infrastructure
 was built or acquired more than thirty years ago, building of new infrastructure and renovation of the existing ones are of
 utmost importance and should be taken up in right earnest.    (Para 25)                                                         
4.         The Committee notes that most of the schlorships/fellowships are provided to students at the higher level i.e. PhD/
 Research levels. The Committee recommends that schlorships/fellowships may be provided at the entry level i.e. graduation
 level and may be increased for students in Post-graduate level to stimulate interest among the new generation towards basic
 sciences. The Committee also recommends that the number and amount of fellowships/scholarships should be increased over
 a period of time. The Committee feels that for the development of science there is a need to improve the opportunities for
 well-trained scientists and young talents to pursue innovative research, to educate the next generation toapply science in areas
 of importance for the health, prosperity and security of the nation.                                        
                                                                               (Para 29)
5.         The Committee commends the CSIR for achieving number one position in securing Patents in India and abroad and
 hopes that the CSIR would strive towards safeguarding the country’s interests, specially keeping in view the efforts made by
 foreign organizations to encroach upon our traditional base.                           (Para 37)
6.         The Committee recommends that a special cell may be set up to coordinate and pool the knowledge gained in the CSIR
 laboratories and the private sector companies and disseminate it through direct interactions with the industry or through the
 print and electronic media. Efforts may also be made to ensure that there is no duplication in the research work carried out in
 the CSIR laboratories and the private sector companies so that country’s scarce resource is not wasted.
(Para 40)
7.       The Committee feels that India needs the most advanced infrastructure and laboratories for carrying out cutting edge
 research in various fields. The infrastructure should be seen as a strategic national resource and funding should be given on a
 long-term basis so that the modernization becomes a continued process for effectiveness and improvement in our scientific
 growth.  The Committee is also of the view that the laboratories at the graduate/post-graduate level should be upgraded so
 that interest can be generated among the young students for further research.                                               (Para 44)          
                                                                        
 8.        The Committee feels that the Department should initiate action to coordinate the research work undertaken by the
 CSIR laboratories and the industrial houses and an atmosphere of co-operation should be generated so that both stand to
 benefit from each  other’s expertise.                                                                                                       (Para 48)
9.         The Committee notes that the research regarding biofuels is still at a research stage and commercial production is yet
 to begin. However, the initiative taken by the Department to produce biofuel, specially from ‘Jatropa Curcus ‘ plant is
 commendable in view of the fact that large tracts of wasteland in the country can be utilized and the farmers can benefit a lot
 from the commercial production of this plant. The Committee, therefore, recommends that efforts should be made towards
 early commercialization of the technology, which will benefit the farmers as well as the
 consumers.                                                               (Para 57)                                                                                             
10.       The Committee is happy to learn that NGRI is developing a special groundwater management strategy for coastal fresh
 water aquifers, endangered by saline incursion and in certain industrial belts for mitigation of groundwater pollution.        
                       (Para 58)                                                                                             
11.       The Committee is further happy to know that NGRI under a global attempt has taken a lead to prepare a Seismic
 Hazard Map covering the entire Himalayan Belt and Seismically active regions of India, under Global Seismic Hazard
 Assessment Programme (GSHAP).                                                                                                                    (Para 59)
12.       Apart from this, NGRI as a premier institute is handling considerable original researches in engineering geophysics,
 redox-history of the planet and in several important areas of radioactive and geochemical properties of
 earth.                                           (Para 60)
 
13.       The Committee, however, has noted that in a few prominent areas where research is necessary to understand the
 anatomy of earth’s inner core, the Institute has not so far undertaken any scientific investigation which are as follows:
a)
                  Heat generating capacity of Radiogenic isotopes of potassium which may  power convection in the core of the
 earth and drive the magnetic field in the earth’s crusts;
b)                  The earth’s dynamo action; and
                  

142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
c) Geo-neutrino picture of earth’s interior for its better comprehension.
(Para 61)
14.       The Institute has stated that since geo-neutrino study is not within the purview of NGRI’s research activities, the
 Institute has not attempted any research work in this field.  The Committee, however, sees no reason why such an important
 study has not been kept within the purview of the research activities of the Institute while in other parts of the world the study
 of geo-neutrino imaging of earth crusts is being given primary importance.  The Committee feels that geo-neutrino imaging
 can give vital information about earth’s core that may prove to be extremely useful for Institute’s preparation of Seismic
 Hazard Map on which the Institute has already taken a lead under a global attempt.                                                    (Para 62)
15.       Moreover, some neglected areas like the understanding of the heat generating capacity of Radiogenic Isotopes and
 greater understanding about earth’s dynamo action may be of considerable help for the Institute to establish a perfect
 intelligibility of the anatomy of earthquake and its accurate prediction which is still eluding the scientists the world over.   
                                                                                                               (Para 63)
16.       The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that feasibility should be explored by the Institute to direct its
 research activities to the following fields which are hitherto remained neglected:
i)
                    Understanding of earth’s dynamo action;
ii)                   Geo-neutrino imaging of earth’s interior; and
iii)         Understanding of heat generating capacity of Radiogenic Isotopes of potassium for a clear intelligibility of the
 anatomy of heat flow from core to mantle, driving convection motion in the outer core that could be linked
 with generation of earthquake.                                                       ( Para 64)                                               
                                                                  
17.       The Committee has been informed that the budgetary Plan allocation for NRDC is Rs. 1.00 crore for the year 2005-06. 
 It is a premier organization engaged in development, promotion and also acts as a catalyst for transforming innovative
 research into marketable industrial products. Keeping in view the specialized activities of NRDC, the Committee feels that
 the present allocation is too meagre. The Committee, therefore recommends that the Plan allocation should be substantially
 increased from the present Rs. 1.00 crore to at least Rs. 4.00 crores.                                                          
                                                       (Para 66)
18.       In a country where a sizable population is barely literate, inculcating a scientific temperament and rational outlook is
 not an easy task. However, to improve the quality of life of the people and removing backwardness and superstitious thinking,
 science popularization is of utmost importance. Therefore, the Committee feels that the Department should not only focus on
 the transfer of technologies but also disseminate basic scientific knowledge to the people through various popular media like
 Television, Documentary Films, frequent melas and demonstrations throughout the country.  (Para 68)                           
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ANNEXURE
BUDGET ESTIMATES 2005-2006
                       ( Rs. in crores)
SR.
NO.
HEAD OF DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS/
 PROGRAMMES/ SCHEMES
 
    Plan             Non-Plan           Total
    
1. Secretariat Economic Services …. 4.90 4.90
 Other Scientific Research    
2.
 
Assistance to Scientific Institutions/Professional Bodies    
2.01 National Institute of Immunology 32.00 0.80 32.80
2.02 National Centre for Cell Sciences 25.00 0.40 25.40
2.03
 
Centre for DNA Finger printing and Diagnostics
 
20.00 …. 20.00
2.04
 
National Brain Research Centre
 13.80 …. 13.80
2.05 National Centre for Plant Genome Research 12.70 …. 12.70
2.06
 
 
Institute of Bioresources and Sustainable Development 3.00
  
3.00
2.07 Institute of Life Sciences
 12.00 …. 12.00
 TOTAL: 118.50 1.20 119.70

142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
3. Assistance to other Scientific Bodies    
3.01 Human Resource Development 18.50 …. 18.50
3.02 Bioinformatics 17.00 …. 17.00
3.03
 
Biotech Facilities, Centres of Excellence and Programme
 Support
45.00 … 45.00
3.04 Research and Development 164.00 …. 164.00
3.05 Biotechnology for Societal Development 11.00 …. 11.00
3.06 Bio-Process and Product Development 16.00 …. 16.00
 TOTAL 271.50 …. 271.50
4. I&M Sector    
4.01
 
 
Assistance for Technology incubators, Pilot Project,
 Biotechnology Parks and Biotech Development Fund
25.00
 
 
….
 
 
25.00
 
 
4.02 Public Private Partnership 18.00 ….. 18.00
  2.00 …. 2.00
 Total 20.00 …. 20.00
5. International Cooperation 10.00 …. 10.00
6. International Centre for Genetic Engineering & Bio-
Technology
…. 7.50 7.50
 GRAND TOTAL: 445.00 13.60 458.60
 
              ANNEXURE
BUDGET ESTIMATES – 2005-06
(Rs. in crores)
 
S. No. Head of Development Projects Budget Estimates 2005-06
 Programmes / Schemes Plan Non-Plan Total
1. Assistance to Council of Scientific & Industrial Research 797.53 705.90 1503.43
2. Technology Promotion Development and Utilisation Programmes 27.47 0.00 27.47
3. Support to NRDC
3.1 Development and promotion of Rural Technology 0.50 0.00 0.50
3.2 Invention Promotion Programme 0.50 0.00 0.50
3.3 Interest subsidy to NRDC 0.00 0.20 0.20
4. Support to R&D schemes to CEL 0.00 0.00 0.00
5 Investment in public enterprises
5.1 Central Electronics Limited 10.00 0.00 10.00
6. Loans to Public Enterprises
6.1 Central Electronics Limited 10.00 0.00 10.00
7. Secretariat Economic Services 0.00 4.90 4.90
8. VRS in CEL 0.00 0.00 0.00
 GRAND TOTAL 846.00 711.00 1557.00
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINUTES
XIII
 
THIRTEENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 30
th March, 2005 in Room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT     
 
1.   Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 

142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Prof. Saif-ud-din Soz
3. Dr. Prabha Thakur
4. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav
5. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
6. Smt. Kum Kum Rai
7. Shri Birabhadra Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
8. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
9. Shri Pankaj Chaudhery
10. Shri Anantrao Gudhe
11. Shri Babubhai Katara
12. Shri K.C.Singh Baba               
13. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
14. Shri V. Aruna Kumar
15. Shri Rakesh Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
           
            Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
 
1.
      Dr. R. A. Mashelkar, Secretary 
2.      Shri Sudhir Kumar, Joint Secretary
3.      Mrs. Rama Murali, Financial Adviser
4.      Dr. O. P. Agarwal, Scientist
5.      Dr. D. Yogeshwar Rao, Scientist
6.      Shri R.K. Gupta, Scientist
7.      Dr. A. Wahid, Scientist
8.      Shri A.K. Verma, Scientist
9.      Dr. A. Lahiri, Adviser
10.  Shri Jagdish Singh, Scientist
11.  Dr. R.R. Abhyankar, Scientist
12.  Dr. D.K. Bhardwaj, Acting Managing Director, NRDC
13.  Shri B.A. Mylar Rao, Chairman cum Managing Director, CEL
14.  Shri M. Sridharan, Controller of Accounts
 
*                                              *                                              *
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the Department of Scientific &
 Industrial Research and requested the Secretary to make a presentation on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department. 
 The Secretary made a visual presentation of the activities and achievements of the Department and explained about the
 budgetary allocations on different heads.  The Members then sought clarifications on various issues relating to the Demands
 for Grants.  The Secretary replied to them.
            The officials then withdrew.
3.         *                                              *                                              *
 
4.         *                                              *                                              *
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 05.15 p.m. to meet again at 03.00 p.m. on 31
st March, 2005.

142nd Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/142ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:32:08]
______________________________________________________________________________*** Relates to other matters.
XVI
SIXTEENTH  MEETING
 
The Committee met at 03.30 p.m. on Wednesday, the 20th April, 2005 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House,
 New Delhi.
 
PRESENT     
1.   Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Prof. Saif-ud-din Soz
3. Shri Dilip Singh Judev
4. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
5. Dr. Kum Kum Rai
 
LOK  SABHA
 
6. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
7. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
8. Shri Brahmananda Panda
9. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat
10. Shrimati Jayaben Thakkar
11. Shri V. Aruna Kumar
 
SECRETARIAT
           
            Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Assistant Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
2.         *                                                          *                                                          *
3.         The Committee, thereafter, took-up consideration of draft ***, ***, 142
nd, ***, ***, *** and *** Reports of the
 Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) pertaining to ***, ***, Department of Scientific & Industrial Research, ***,
 ***, ***and ***.  After discussion and minor changes in ***, ***and *** reports, the Committee adopted all the reports.
4.         The Committee authorised the Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy to present the Reports
 in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Sujan Chakraborty, and in his absence, Shri Bachi Singh Rawat to lay the Reports on the table of
 the Lok Sabha on Monday, the             25th April, 2005.
 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 04.00 p.m.
 
______________________________________________________________________________
***Relates to other matters.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------