PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
  
  
ONE HUNDRED-TWENTY SEVENTH  REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-2005) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
(MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY) 
(DEMAND NO. 85) 
  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 18TH   AUGUST, 2004) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 18TH   AUGUST, 2004) 
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2004/SRAVANA, 1926  (SAKA) 
                      
             
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
  
  
C O N T E N T S 
          
1.     COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                     
2.     INTRODUCTION                                                                                                      
3.     REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE              
                                                                                                                
4.     SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                                                  
5.     ANNEXURE                                                                                                                    
6.    MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                        
                                
  
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,  
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2004) 
  
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz  
3. Dr.Prabha Thakur  
4. Shri Jaswant Sin gh  
Page 1 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

5. Shri Dilip Singh Judev  
6. Dr Biplab Dasgupta  
7. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav  
8. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
9. Smt. Kum Kum Rai  
10. Shri Birabhadra Singh  
  
LOK  SABHA 
  
11. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal  
12. Shri Jasubhai D. Barad              
13. Shri Sujan Chakraborty  
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhery  
15. Shri Mohan S. Delkar                
16. Shri Anantrao Gudhe  
17. Shri Babubhai Katara  
18. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik             
19. Shri Brahmananda Panda  
20. Smt. Neeta Pateriya  
21. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                          
22. Shri K.C.Singh Baba     
23. Smt. Jayaben  Thakkar  
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                                
25. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh                             
26. Shri D. Venugopal  
27. Shri Sita Ram Yadav  
28. Shri V.Aruna Kumar  
    *29. Shri Rakesh Singh          
      30. Vacant 
      31. Vacant 
  
SECRETARIAT 
      Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
      Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary  
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
    * Nominated w.e.f. 13th August, 2004. 
INTRODUCTION 
  
      I, the Chairman of the Department-rel ated Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this One Hundred -Twenty Seventh Report of the Commi ttee.  This Report deals with 
the detailed Demands for Grants (2004-2005) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of Science
and Technology) (Demand No.85). 
  
2.  In the meetin g of the Committee held on 9 th August, 2004 the Secretar y and other Officers of the 
Page 2 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

Department of Biotechnology gave an overview of th e various activities of the Department and the
Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the De partment to enable it to
scrutinise the Demands for Grants. 
  
3.  The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the
clarifications sought by the Memb ers and placing before it the re quired material to enable the
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology. 
  
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 16th August, 2004. 
  
  
  
R E P O R T 
  
            The field of biotechnology world over, as in India, has moved with spectacular speed towards 
developing a better understanding and insight into  life processes and addressing many problems
concerning humankind.  Its impact in the domain of health, ag riculture, environment and industrial 
sectors has given a new dimension to  our development process.  Ther e is a paradigm shift in basic 
research in modern biology; scien tists are moving closer to the f undamental secrets of life and the
application of the knowledge generated.   
2.         The Department of Biotechnology (DBT), under the Ministry of Science and Technology was set 
up in February 1986 to give an imp etus to the development of bi otechnology in the country.  The 
objectives of Department of Bi otechnology include the developmen t of products, processes and
technologies whose large-scale appl ications would result in societal and economic benefits.  The 
biotechnology programmes are implemented thr ough a number of autonomous and statutory
institution/universities by giving  them grants-in-aid. 
3.         Work on transgenic, coupled with pros pecting for new genes from our rich biodiversity, is 
poised to pay rich dividends in terms of new products and technologies for improved production and
enhanced nutritive quality of food, fruit and vegetable crops and reduce post-harvest losses.  Application 
of biotechnology to animal health and productivity  including our marine bi oresources will yield
attractive dividends.  India bei ng a global mega biodiversity hub, c onservation, characterization and 
sustainable utilization this natural wealth through the application of biotechnology assumes priority.   
4.         New generation of vaccines, diagnostic kits and therapeutics, are likely to lead to a major shift in
the healthcare strategy for preventi on, early detection and treatment of  diseases that impose the highest
burden.  Stem cell research has emer ged as a cutting edge area of enormous potenti al for application in 
cancer, autoimmune deficiencies, cardio-vascular and neurological disease and other disorders.  
5.         India is likely to require high quality human resource in the biotechnology sector, as industry and
public sector-driven R&D expands to propel the country into a global power in this sector.  The creation 
of infrastructural facilities, promotion of biotech parks and incubators are some of the programmes taken
up during the year, which have contributed significa ntly to the speedy progress.  The importance o f 
bioinformatics has also increased manifold and the best-performing centres are being upscaled as centres 
of excellence.  
6.         Biotechnolo gy-based programmes for societ y es pecially women, weaker sections and rural 
NEW DELHI; 
August 16, 2004 
P.G.NARAYANAN, 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on  
 Science & Technology, Environment & 
Forests
Page 3 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

people have gradually started to show their imp act on the economic and technological empowerment o f
the target groups.  A special initi ative to develop location-specific solutions has been of tremendous 
benefit to the people at the grass roots level.  
7.         The increase in the number of indust ries entering the recombin ant sector has been most
impressive.  The department has sp ecial efforts to expand public-priva te partnerships and in forging 
effective links with academia particularly in up scaling and validation of laboratory research.  A number 
of recombinant products made in the country by our own industry have already come into the market.  In 
collaboration with other ministries a nd agencies special efforts have be en initiated to simplify biosafety
procedures and reducing the time span of clearance pr ocedures and bring in more professional inputs,
without compromising on the safety aspect. 
8.         The mandate of the Department are: 
i)          To evolve policies and inte grated programmes in bi otechnology and ensure thei
r 
implementation and monitoring. 
ii)         To identify specific programmes of Research and  
Development and manufacturing in biologicals and biotechnology and oversee the initiation and pursuit
of related research and manufacturing activities. 
iii)         To identify, set up and support Ce ntres of Excellence for Re search and Development in
biotechnology and ensure proper dovetailing of their activities as per national priorities and objectives. 
iv)        To act as a screening, advising a nd approving agent of the G overnment with regard to
import and transfer of new technologies for the manufacture of biological, biotechnological products and
their intermediates. 
v)         Evolve safety guidelines  for biotechnology Research and Development an d
manufacturing in India. 
vi)        To act as the central agency for th e import of genetically mani pulated materials, culture,
cells, specimens, tissues and biotech products in cluding DNA and RNA of any type or size and fo r
promoting their production in the country. 
vii)        Serve as the inter-ministerial and interagency nodal point for al l specific international
bilateral and multilateral Research and Developm ent collaborations and ag reements in the area o f
biotechnology; act as the nodal point for all technology transfers in the area of biotechnology. 
viii)       Manufacture and ensu re application of recombinant, cell- based and DNA vaccines, 
diagnostics and other biotechnological products. 
ix)        To evolve programmes for Human Resource Development in the area of biotechnology. 
x)         Serve as an administrative a nd implementing Department of agencies, commissions, 
boards, etc. specifically formed by the Govern ment for fulfilling the national objectives in
biotechnology and also to serve as the nodal point fo r Bio-informatics including training and creation of 
infrastructure, collection, dissemination and exchange of information relating to biotechnology. 
 9.        In the year 2003-04, 26 scientists were se lected for the award of overs eas associateship.  Seven 
National Bioscience Awards for Ca reer Development, one Disti nguished Biotechnol ogist Award, 25
biology scholarships to the CBSE XII toppers (who opt for biological science as a career) and fou r
national women bioscientist awards have been given.  In addition, six awards were given to the industry 
for technology transfer and commer cialization of products and processes of economic value on the
Technology Day; besides, financial support has been provided for organizing popular lectures, seminars
and symposia. 
10.       The Tenth Plan document of the Departme nt primarily focuses on ge nomics; proteomics; stem 
cell research; structural biology;  computational biology and bioinfor matics; new molecular healthcare
regime with new generation vaccines and diagnosti cs; bioresource utilizati on and conservation; and
agricultural products with value addition and with biotic and abiotic resistance.  The  
Vision Document of the Department has identified achievable milest ones.  Expeditious implementation 
of such programmes of relevance and excellence is being accorded high priority, Promotion o f
biotechnology is catalyzed by vari ous policies and progr ammes covering econo mic, industrial,
environmental and several othe r socio-economic sectors, em phasis has been laid on stron g public-
Page 4 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

private partnership, interaction with stakeholders and working towards a sustainable development. 
            Besides continuation of ongoing programmes and projects during the year 2004-05, the concepts 
outlined in the Vision Document and overall perspective of 10 th Plan proposal would be furthe r 
translated in the research projects and activities and implemented in a time-bound goal oriented manner. 
11.       For the benefit of rural population, it is proposed to set up “Rural Bi oresource Complexes” at 
several selected village clusters using economically viable and ecologically compatible biotechnologies.  
The programme would engage  state agricultural universities as active hubs, and is expected to lead
towards holistic and sustainable rural developmen t and income generation for rural poor, women and
scheduled castes and tribes. 
12.       In reply to the supplementary question regarding Human Resource Development, the Committee
was informed that during 2003-04 this Department has offered 65 Post Do ctoral fellowships in different
R&D Institutions/Universities and proposes to offer 75 post Doctor al Fellowships in the current
financial year 2004-05. 
  
During 2004-05 Department has started the DBT-Junior Research Fellowship (Ph.D) Programme 
and has selected 43 Junior Research Fellows to be placed in 24 institutions. 
  
This department has provided 27 Overseas Asociateships during 2003-04 to the mid-caree r 
scientists for hands-on-training in R&D institutions in foreign countries and pr oposes to offer about 30 
Associateships in the current financial year, 2004-05. 
  
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION 
13.       The Committee was informed that the cu rrent activities of the Depa rtment namely, the human 
resource development, support for new Centres of excellence, facilities, repositories and services, basic
and product oriented R&D,  biotech product and process developm ent, bioinformatics, international
cooperation in biotechnology, biotechn ology based projects for societal  development and support to the
autonomous institutions would further be consolidated and continued during the year 2004-2005.  These 
activities form the basis for im plementation of biotechnology programmes and development in terms o f
application and commercialization.  
14.       The total budgetary allocation (Plan & non -Plan) for the Department  for the year 2004-2005 is 
Rs. 323.45 crores in the B.E. stage and Rs. 263.79 crores in R.E. of 2003-2004. The plan component Rs. 
310.00 crores (for the year 2004-2005) represents an increase of about Rs. 60.00 crores over the R.E. 
stage of last year. The increased amount is sought to be utilized on ongoing core activities / programmes
of the Department. The details of the budgetary projections as mentioned in the Expenditure Budget, fo r
the programmes/activities of the Departme nt during the year 2004-2005 are given at Annexure-I.
However, the financial summary of the last three years of the Tenth Plan is as follows: 
(Rs. In crores)
   
15.       The Committee notes the fact that the Departme nt has made optimum ut ilization of the funds 
allocated to it to carry out its various programmes/activities for the overall development of the country. 
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR CELL SCIENCE (NCCS), PUNE 
16.       The National Centre for Cell Science (NCC S), Pune, has made significa nt contributions towards 
research and human resource deve lopment through training and work shops with major R&D focus in
the areas of stem cell biology, cancer biology, cell biology, immunology, diabetes, HIV biology etc.
Year Proposed B.E R.E Actual Expenditure
2002-2003 350.00 225.00 205.00 203.09
2003-2004 310.00 260.00 250.00 249.42
2004-2005 360.00 310.00 ---- 40.00 
As on 30
th 
June,2004                                
Page 5 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

17.       The facility was establ ished to receive, identi fy, maintain, grow and supply animal and human
cell lines, tissues, organs and fe rtilized eggs and embryos, hybrid-cells including hybridomas, plasmids, 
genes and genomic libraries; to carry out research  and development in thes e cell lines and related
materials and products; to develop quality control and s upply culture media and other reagents and
materials independently or in collaboration with industry; to organize training programmes for technical
personnel in Tissue culture Technology, Tissue Ba nking, Cell products and Data Bank, etc. and to
provide consultancy servic es to Medical, Veterinar y.  Pharmaceutical Instit utions, Public Health 
Services and industries in the country; to provi de and promote effectiv e linkages between various
scientific and research ag encies/laboratories and other organizati ons including industries; to collaborate
with foreign organizations in the relevant areas.  
18.       The Committee was informed that the incr eased allocation for NCCS is  to take care of its
expanded research activities, in the areas of cell culture, stem cell and related areas, which provide leads
for product development.               
19.       The Committee is of the view th at the Centre should give more  emphasis on stem cell research 
through development of specific lines from human a nd animal tissues such as tumours, lymphoblast
cells for patients with genetic disorders. Besi des, the Committee hopes that  the Centre should make
efforts to identify factors influe ncing the lineage specification of stem cells into neurons, cardiac &
pancreatic islets and study their tran s differential potential which can bring further improvement in this
area of research. 
20.       The Committee is aware of the fact that  researches in Embryonic St em cell involve a lot o
f
hindrances due to infant stage of de velopment of knowledge in  this field.  However,  this infant stage o f 
research in fact urges the Comm ittee to strongly recommend that  Department of Biotechnology should
initiate Comprehensive Research Programme to bri ng upcoming development in this sphere at par with
the international standard and expl ore for a more wider application of  embryonic stem ce ll research so
that some concrete achiev ement could be made in cr itical areas.  The Committ ee feels that in order to 
move ahead in the field, the DBT needs to work on both embryonic stem cell and adult derived stem cell
for more functional applications in the field of Biotechnology.  
            The Committee has been given to unders tand that Researches in the field of Tissue Engineering
will deliver new medica l techniques and devices,  including small blood vess el replacement, bone,
tendon, ligament and cartilage repair, healing of skin wounds and advan ces in nerve re-generation.  It 
will also lead to cellular based therapies for de-g enerative problems in muscles for cardiac regeneration 
in the heart and in treating de-generative conditions in the brain.  In view of this, the Committee strongly 
recommends for the in-depth research in the field.  
  
CENTRE FOR DNA FINGER PRINTING AND DIAGNOSTICS (CDFD) HYDERABAD 
21.       The objective of the Centre for DNA Finge r Printing and Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad is to 
provide DNA fingerprinting services for crime investigations, settling paternity disputes and to provide
DNA fingerprinting services, undertaking R&D work in the area of DNA fingerprinting and diagnostics,
carrying out research in  modern biology through cutting edge tools and providing training in DNA
fingerprinting techniques.   Th e CDFD has provided DNA fingerpri nting and analysis of cases 
pertaining to parentage, identity, rape, identifi cation of dead wild an imals immigration, kidney
transplantations, plant and seed auth entication etc. referred by crime i nvestigation agencies in India and
abroad. It has catered to the needs of the investigating agencies in Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Mauritius, and
Nepal etc.  
  
22.       During the year 2003-04 the CDFD has handled a large number of cases every day and has
recently automated and computerized all the case st udies with plans for the development of a complete
database vis-à-vis the appropriate ness of a given probe for the I ndian population.  CDFD has signed 
Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) and is wo rking very closely with State/Central Forensic
Science laboratories to popu larize this technology for the benefit of the society.  To ensure prope r 
quality control and quality assurance, CDFD has taken pro-active measures that also involve setting up a 
Page 6 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

National level Statutory Body. CDFD has not only provided DNA finger printing services but also DNA
diagnostic and chromosome analysis services along with related state of the art R&D inputs.  CDFD has 
also made a beginning for creation of database for the Indian population using microsatellite markers. 
23.       In reply to the question about enhan ced budgetary allocation for CDFD for the year 2004-2005, 
the Committee was informed that the Centre has initiated R&D efforts for drug discovery and molecular
epidemiology of tuberculosis. The bioinformatics facilities have also been expanded and reinforced by it
for drug discovery efforts. Additional funds are also required for building, which is under construction.   
24.       In reply to the supplementary question on the cost of building, the Committee was informed that
the present EFC sanction is for Rs. 13.55 crores. CDFD has projecte d an amount of Rs. 43.50 crores.
The EFC will meet again to finalize the revised cost after considering various factors.  
  
25.       The Committee commends the effo rts being made by the CDFD in promoting research in DNA 
finger printing and diagnostics. Furthe r it hopes that CDFD will emerge  as India’s leading Centre not 
only for DNA fingerprinting and diagnostics but also for state-of-the-art R&D in areas of human health.  
CDFD will have a major role to pl ay in authentication and certificati on of seed varieties, Genetically
Modified foods (GMOs) and in other collaborative ef forts involving the academia, industry and
Government. 
  
  
NATIONAL BRAIN RESEARCH CENTRE (NBRC), GURGAON 
  
26.       National Brain Research Centre (NBRC) continues to undertake resear ch primarily in the areas
of neurosciences and basic brain re search. The mandate of the Centre is to undertake basic research to
understand brain function in  health and disease and establish linkages with nati onal/international
organizations involved in neuroscience research. During the year 2003-2004, the new state of art facility 
at Manesar has been made fully functional.  This  includes the commissioning of the animal facility, 
laboratories, guesthouse and hoste l facilities.  The centre has been emphasizing human resource
development in order to help create a vibrant neuroscience community in India. Since the availability o f
trained manpower would be a major limiting factor there is a tr emendous need for generating trained
manpower that would be able to bridge across disciplines ranging from computational science to modern
biology.  In order to generate such a resource, trai ning programmes have been initiated at all levels 
ranging from post-graduate, postdoctoral and summer schools for established researchers.  
27.       The Committee was informed that NBRC has now started functioning  as a deemed university.  
The research activities have now been expanded.  The Hon’ble President of India dedicated the centre to 
the nation as a Centre of Excellence on 16 th December 2003.  This has give n the institute an increased 
mandate of research of national rele vance.  The phase – II of the bui lding is now under construction to 
cater to the expanding needs of res earch, training and education.  Th e additional budgetary allocation is 
for these activities.  
28.       In reply to the supplementary question on details of specific areas of research the Committee was 
informed that the major resear ch areas identified for phase-II  of NBRC are Neurogenetics, 
neurovirology, neurophysiology, ne ruopharmacology, neuroinforma tics including computational
neuroscience and human resource development. 
29.       The Committee commends the activities being pursued by the Centre and recommends that
NBRC should initiate the major pr ojects in the areas as  computational neuros cience, system and
cognitive neuroscience, stem cel l research, developmental neurobi ology and basic research towards
understanding of neurological and psychiatric disorder s. Besides, it should focus on modern imaging
techniques such as functional magnetic resona nce imaging, positron emission tomography, optical
imaging provide noninvasive methods for understanding brain functions in human etc.    
  
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR PLANT GENOME RESEARCH (NCPGR), NEW DELHI 
30.       The main ob jective of National Centre for Plant Genome Research (NCPGR) is to take u p the
Page 7 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

research work on structural, functi onal and application genomics of sel ective crop plants.  In addition 
the Centre utilizes molecular biology approaches  alongwith tissue culture and genetic engineering
technology to identify important genes and manipulate these for ge nerating transgenic plants with
improved agronomic characters and pathogen/stress resistance. The ce ntre utilizes molecular biology
approaches, tissue culture and ge netic engineering technologies to  identify important genes and
manipulate them for generating tr ansgenic plants with improved agronomic characters, nutritional
quality and pathogen/stress re sistance in food crops and high levels of specific molecules in industrial
crops.  It also provides and promotes effective linkages between various sc ientific and research 
agencies/laboratories and other organizations workin g in the country on plant genes, development and
related areas.  
            During the year 2003-04 the multilocati onal field trial of fungal inf ection tolerant transgenic 
tomato with OXDC+ gene and stu dy of role of oxalate decarboxyl ase in fungal tolerance has been
initiated by the Centre. Further, molecular map of  chickpea delineating th e loci for morphological,
physiological and other yield determin ing traits is in the making.  Molecular marker breeding for high 
yield, maturity time and gr ain quality is in progress.  Diversity analysis to place chickpea germplasm in 
hierarchial groups for selection of  parents for initiating new market assisted breeding programmes has
been carried out. 
31.        The Committee was informed that the NCPGR allocation in the last financial year was enhanced
from Rs.7.00 crores to Rs.12.00 crores mainly on acc ount of the building cons truction.  During the 
current year the provision has been kept at Rs.10.00 cr ores since this is as per EFC approval.  Howeve r 
there would be an additional require ment of funds to meet cost of construction activities, which will be
projected in the revised estimate.  
32.       The Committee recommends th at the Centre should undertak e programmes like nutritional
improvement in carbohydrate rich crops, including rice and sweet pot ato, by transgenic expression o f
AmAl+ gene and molecular assessment of AmAl+ induced physiological/developmental changes in GM-
potato. It should make mole cular cloning and char acterization of genes involve d in increased shelf life
of fruits and vegetables. Further, it should or ganize seminar(s), symposiu m and workshop meeting fo r
discussions on recent developments in plant mole cular genetics/biology/bi otechnology/genomics; and
begin to serve as national resource of information in the various areas of modern plant biology.  
  
BIOINFORMATICS 
33.       The plan scheme of bioinformatics envisages providing a National bioinformatics Network in the 
country designed to bridge the gaps in Biotechnology information and to establish links among scientists
in Biotechnology.  The network aims to provide a single reference to various information resources o f 
importance to biotechnology and modern biology includi ng data banks of genetic importance, published
literature, patents and other informa tion of scientific and commercial va lue.  It also aims to provide 
necessary infrastructural support for modern research in biology involving computationally intensive
analysis. 
            During the year 2003-2004, M.Tech  in Bioinformatics has b een introduced at SASTRA,
Thanjavur which is the second of such courses on BTISnet.   Seve ral Research and Developmental 
projects on Bioinformatics have been considered for extending fina ncial support by the Department o f
Biotechnology. 
34.       The Committee was informed that the 10 th plan outlay for bioinfor matics is Rs.70.00 crores.  
This envisages, besides continuing support to th e Distributed Informati on Centres (DIC’s) and 
Distributed Information sub-cent res (sub DIC’s) strengthening of the communication network among
the centers and sub-centre s, upgradation of 5 distributed Info rmatics Centres (DIC) to Centes o f
Excellence, 5 sub-DIC’s to DIC’s establishment of 5 new sub-DIC’s and upgradation of infrastructure of 
DIC’s and sub-DIC’s as the computer hardware and software provided earlier require upgrading.  
During the first two years of the 10 th plan only Rs.7.68 crores and Rs .10.96 cores respectively could be 
provided due to funds constraint.  Nearly Rs.51 crores need to be provided during the last three years in
Page 8 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

order to undertake and complete the tasks envisaged in the 10 th Plan.  Keeping this in mind an amount 
of Rs.16.00 crores have been sought during the year 2004-05.  This is an increase of Rs.5.04 crores over 
the actual amount spent during 2003-04. 
35.       In reply to the supplementary question on the exact number centers as well as the difference
between DIC’s and sub-DIC’s, the Committee was informed that five DI Cs  namely, (1) IISc., 
Bangalore, (2) Pune University, Pune, (3) Bose Institute, Kolkata, (4) MKU Madurai, and (5) JNU, New
Delhi have been approved for upgrad ation as Centres of Excellence in Bioinfor matics. Five Sub DICs
namely (1) Anna University, Chenna i, (2) Pondicherry University, P ondicherry, (3) Kerala Agriculture
University, Thrissur, (4) MS Univer sity, Baroda, and (5) Ca lcutta University, Calcutta have approved
for upgradation as DICs. 
Distinction between functions of DIC’s and sub-DIC’s 
¾      Functions of DIC: 
i)                    The principal objective of a DIC is to function as an in formation base in a specific 
field providing scientists a nd biotech organizati ons ready access to computer based
information on resources, cr eation of subject specific databases and to build up
expertise in bioinformatics. 
ii)                   To provide a computer based information st orage and retrieval system of database 
that collects structured information generated by research and industrial institutions in
the identified fields of biotechnology, cont inually update the databank and make the
information available to the interested parties. 
iii)                 To provide retrieval service either online or offline in the specialized area and to
give overall information support even in areas other than those assigned to them. 
iv)                 To provide communication li nk at times with Dialog fo r selective bibliographic
information for the user scientists. 
v)                  To develop software packages specific to user needs. 
vi)                 To conduct training courses in the specialized  areas periodically to meet the special
requirements of manpower development in the area and to promote awareness about
the computerized storage a nd retrieval facility among bio- scientists and information 
scientists. 
¾      Functions of Sub-DICs: 
While the Distributed Information Centre act as repository of informatio n in their specialized
disciplines, the distributed sub- centres provide an access mechan ism for the information to be 
available at the universities, R&D and manufacturing institutions . However, some of the Sub-
DICs are also working towards development of databases and training activities. 
  
36.       The Committee observes that th e continuation of various Bioi nformatics schemes would be o f
immense help for the development of biotechnology in the country. It further hopes that the Department
should take necessary steps for the establishment of  National Bioinformatics Institute as an autonomous
body under Department of Bi otechnology to promote developmental activities in Bioinformatics and
augmentation of Infrastructure facilities for the BTISnet centres to cope  up the enhanced activities of IT
in Biotechnology.  
  
BIOTECH FACILITIES, CENTRES OF EXCELLENCE AND PROGRAMME SUPPORT 
37.       It includes repositories for conservati on of plant microbes, specia lized biotechnology facilities 
for advance research, pilot scale manufacturing, centres of excellen ce and programme support in high
priority areas of modern biology.  The seven repositories include t hose on medicina l and aromatic 
plants, filarial and reag ents, cryopreservation of bl ood cells, tissue culture micr oorganisms, blue green
algae, marine cyanobacteria  and drosophila stockcentre.  The           biotechnology facilities include 
experimental animal facilities , genetic engineering and strain  manipulation uni t and biochemical
engineering and process developm ent.  During the year 2003-04, th e upgradation of the existing 
Infrastructure and creation of additional Infrastructur al facilities were com pleted.  Research activities 
Page 9 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

relating to microbial taxonomy were  strengthened.  Acti vities relating to characterization an d 
conservation of microflora  of the country continued.  Traini ng of the area of microbial taxonomy, 
ecology, microbial diversity and e nvironmental genomics was organize d. Collection and compilation o f
data on microbial resources were undertaken.  
38.       The Committee was informed that the allo cation for Biotech facilities, Centre of Excellence and 
Programme Support has been reduced this year, keeping in mind the proposals at hand.  The Department 
proposes to set up two new Centres of Excellence/Biotech facilities during the year.  The remaining 
budget is to be used for meeting operational costs of already established facilities.  
39.       In reply to another question on the details of the proposals of two new centres of excellence, the 
Committee was informed that base d on the recommendations of the e xpert committee, the Department
has identified the following areas for support: 
•        Marine Biotechnology 
•        Clinical proteomics  
•        Innovative technologies for public health 
•        Quality testing of Genetically Modified products  
•        Criteria for selection of project in different activity are as follows: 
         Programme support  
¾      Track record of scientists 
¾      Willingness of several partners to work together for a common goal 
         Biotech facilities: 
¾      Where the facilities and resources are not available  
¾      Where the facilities and resources are need based 
40.       The Committee hopes that the activities of International Depository authority should be
broadened. Besides, efforts should be made to augm ent the network programme in microbial diversity;
an international training programme should also be conducted in order to expose our scientists to the
advances on microbial research  world over. 
CROP BIOTECHNOLOGY 
41.       Advances in gene disc overy and genomics have led to the identification of several genes that
provide excellent opportunities for e ffectively tackling biotic/abiotic stresses, fo r enhancement for crop
productivity, and for improvement of  nutritional quality.  These scient ific advances can accelerate the 
‘upstream’ germplas m enhancement/pre- breeding for eventual crop im provement thr ough effective 
transgenic approaches.  The depart ment is supporting three main types of research activities under the
scheme; R&D projects in priority crops, multi-inst itutional projects and Plant Molecular programmes in
certain institutions/universities. The multi-institutional project involves interaction amongst a number o f 
institutions with well-defined objectives.  
42.       The Committee notes with satisf action the advances made in the area of genomics and gene 
sequencing. Further it hopes that efforts should be initiated for programme  on functional genomics o f
various crops. A multi-institutiona l programme on development of crops  resistant to viral diseases 
should be considered. 
43.       Our country has been facing a serious drought condition, which has drastically reduced the 
production of food as well as comm ercial crops. The Committee is of  the view that the Department
should take initiatives to tackle the problem s of drought by introducing dr ought resistant crops through
the application of functional genomics. 
  
BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT 
  
44.       The Committee was informed that  special biotechnology based programme for SC/ST 
population, women and rural areas were taken up during the year 2003-04.  The programmes on rural
areas have so far benefited around 12,000 rural people.  More th an 2,100 rural people have been trained 
to cultivate medicinal plants.  Many more people have been al so trained in preparation of products like 
Page 10 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

jams, jelly, squash, pickle and thes e products are being sold  in local market and supports an additional
income of around Rs.2000 per month.  Biotechnology based programmes for so cietal development
continued to benefit the women, SC/ST population in rural areas. During the year 2003-04, 13 new 
projects under SC/ST programme, th e Department approved 4 new projects under rural programme.  
Projects in the areas of floriculture, organic farming, food biotechnology an d genetic disorders and
counseling are proposed during the 2004 -05 that would benefit women in rural areas.  Two bio-village 
projects are also under consideration by the Department.    
45.       In reply to a question about enhanced budgetary allocation for societal development programme, 
the Committee was informed by the De partment that the thrust was on technology transfer training and
specialized employment and income generating activities through biotec hnology for socio-economic 
development of women, among rural and SC/ST populat ion.  These programmes include the area o f 
plant tissue culture, medi cinal plant cultivation, mushroom pr oduction, spirulina and vermin-compost, 
aquaculture and genetic c ounseling units for tribal populations.  During the last  financial year, special 
programmes were developed for women upliftment,  however, since most of  these programmes were
with NGO’s which requires a form al legal Memorandum of Association(MoA) , and that requires
considerable time for cl earance.  This was one of the reasons for reduction in the budget allocation
during RE stage. The Department also informed th e Committee that the progr ammes were not affected
once clearance of MoA were obtained resulting in the reflection in th e progressive expenditure of the
2003-04 budget. Under societal development nearly complete budget allocated were utilized under vote-
on-account.  The Committ ee was also informed that during th e 2004-05, there is a requirement fo r 
enhanced budget for special programme s being considered such as Bi oresource rural complexes to be
established in 4-5 locations for sustainable development. 
46.       In reply to the supplementary quest ion on Bioresource Rural Comp lexes, the Committee was 
informed that initial discussions have been held with the vice-cha ncellors of the following five 
Agricultural Universities: 
i.         GB Pant University of Agriculture and Technology,Pantnagar 
ii.       CCS Haryana Agricultural University, Hissar 
iii.      University of Agriculture Sciences, Bangalore 
iv.     Marathwada Agricultural University, Parbhani 
v.       Orissa University of Agriculture & Technology, Bhubanesaneswar 
Details are being worked out . The specific sites woul d be selected in     consultation with the 
State Governments. 
47.       The Committee commends the efforts made by he Department for upliftment of SC/ST 
population and women.  The Committee feels that De partment should publicize their entrepreneurship
programmes so that concerned companies could co me forward for marketi ng their products through
these communities. Further, Biot echnology based projects  should also be strengthened, which may be
helpful in amelioration of ec onomic mission of women, SC/ST and rural population engaged in
agriculture, presently suffering on account of recent decline in the competitiveness of Indian agriculture. 
I&M SECTOR ASSISTANCE FOR TECHNOLO GY INCUBATORS, PILOT PROJCETS,
BIOTECHNOLOGY PARKS AND BIOTECH DEVELOPMENT FUND 
48.       The main objectives of the progra mme are to examine, ev aluate and recommend fo r
financial/logistical support in the proposals relati ng to the establishment of the biotechnology parks,
biotechnology incubators, training and pilot proj ects received from va rious States and othe r
organizations.  To work out the modalities for the identification, implementation and review with 
suggestive course corrections etc.  for the projects and biotech park s, technology incubators and pilot
projects, with an aim to identify this sunrise sector within the knowledge based biotech industries. 
49.       During the year 2003-2004, an Expert Committee was constituted by the Department to look into
various projects and sugge sting modalities for su pporting them, Pr oposals from the state of Utta r
Pradesh for establishment of biotechnology park at  Lucknow and setting up of Biotechnology Incubator
at Andhra Pradesh Biotech Park in the Genome Valley, Hyderabad were approved by the Government. 
50.       The Committee was informed that as per the approved EFC and Planning Commission directive, 
Page 11 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

only two Biotech Parks could be s upported that have been  established at Lucknow and Hyderabad.  
During the year 2003-04, their main es tablishment costs were met.  Th e budget for the current financial 
year i.e. 2004-05 is only for operational cost s and total 10 th plan provision is only Rs.30.00 crores, 
therefore, allocation during the current year has be en restricted to Rs.10.00 crores.  In view of the 
increased number of requests being received from  various State Government, a special request has been 
made to Planning Commission and a revised EFC has been prepared  for increased allocation during
remaining 3 years of 10th plan and also for approval for supporting more parks.  
  
51.       In reply to a question on Biotechnology Park s, the Committee was informed that the Department 
has received proposals from State governments like, Gujarat, Haryan a, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab,
Karnataka, Rajasthan, West Bengal and Kerala and also from National Institutes like University Institute
of Chemical Technology (UICT), Mumbai for sett ing up of biotech parks/incubators. The likely
budgetary requirements sha ll depend on the nature of  activities proposed by eac h state and also actual
requirements. The Department has approached the Planning Commission to relax the initial restriction of
funding only two biotech parks and also to increa se the budgetary allocation from Rs. 30.0 crores to
Rs.75.00 crores during the 10th plan period 
52.       Providing infrastructure facilit ies for the promotion of Biot echnology is an ongoing process o f 
the Government of India for the benefit of various  organizations including sm all, medium and large
industrial entrepreneurs. The Committee hopes that the Department should pr ovide need based inputs
for facilitating implementation of proposals of establishing different kind of facilities like Biotechnology
Incubators, Downstream processing f acilities, Pilot Plant f acilities, Tissue Cultur e hardening facilities
etc. at biotech Parks created by the States as and when required.  Th e Committee is strongly of the view 
that the Department should approach the Pla nning Commission for enhancing the allocation fo r
establishment of Bio-Parks in strategic areas in the country. 
  
INTERNATIONAL CENTRE FOR GENETI C ENGINEERING & BIOTECHNOLOGY
(ICGEB) 
53.       International Centre for Genetic Engi neering and Biotechnology (ICG EB) has been established 
with two components one in New Delh i and the other in Trieste, Italy with the objective of bringing the
fruits of modern biotechnology to the developing countries.  Intensive scientific research is performed in 
a total of six groups viz., mala ria, virology, immunology, recombinan t gene products, plant molecula r
biology and insect resistance.  In addition to research, there are seve ral training and other scheme such 
as post-doctoral and Ph.D. programmes as well as organization of training courses and symposia.            
54.       The DBT provides its contribution to ICGE B as the institution is situated in the host country, 
which is a fixed amount.  This w ould not enhance research impact of the centre, since it receives
separate extramural research funding from DBT and other agencies.  
55.       The Committee hopes that the Cent re continues its research work  in the areas of Hepatitis, 
Malaria, recombinant gene product , plant molecular biology, plant resi stance, plant transformation, etc
which will help for the development of Biotechnology in our country. 
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS & BIOSAFETY 
56.       The major activities of the Programme in clude providing facilitation and financial support for 
filing of patents, creating aw areness through seminars, sympos ia, workshops, guest lectures,
publications, web pages, etc. on Intellectual Prope rty Rights (IPRs); organi zing training courses on
patenting and IPR to generate skilled manpower on IPR in Biotechnology. It also deals with the national
Policy issues in IPRs and related areas. 
57.       Department of Biotechnology has been involved in promoting awar eness generation in the 
biotechnology sector through workshops, symposia and seminars.  There is  a special pate nt facilitating 
cell to help scientists in searching and filing of patent.  The Department re gularly organizes one-wee k 
refresher course on “ IPR in  Biotechnology” which is conduc ted by the National Law School, 
Bangalore.  A s pecial Di ploma Course on IPR is also bein g initiated at National Law School,
Page 12 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

Bangalore.  The Department is also involved in providing inputs for the 3rd amendment to the Patent Act 
in compliance with TRIPS of WTO. 
58.       The Committee recommends that the Department continues to augment its  efforts to undertake 
activities like awareness bui lding in IPR by organizing semi nars/workshops; generation of IP R
knowledge based manpower through training course; a P.G. di ploma on biotechnology and IP R
publications on WTO negotiations and Patent Act and rules, as modified from time to time, pertaining to
biotechnology; framing of rules and regulations for IDA and its future strengthening; linkages with other
agencies like Patent Officers TIFA C, IIP, IPMD and other like minded institutions; and liaison with the
PSUs, NRDC, patent attorneys and the patent offices for patent facilitation. 
  
GREEN COWS 
59.       The Committee would like to suggest that a section of resear ch in Biotechnology should 
concentrate on the br eeding of special cows that naturally produce low-fat milk that boost immune 
system which may be termed as ‘g reen cow’ and which are specifi cally engineered to produce less 
methane to help stem global warming.  Green cows  generally deliver low fa t milk that boosts immune
system, improve lactose utilization a nd relive diarrhoea.  Recent adva nces in Biotechnology as what the 
Committee has been given to understa nd have identified gene for milk  fat synthesis th at may one day
allow scientists to selectively breed cows that naturally produce low fat milk.  This will also 
considerably improve the efficiency of the milk production of the cows.  Si nce the green cows are
environmentally cleaner cows they produce less si gnificant amount of methane, which is a majo r
contributor to green house effect, in the atmosphere, second, only to CO2 which generally contributes to
global warming.  Green cow can alter cattle digest ion either by removing microorganisms from thei r 
stomachs that produce methane or by creating microor ganisms that can pr oduce metabolic products
other than methane.  The Committee also feels that  if DBT makes a concentr ation on such type o f
research, the emphasis on food safety  will increase and by increasing the body’s defence mechanism, a 
great section of population could be saved from constant attacks of common incurable diseases.  
  
BIO-TERRORISM 
60.       The Committee recommends  that the Department of Bio-technology should take steps to ensure 
bio-security without  hampering legitimate re search or free flow of information in the field 
biotechnology, first, there must be an increased awareness of risk of Bio-Terrorism among scientists and 
scientific leaders.  In order to  augment awareness about security, the committee woul d like to suggest
for arrangement of training and accr editation programmes that would in crease considerable awareness
and stimulate better communications between scient ific and national security communities.  The 
Committee feels that any Bio-secu rity policies must take a ‘botto m up’ approach by including direct 
involvement of working scientists.  The security provisions should wo rk hand in hand with the progress 
in biological research.  It is th e categorized opinion of the Committee th at the strategies that block the 
publication of certain research mate rials would deter the free flow of  information, impede careers o f
scientists in the field of bio-t echnology and discourage new incumbents  in entering the field of research
in Bio-Technology. 
            The guidelines should, therefore, be developed to allow researches to publish their work without 
providing information that would be useful to Bio-Terrorists.  Universities and other scientific 
institutions as what the Committee feels should deve lop the procedures to monitor scientific activities
and design full proof action plan to prevent any strategic inform ation leakage relating to Bio-
Technology to bio terrorists who w ould in turn adversely utilize th ese information for creating Bio-
Terrorism thereby throwing considerable threat on the very existen ce of human communities by waging
biological warfare. 
            Biological weapons pose a strategic threat mirrored by no other form of attack other than nuclear
weapons.  The Committee feels that as there is no simple solution to bio s ecurity, the Department o f
Bio-Technology must construct a syst em of checks and balances need ed to assure that the growing
power of life sciences is only used to protect life and not to destroy it.
Page 13 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

61.       After considering the Demands for Grants  of the Department of Bio-technology and assessing
the progress of various importa nt programmes and projects admin istered by it, the Committee
recommends that the budgetary allocation of Rs.323.45 crores, as sought by the Department for the yea r
2004-2005, under Demand No. 85, may be approved. 
  
SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
1.         The Committee notes with satisfaction th at the Department has made optimum utilization of the 
funds allocated to it to carry out its various progr ammes/activities for the ove rall development of the
country.                                                                          
(Para 15)
2.         The Committee is of the view that th e Centre should give more em phasis on stem cell research 
through development of specific lines from human a nd animal tissues such as tumours, lymphoblast
cells for patients with genetic disorders. Besi des, the Committee hopes that  the Centre should make
efforts to identify factors influe ncing the lineage specification of stem cells into neurons, cardiac &
pancreatic islets and study their tran s differential potential which can bring further improvement in this
area of research.                                                                   
(Para 19)
3.         The Committee is aware of the fact th at researches in Embryonic Stem cell involve a lot o f
hindrances due to infant stage of de velopment of knowledge in  this field.  However,  this infant stage o f 
research in fact urges the Comm ittee to strongly recommend that  Department of Biotechnology should
initiate Comprehensive Research Programme to bri ng up coming development in this sphere at par with
the international standard and expl ore for a more wider application of  embryonic stem ce ll research so
that some concrete achiev ement could be made in cr itical areas.  The Committ ee feels that in order to 
move ahead in the field, the DBT needs to work on both embryonic stem cell and adult derived stem cell 
for more functional applications in the field of Biotechnology.  
            The Committee has been given to unders tand that Researches in the field of Tissue Engineering
will deliver new medica l techniques and devices,  including small blood vess el replacement, bone,
tendon, ligament and cartilage repair, healing of skin wounds and advan ces in nerve re-generation.  It 
will also lead to cellular based therapies for de-g enerative problems in muscles for cardiac regeneration 
in the heart and in treating de-generative conditions in the brain.  In view of this, the Committee strongly 
recommends for the in-depth research in the field.                                        
 (Para 20)
4.         The Committee commends the efforts be ing made by the CDFD in promoting research in DNA 
finger printing and diagnostics. Furthe r it hopes that CDFD will emerge  as India’s leading Centre not 
only for DNA fingerprinting and diagnostics but also for state-of-the-art R&D in areas of human health.  
CDFD will have a major role to play in auth entication and certification of seed varieties, GM
food/GMOs and in other coll aborative efforts involving th e academia, industry and
Government.                                    
(Para 25)
5.         The Committee commends the activit ies being pursued by the Centre and recommends that
NBRC should initiate the major pr ojects in the areas as  computational neuros cience, system and
cognitive neuroscience, stem cel l research, developmental neurobi ology and basic research towards
understanding of neurological and psychiatric disorder s. Besides, it should focus on modern imaging
techniques such as functional magnetic resona nce imaging, positron emission tomography, optical
imaging provide noninvasive methods for unders tanding brain functions  in human etc.   
                                                                                                                    
 (Para 29)
6.                  The Committee recommends that  the Centre should undertake programmes like  nutritional
improvement in carboh ydrate rich cro ps, including rice and sweet potato, by transgenic expression of
Page 14 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

AmAl+ gene and molecular assessment of AmAl+ induced physiological/developmental changes in GM-
potato. It should make mole cular cloning and char acterization of genes involve d in increased shelf life
of fruits and vegetables. Further, it should or ganize seminar(s), symposiu m and workshop meeting fo r
discussions on recent developments in plant mole cular genetics/biology/bi otechnology/genomics; and
begin to serve as national resource of inform ation in the various areas of modern plant
biology.                                                                        
(Para 32)
7.         The Committee observes that the contin uation of various Bioinfor matics schemes would be o f
immense help for the development of biotechnology in the country. It further hopes that the Department
should take necessary steps for th e establishment of National Bioinfor matics institute as an autonomous
body under Department of Biotechnology to promote de velopmental activities in Bioinformatics ad
augmentation of Infrastructure facilities for the BTISnet centers to cope  up the enhanced activities of IT
in Biotechnology.                                                                     
 (Para 36)
8.         The Committee hopes that the activit ies of International Depository authority should be
broadened. Besides, efforts should be made to augm ent the network programme in microbial diversity;
an international training programme should also be conducted in order to expose our scientists to the
advances on microbial research world over.                                                                                    
 (Para 40)
9.         The Committee notes with satisfaction the advances made in the area of genomics and gene 
sequencing. Further it hopes that efforts should be taken on programme on functional genomics o f
various crops. A multi-institutional programme on development of crops resistant to viral disease should 
be considered.            
(Para 42)
10.       Our country has been facing a serious drought condition, which has drastically reduced the 
production of food as well as comm ercial crops. The Committee is of  the view that the Department
should take initiatives to tackle the problem s of drought by introducing dr ought resistant crops through
the application of functional genomics.                                      
 (Para 43) 
11.       The Committee commends the efforts made by he Department for upliftment of SC/ST 
population and women.  The Committee feels that De partment should publicize their entrepreneurship
programmes so that concerned companies could co me forward for marketi ng their products through
these communities. Further, Biot echnology based projects  should also be strengthened, which may be
helpful in amelioration of ec onomic mission of women, SC/ST and rural population engaged in
agriculture, presently suffering on account of recent decline in  the competitiv eness of Indian
agriculture.                                                               
 (Para 47)
12.       Providing infrastructure facilities for the promotion of Biotechnol ogy is an ongoing process o f 
the Government of India for the benefit of various  organizations including sm all, medium and large
industrial entrepreneurs. The Committee hopes that the Department should pr ovide need based inputs
for facilitating implementation of proposals of establishing different kind of facilities like Biotechnology
Incubators, Downstream processing f acilities, Pilot Plant f acilities, Tissue Cultur e hardening facilities
etc. at biotech Parks created by the States as and when required. The Committee is strongly of the view
that the Department should approach the Pla nning Commission for enhancing the allocation fo r
establishment of Bio-parks in strategic areas in the country.   
                                                                                            (Para 52) 
13.       The Committee hopes that the Centre conti nues its research work in the areas of Hepatitis, 
Malaria, recombinant gene product , plant molecular biology, plant resi stance, plant transformation, etc
which will help for the development of Biotechnology in our country.  
(Para 55)
14.       The Committee recommends that the De partment continues to au gment its efforts to undertake 
Page 15 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

activities like awareness bui lding in IPR by organizing semi nars/workshops; generation of IP R
knowledge based manpower though training course; a P.G. di ploma on biotechnology and IP R
publications on WTO negotiations and Patent Act and rules, as modified from time to time, pertaining to
biotechnology; framing of rules and regulations for IDA and its future strengthening; linkages with other
agencies like Patent Officers TIFAC, IIP, IPMD  and other like minded institutions; and liaison with the 
PSUs, NRDC, patent attorneys a nd the patent offices for patent
facilitation.                                                           
(Para 58)
15.       The Committee would like to suggest that a section of resear ch in Biotechnology should 
concentrate on the br eeding of special cows that naturally produce low-fat milk that boost immune 
system which may be termed as ‘g reen cow’ and which are specifi cally engineered to produce less 
methane to help stem global warming.  Green cows  generally deliver low fa t milk that boosts immune
system, improve lactose utilization a nd relive diarrhoea.  Recent adva nces in Biotechnology as what the 
Committee has been given to understa nd have identified gene for milk  fat synthesis th at may one day
allow scientists to selectively breed cows that naturally produce low fat milk.  This will also 
considerably improve the efficiency of the milk production of the cows.  Si nce the green cows are
environmentally cleaner cows they produce less si gnificant amount of methane, which is a majo r
contributor to green house effect, in the atmosphere, second, only to CO2 which generally contributes to
global warming.  Green cow can alter cattle digest ion either by removing microorganisms from thei r 
stomachs that produce methane or by creating microor ganisms that can pr oduce metabolic products
other than methane.  The Committee also feels that  if DBT makes a concentr ation on such type o f
research, the emphasis on food safety  will increase and by increasing the body’s defence mechanism, a 
great section of population could be saved from constant attacks of common incurable diseases.  
(Para 59)
16.       The Committee recommends  that the Department of Bio-technology should take steps to ensure 
bio-security without  hampering legitimate re search or free flow of information in the field 
biotechnology. First, there must be an increased awareness of risk of Bio-Terrorism among scientists 
and scientific leaders.  In order to augment awareness about security, the committee would like to
suggest for arrangement of trai ning and accreditation programmes that would increase considerable
awareness and stimulate better communications betw een scientific and nationa l security communities.  
The Committee feels that any Bio-security policies must take a ‘bottom up’ approach by including direct 
involvement of working scientists.  The security provisions should wo rk hand in hand with the progress 
in biological research.  It is th e categorized opinion of the Committee th at the strategies that block the 
publication of certain research mate rials would deter the free flow of  information, impede careers o f
scientists in the field of bio-t echnology and discourage new incumbents  in entering the field of research
in Bio-Technology. 
            The guidelines should, therefore, be developed to allow researches to publish their work without 
providing information that would be useful to Bio-Terrorists.  Universities and other scientific 
institutions as what the Committee feels should deve lop the procedures to monitor scientific activities
and design full proof action plan to prevent any strategic inform ation leakage relating to Bio-
Technology to bio terrorists who w ould in turn adversely utilize th ese information for creating Bio-
Terrorism thereby throwing considerable threat on the very existen ce of human communities by waging
biological warfare.  
            Biological weapons pose a strategic threat mirrored by no other form of attack other than nuclear
weapons.  The Committee feels that as there is no simple solution to bio s ecurity, the Department o f
Bio-Technology must construct a syst em of checks and balances need ed to assure that the growing
power of life sciences is only used to protect life and not to destroy it.     
                                                                                            (Para 60) 
  
  
Page 16 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

ANNEXURE 
  
BUDGET ESTIMATES 2004-2005 
            ( Rs. in crores)
SR. 
NO. 
HEAD OF DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS/ 
PROGRAMMES/ SCHEMES 
  
       Plan                  Non-Plan             
Total
1. Secretariat Economic Services -- 4.68 4.68 
  Other Scientific Research        
2. 
  
Assistance to Scientific 
Institutions/Professional Bodies
      
2.01 National Institute of Immunology 28.00 0.85 28.85 
2.02 National Centre for Cell Sciences 15.00 0.42 15.42 
2.03 
  
2.04 
  
2.05 
  
2.06 
  
2.07 
Centre for DNA Fing er printing and 
Diagnostics 
  
National Brain Research Centre 
  
National Centre for Plant Genome Research 
  
Institute of Bioresources and Sustainable 
Development 
  
Institute of Life Sciences 
  
12.00 
  
21.00 
  
10.00 
  
3.50 
  
5.00 
-- 
  
-- 
  
-- 
  
-- 
  
-- 
12.00 
  
21.00 
  
10.00 
  
3.50 
  
5.00 
  
TOTAL:
 94.50 1.27 95.77 
3. Assistance to Other Scientific Bodies       
3.01 Human Resource Development 15.00 -- 15.00 
3.02 Bioinformatics 16.00 -- 16.00
  
3.03 
  
  
Biotech Facilities, Cent res of Excellence and 
Programme Support 
  
14.00 
  
-- 
  
14.00 
  
3.04 
  
Research and Development 
  
132.50
  
-- 
  
132.50
  
3.05 
  
Biotechnology for Societal Development
  
9.00
  
-- 
  
9.00
  
3.06 
  
Bio-Process and Product Development
  
10.00
  
-- 
  
10.00
  
  
  
4. 
TOTAL 
I&M Sector-Assistance for Technology 
incubators, Pilot Project, Biotechnology Parks 
and Biotech Develo
pment Fund
196.50 
  
  
10.00
-- 
  
  
-- 
196.50 
  
  
10.00
  
5. 
  
International Coo
peration 
  
9.00
  
-- 
  
9.00
  
6. 
  
International Centre fo r Genetic Engineering 
  
-- 
  
7.50 
  
7.50 
Page 17 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

  
MINUTES 
  
I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Monday, the 9 th August, 2004 in Committee Room ‘D’, 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.  
  
PRESENT      
  
29. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
30. Dr.Prabha Thakur  
31. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
32. Smt. Kum Kum Rai  
  
LOK  SABHA 
  
33. Shri Sujan Chakraborty  
34. Shri Pankaj Chaudhery  
35. Shri Anantrao Gudhe  
36. Shri Babubhai Katara  
37. Shri Brahmananda Panda  
38. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                          
39. Shri K.C.Singh Baba     
40. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh                             
41. Shri V.Aruna Kumar  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
             
            Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer 
 
  
  
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIO-TECHNOLOGY   
  
1.
      Dr. M. K. Bhan , Secretary 
2.      Shri U. N. Behera, Joint Secretary 
3.      Shri Arun Sharma, JS & FA 
4.      Dr. S.N. Natesh, Scientist ‘G’ 
5.      Dr.B.M. Gandhi, Scientist ‘G’ 
6.      Dr.V. P. Gupta, Scientist ‘G’ 
& Bio-Technology 
    
GRAND TOTAL: 
310.00 13.35 323.45 
Page 18 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

7.      Dr.B. S. Das, Scientist ‘G’ 
8.      Dr. K. K. Tripathi, Scientist ‘G’ 
9.      Shri Ajay Kumar, Director 
10. Shri M.P. Banga, Director 
      11. Ms Kana Talukdar, Dy. Secretary (Fin) 
12.  Dr. (Ms) Renu Swarup, Sc. ‘F’ 
13. Dr (Mrs) Alka Sharma, Scientist ‘D’  
  
2.   *                                                                *                                                          * 
3.   *                                                                *                                                          *           
4.   The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 04.15 p.m. for tea break and re-assembled at 4.40 p.m.. to 
hear the Secretary, Department of Biotechnology. 
  
5.   The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other of ficials of the Depart ment of Biotechnology.
Chairman then requested the Secretary to make a brief presentation regardi ng the Demands for Grants
(2004-05) of the Department.   
  
6.         Thereafter, the Secretary made a vi sual presentation regarding the major activities and 
achievements of the Department.  The Secretary also explained  th e budgetary allocations on different 
heads as also the functioning of the Department.   
            The Members then sought clarifications  on the points that emerged out  of the presentation of the 
Secretary.   
  
7.         The Secretary requested the Committee to recommend more budgetary allocation to take care o f 
the requirements of the demands of the Institutes/Or ganisations under the Depart ment.  He also pointe d 
out that any drastic cut in the allo cations of the Departme nt can hampered the pr ogress of its scientific
activities.  
  
                        The witnesses then withdrew.  
  
            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
  
8.         The Committee then adjourned at 06.15 P.M. to meet again on 10th August, 2004. 
  
________________________________________________________________________ 
*** Relates to other matters 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
      The Committee me t at 03.00 P.M. on Monday, the 16 th August, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi.  
             
PRESENT 
  
1.   Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Dr. Prabha Thakur  
3. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav  
Page 19 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm

4. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
5. Shrimati Kum Kum Rai  
6. Shri Birabhadra Singh  
  
LOK  SABHA 
  
7. Shri Sujan Chakraborty  
8. Shri Brahmanada Panda  
9. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                          
10. Shrimati  Jayaben Thakkar         
11. Shri Sita Ram Yadav  
12. Shri V. Aruna Kumar     
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
                        Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer 
  
2.   The Committee took up consider ation of Draft ***, *** and 127 th Reports of the Committee on 
Demands for Grants (2004-2005) pertaining to ***, ***and Department of Biotechnology, respectively.  
After discussion and suggesting minor changes,  the Committee considered and adopted each of the 
above reports.  
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman  and in his absence Shrima ti  Kum Kum Rai and Shri 
Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy to present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Bachi Singh Rawat and
in his absence Shri Sujan Chakraborty to lay the Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha. 
  
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 03.20 P.M. 
  
-
____________________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters. 
Page 20 of 20127threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/127threport.htm