PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY NINTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the
Department of Biotechnology
(Ministry of Science and Technology)
(Demand No. 88 )
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th May, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th May, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)
259
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY NINTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the
Department of Biotechnology
(Ministry of Science and Technology)
(Demand No. 88 )
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 7th May, 2015)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 7th May, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2015/Vaisakha, 1937 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-14
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE.................................................... 15-17
6. M INUTES  ............................................................................................................. 19-24

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2014)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri Bhupinder Singh
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Beig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
22. Shri Nana Patole
23. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
(i)

(ii)
24. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
25. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
27. Shri Nagendra Singh
28. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
*31. Shri Chirag Paswan
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
* Nominated w.e.f.  25th March, 2015

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Two Hundred Fifty-ninth Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the
detailed Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of Science and
Technology) (Demand No. 88).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on 9th April, 2015, the Secretary and other Officers of the
Department of Biotechnology gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the
Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to
scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications
sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise
the Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 6th May, 2015.
   N EW D ELHI; ASHWANI  KUMAR
 6 May, 2015 Chairman,
Vaisakha 16, 1937 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
BIBCOL : Bharat Immunological and Biologicals Corporation Limited
BIG : Biotechnology Ignition Grant
BIPP : Biotechnology Industry Partnership Programme
BIRAC : Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council
BMGF : Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
BTFS : Biotechnology Finishing School
CDFD : Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics
CEFIPRA : Indo-French Centre for the Promotion of Advanced Research
CfEL : Center for Entrepreneurial Learning
CIAB : Center of Innovative and Applied Bioprocessing
CoE : Centre of Excellence
CRS : Contract Research Scheme
HRD : Human Resource Development
IBSD : Institute for Bioresource and Sustainable Development
ICGEB : International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology
IKP : Innovation Knowledge Progress-Knowledge Park
ILS : Institute of Life Sciences
IVCOL : Indian Vaccines Corporation Limited
IYBA : Innovative Young Biotechnologist Award
NBRC : National Brain Research Centre
NCCS : National Centre for Cell Sciences
NII : National Institute of Immunology
NIPGR : National Institute for Plant Genome Research
PMC : Project Monitoring Committee
PNAS : Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
SBIRI : Small Business Innovation Research Initiative
SFC : Standing Finance Committee
(iv)

(v)
SHG's : Self Help Groups
SMEs : Small and Medium Enterprises
TB : Tuberculosis
TSC : Technical Steering Committee
UG & PG : Under Graduate and Post Graduate
USAID : United States Agency for International Development

REPORT
INTRODUCTION
The Department of Biotechnology was initially set up as an Independent Board in 1982 and thereafter
became a full fledged Department under Ministry of Science & Technology in 1986. The main mandate
of the department is given below:
(i) To evolve policies and integrated programmes in biotechnology and ensure their implementation
and monitoring.
(ii) To identify specific programmes of Research and Development and manufacturing in biologicals
and biotechnology and oversee the initiation and pursuit of related research and manufacturing
activities.
(iii) To identify, set up and support Centres of Excellence for Research and Development in
biotechnology and ensure proper dovetailing of their activities as per national priorities and
objectives.
(iv) To act as a screening, advising and approving agent of the Government with regard to import
and transfer of new technologies for the manufacture of biologicals, biotechnological products
and their intermediates.
(v) Evolve safety guidelines for biotechnology Research and Development and manufacturing in
India.
(vi) To act as the central agency for the import of genetically manipulated materials, culture, cells,
specimens, tissues and biotech products including DNA and RNA of any type or size and for
promoting their production in the country.
(vii) Serve as the inter-ministerial and interagency nodal point for all specific international bilateral
and multilateral Research and Development collaborations and agreements in the area of
biotechnology; act as the nodal point for all technology transfers in the area of biotechnology.
(viii) Manufacture and ensure application of recombinant, cell-based and DNA vaccines, diagnostics
and other biotechnological products.
(ix) To evolve programmes for Human Resource Development in the area of biotechnology.
(x) Serve as an administrative and implementing Department of agencies, commissions, boards,
etc. specifically formed by the Government for fulfilling the national objectives in biotechnology
and also to serve as the nodal point for Bio-informatics including training and creation of
infrastructure, collection, dissemination and exchange of information relating to biotechnology.
(xi) Establishment of National Biotechnology Regulatory Authority
(xii) Matters relating to:
• International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), New Delhi;

2
• National Institute of Immunology (NII), New Delhi;
• National Centre for Cell Sciences (NCCS), Pune;
• Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad;
• National Institute for Plant Genome Research (NIPGR), New Delhi;
• National Brain Research Centre (NBRC), Manesar, Gurgaon;
• Institute for Bioresource and Sustainable Development (IBSD), Imphal
• Institute of Life Sciences (ILS), Bhubaneswar
• Translational Research in Health Science and Technology Institute, Faridabad
• Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Trivananthpuram
• UNESCO Regional Centre for Education, Training & Innovation in Biotechnology, Faridabad
• National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Kolkata
• Institute for Stem Cell Science and Regenerative Medicine, Bangalore
• National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute Mohali, Punjab
• National Institute of Animal Biotechnology, Hyderabad
(xiii) Matters relating to:
• Bharat Immunological and Biologicals Corporation Limited (BIBCOL), Bulandshahar, Uttar
Pradesh;
• Indian Vaccines Corporation Limited (IVCOL), Manesar, Gurgaon.
• Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC), New Delhi
• Center of Innovative and Applied Bioprocessing (CIAB), Mohali
2. The vision of the Department is to create biotechnology tools and technologies that address the
problems of agriculture productivity, food production, nutrition security, health care and environmental
sustainability by providing new and emerging products and services at affordable prices, generate
employment opportunities and make India globally competitive in the emerging bio-economy.
3. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
and Forests considered the Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Department of Biotechnology in its
meeting held on the 9th April, 2015.
4. FINANCIAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT
4.1 The proposed and approved outlay for the Twelfth Five Year Plan period, BE, RE allocations and
actual expenditure, year-wise, for the year 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2014-15 together with the allocation

3
made in 2015-16 of the Department of Biotechnology are as under:
(` in Crores)
Y ear Proposed B E RE Actual Exp. Percentage
Utilisation
2012-17 18000.00 1 1804.00 -- -- --
(12th Plan)
2012-13 2000.00 1485.00 1300.00 1271.00 97.76
2013-14 2045.00 1485.00 1300.00 1289.50 99.19
2014-15 2176.00 1500.00 1395.00 1 160.00 83.32
(As on 12.2.2015)
2015-2016 2200 00 1606 80 -- -- --
4.2 The Committee notes that Department of Biotechnology had proposed a budget outlay of ` 18000
crore for the 12th Plan period whereas the approved outlay was ` 11804 crore. Out of the above only
` 4470 crores has been allocated to the Department during the first three years of the plan period which
was reduced to ` 3995.00 crores at RE stage, which is only 33.83 percent of the allocation approved
for the 12th Five Year Plan. As such 66.17 percent of the XII Plan outlay i.e. ` 7809 crore remains to
be allocated to the Department during the last two years of the Plan period out of which ` 1606.80 crore
has been allocated to the Department for 2015-16. The Department was able to spend 97.76 % and 99.16
% of the allocated amount during 2012-13 and 2013-14 respectively and 83.32% of the allocation upto
12th January, 2015.
4.3 The Committee feels that although the Department of Biotechnology had been able to spend
97.76 percent and 99.19 percent of the allocations made during 2012-13 and 2013-14, the allocations
of the Department were not only allocated on pro-rata basis during first three years of the
Twelfth Plan period but it has been reduced at RE stage in each of the first three years of the
Plan period. The Committee is of the considered view that the Biotechnology will play a very
important role in the development of the nation in the years to come and reduction in the
allocations of the Department at the RE stage, when the Department has demonstrated capability
to utilise the allocated amounts, results in avoidable delay in the implementation of programmes
and achievement of the targets fixed, thereby adversely affecting the scientific and technical
advancement of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the budgetary allocation
of the Department should be increased at the RE stage during the current financial year and the
Department should be provided the full amount as it is capable of utilising the same during the
remaining period of the Twelfth Plan.
5. MONITORING MECHANISM OF THE DEPARTMENT
5.1 The Committee enquired about the mechanisms devised by the Department to monitor and review
the progress of its ongoing schemes and programmes. The Committee was informed that the Department
has put in place several mechanisms for monitoring the progress of implementation of its projects. The

4
Department implements various types of schemes broadly classified as (a) Scientific research and
infrastructure development through Competitive Research Grant system open to individual scientists/
Professors or network of scientists (b) Technology development through public private partnership
schemes (c) implementation of programmes in the autonomous R&D institutions; and (d) International
S&T cooperation. For all S&T schemes, there are about 20 subject specific task forces consisting of
about 250 experts engaged in monitoring of the progress of the project on 6 monthly or annual basis
including site visits etc. An elaborate monitoring mechanism has also been put in place for all public
private partnership schemes such as site visits by Project Monitoring Committee (PMC) comprising of
two area experts, one DBT officer and one financial person, every six months at the project implementation
site to review the progress of the project. The review of the project is also done by Technical Steering
Committee (TSC) every year and the annual financial releases are made based on the successful completion
of milestones/targets specified. To strengthen the system further, the Department is implementing online
project registration and monitoring system namely "e-promis" where all periodical progress reports are
available for scrutiny and review at all permitted levels.
5.2 The Committee is of the view that a strong and potent monitoring mechanism is extremely
important for achieving the set objectives and implementation of the schemes and, therefore,
recommends that the Department should continue with its monitoring mechanisms to ensure
that there are no time and cost overruns in respect of its schemes/programmes.
6. Research and Development
6.1 Research and Development is one of the thrust areas of the Department of Biotechnology during
the year 2015-16. The BE and RE allocation and actual expenditure incurred in respect of this programme
during 2013-14 and 2014-15 and budgetary allocation made during 2015-16 are as under:
(` in Crores)
Y ear B E RE Actual Expenditure
2013-14 420.50 444.65 436.27
2014-15 401.00 378.00 374.89
2015-16 470.00 – –
6.2 Regarding reasons for reduction of BE allocation of ` 401.00 crore to ` 378.00 in RE in 2014-15,
the Department informed that the reduction at RE stage was due to mandatory cut of ` 105.00 crores
from the overall budget by Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. It was pointed that the full
budget was approved in June, 2014 and permitted for use from July, 2014 and even though expenditure
as on September, 2014 was more than 50 percent as prescribed, the mandatory cut was imposed. The
Department also pointed out that unlike the past practice of indicating a lump sum amount of allocation
for each financial year and giving opportunity to the Department to provide a breakup based on demand
and commitments under each schemes during 2014-15, the Ministry of Finance had directly provided
breakup for all the major budget heads.
6.3 On being enquired as the how the Department proposed to utilise the increased allocation of
` 470 crores for R&D during 2015-16, the Committee was informed that the head of account "International
Collaboration" has been merged into R&D due to rationalisation of budget heads. Therefore, the Department

5
has merged the head "International Collaboration" with a provision of ` 70.00 crores for 2015-16, which
explains the additional amount of ` 70.00 crores in the proposed BE of 2015-16 over and above the RE
of ` 401.00 crores. In addition, new R&D programmes are also being initiated in the emerging areas of
genome editing, synthetic biology and chemical biology during 2015-16.
6.4 The Committee notes that inspite of making utilisation of its allocated funds in respect of
Research and Development scheme, the allocation under R&D had been considerably reduced
during the 2014-15. The apparent increase in allocation during 2015-16 is actually due to merger
of 'International Collaboration" under R&D scheme. The Committee is of the view that for
facilitating R&D and encouraging young scientists in the extremely important area of
biotechnology, increased allocations to this sector are in order. Genomics, synthetic biology and
chemical biology are frontier areas of big ticket science and for India to establish itself as a
global leader in these areas, funds should never be an issue. We need to invest in our future
now. Biotechnology holds the key to some of the critical challenges that we face.
7. PRIV ATE SECTOR INVESTMENT IN RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
7.1 The Committee desired to know the details of action initiated by the Department to augment private
sector investment in Research and Development and public private partnership schemes to promote
biotechnology ventures and whether any international collaborative ventures had been signed with major
non-governmental scientific and technology establishments. The Committee was informed that the
Department has set up the Biotechnology Industry Assistance Council (BIRAC) with the approval of the
Cabinet, as a public sector, 'Not-for-Profit' company on 20th March, 2012. BIRAC is an interface agency
of the Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science & Technology, and has the mandate of fostering
and nurturing the Biotech Enterprises specially start-ups and Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) for
enhancing their innovation research capacities and promoting affordable product development. BIRAC
provides funding support for the various components of Product Development Chain from Discovery,
Innovation, Early and Late Stage validation upto pre-commercialization. Various funding schemes are
being handled by BIRAC. So far nearly 250 start-ups and SMEs and over 100 young entrepreneurs have
been supported. 17 Products, 11 new technologies and 24 IP have been generated. Through this support,
there is a commitment of funds of ` 550 crores from Government and as a part of the company
contribution approximately ` 650 crores have been committed. Various Public Partnership schemes for
healthcare, agriculture and industrial biotechnology are operational as listed below:
Biotechnology Ignition Grant (BIG):  To support and nurture high risk and novel concepts for
potential entrepreneurs from Academia start up or an Incubatee who have an exciting idea.
Small Business Innovation Research Initiative (SBIRI): To strengthen those existing private industrial
units whose product development is based on in-house innovative R&D, encourage smaller businesses
to increase their R&D capabilities. Support is provided for Discovery to Proof of Concept and Early
Stage Validation.
Biotechnology Industry Partnership Programme (BIPP):  It is a partnership with Industrie(s) for
support on a cost sharing basis for path-breaking research in frontier futuristic technology areas
having major economic potential and making the Indian industry globally competitive.

6
Contract Research Scheme (CRS):  This scheme facilitates the academia-industry interaction to take
forward the research leads of Academic Universities and Research Institutes through validation and
translation by industry.
7.2 BIRAC has a major focus on International partnerships to leverage the strengths of the organization
and bring in best practices and also to encourage collaboration between Indian startups /SMEs with the
partners globally. Some important International collaborations are (i) an agreement with Bill and Melinda
Gates Foundation (BMGF) to collaborate on mission directed research and to build a 'Grand Challenges
India' to support health research and innovation; (ii) United States Agency for International Development
(USAID) has also joined hands with DBT-BMGF-BIRAC to collectively promote innovation for affordable
solutions under the Grand Challenges India programme for - "Achieving Healthy Growth through Agriculture
and Nutrition" and "All Children Thriving". BIRAC has signed an MoU with Wellcome Trust, UK to
support a joint call in Translation Medicine under the theme of "Diagnostics for Infectious Diseases".
Two projects have been supported. Other areas include partnering with Innovation Knowledge Progress-
Knowledge Park (IKP) and USAID to support "Innovations in tuberculosis (TB) control in India";
Partnership with the Indo-French Center (CEFIPRA) and French Embassy in India for funding support
up to pre-commercialization stage in the area of molecular diagnostics for prediction of cardiac diseases,
Alzheimer's disease and/or dementia, cerebral palsy and generation of new assistive technologies for
mobility of the physically challenged and partnership with the Center for Entrepreneurial Learning (CfEL),
University of Cambridge, UK for Start-up Mentorships through a Programme called "Ignite", which is
aimed at providing academics (PhDs, post-docs and scientists) entrepreneurial opportunities to explore
their innovative ideas and transform them into a business project.
7.3 The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by Biotechnology Industry Assistance
Council (BIRAC) to encourage and involve the private sector in the field of Biotechnology. The
Committee is of the view that involving/facilitating private sector is extremely important for
accelerating the growth of biotechnology in the country and recommends that BIRAC should
accelerate its efforts to attract/facilitate private sector participation and increase global
competitiveness of Indian biotech industry. International partnership should be entered in the
frontier area of biotechnology and the results thereof should be clearly verifiable.
8. PROGRAMME FOR PROMOTION OF EXCELLENCE AND INNOV ATION
8.1 Programme for Promotion of Excellence and Innovation is another thrust area of the
Department of Biotechnology during the year 2015-16. The details of BE and RE allocation made,
actual expenditure incurred in respect of this programme during 2013-14 and 2014-15 and budgetary
allocation made during 2015-16 are as under:
(
` in Crores)
Y ear B E RE Actual Expenditure
2013-14 65.00 60.00 59.21
2014-15 63.00 49.69 44.42
2015-16 63.00 – –
8.2 When enquired about the reasons for reduction in BE allocation in 2014-15 of ` 63 crores to ` 49.69
crores at RE stage, the Committee was informed by the Department that the 'Programme for Promotion

7
of Excellence and Innovation' includes two sub-schemes, namely (i) Centre of Excellence (CoE) and
(ii) Scheme for Inter-institutional and Partnership Centres with B.E. of ` 40.00 crores and ` 23.00 crores
respectively for the year 2014-15. While the expenditure in the Centre of Excellence scheme was upto
the mark, expenditure could not be made in the Inter-institutional scheme due to delay in preparation of
Standing Finance Committee (SFC) documents for new proposals.
8.3 The CoE scheme had 14 Centres of Excellence, 40 second tier Centres of Excellence and 10
projects around outstanding investigators with multi-institutional collaborations both in the public and
private sector. Research publications have been made in 'Nature', 'Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences (PNAS)' and other prestigious biology international journals. Technologies such as viral
disease resistant silkworm; new tuberculosis chemotherapy; software for whole genome analysis
methodology; genetic markers for level breeding genetic disorders; rice crop verities with higher adoptability
to aerobic conditions etc. Two inter-institutional/partnership centres have been established each on
metabolomics at THSTI, Faridabad and Advanced areas of biology and bioengineering at IISc., Bengaluru.
The IISc. partnership centre published 337 international publications of repute during 2014-15.
8.4 The Committee notes the reasons for underutilisation of allocated funds for 'Programme for
Promotion of Excellence and Innovation' during 2014-15 and feels that they are of administrative
nature and that underutilisation of funds was avoidable. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Department should strengthen its administrative and monitoring mechanisms to ensure
that funds allocated for important projects are not underutilised.
9. HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (HRD)
9.1 The BE and RE allocations made and actual expenditure incurred in respect of this programme
during 2013-14 and 2014-15 and budgetary allocation made during 2015-16 are as under:
(` in Crores)
Y ear B E RE Actual Expenditure
2012-13 81.94 77.00 75.06
2013-14 85.00 78.95 59.21
2014-15 68.00 78.81 74.39
2015-16 90.00 – –
9.2 The Committee was informed that the Department was implementing an Integrated Human Resource
Development Programme comprising of star college scheme, postgraduate teaching programme, doctoral
and post-doctoral fellowships as well as specialized training programmes for under Graduate and Post
Graduate (UG and PG) teachers and mid-career scientists. Teaching and training programmes aim to
support quality education to UG & PG students with emphasis on intensive hands on training in various
areas of biotechnology. The Department was also providing industrial training to biotechnology students
to fulfil the skill set requirement of biotech industries in country. Department also awarded fellowships
to 10+2 students, doctoral and post doctoral fellows, to strengthen research in universities/ research
institutions across the country. Fellowships and various awards are also available for scientists to build

8
excellence and promote innovation. To popularise Biotechnology activities in India, Department of
Biotechnology provides financial assistance towards organizing Conference/Seminar/Symposium Workshop
and Travel support to the researchers.
9.3 The Committee sought to know the details of the achievements of the Department in Human
Resource Development during 2013-14 and 2014-15. The Committee was informed that 20 courses had
been sanctioned during 2014-15, for short term training programmes for upgrading the skills of mid-
career scientists from R&D institutions and faculty involved in undergraduate and postgraduate teaching
and financial support. 701 candidates were selected for training for six month industrial training programme.
Biotechnology Finishing School (BTFS) programme initiated with KBITS (Karnataka Biotechnology and
Information Technology Services) and others with one year P.G. Diploma programme aimed at educating
and empowering human resource required for the Biotechnology industry.
9.4 Under DBT-JRF programme, 520 students registered for Ph.D in research institutions in all parts
of the country reflecting a true all India representation. Under DBT Research Associateship programme,
80 candidates were selected for fellowship during the year 2014-15. The Khorana Program is meant for
scholars/students in the field of biotechnology and biomedical sciences from India and the US. The
Department is providing opportunity for advanced training in best foreign laboratories. Through the DBT-
CREST (Cutting edge research enhancement and scientific training Awards) awards, continued Support
has been provided for 46 awardees selected from 16 disciplines in 2013-14 for training of 1-12 months.
9.5 Under Ramalingaswami Re-entry Fellowships, a total of 247 scientists have so far been selected in
7 batches including several such scientists who were working abroad but had returned back. 150 fellows
had already been relocated to various Indian host institutes and many of them have been able to seek
permanent faculty positions. The scientists selected had been able to publish their findings in peer
reviewed journals. Under Tata Innovation Fellowship reward, the scientists engaged in innovation and in
the pursuit of path breaking solutions to major challenges, altogether, 37 scientists have been awarded
the fellowship since its inception.
9.6 The Wellcome Trust/DBT India Alliance is an £80 million initiative funded equally by The Wellcome
Trust, UK and Department of Biotechnology, India. Under the alliance, fellowships are available across
the full spectrum of biomedical research from fundamental biology to clinical and public health research.
In the year 2014-15, 38 awards were recommended under different Fellowship schemes. India Alliance
has recommended 163 awards at 55 Host Institutions over a period of 5 years, i.e. 2009 - 2014. of these,
139 awards have been accepted/activated at 51 institutions. India Alliance Fellowships have been instrumental
in building excellence at newly established institutions. Under Innovative Young Biotechnologist Award
(IYBA), so far 93 young scientists were awarded through this programme. The regular and non-regular
scientists are eligible to compete for this award.
9.7 The Department has implemented "Biotechnology Career Advancement and Re-Orientation Program"
in 2010 & aims at providing support for project grants to women scientists (employed & unemployed)
for whom it is the first extramural research grant. During reporting period, 31 employed and 32
unemployed women scientists RGO, 14 employed and 19 unemployed women scientists under ECS
category have been supported during the year. Projects have been supported in the area of Healthcare,
Agriculture, Environment, Energy, Industrial and Basic Science and nearly 55 research publications
evolved out of the projects supported & 2 patents have been filed.

9
9.8 Department is supporting biotechnology students from NER region with domicile of NER or
education in past 3 years in university/institute in North Eastern States. There is provision for 100
trainees per year. During the year, total 92 applications were received, 61 candidates selected and 38
candidates joined the industrial training.
9.9 The Committee notes that the allocation for Human Resource Development at the RE stage
has remained almost the same during the last three years. Although the Department was not
able to fully utilise the allocation made to the programme during 2013-14, it could utilise most
of the outlays during 2012-13 and 2014-15. The Committee notes the schemes initiated by the
Department to attract and develop quality human resource as skilled and quality manpower is
an important and key component for scientific development in multidisciplinary areas of
biotechnology. The Committee, recommends that the Department should be allocated additional
funds for this sector to ensure completion of schemes initiated for scientific development in
multidisciplinary areas of biotechnology. The Committee also recommends that the Department
on its own part, should ensure that funds allocated for Human Resource Development are
utilised not only fully but optimally.
9.10 During the meeting of the Committee held on the 9th April, 2015, the issue of not-filling of
vacancies in top posts, caused inter alia due to the retirement in scientific organisations, non availability
of capable persons for appointments also came up. In response, the Secretary stated as under:
"In our National Laboratories the retirement age of our scientists is 60. So, young scientists who
come in, would like to go to the universities as faculty members wherein the retirement age is 65.
Over the last five years, what we have done is something that we have taken our Director level
positions and leadership positions and given them to the scientists who are close to 58, 59 and 60
and told them, "Okay, when you come to 60 you will routinely get an extension from 60 to 62 and
from 62 to 63." That has come to a halt now. That policy is being looked at. In that situation, it
is also becoming very difficult for us to get Directors coming in because now we have to go for
people who are typically in the core of their scientific programmes, in the mid fifties to leave and
become heads of institutions. Culturally, all over the world, leadership positions of this kind at 60
years of age today, is considered as young in the scientific field. This is a challenge which we must
grasp."
9.11 The Committee notes with concern the reasons outlined by the Secretary, Department of
Biotechnology for not-filling top posts in scientific institutions. The Committee is of the view that
the situation that has arisen due to retirement age of scientists in universities vis-a-vis the
Department's institutes needs to be rectified to create a good research base in the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should evolve a suitable mechanism to
contain this problem of brain drain from institutes to universities and adhocism. Considering the
actual role of experts in the field of biotechnological advance and also the need for the best
minds to provide a leadership role in the area, the challenges outlined above need to be proactively
and imaginatively dealt with. Hence retaining and engaging the best minds is of critical importance.
10. INDIA'S RANKING IN INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH PUBLICATIONS
10.1 The Committee enquired from the Department as to what was India's position/ranking in international
research publications on biotechnology and what efforts have been made by the Department to improve

10
the said position/ranking. Department informed the Committee that Biotechnology is a multidisciplinary
area involving foundational sciences such as biochemistry, genetics, microbiology, immunology and
molecular biology techniques for understanding basic biology in terms of structure and function so as
to develop biotechnological processes and products beneficial in agriculture, healthcare, industry and
environmental aspects. Therefore, performance in the foundation sciences, as measured by the number
of publications over a period of 5-10 years, citable documents, scientific citations, self citations, citations
per document and H index (total publications/citations), are important ranking parameters of scientific
performance across countries. Among several agencies, SCImago Journal & Country Rank portal, which
analyses information of a large database of publications namely 'Scopus' is one of the most referred
sources. 10.2 The Department provided the following comparative ranking in the above foundation
sciences for measuring citation index:-
Sl. No. Subject Area Global Ranking at around Countries with performance
5 years period above rank of India in
descending order
1996 2001 2007 2013
1. All Sciences 13 12 10 7 United States, China, United
Kingdom, Germany, Japan,
France
2. Biochemistry, Genetics and 14 13 10 7 United S tates, China, Germany,
Molecular Biology United Kingdom, Japan,
France
3. Immunology and Microbiology 15 15 14 8 United States, China, United
Kingdom, Germany, Japan,
France, Italy
10.3 Between 1996 and 2013, India improved its global ranking from 14/15 to 7/8 immediately after
advanced countries. Increased investments in science & technology in general and biological sciences
and biotechnology in particular have been the major contributing factors. Several initiatives by the
Department of Biotechnology with a primary mandate to promote basic and applied research in foundational
biological sciences such as integrated human resource development, establishment of research resources,
technology platforms, incubators, high-end equipment, large scale extramural competitive R&D grants in
universities and institutions, establishment of new institutions in cutting edge areas for global competence
have been largely responsible for the phenomenal performance. Several recent initiatives particularly
international collaborations, establishment of Centres of Excellence and human resource development
schemes from graduate colleges to young scientists in biological sciences is expected to further enhance
the international performance in future years.
10.4 The Committee notes the improvement in the global ranking of the country in various fields
of Biotechnology but expresses its concern over India lagging behind China in the field of
foundational sciences. The Committee also notes that the Department has not let the budgetary
constraints come into the way of its excelling in the field of biotechnology and earning India a
place in the top countries of the world. The Committee exhorts the Department to attain

11
excellence and improve India's global ranking in Biotechnology and must specifically endeavour
to be amongst the first five countries as per established parameters. A time frame for achieving
the milestone should be fixed and a purposive/concrete Action Plan be formulated to achieve this
ambitious national aspiration. The Committee feels that Department should adore the number
of patents granted to its scientists as one of the measures to judge the quality of research. This
area requires a special focus. Commercialisation of patents is a weak area. The reasons therefore
need to be identified and suitable correctives should be applied.
11. STEPS TO CONTAIN BRAIN DRAIN
11.1 Brain drain is a major concern for our country. A majority of the country's skilled workforce goes
abroad in search of greener pastures keeping this in view, the Committee sought to know from the
Department as to what steps have been taken by the Department to attract talented people into the field
of research/study of Biotechnology and the result achieved thereby. The Committee was informed that
the Department is implementing an integrated human resource development programme to create trained
manpower in the field of biotechnology by providing hands on experience to UG science students under
star college scheme, supporting M.Sc. /M.Tech. teaching programmes in 71 universities in the country,
industrial training for B.Tech./M.Sc./M.Tech. biotech students and finishing schools for bridging skill
gaps and enhancing employment prospects, re-training of existing faculty and scientists in advanced
areas for upgrading their skills by conducting short term training courses, providing fellowships for
doctoral and post-doctoral research. Emphasis is laid on selection of students on an All India entrance
test basis, framing of model course curriculum, provision for regular faculty positions in gap areas and
inviting guest faculty, scholarships for all selected students, liberal grants for laboratory equipment,
maintenance and recurring grants for consumables, thesis grants to provide quality all round training as
well as industrial training to ensure employability of students.
11.2 Further, the Department has instituted Ramalingaswami fellowships for encouraging Indian scientists
working in overseas laboratories to return to the country as well as DBT Wellcome Trust fellowships
for outstanding scientists to pursue research in Indian laboratories. Opportunity for conducting advanced
research or undergoing specialized training CREST (Cutting Edge Research Enhancement and Scientific
Training Awards) for Indian scientists in leading overseas laboratories is also provided. Department has
launched DBT-BUILDER (DBT-Boost to University Inter-disciplinary Departments of Life Sciences for
Education and Research) for advanced education and research by upgradation/re-engineering/remodelling/
creation of Life science departments in universities. These programmes have resulted in attracting,
retaining and training to meet the needs of quality trained manpower in the country.
11.3 The Department has also implemented biodesign programmes focused on innovation and
entrepreneurship in area of medical devices and implants and an indigenous international biodesign
fellowship i.e., i-Fellowship at AIIMS, New Delhi and IIT, Delhi in collaboration with Stanford University,
USA and Queensland University, Australia.
11.4 The Department further informed that Star College scheme has resulted in attracting young students
to take up undergraduate science courses, provide hands-on experience resulting in retaining students in
science which is evident from increase in cut off percentage for admission, number of applications

12
received with reference to number of seats, decline in drop out rates, better performance in UG results,
increase in PG admissions in science courses. Biotech Industry Training Programme provides opportunity
for skill development for industry needs; yearly about 600 students are placed in biotech industries.
11.5 The Committee notes the steps taken by the Department for attracting the required talent
available with the country in the field of Biotechnology through various fellowships/schemes,
both for students and scientists. The Committee feels that there is no dearth of talent in the
country. The need is to tap this talent and provide all necessary wherewithal for achieving
excellence in the field of Biotechnology. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there
should be no let up in the efforts of the Department to attract talented people in the field of
Biotechnology. The Department should spearhead an accelerated effort not only to woo the talent
available in the country but also attract top Indian talent in other countries to the field of
Biotechnology in India. Apart from initiatives already in place, the Department should explore
other meaningful initiatives to establish strong foundations for an onward and long journey to
achieve a leadership role in the various areas of biotechnology. The Committee feels that excellent
leadership has been provided in the past by the Department of Biotechnology but for the Department
to play its rightful role in meeting challenges of the future, it must inspire the best minds to
join the Department and continue with various schemes. Allocating fiscal and career progression
related incentives should be put in place for the purpose.
12. BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT
12.1 The mandate of the Societal Programme is to promote use of biotechnological processes and tools
for the benefit of the disadvantaged sections of society comprising women, rural population and SC/STs
in ecologically compatible manner. The programme aims to create a platform for self-employment
generation among the target population and diffusion of proven and field-tested technologies through
demonstration, training and extension activities. The focused areas are bio-fertilizer production,
vermicomposting, apiculture, poultry, fish production and rearing, artificial insemination, mushroom
cultivation, goat rearing, fruit plant nurseries, sericulture, post-harvest processing technologies, hybrid
seed production, use of quality planting materials and women and child health care.
12.2 The BE and RE allocation made and actual expenditure incurred in respect of this programme during
2013-14 and 2014-15 and budgetary allocation made during 2015-16 are as under:
(
` in Crores)
Y ear B E RE Actual Expenditure
2013-14 12.00 12.06 10.97
2014-15 12.00 12.00 10.59
2015-16 15.00  -- --
12.3 The Committee was informed that under this programme, the impact has been assessed in the
participating community with skill development activities by Training and Demonstrations conducted in
various parts of the country. The Committee sought to know the details of the activities undertaken and
the impact of the above programme and how it had actually benefitted the society in terms of employment

13
and entrepreneurship. The Committee was informed that the proposals supported during the year
2013-14 & 2014-15 were on various aspects such as promotion of quality planting material, mushroom
cultivation, sericulture, production and use of bio-agent/bio-fertilizers, floral craft technology for physically
& mentally challenged children, value-added product preparation, piggery, turkey and quail farming,
hygienic drying of fish through solar dryer, new born screening for genetic disorders, artificial insemination
for improving the animal breeds, introducing improved variety of crops etc.
12.4 As regards t he benefit to the society in terms of employment and entrepreneurship, the Committee
was informed that large number of women, both rural and urban, have benefitted directly through biotech
packages for floriculture, horticulture, cultivation of mushrooms, medicinal and aromatic plants,
biofertilisers, organic farming, vermicomposting, sericulture, aquaculture, animal husbandry, poultry
farming and making of bio-crafts. Several training modules have been prepared for creating awareness
on health, nutritional food preparations and agricultural practices. One of the example of innovative
scheme supported under Biotechnology based Programme for Women was "Network Project on Prasad
Kit" which has been successfully completed benefitting around 7000 women. Emphasis was on the
utilization of locally available and nutritionally rich raw material for preparation of edible items used as
Prasad in different religious shrines/temples. Some of the projects supported under the scheme resulted
into sustainable model of income generation in the region and are still continuing. Various projects have
also been supported under a new initiative to improve the health, hygiene and nutritional aspects with
respect to women community.
12.5 In the Rural Bio-resource complexes supported by the Department, the integration of 2-3 interventions
Agri/Horticulture/Animal Husbandry would fetch good income generation. Some of the interventions
adopted by entrepreneurial activities by the youths and Self Help Groups (SHG's) have resulted in good
earning and annual income of ` 30,000/- to ` 50,000 per acreage land area. This programme is addressed
to cover the grass root level community farmers, youths, villagers and SHG's to utilize local resources
for their sustainable livelihoods. Other activities like health intervention, environment and sanitation are
also addressed to provide good socio economic condition to the community for their holistic development.
12.6 The Committee had earlier been informed by the Department that a survey will be undertaken, based
on primary and secondary data collection, to assess the impact of the above programme. When enquired
about the details of the survey so conducted, the Department informed that although the survey could
not be undertaken, the special Task Force of multidisciplinary experts have been monitoring the progress
of the projects implemented under the scheme.
12.7 The Committee notes the contributions made by the Department in the field of bio-fertilizer
production, vermicomposting, apiculture, poultry, fish production and rearing, artificial
insemination, mushroom cultivation, goat rearing, fruit plant nurseries, sericulture, post-harvest
processing technologies, hybrid seed production, use of quality planting materials and women and
child health care for societal development through biotechnology. The Committee recommends
that the Department should ensure greater involvement of Civil Society organisations, NGOs,
local representatives at the Panchayat level in the implementation of its schemes/programmes
so that the benefits of the programme percolate to the rural areas and weaker and lower sections
of the society in real terms.

14
12.8 The Committee notes that although the Department has outlined the multifarious benefits
of the programme, the fact remains that, in spite of its earlier assurance to the Committee to
undertake the survey to assess its impact as to how it actually helped/benefitted society in terms
of employment and entrepreneurship, the survey has not been conducted so far. The Committee
recommends that the Department should institute a survey to assess the impact of its societal
benefit programmes/schemes in actual terms and report the results to the Committee.
12.9 The Committee also recommends that special efforts should be made to disseminate
information and knowledge of the schemes of the Department in for flying districts and particularly
in the states of North East.
12.10 Parliamentary oversight through the work of the Standing Committee would be meaningful
only if the recommendations of the Committee are implemented in their true spirit and not
ignored under the usual pretexts. The Committee hopes that the recommendations made are
implemented proactively and within a stipulated time frame.

15
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
FINANCIAL ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE DEPARTMENT
The Committee feels that although the Department of Biotechnology had been able to spend
97.76 percent and 99.19 percent of the allocations made during 2012-13 and 2013-14, the allocations
of the Department were not only allocated on pro-rata basis during first three years of the
Twelfth Plan period but it has been reduced at RE stage in each of the first three years of the
Plan period. The Committee is of the considered view that the Biotechnology will play a very
important role in the development of the nation in the years to come and reduction in the
allocations of the Department at the RE stage, when the Department has demonstrated capability
to utilise the allocated amounts, results in avoidable delay in the implementation of programmes
and achievement of the targets fixed, thereby adversely affecting the scientific and technical
advancement of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the budgetary allocation
of the Department should be increased at the RE stage during the current financial year and the
Department should be provided the full amount as it is capable of utilising the same during the
remaining period of the Twelfth Plan. (Para 4.3)
MONITORING MECHANISM OF THE DEPARTMENT
The Committee is of the view that a strong and potent monitoring mechanism is extremely
important for achieving the set objectives and implementation of the schemes and, therefore,
recommends that the Department should continue with its monitoring mechanisms to ensure
that there are no time and cost overruns in respect of its schemes/programmes. (Para 5.2)
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes that inspite of making utilisation of its allocated funds in respect of
Research and Development scheme, the allocation under R&D had been considerably reduced
during the 2014-15. The apparent increase in allocation during 2015-16 is actually due to merger
of 'International Collaboration" under R&D scheme. The Committee is of the view that for
facilitating R&D and encouraging young scientists in the extremely important area of
biotechnology, increased allocations to this sector are in order. Genomics, synthetic biology and
chemical biology are frontier areas of big ticket science and for India to establish itself as a
global leader in these areas, funds should never be an issue. We need to invest in our future
now. Biotechnology holds the key to some of the critical challenges that we face.
(Para 6.4)
PRIV ATE SECTOR INVESTMENT IN RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by Biotechnology Industry Assistance
Council (BIRAC) to encourage and involve the private sector in the field of Biotechnology. The
Committee is of the view that involving/facilitating private sector is extremely important for
accelerating the growth of biotechnology in the country and recommends that BIRAC should
accelerate its efforts to attract/facilitate private sector participation and increase global
competitiveness of Indian biotech industry. International partnership should be entered in the
frontier area of biotechnology and the results thereof should be clearly verifiable.
(Para 7.3)
15

16
PROGRAMME FOR PROMOTION OF EXCELLENCE AND INNOV ATION
The Committee notes the reasons for underutilisation of allocated funds for 'Programme for
Promotion of Excellence and Innovation' during 2014-15 and feels that they are of administrative
nature and that underutilisation of funds was avoidable. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Department should strengthen its administrative and monitoring mechanisms to ensure
that funds allocated for important projects are not underutilised. (Para 8.4)
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (HRD)
The Committee notes that the allocation for Human Resource Development at the RE stage
has remained almost the same during the last three years. Although the Department was not
able to fully utilise the allocation made to the programme during 2013-14, it could utilise most
of the outlays during 2012-13 and 2014-15. The Committee notes the schemes initiated by the
Department to attract and develop quality human resource as skilled and quality manpower is
an important and key component for scientific development in multidisciplinary areas of
biotechnology. The Committee, recommends that the Department should be allocated additional
funds for this sector to ensure completion of schemes initiated for scientific development in
multidisciplinary areas of biotechnology. The Committee also recommends that the Department
on its own part, should ensure that funds allocated for Human Resource Development are
utilised not only fully but optimally. (Para 9.9)
The Committee notes with concern the reasons outlined by the Secretary, Department of
Biotechnology for not-filling top posts in scientific institutions. The Committee is of the view that
the situation that has arisen due to retirement age of scientists in universities vis-a-vis the
Department's institutes needs to be rectified to create a good research base in the country. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should evolve a suitable mechanism to
contain this problem of brain drain from institutes to universities and adhocism. Considering the
actual role of experts in the field of biotechnological advance and also the need for the best
minds to provide a leadership role in the area, the challenges outlined above need to be proactively
and imaginatively dealt with. Hence retaining and engaging the best minds is of critical importance.
(Para 9.11)
INDIA'S RANKING IN INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH PUBLICATIONS
The Committee notes the improvement in the global ranking of the country in various fields
of Biotechnology but expresses its concern over India lagging behind China in the field of
foundational sciences. The Committee also notes that the Department has not let the budgetary
constraints come into the way of its excelling in the field of biotechnology and earning India a
place in the top countries of the world. The Committee exhorts the Department to attain
excellence and improve India's global ranking in Biotechnology and must specifically endeavour
to be amongst the first five countries as per established parameters. A time frame for achieving
the milestone should be fixed and a purposive/concrete Action Plan be formulated to achieve this
ambitious national aspiration. The Committee feels that Department should adore the number
of patents granted to its scientists as one of the measures to judge the quality of research. This
area requires a special focus. Commercialisation of patents is a weak area. The reasons therefore
need to be identified and suitable correctives should be applied. (Para 10.4)

17
STEPS TO CONTAIN BRAIN DRAIN
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Department for attracting the required talent
available with the country in the field of Biotechnology through various fellowships/schemes,
both for students and scientists. The Committee feels that there is no dearth of talent in the
country. The need is to tap this talent and provide all necessary wherewithal for achieving
excellence in the field of Biotechnology. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there
should be no let up in the efforts of the Department to attract talented people in the field of
Biotechnology. The Department should spearhead an accelerated effort not only to woo the talent
available in the country but also attract top Indian talent in other countries to the field of
Biotechnology in India. Apart from initiatives already in place, the Department should explore
other meaningful initiatives to establish strong foundations for an onward and long journey to
achieve a leadership role in the various areas of biotechnology. The Committee feels that excellent
leadership has been provided in the past by the Department of Biotechnology but for the Department
to play its rightful role in meeting challenges of the future, it must inspire the best minds to
join the Department and continue with various schemes. Allocating fiscal and career progression
related incentives should be put in place for the purpose. (Para 11.5)
BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT
The Committee notes the contributions made by the Department in the field of bio-fertilizer
production, vermicomposting, apiculture, poultry, fish production and rearing, artificial
insemination, mushroom cultivation, goat rearing, fruit plant nurseries, sericulture, post-harvest
processing technologies, hybrid seed production, use of quality planting materials and women and
child health care for societal development through biotechnology. The Committee recommends
that the Department should ensure greater involvement of Civil Society organisations, NGOs,
local representatives at the Panchayat level in the implementation of its schemes/programmes
so that the benefits of the programme percolate to the rural areas and weaker and lower sections
of the society in real terms. (Para 12.7)
The Committee notes that although the Department has outlined the multifarious benefits
of the programme, the fact remains that, in spite of its earlier assurance to the Committee to
undertake the survey to assess its impact as to how it actually helped/benefitted society in terms
of employment and entrepreneurship, the survey has not been conducted so far. The Committee
recommends that the Department should institute a survey to assess the impact of its societal
benefit programmes/schemes in actual terms and report the results to the Committee.
(Para 12.8)
The Committee also recommends that special efforts should be made to disseminate
information and knowledge of the schemes of the Department in far flung districts and particularly
in the states of North East. (Para 12.9)
Parliamentary oversight through the work of the Standing Committee would be meaningful
only if the recommendations of the Committee are implemented in their true spirit and not
ignored under the usual pretexts. The Committee hopes that the recommendations made are
implemented proactively and within a stipulated time frame. (Para 12.10)

MINUTES

X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 9th April, 2015 in Room No.139, First Floor,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
6. Shri Bhupinder Singh
7. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
8. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Dr. K. Gopal
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Nana Patole
14. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
15. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
16. Shri Vikram Usendi
17. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
21

22
*  * *
2. *   * *
3. *   * *
4. *   * *
5. *   * *
6. *   * *
7. *   * *
8. *   * *
9. *   * *
10. The following representatives of Department of Biotechnology then appeared before the Committee:-
1. Prof. K. Vijayraghavan, Secretary
2. Shri J.B. Mahapatra, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
3. Dr. T.S. Rao, Scientist 'H'
4. Dr. Ms. Renu Swarup, Scientist 'H'
5. Dr. S.R. Rao, Scientist 'G'
6. Dr. T. Madan Mohan, Scientist 'G'
7. Dr. Mohd. Aslam, Scientist 'G'
8. Dr. Mrs. Alka Sharma, Scientist 'F'
9. Mrs. Veena T. Bhatia, Director
11. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Department of Biotechnology and his team of officers to
the meeting and informed that the Committee was scheduled to discuss the Demands for Grants
2015-16 of the Department. He asked the Secretary to brief the Committee about the budgetary allocations
for different schemes during the year 2015-16 and whether the allocation was sufficient to implement
the programmes of the Department. He also asked the Secretary to outline the achievements made in the
year 2014-15 and key thrust areas of financial year 2015-16. He also desired to know about the
contribution made or proposed to be made in agricultural and medical biotechnology, societal development,
treatment of infectious diseases and cancer, and bio-resources and environmental biotechnology. He
further desired to know the steps taken to attract talented people in the field of biotechnology.
12. Thereafter, the Secretary made a power-point presentation on various aspects of the Demands for
Grants 2015-16, the achievements of the Department during 2014-15 and key thrust areas of the
Department during 2015-16. The Committee desired to know the allocation sought by the Department
and the allocation actually made to them during 2015-16. The Committee was informed that against the
proposed funds to the tune of `2200 crore, only `1600 crore had been allocated. The Secretary stated
***Relate to other Matters.

23
that during the last 30 years, the Department had transformed the life sciences sector in the country with
small allocations and if the Department could be provided some increased allocation, they could also
improve the human resources sector.
13. Thereafter, the Chairman raised the issue of non-filling of vacancies in top posts, caused inter alia
due to the retirement in scientific organizations, and non-availability of capable persons for appointments.
He stressed upon the need for a policy to ensure continuous refurbishment of human resource in
scientific establishments. The Secretary pointed out that the retirement age of University faculty members
was 65 years and in scientific establishments all over the world, it was above 60 years. He suggested
that the retirement age for scientists should be raised above 60 years.
14. The Chairman then desired to know about the DNA Profiling Bill and whether the issue of privacy
concerns raised by him had been addressed or not. It was informed that the Department had taken care
of the concerns raised by him and the matter had also been reviewed by the Ministry of Law. It was
also informed that in the absence of a Bill, whatever was being done could potentially violate privacy
and therefore, the need for a Bill which gives protection was being felt by everyone.
15. The Committee then raised various issues such as number of malnourished children in the country
and steps taken to address the challenge; how genomics enhances the agricultural productivity; international
collaborations of the Department; cost and benefits of e-toilets etc. The representatives of the Department
also replied to some of the queries raised by the Members.
16. The witnesses then withdrew and the Committee adjourned for lunch at 1.37 
P.M.
17. *   * *
18. *   * *
19. *   * *
20. *   * *
21. *   * *
22. *   * *
23. *   * *
24. *   * *
25. *   * *
26. *   * *
27. *   * *
28. *   * *
29. *   * *
30. *   * *
31. *   * *
32. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
33. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.
***Relate to other Matters.

24
XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 6th May, 2015 in Committee Room 'A',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Shri Bhupinder Singh
5. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapshinh Chauhan
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Dr. K. Gopal
9. Shri Daddan Mishra
10. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
11. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed that the
meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 258th, 259th and 260th reports on Demands
for Grants (2015-16) pertaining to the Departments of Science & Technology and Biotechnology and
Ministry of Earth Sciences respectively.
3. The Committee, thereafter considered the draft 258th, 259th and 260th Reports and adopted the
same with slight modifications.
4. The Committee also decided to present/lay the 258th, 259th and 260th Reports to both the Houses
of Parliament on the 7th May, 2015. The Committee authorised the Chairman and, in his absence,
Shri Bhupinder Singh and Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and Shri Daddan
Mishra and, in his absence, Shrimati Vasanthi M. to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
5. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 10.30 
A.M.
24