PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY EIGHTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the
Department of Biotechnology
(Demand No. 79 )
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th May, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th May, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2016/Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka)
278
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha. nic. in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic. in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SEVENTY EIGHTH REPORT
Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the
Department of Biotechnology
(Demand No. 79 )
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th May, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 9th May, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
May, 2016/Vaisakha, 1938 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(iv)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (vi)-(vii)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................. 1-17
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE.................................................... 18-21
6. M INUTES  ............................................................................................................. 23-29

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2015-16)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2015)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
9. Shri Bhupinder Singh
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakraborty
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nana Patole
(i)

(ii)
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
30. Shri Vikram Usendi
31. Shrimati M. Vasanthi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2015-16)
(Constituted on 1st September, 2015)
*1. Smt. Renuka Chowdhury — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Parimal Nathwani
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
8. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
9. Shri Bhupinder Singh
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakraborty
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nana Patole
*Nominated w.e.f. 21th April, 2016
(iii)

24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
30. Shri Vikram Usendi
31. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
(iv)

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
its behalf, present this Two Hundred Seventy-eighth Report of the Committee. This Report deals with the
detailed Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Department of Biotechnology (Demand No. 79).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on 30th March, 2016, the Secretary and other Officers of
the Department of Biotechnology gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the
Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to
scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications
sought by the Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise
the Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 4th May, 2016.
   N EW D ELHI; RENUKA CHOWDHURY
 4 May, 2016 Chairperson,
Vaisakha 14, 1938 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
B E : Budget Estimates
BIBCOL : Bharat Immunological and Biologicals Corporation Limited
BIRAC : Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council
BITP : Biotech Industrial Training Programme
CDFD : Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics
CoE : Centre of Excellence
DBT : Department of Biotechnology
DNA : Deoxyribonucleic Acid
HRD : Human Resources Development
I&M : Information and Management
IISc : Indian Institute of Science
JRF : Junior Research Fellowship
KPC : Knowledge Processing Centre
MP : Member of Parliament
NCAR : National Centre for Atmospheric Research
NCBS : National Centre for Biological Sciences
NER : North East Region
OPV : Oral Polio Vaccine
PDF : Post Doctoral Fellow
PG : Post Graduate
Ph.D : Doctor of Philosophy
R&D : Research and Development
RE : Revised Estimates
RNA : Ribonucleic Acid
RNAi : RNA Interference
SAU : State Agricultural University
SC/STs : Scheduled Caste/Scheduled Tribes
(vi)

(vii)
TW AS : The World Academy of Sciences
UAS : University of Agricultural Sciences
UG : Under Graduate
UNESCO : United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation

REPORT
INTRODUCTION
The Department of Biotechnology was initially set up as an Independent Board in 1982 and thereafter
became a full fledged Department under the Ministry of Science and Technology in 1986. The main
mandate of the Department is:
(i) To evolve policies and integrated programmes in biotechnology and ensure their implementation
and monitoring.
(ii) To identify specific programmes of Research and Development and manufacturing in biologicals
and biotechnology and oversee the initiation and pursuit of related research and manufacturing
activities.
(iii) To identify, set up and support Centres of Excellence for Research and Development in
biotechnology and ensure proper dovetailing of their activities as per national priorities and
objectives.
(iv) To act as a screening, advising and approving agent of the Government with regard to import
and transfer of new technologies for the manufacture of biologicals, biotechnological products
and their intermediates.
(v) To evolve safety guidelines for biotechnology Research and Development and manufacturing
in India.
(vi) To act as the central agency for the import of genetically manipulated materials, culture, cells,
specimens, tissues and biotech products including DNA and RNA of any type or size and for
promoting their production in the country.
(vii) To serve as the inter-ministerial and inter-agency nodal point for all specific international
bilateral and multilateral Research and Development collaborations and agreements in the area
of biotechnology; act as the nodal point for all technology transfers in the area of biotechnology.
(viii) To manufacture and ensure application of recombinant, cell-based and DNA vaccines, diagnostics
and other biotechnological products.
(ix) To evolve programmes for Human Resource Development in the area of biotechnology.
(x) To serve as an administrative and implementing Department of agencies, commissions, boards,
etc. specifically formed by the Government for fulfilling the national objectives in biotechnology
and also to serve as the nodal point for Bio-informatics including training and creation of
infrastructure, collection, dissemination and exchange of information relating to biotechnology.
(xi) Establishment of National Biotechnology Regulatory Authority
(xii) Matters relating to:
• International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB), New Delhi;

2
• National Institute of Immunology (NII), New Delhi;
• National Centre for Cell Sciences (NCCS), Pune;
• Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad;
• National Institute for Plant Genome Research (NIPGR), New Delhi;
• National Brain Research Centre (NBRC), Manesar, Gurgaon;
• Institute for Bioresource and Sustainable Development (IBSD), Imphal
• Institute of Life Sciences (ILS), Bhubaneswar
• Translational Research in Health Science and Technology Institute, Faridabad
• Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Trivananthpuram
• UNESCO Regional Centre for Education, Training and Innovation in Biotechnology,
Faridabad
• National Institute of Biomedical Genomics, Kolkata
• Institute for Stem Cell Science and Regenerative Medicine, Bangalore
• National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute Mohali, Punjab
• National Institute of Animal Biotechnology, Hyderabad
• Centre of Innovative and Applied Bioprocessing (CIAB), Mohali
(xiii) Matters relating to:
• Bharat Immunological and Biologicals Corporation Limited (BIBCOL), Bulandshahar, Uttar
Pradesh;
• Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC), New Delhi
1.1 The vision of the Department is to create biotechnology tools and technologies that address the
problems of agriculture productivity, food production, nutrition security, health care and environmental
sustainability by providing new and emerging products and services at affordable prices, generate
employment opportunities and make India globally competitive in the emerging bio-economy.
1.2 The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
and Forests considered the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Department of Biotechnology in its
meeting held on the 30th March, 2016, which inter-alia included the following aspects:.
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT
2. The proposed and approved plan outlay for the Twelfth Five Year Plan period, BE, RE allocations
and actual expenditure, year-wise, for the year 2012-13, 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16 together with

3
the allocation made in 2016-17 of the Department of Biotechnology are as under:
(` in Crores)
Y ear Proposed B E RE Actual Percentage
Expenditure Utilisation
2012-17 18000.00 1 1804.00 – – –
(12th Plan)
2012-13 2000.00 1485.00 1300.00 1271.00 97.76
2013-14 2045.00 1485.00 1300.00 1289.50 99.19
2014-15 2176.00 1500.00 1395.00 1344.35 96.36
2015-16 2200.00 1606.80 1606.80 1480.32 92.13%
(As on
28.3.2016)
2016-17 2500.00 1800.00 -- -- --
2.1 Against the proposed allocation of ` 18000 crore for the 12th Plan period, the approved outlay of
Department of Biotechnology was ` 11804 crore. Out of the above, only ` 6076.80 crore was allocated
to the Department during the first four years of the plan period which was reduced to ` 5601.80 crore
at RE stage. An allocation of ` 1800 crore has been made during 2016-17. As such, the total allocation
to the Department during the Twelfth Five Year Plan is ` 7401.80, which is only 62.70 percent of the
allocation approved for the Twelfth Five Year Plan. The Department was able to spend 97.76 %, 99.16
% and 96.36% of the allocated amount during 2012-13, 2013-14 and 2015-16 respectively and 92.13%
of the allocation upto 28th March, 2016 in 2016-17.
2.2 The Committee feels that the purpose of Five Year Plans is to formulate long gestation
projects and the inadequate allocation of funds during the plan period adversely affects the
execution of projects. The Committee is disappointed to note that instead of being provided the
approved allocation, the Department of Biotechnology has been allocated only 62.70 percent of
its approved outlay during the Twelfth Five Year Plan. This would certainly have an adverse
bearing on the schemes/programmes of the Department in the Twelfth Five Year Plan.
2.3 The Committee notes that the actual expenditure of the Department has gone down from
99.19 percent in 2013-14 to 96.36 percent and 92.13 percent in 2014-15 and 2015-16 respectively.
The Department's performance of utilising 99.19 percent of its allocation in 2013-14 indicates
that it has the capability of fully utilising the resources made available to it. However, the
Department failed to rise to its true potential and could expend only 92.13% of the allocated
resources till 28.3.2016. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department
should review its financial performance during 2015-16 and try to identify the bottlenecks
responsible for not optimally utilising the funds made available to it, so as to avoid its recurrence
in future.

4
BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE YEAR 2016-17
3. The Budget allocation for the year 2016-17 of the Department of Biotechnology is as under:-
(` in Crores)
Sl. No. Name of the Scheme Schemes of 2015-16 Total Plan Allocation
merged due to budget Allocations to North
head rationalization East Region
S&T SECTOR
1. Assistance to Autonomous Nil 620.00 40.00
Institutions
2. Biotechnology Research and (i) Human Resource Development 790.00 130.00
Development (ii) Programme for Promotion of
Excellence and Innovation
(iii) Biotech Facilities
(iv) Bioinformatics
(v) Research & Development
(vi) Grand Challenge Programme
(vii) Biotechnology for Societal
Development
(viii) International Collaboration
3. Industrial and (i) Bioclusters and Incubators 210.00 10.00
Entrepreneurship (ii) I&M Sector
Development (iii) Biotechnology Industry
Research Assistance Council
(BIRAC)
Sub-Total for Plan Scheme 1620.00 180.00
G
RAND T OTAL 1800.00
3.1 An allocation of ` 20 crore has also been made towards expenditure of the Secretariat of the
Department of Biotechnology.
3.2 During the meeting of the Committee held on the 30th March 2016, the Secretary of the Department
stated that the Department needed an additional amount of ` 200 crore to implement mission programmes
in live-stock and pulses and other inter-ministerial programmes. The Department of Biotechnology also
stated that additional budgetary allocation of ` 200.00 crore during 2016-17 was required for seed money
to launch the following programmes in line with the policy of the Government in science and technology

5
for agriculture, healthcare and animal husbandry through inter-ministerial participation and collaboration.
The major project initiatives include:
(i) Climate Change and its impact on agriculture and livestock needs urgent attention. A major
initiative on the genomics of livestock, vaccines for livestock and technologies for sperm
selection will be launched this year. New programmes in the genome sequencing of pulses will
also be launched this year.
(ii) Setting up of a new Marine Biology and Biotechnology Institute through international partnership
as an anchor in Goa with laboratories in the Andamans, Odisha, Nellore, Munnar, Cochin,
Kutch and the Lakshadweep. This initiative will explore the oceans for knowledge and the
development of the blue economy.
(iii) Launching a "Industry Academia Collaborative Mission for Accelerating Discovery Research
to Early Development for Biopharmaceuticals". This will help to develop indigenous quality
biopharma products and promote "Innovate in India" for "Make in India".
(iv) India aims to become a Knowledge Processing Centre (KPC) for India and the world, using
deep understanding of domains to analyse big-data in Cancer, Diabetes, Cardiovascular Disease,
marine biology etc. As a first step in this direction a hub of the highest quality genome
sequencing technologies will be established at the interface of Academia and Industry. The
spokes of KPCs will be distributed in entrepreneurship incubators all over the country.
3.3 The Committee notes that unlike previous years of the Twelfth Five Year Plan, the allocation
of the Department was not reduced at RE stage during 2015-16. The Department has indicated
the requirement of an additional amount of ````` 200 crore to implement mission programmes in
live-stock and pulses and other inter-ministerial programmes. Keeping in view the fact that a
large amount of its allocation promised for the Twelfth Five Year Plan is yet to be disbursed to
the Department, the Committee recommends that the plan allocation of the Department should
be suitably augmented at RE stage to enable the Department to achieve its desired objectives.
MONITORING MECHANISM OF THE DEPARTMENT
4. The Committee desired to know the mechanism devised by the Department to monitor and review
the ongoing schemes/Programmes and the details of monitoring/reviews undertaken by the Department
during the last three years. The Committee was informed that for all Science and Technology schemes,
there are about 20 subject specific task forces consisting of about 250 experts engaged in monitoring
of the progress of the project on half-yearly or annual basis including site visits etc. An elaborate
monitoring mechanisms has also been put in place for all public private partnerships schemes such as
site visits by Project Monitoring Committee (PMC) comprising of two area experts, one DBT officer and
financial person every six months at the project implementation site to review the progress of the
projects. Besides regular monitoring mechanism, an Independent External Committee has been constituted
by Department of Biotechnology for external evaluation of schemes and programmes of the department
for continuation from 11th Plan (2007-2012) to 12th Plan (2012-2017). The committee recognized that
the department has taken many positive steps for boosting the biotechnology in recent years. To face
the increasing social and scientific challenges, the Indian S&T landscape needs to undergo a paradigm

6
shift. Therefore, the committee recommended while reviewing ongoing projects for logical conclusions,
not to fund new projects from April 2014 in the following sub schemes: Post Graduate programmes in
Biotechnology; Technician Training Programme; Biotechnology Career Development awards; Annual
expansion/ setting up of new bioinformatics centers; RNAi technology; Plant Biotechnology; Plant
metabolomics and metabolic engineering; Biofertilizer technology, bio-pesticides and biocontrol agents in
crop management; Fast track programmes in crop biotechnology; Development of Biological Agents/
biofertilisers/biopesticides; Accelerated molecular breeding projects of crops; Medicinal and Aromatic
Plants; Seri Biotechnology; and Bioprocessing and Scale-up Biotechnology. Action has been taken on all
these schemes as suggested.
4.1 The existence of a strong and effective monitoring mechanism to monitor and review the
progress of ongoing schemes and programmes is extremely important. The Committee recommends
that the Department of Biotechnology should periodically monitor all its schemes and programmes
and take corrective measures, wherever required, so as to ensure that all its schemes/programmes
proceed as per the schedule.
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (HRD)
5. Human Resource Development is one of the thrust areas of the Department of Biotechnology during
the year 2016-17. The Committee desired to know as to what allocation has been made for Human
Resource Development in 2016-17? The Committee was informed by the Department that due to budget
rationalisation w.e.f. Financial Year 2016-17, there is no separate head of allocation for the "Human
Resource Development" as it is merged with a broader scheme entitled "Biotechnology Research and
Development" with a sub-head "Human Resource Development, Research Resources and Facilities".
Accordingly, a tentative internal allocation of ` 120.00 crores has been made for Human Resource
Development.
5.1 The allocation made under the head during the last three years and actual expenditure was as under:-
(` in crore)
Sl. No. Financial Year
2013-14 2014-15 2015-16
1. Budget Estimate (B.E.) 85.00 68.00 90.00
2. Revised Estimate (R.E.) 78.95 78.81 110.00
3. Actual Expenditure 78.9227 85.3656 97.6040
As on 02.03.2016
5.2 The Committee was informed that to cater to the needs of the R&D, manufacturing, quality control
sector in academic and industrial environment, the Department initiated several new schemes in 2014-
15 and 2015-16 viz. Postgraduate teaching programmes initiated in multidisciplinary areas of biotechnology
during 1985-86 were expanded to over 71 universities offering general biotechnology courses and
specialized courses. Department has published two books entitled (i) Biotech Career Ready Reckoner;
and (ii) Industrial Immersion to Bridge Skill Gap for benefit of students. The Department has initiated

7
'Star College Scheme' in to address several important dimensions of undergraduate education. The
scheme has PAN INDIA presence and is currently being implemented in 105 colleges and 16 of them
have started in different geographical locations in India. The Department is providing support for organization
of short term training programmes for upgrading the skills of mid-career scientists from R&D institutions
and faculty involved in undergraduate and postgraduate teaching and financial support. 50 training
courses for providing hands on training to mid career Scientist UG & PG teachers was conducted in
2014-15. Six months industrial training programme provided to 1253 students and 138 candidates from
North East Biotechnology in two years. Under DBT-JRF programme, at present, 410 students are
registered for Ph.D in research institutions in all parts of the country reflecting a true all India representation.
Post-Doctoral fellowships were awarded in frontier areas of research in life Sciences and biotechnology
at premier institutes in country to 170 Ph.D Scolars at national level and 37 from NE Region.
5.3 The Khorana Programme is meant for Scholars for students in the field of biotechnology and
biomedical sciences from India and the US. The Department provided opportunity to 85 candidates for
advanced training in best foreign laboratories. Through the DBT-CREST (Cutting Edge Research
Enhancement and Scientific Training Awards) awards, continued support was provided for 37 awardees
selected from 16 disciplines in 2014-16 for training 1-12 months. Under the Newton-Bhabha Ph.D
placement programme, 35 selected Indian Ph. D students will be given airfare and other travel cost to
conduct research in U.K labs for duration of 3-6 months and 10 U.K students will be given fellowship.
5.4 About 100 fellowships were given under Ramalingaswami Re-entry Fellowships. Out of total of 247
scientists working abroad selected earlier in 7 batches, 180 fellows have already been relocated to various
Indian host institutes and many of them have been able to seek permanent faculty positions. The
scientists selected have been able to publish their findings in peer reviewed journals. Under the Wellcome
Trust/DBT India Alliance (India Alliance), fellowships are available across the full spectrum of biomedical
research from fundamental biology to clinical and public health research. 60 awards were recommended
under different Fellowship schemes. India Alliance has recommended 163 awards at 55 Host Institutions
over a period of 5 years, i.e. 2009-2014. Out of these, 139 awards have been accepted/activated at 51
institutions. India Alliance Fellowships have been instrumental in building excellence at newly established
institutions.
5.5 Under Innovative Young Biotechnologist Award (IYBA), so far, 93 young scientists were awarded
through this programme. The regular and non-regular scientists are eligible to compete for this award.
The Department has implemented "Biotechnology Career Advancement and Re-Orientation Program" in
2010 and aims at providing support for project grants to women scientists (employed and unemployed)
for whom it is the first extramural research grant. 100 Fellows were selected under Ramalingaswamy
fellowships and, out of these, 20 were absorbed as permanent faculty. Further, a total of 150 fellowships
and awards were given under Wellcome Trust DBT fellowships.
5.6 The Committee desired to know as to how the budget allocation would be utilised for Human
Resource Development during 2016-17. The Committee was informed that the budget allocation will be
utilised for fellowships and programmes under Human Resource Development; Biotechnology Education
and Training; Biocare; DBT-TWAS Fellowship; Conferences and Seminars; Tata Innovation Fellowship;
Scholarship/Stipend; DBT-JRF; DBT-RA; Biotech Industrial Training Programme (BITP); Short Term

8
Training Programme (STTP); Star College Scheme; PG Teaching Programme. Some of the targets
during 2016-17 are as under:-
(i) 100 PDFs will be selected at national level and 25 PDFs from NE Region;
(ii) 275 students will be selected for award of DBT-JRF;
(iii) 71 PG teaching programmes will be continued;
(iv) Under BITP program, 700 students will be selected at national level and 100 from NE Region
for industrial training;
(v) 30 short term teachers training programmes will be conducted;
(vi) Support ongoing colleges under Star College scheme for strengthening of life science component;
and
(vii) Biotechnology Career Advancement and Re-orientation program for Women Scientists
(Bio-CARe)
5.7 The Committee has noted the performance of the Department on Human Resource
Development during the last three years. Since human resources form the backbone of research
activities, the Committee recommends that the Department should continue to optimally utilise
the allocation made for HRD internally by it. The Committee notes the schemes/programmes of
the Department to encourage, nurture and involve talented researches in scientific pursuits. The
effort being made by the Department in creating capable and skilled human resource in
biotechnology sector and extending support to students at different levels through short term
training courses, fellowships and awards providing industrial training to students etc. is
commendable. The Committee is of the view that biotechnology will play a major role in scientific
activities in the years to come and recommends that keeping in view the increased requirement
of human resources in the Biotechnology sector in the future, the Department should undertake
a review of its existing capacity to generate human resources and expand its extant infrastructure
to cater to the additional requirement of personnel and provide the requisite quality human
resource in biotechnology sector. The Committee also feels that more allocation is required for
the purpose.
BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT
6. The social agenda of the Department is to provide cost-effective/income generation solutions. The
approach, primarily, is to use softer biotechnologies and its demonstration for adoption by rural population,
women and tribals. The agenda is to take forward primarily in the form of demonstration of proven
technologies on food and nutrition, use of bio-control agents, bio-fertilizer, healthcare technologies, etc.
Urban and semi-urban beneficiaries are encouraged to set up their enterprises in sectors like flori-culture,
medicinal and aromatic plants, bee-keeping, bakery and value added products from seasonal horticultural
crops, sericulture, etc. The programme aims to create a platform for self-employment generation among
the target population and diffusion of proven and field tested technologies through demonstration, training
and extension activities.

9
6.1 The Committee was informed that the programme has been merged with the new scheme namely,
'Biotechnology Research & Development' in the year 2016-17 due to budget head rationalisation.
6.2 The B.E. and R.E. allocation made and actual expenditure for Biotechnology for Societal Development
during 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16 were as under:-
(` in Crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Actual Expenditure
2013-14 12.00 12.06 10.97
2014-15 12.00 12.00 10.59
2015-16 15.00 12.50 8.78
(As on 2.3.2016)
6.3 The Committee enquired about the activities undertaken under this programme during the last two
years and activities proposed to be undertaken during 2016-17. The Committee was informed that till
now, large number of rural, SC/ST and women population have benefited through implementation of
these programmes. Excellent examples of innovative societal programmes are: Network Project on
Prasad Kit, running of mobile ambulatory clinics for the farmers, low cost poly house construction for
raising nursery-planting material and establishment of rural bio-resource complexes at seven SAUs. A
programme for the rehabilitation of Tsunami and Flash Flood victims in Tamil Nadu and Uttarakhand
respectively were also undertaken where projects were supported to benefit large number of coastal
fisherman community and people residing in hilly areas of Uttarakhand.
6.4 As regards activities to be undertaken during 2016-17, the Committee was informed that it is
proposed to continue projects/programme mode support for women, rural areas and SC/ST population
with certain modification/revision of funding guidelines for the social sector. New and innovative
programmes are being identified and supported through the Task Force Mechanism which would sustain
the economy of the target community through entrepreneurship development. The interventions are likely
to supplement additional income by addressing activities of agri, horticulture and animal husbandry
practices through adoption of sustainable models.
6.5 The Committee drew attention of the Department that the allocation for the above programme was
decreased from ` 15.00 crore at B.E. to ` 12.50 crore at R.E. stage in 2015-16 and the actual
expenditure upto 2.3.2016 had been only ` 8.78 crore. The Committee sought to know the reasons for
under-utilisation of funds. The Committee was informed that the scheme is implemented for funding
projects related to technology transfer and demonstration for the benefit of SC/ST and rural areas. The
projects are awarded through competitive grant system based on merit of the proposal, biodata of the
project coordinator and the credentials of the Institute/ University/Non-profit Organization. The decrease
in allocation for this programme at R.E. stage is due to lack of adequate proposals to fund. During 2014-
15 out of 86 proposals received, 15 projects could be funded based on merit whereas in 2015-16, only
67 projects were received and 7 found suitable for funding, including the expenditure related to ongoing
projects and 2 new projects. Department of Biotechnology further stated that it is expected that the
balance available as on 02.03.2016 will be fully utilized.

10
6.6 The Committee feels that the reasons furnished by the Department for underutilisation of
funds under 'Biotechnology for Societal Development' are not convincing. Further, in view of the
underutilisation by the Department under this programme during 2013-14 and 2014-15, the
Committee is not inclined to accept the view expressed by the Department that balance amount
under the head will be fully utilised. The aim of the programme is to promote use of biotechnological
processes and tools for the benefit of the disadvantaged sections of the society comprising of
women, rural population and SCs/STs and any underutilisation of the funds allocated for the
programme directly affects these underprivileged sections of the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should undertake a periodic review of the progress of the
programmes under the head and ensure that there is no underutilisation of the funds allocated
for the benefit of the underprivileged sections of the society.
BIOTECHNOLOGY CLUSTERS
7. The details of BE and RE allocation made, actual expenditure incurred in respect of Biotechnology
Clusters during 2014-15 and 2015-16 are as under:-
(
` in Crore)
Year B.E. R.E. Actual Expenditure
2014-15 90.00 50.00 32.57
2015-16 90.00 10.00 12.49
7.1 The Committee noted that the B.E. Allocation of ` 90 crores for Biotechnology Clusters was
reduced to ` 10 crores at R.E. stage in 2015-16. The Committee sought to know the reasons therefor
and the adverse effect it had on the project. The Committee also desired to know the budgetary
provisions for 'Biotechnology Clusters' in 2016-17 and how the same was proposed to be utilised?
7.2 The Department informed the Committee the reduction at the R.E. stage in 2015-16 was due to the
fact that several proposals at Bioclusters planned at Kalyani, Kolkata, NCAR Faridabad and Bangalore
were delayed due to consultation with various stake holders and necessary clearances. However, the
ongoing activities which were sanctioned in 2014-15 were undertaken without adversely affecting the
overall goals and scope of the bio-clusters.
7.3 The Department further informed that due to budgetary head rationalisation by Ministry of Finance
from 2016-17, the scheme has been merged with a broader scheme entitled "Industrial and Entrepreneurship
Development" with a tentative internal allocation of ` 65.00 crores for meeting the ongoing expenditure
as well as the initiatives on pending proposals.
7.4 The Committee observes that the B.E. allocation of ````` 90 crore, both in 2014-15 and
2015-16, was reduced to ````` 50 crore and ````` 10 crores during the two financial years and the actual
expenditure was only ````` 32.57 crore and ````` 12.49 crores respectively. The Committee is of the view
that there has been gross underutilisation of funds in this programme and the contention of the
Department that there was no adverse effect on the overall goals and scope of bioclusters, is not
tenable. Further, the Committee feels that the reasons furnished by the Department for

11
underutilisation are administrative and were avoidable. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Department should strengthen its administrative and monitoring mechanism to ensure
that funds allocated are fully utilised.
BHARAT IMMUNOLOGICALS & BIOLOGICALS CORPORATION LIMITED (BIBCOL),
BULANDSHAHR, UTTAR PRADESH
8. Bharat Immunologicals & Biologicals Corporation Limited (BIBCOL), a Public Sector Undertaking,
was incorporated in March 1989 as a Public Sector company at Village Chola, Distt. Bulandshahar, UP,
to manufacture Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV) and other Immunologicals. BIBCOL started its journey with
single product (tOPV) but gradually added more products and now produces Diarrhoea Management Kit,
Oral Polio Vaccine (mOPV , bOPV and tOPV), and Zinc Dispersible Tablet.
8.1 The Committee desired to know the main activities and achievements of BIBCOL as well as its
financial performance during the last three years. The Committee was informed that the main activity
of BIBCOL is formulation of oral polio vaccine and supply to Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,
Government of India. During the last three years, BIBCOL has been able to secure major orders from
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, through competitive bidding in tender. There are five major polio
vaccine manufacturing units in India, mostly in private sector. Ministry purchases oral polio vaccine for
two programs, one for routine immunization program and second for pulse polio program. For last three
years, BIBCOL has been successful in securing 80% of order for routine immunization program and
about 26% of pulse polio requirement.
8.2 As regards its financial performance, the Department informed the Committee that for the last three
years, BIBCOL has been performing exceptionally well and from a sick company, the company has
become profit making company. Until 2010-11, the company was incurring losses and at the end of 31st
March 2011, it had accumulated losses of ` 27.23 cores, which have been reduced to ` 1.86 crore as
on 31st March 2015. The financial performance of BIBCOL during the last three years is as under:-
(
` in Crores)
Sl. No. Parameter Year 2012-13 Year 2013-14 Year 2014-15
1 Revenue from operation 172.92 202.96 146.24
2 Profit before tax (PBT) 6.87 1 1.01 2.09
3 Profit after tax (PAT ) 5.02 6.41 1.55
8.3 The Committee appreciates that BIBCOL has transformed from a sick company to a profit
making one. However, the Committee notes that the financial performance of the company
nosedived during 2014-15 in all parameters i.e. Revenue from operation, profit before Tax and
Profit after Tax, as compared to the previous two financial years. The Committee recommends
that the concerned authorities should take all necessary measures to ensure that the momentum
of the company to generate revenue is not destabilised and that the gains made by the company
in 2012-13 and 2013-14 are sustained and improved.

12
FILING AND GRANT OF PATENTS
9. The Committee desired to know the targets and achievements of the Department in terms of patents
filed and granted, both in India and abroad, during the last three years and how the Department judged
its performance in this field. In response, the Committee was informed that the Department supports
various projects on the basis of competitive granting system to various universities, institutions and non-
profit scientific organizations. Since it is not essential to patent innovations in these projects through
patents facilitation mechanisms of DBT or any other funding agency, it is difficult to obtain accurate data
on patents filed/granted. However, the available data is as under:
Y ear National Filed National Granted Foreign Filed Foreign Granted
2013-14 70 32 18 16
2014-15 62 23 6 41*
2015-16 33 24 10 6
* Includes previous years' filed patents
9.1 During the year 2013-2014, the Department of Biotechnology was on 4 position among the Scientific,
Research and Development Organizations in terms of application filed (Patent Office Annual Report
2013-2014). A noteworthy impact has been that based on DNA inventions developed and patented by the
CDFD, Hyderabad, the Agricultural Products Export Development Authority (APEDA) has entrusted to
the Centre the task of certifying the quality and authenticity of basmati rice. More than 200 basmati rice
samples have been examined for certification, a majority of which were forwarded to the Centre by
Export Inspection Council (EIC) of India during the year 2015.
9.2 The Committee is surprised to know that the Department of Biotechnology does not have
a mechanism to maintain data on patents filed/granted even though it supports various projects
of different universities, institutes and non-profit scientific organisations. The Committee is of
the view that patent filing is one of the major indicators of the scientific and technological
advancement of a country. In the absence of any reliable data, it is not possible to undertake
a conclusive analysis of the scientific achievements of the Department in this field. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department of Biotechnology should devise a mechanism to
keep a record of the patents filed and granted, both in India and abroad, by the institutions
supported by the Department.
9.3 The Committee observes that the number of patents filed (national) dropped from 70 in
2013-14 to 33 in 2015-16. Similarly, the number of patents filed (foreign) dipped from 18 in
2013-14 to 10 in 2015-16. The available data furnished by the Department for the last three
years, therefore, indicates that the performance of the Department has gone down considerably
during the last three years both in terms of patents filed and granted, both in India and abroad.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should intensify and galvanise its
efforts to improve upon its performance in terms of filing and grant of patents.
RANKING IN RESEARCH PUBLICATIONS
10. The Committee desired to know from the Department India's ranking in international research
publications on biotechnology during the last three years and what efforts were made by the Department

13
to improve the said ranking. The Committee was informed by the Department that Biotechnology is a
multidisciplinary area involving basic sciences such as understanding basic biology in terms of structure
and function for developing biotechnological processes and products beneficial in agriculture, healthcare,
industry and environmental aspects. Therefore, performance in the basic sciences as measured by
number of publications over a period of 5-10 years, citable documents, scientific citations, self citations,
citations per document and H index (total publications/citations) are important ranking parameters of
scientific performance across countries. Among several agencies SCImago Journal & Country Rank
portal (www.scimagojr.com) which analyses information of a large database of publications namely
SCOPUS is one of the most referred sources.
10.1 The following chart indicates the number of international publications in the ongoing projects
involving extramural plan grants in various areas with the following impact factors:
Subject Area Number of Publication Average Impact Highest Impact
Factor Factor
Basic Research 181 10.41 13.59
Agriculture Biotechnology 170 5.24 7.877
Medical Biotechnology 130 8.814 9.674
Bioresources/Bioenergy and 110 5.89 9.02
Environment Biotechnology
T
OTAL 591 7.589* 10.040*
* average
10.2 A comparative ranking for three years 2012, 2013 and 2014 (Ranking for 2015 will be available
from June, 2016), as provided by the Department is as under:-
Sl. No. Subject Area Global Ranking at Countries with performance above
around 5 years rank of India in descending
period order for 2014
2012 2013 2014
1. All Sciences 7 7 6 United States, China, United Kingdom,
Germany, Japan, India
2. Biochemistry, Genetics 7 7 6 United States, China, Germany,
and Molecular Biology United Kingdom, Japan, India
3. Immunology  and 8 8 8 United States, China, United Kingdom,
Microbiology Germany, France, Italy, Japan, India
10.3 The Department stated that India improved its global ranking in all sciences and in key basic
sciences - Biochemistry, genetics & molecular biology, from 7th position to 6th position, which was
occupied by France till 2012. The schemes which have contributed to this push in the rank are large

14
number of international collaborative projects, fellowships such as Khorana Fellowship, Wellcome Trust
U.K. - India International Fellowships and Ramalingaswami Fellowships, besides several R&D projects
promoted under basic research and establishment of world class or state of the art research resources
for genomics, proteomics and animal experimentation.
10.4 The Committee notes with satisfaction, the improvement in global ranking of India in all
sciences and key basic sciences during the year 2014 and her surging ahead of France in
international research publications on Biotechnology. The Committee hopes that the Department
would further improve its performance and move ahead of other countries in all the three subject
areas in the years to come. The Committee recommends that the Department should leave no
stone unturned to achieve excellence in international research publications and earn India a
name in the field of Biotechnology at the international platform and that the funds required for
the purpose be made available to the Department.
PROJECTS/SCHEMES FOR THE BENEFIT OF NORTH-EASTERN AREAS AND SIKKIM
11. The North East Region (NER) of India is a treasure house of exceptional natural beauty, floral and
faunal biodiversity and abundant mineral, water and forest resources. It has been identified as one of the
biodiversity hotspots of the world. Rich bioresources spread across NER's diverse ecosystems and
nurtured by indigenous communities, provide ample opportunities for furthering economic development
of the region. However, NER has remained arguably the most backward region of the country, prompting
the Government of India to make commitment to allocate 10% of its total budget for the development
of NER. Accordingly, out of the total plan allocation of ` 1800 crores for the year 2016-17, ` 180 crores
have been earmarked towards biotechnology backed development activities in the North East Region of
the country.
11.1 The Committee enquired about the programmes/schemes of the Department for the North-Eastern
states and Sikkim during 2015-16 and to what extent the Department has been able to achieve its goals
and objectives in North-Eastern states and Sikkim. The Committee was informed that the Department
has been successfully achieving its targeted goals and objectives for biotechnology based development
of NER including Sikkim. Some achievements are: more than 600 NER scientists/researchers/faculty,
creation of best of the R&D infrastructure at almost all R&D institutions and universities of NER through
equipment support, setting up of Centre of Excellence (CoEs) as well as setting up of Units of Excellence
(U-Excel) around meritorious scientists, training of NER scientists/faculty in reputed overseas institutions
and specialised training of scientists/ researchers/students under various schemes/programmes. 88 Senior
Secondary Schools from NER have been selected for setting up of Biotechnology Labs under
"Biotechnology Labs in Senior Secondary Schools (BLiSS)" Programme. During 2015-16, 15 Scientists/
Faculty have been selected for bringing advancement in the Biotechnology and Life Science related
activities in various institutions of research and higher learning in the NER under "DBT-NER Visiting
Research Professorship (VRP) Programme".
11.2 The major programmes implemented during 2015-16 are Flagship TWINNING R&D programme
to facilite collaborative studies between labs in NER and institutions from the rest of India with more
than 350 such network projects; a collaborative research programme on Chemical Ecology of North
Eastern Region has been initiated in collaboration with leading institutions (IISc, NCBS, UAS) and NER

15
institutions; 14 scientists/faculty have been selected for "Visiting Research Professorship (VRP)"; 41
Scientists of NER were awarded Overseas Associateship through a special programme of DBT's
Biotechnology Overseas Associateship; a DBT partnership Center of Excellence on Fisheries & Aquaculture
Biotechnology (COE-FAB) has been established at College of Fisheries, CAU, Lembucherra; a regional
level Animal House Facility is funded in Dibrugarh; a DBT-NER Centre for Advanced Animal Diagnostics
and Services on Animal Health and Diseases (ADSAHD) is being established in NER involving all eight
States and few specialised laboratories from other parts of the country; a modern Regional X-Ray
Crystallography Facility has been established at IIT Guwahati as a regional facility and being used by
the NER researchers; and over 150 training programmes have been conducted for NER scientists/
researchers/students by biotech hub network in NER. The Department of Biotechnology further stated
that during this short span of time, the NER researchers have been able to publish more than 400
research papers in the peer reviewed journals besides presentation of papers in the national as well as
international conferences.
11.3 The Committee feels that 10% allocation of the total budget towards biotechnology backed
development activities in the North Eastern region of the country is certainly a boon for the
development of scientific activities in the region. The Committee recommends that the Department
should intensify its efforts and ensure that the requisite 10% allocation of budget is fully utilised
towards the proposed activities. Further, the Department should in coordination with other
scientific Departments, make efforts for creation of skilled human resource and setting up of
institutional resources for much needed growth in this region.
PUBLICITY TO THE SCHEMES AND PUBLIC AWARENESS
12. During the meeting of the Committee held on the 30th March, 2016, the Committee expressed
concern that inspite of initiating a lot of schemes/programmes for the benefit of the underprivileged
people and the society, the Department was not able to effectively communicate its achievements and
schemes/programmes etc. to the people at large. Even the Members of the Standing Committee/other
MPs as well as State Government officials were ignorant and unaware of the schemes initiated by the
Union Department of Biotechnology. One of the Members of the Committee cited an incident wherein
during a district level meeting with various departments of State Government, he found that the District
Collector and other district level officers present in the meeting were unaware of the schemes of the
Central Government launched for the benefit of the society at large.
12.1 The Committee is aware that the Department undertakes many programmes which aim to
create a platform for self-employment generation among the target population and diffusion of
proven and field tested technologies through demonstration, training and extension activities.
The Committee is of the opinion that there is a need to give publicity to the research activities
undertaken by the Department and the schemes/programmes of the Department for the benefit
of the people. State Governments, especially North-Eastern States, should be informed of these
schemes so that the benefit of the schemes could reach those for whom these are intended. The
Committee is of the view that the information regarding the schemes/programmes of the
Department must reach down to the lowest level even if it is not beneficial straightaway. The
Committee recommends that there should be a specific provision for publicity to the schemes/

16
programmes of the Department in the budget allocation of every Ministry/Department so that
the activities of the Department could reach the common people and that the required funds for
the purpose should be made available to the Department. In order to filter down the information
to the grassroots level, the Department should also have regular meetings with the members of
the standing Committee and other MPs to brief them about these schemes so that they could
communicate the same to the people in their constituency for their effective utilisation.
NATIONAL BIOTECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2015-20
13. The Committee desired to know the aims and objectives of the National Biotechnology Development
Strategy 2015-20 and the long and short term plans envisaged by the Department to achieve the said
objectives. The Committee was informed that the envisaged mission of the National Biotechnology
Development Strategy (NBDS) 2015-20 are providing impetus to utilising the knowledge and tools to the
advantage of Humanity; Launch a major well directed mission backed with significant investment for
generation of new Biotech Products; Empower scientifically and technologically India's incomparable
Human Resource; Create a strong Infrastructure for R&D and Commercialisation; and establish India as
a world class Bio-manufacturing Hub.
13.1 The key elements of the Strategy are: Building a Skilled Workforce and Leadership; Revitalizing the
knowledge environment at par with the growing bio economy; Enhance Research opportunities in basic,
disciplinary and inter-disciplinary sciences; Encourage use-inspired discovery research; Focus on
biotechnology tools for inclusive development; Nurturing innovation, translational capacity and
entrepreneurship; Ensuring a transparent, efficient and Regulatory system of global standard and
communication strategy; Biotechnology cooperation - Fostering global and national alliances; Strengthen
Institutional Capacity with redesigned governance models; and Create a matrix of measurement of
processes as well as outcome.
13.2 The Committee desired to know the budgetary provisions made by the Department in 2016-17 to
pursue the objectives of the strategy. The Department informed that the new strategy will have financial
implications from the financial year 2016-17 which is also the last year of 12th Plan (2012-17). To initiate
the programmes of the strategy, initial seed money has been provided in relevant schemes particularly
Biotechnology Research and Development; and Biotech Industrial Development and Entrepreneurship. It
was also informed that the strategy would require major allocations for the period 2017-2020.
13.3 The Committee is of the view that biotechnology is the technology of the future and hopes
that National Biotechnology Development Strategy 2015-20 would play a key role in establishing
India as a world class Biotechnology hub. The Committee recommends that the Government
should provide adequate financial allocations for the implementation of the strategy in the years
to come.
GENERAL OBSERV ATION
14. The Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology plays a pivotal role
in the promotion of biotechnology in the country. New initiatives in the field of biotechnology

17
play a significant role in the development of a nation, be it in the field of agriculture, education,
medicine, economy, sports, games, jobs or tourism, etc. All the great scientific discoveries and
technological achievements in our country have improved the Indian economic status and have
created many new ways for the new generations to grow in the technologically advanced
environment. The Committee is of the view that although the Department has undertaken
accelerated efforts for achieving excellence in the field of biotechnology, a lot more needs to be
done and achieved in this sector. In order to successfully meet the challenges of the future, the
Committee recommends that the Department should undertake meaningful initiatives to establish
strong foundations for a leadership role in the world in various areas of biotechnology.

18
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT
The Committee feels that the purpose of Five Year Plans is to formulate long gestation
projects and the inadequate allocation of funds during the plan period adversely affects the
execution of projects. The Committee is disappointed to note that instead of being provided the
approved allocation, the Department of Biotechnology has been allocated only 62.70 percent of
its approved outlay during the 12th Five Year Plan. This would certainly have an adverse bearing
on the schemes/programmes of the Department in the 12th Five Year Plan. (Para 2.2)
The Committee notes that the actual expenditure of the Department has gone down from
99.19 percent in 2013-14 to 96.36 percent and 92.13 percent in 2014-15 and 2015-16 respectively.
The Department's performance of utilising 99.19 percent of its allocation in 2013-14 indicates
that it has the capability of fully utilising the resources made available to it. However, the
Department failed to rise to its true potential and could expend only 92.13% of the allocated
resources till 28.3.2016. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
review its financial performance during 2015-16 and try to identify the bottlenecks responsible
for not optimally utilising the funds made available to it, so as to avoid its recurrence in future.
(Para 2.3)
BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE YEAR 2016-17
The Committee notes that unlike previous years of the 12th Five Year Plan, the allocation
of the Department was not reduced at RE stage during 2015-16. The Department has indicated
the requirement of an additional amount of ````` 200 crore to implement mission programmes in
live-stock and pulses and other inter-ministerial programmes. Keeping in view the fact that a
large amount of its allocation promised for the 12th Five Year Plan is yet to be disbursed to the
Department, the Committee recommends that the plan allocation of the Department should be
suitably augmented at RE stage to enable the Department to achieve its desired objectives.
(Para 3.3)
MONITORING MECHANISM OF THE DEPARTMENT
The existence of a strong and effective monitoring mechanism to monitor and review the
progress of ongoing schemes and programmes is extremely important. The Committee recommends
that the Department of Biotechnology should periodically monitor all its schemes and programmes
and take corrective measures, wherever required, so as to ensure that all its schemes/programmes
proceed as per the schedule. (Para 4.1)
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (HRD)
The Committee has noted the performance of the Department on Human Resource
Development during the last three years. Since human resources form the backbone of research
activities, the Committee recommends that the Department should continue to optimally utilise
the allocation made for HRD internally by it. The Committee notes the schemes/programmes of
the Department to encourage, nurture and involve talented researches in scientific pursuits. The
18

19
effort being made by the Department in creating capable and skilled human resource in
biotechnology sector and extending support to students at different levels through short term
training courses, fellowships and awards providing industrial training to students etc. is
commendable. The Committee is of the view that biotechnology will play a major role in scientific
activities in the years to come and recommends that keeping in view the increased requirement
of human resources in the Biotechnology sector in the future, the Department should undertake
a review of its existing capacity to generate human resources and expand its extant infrastructure
to cater to the additional requirement of personnel and provide the requisite quality human
resource in biotechnology sector. The Committee also feels that more allocation is required for
the purpose. (Para 5.7)
BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT
The Committee feels that the reasons furnished by the Department for underutilisation of
funds under 'Biotechnology for Societal Development' are not convincing. Further, in view of the
underutilisation by the Department under this programme during 2013-14 and 2014-15, the
Committee is not inclined to accept the view expressed by the Department that balance amount
under the head will be fully utilised. The aim of the programme is to promote use of biotechnological
processes and tools for the benefit of the disadvantaged sections of the society comprising of
women, rural population and SCs/STs and any underutilisation of the funds allocated for the
programme directly affects these underprivileged sections of the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should undertake a periodic review of the progress of the
programmes under the head and ensure that there is no underutilisation of the funds allocated
for the benefit of the underprivileged sections of the society. (Para 6.6)
BIOTECHNOLOGY CLUSTERS
The Committee observes that the B.E. allocation of ````` 90 crore, both in 2014-15 and 2015-
16, was reduced to ````` 50 crore and ````` 10 crores during the two financial years and the actual
expenditure was only ````` 32.57 crore and ````` 12.49 crores respectively. The Committee is of the view
that there has been gross underutilisation of funds in this programme and the contention of the
Department that there was no adverse effect on the overall goals and scope of bioclusters, is not
tenable. Further, the Committee feels that the reasons furnished by the Department for
underutilisation are administrative and were avoidable. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the Department should strengthen its administrative and monitoring mechanism to ensure
that funds allocated are fully utilised. (Para 7.4)
BHARAT IMMUNOLOGICALS & BIOLOGICALS CORPORATION LIMITED (BIBCOL),
BULANDSHAHR, UTTAR PRADESH
The Committee appreciates that BIBCOL has transformed from a sick company to a profit
making one. However, the Committee notes that the financial performance of the company
nosedived during 2014-15 in all parameters i.e. Revenue from operation, profit before Tax and
Profit after Tax, as compared to the previous two financial years. The Committee recommends
that the concerned authorities should take all necessary measures to ensure that the momentum

20
of the company to generate revenue is not destabilised and that the gains made by the company
in 2012-13 and 2013-14 are sustained and improved. (Para 8.3)
FILING AND GRANT OF PATENTS
The Committee is surprised to know that the Department of Biotechnology does not have
a mechanism to maintain data on patents filed/granted even though it supports various projects
of different universities, institutes and non-profit scientific organisations. The Committee is of
the view that patent filing is one of the major indicators of the scientific and technological
advancement of a country. In the absence of any reliable data, it is not possible to undertake
a conclusive analysis of the scientific achievements of the Department in this field. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department of Biotechnology should devise a mechanism to
keep a record of the patents filed and granted, both in India and abroad, by the institutions
supported by the Department. (Para 9.2)
The Committee observes that the number of patents filed (national) dropped from 70 in
2013-14 to 33 in 2015-16. Similarly, the number of patents filed (foreign) dipped from 18 in
2013-14 to 10 in 2015-16. The available data furnished by the Department for the last three
years, therefore, indicates that the performance of the Department has gone down considerably
during the last three years both in terms of patents filed and granted, both in India and abroad.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should intensify and galvanise its
efforts to improve upon its performance in terms of filing and grant of patents. (Para 9.3)
RANKING IN RESEARCH PUBLICATIONS
The Committee notes with satisfaction, the improvement in global ranking of India in all
sciences and key basic sciences during the year 2014 and her surging ahead of France in
international research publications on Biotechnology. The Committee hopes that the Department
would further improve its performance and move ahead of other countries in all the three subject
areas in the years to come. The Committee recommends that the Department should leave no
stone unturned to achieve excellence in international research publications and earn India a
name in the field of Biotechnology at the international platform and that the funds required for
the purpose be made available to the Department. (Para 10.4)
PROJECTS/SCHEMES FOR THE BENEFIT OF NORTH-EASTERN AREAS AND SIKKIM
The Committee feels that 10% allocation of the total budget towards biotechnology backed
development activities in the North Eastern region of the country is certainly a boon for the
development of scientific activities in the region. The Committee recommends that the Department
should intensify its efforts and ensure that the requisite 10% allocation of budget is fully utilised
towards the proposed activities. Further, the Department should in coordination with other
scientific Departments, make efforts for creation of skilled human resource and setting up of
institutional resources for much needed growth in this region. (Para 11.3)

21
PUBLICITY TO THE SCHEMES AND PUBLIC AWARENESS
The Committee is aware that the Department undertakes many programmes which aim to
create a platform for self-employment generation among the target population and diffusion of
proven and field tested technologies through demonstration, training and extension activities.
The Committee is of the opinion that there is a need to give publicity to the research activities
undertaken by the Department and the schemes/programmes of the Department for the benefit
of the people. State Governments, especially North-Eastern States, should be informed of these
schemes so that the benefit of the schemes could reach those for whom these are intended. The
Committee is of the view that the information regarding the schemes/programmes of the
Department must reach down to the lowest level even if it is not beneficial straightaway. The
Committee recommends that there should be a specific provision for publicity to the schemes/
programmes of the Department in the budget allocation of every Ministry/Department so that
the activities of the Department could reach the common people and that the required funds for
the purpose should be made available to the Department. In order to filter down the information
to the grassroots level, the Department should also have regular meetings with the members of
the standing Committee and other MPs to brief them about these schemes so that they could
communicate the same to the people in their constituency for their effective utilisation.
(Para 12.1)
NATIONAL BIOTECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2015-20
The Committee is of the view that biotechnology is the technology of the future and hopes
that National Biotechnology Development Strategy 2015-20 would play a key role in establishing
India as a world class Biotechnology hub. The Committee recommends that the Government
should provide adequate financial allocations for the implementation of the strategy in the years
to come. (Para 13.3)
GENERAL OBSERV ATION
The Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science and Technology plays a pivotal role
in the promotion of biotechnology in the country. New initiatives in the field of biotechnology
play a significant role in the development of a nation, be it in the field of agriculture, education,
medicine, economy, sports, games, jobs or tourism, etc. All the great scientific discoveries and
technological achievements in our country have improved the Indian economic status and have
created many new ways for the new generations to grow in the technologically advanced
environment. The Committee is of the view that although the Department has undertaken
accelerated efforts for achieving excellence in the field of biotechnology, a lot more needs to be
done and achieved in this sector. In order to successfully meet the challenges of the future, the
Committee recommends that the Department should undertake meaningful initiatives to establish
strong foundations for a leadership role in the world in various areas of biotechnology.  (Para 14)

MINUTES

XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 30th March, 2016 in Committee Room 'A',
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Shri Bhupinder Singh
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
6. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
7. Shri Ninong Ering
8. Shri Laxman Giluwa
9. Shri Daddan Mishra
10. Shri Nana Patole
11. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
12. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
13. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
14. Shri Nagendra Singh
15. Shri Vikram Usendi
16. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
Representatives of Department of Biotechnology
1. Prof. K. Vijay Raghavan, Secretary
25

26
2. Shri B.B. Mahapatra, Joint Secretary and Financial Advisor
3. Dr. (Ms.) Renu Swarup, Scientist 'H'
4. Dr. S.R. Rao, Scientist 'G'
5. Mrs. Veena T. Bhatia, Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee; Secretary, Department of
Biotechnology and his team of officers and informed that the meeting has been convened to discuss the
Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Department. He asked the Secretary to apprise the Committee of
the budgetary allocations made and physical targets set for programmes and schemes proposed to be
taken up by the Department in the year 2016-17. He also asked the Secretary to apprise the Committee
of the developments in the fields of Basic research, Nanotechnology and Genome Engineering Technologies
and their applications and Medical Biotechnology; and the steps taken by the Department to attain
excellence and achieve global leadership in the field of biotechnology.
3. The Secretary stated that the Department had completed 30 years of its existence and, during this
period, the Department had made extraordinary impact on the life sciences and biotechnology in the
country. He then made a power point presentation on the achievements of the Department during 2015-
16, the various aspects of the Demands for Grants 2016-17 and the key thrust areas of the Department
during 2016-17.
4. The Committee then drew attention to the research work being done on similar subjects by different
Departments and enquired about the coordination among the Department of Biotechnology with other
scientific Departments. The Committee also desired to know about the work undertaken in the field of
organic farming and transitional loss in yield suffered by farmers in switching over to organic farming.
The Committee also enquired about anemia redressal through fortified foods, work undertaken in the
North-East region of the country and research work done on cancer, diabetes, Tuberculosis etc.
5. The Committee expressed concern on the lack of information among the district level officers of
the States about programmes/policies of the Central Government and stressed the need for the Department
to make specific budget provision for giving publicity to its schemes/achievements. The Committee also
suggested the use of information technology to create awareness of schemes/programmes of the
Department. The Secretary suggested that there should be regular briefings to the Committee by the
Department throughout the year and the work done by the Department can be communicated by the
Members at the ground level. He was also in agreement with the suggestion of the Committee on
establishing interaction with officials of the State Governments so that they were adequately informed
about details of the schemes/programmes of the Central Government.
6. The Committee also impressed upon the need to encourage young scientists in schools, colleges and
universities and coordinate with other concerned Departments about the research work done by them
in restoration of Mangrove forests, skill development, research in the field of cancer etc. The Secretary
informed that to encourage organic farming, Chemical Ecology Programme was being carried out by the
Department. Further, coordination was being done with state agencies and other concerned authorities
for fortification of foods.

27
7. The Secretary, while responding to the queries raised by the Members, apprised the Committee
about 'Shiksha Setu' programme of the Department whereby the scientists of the scientific institutions
would teach in schools and colleges. They would also meet the farmers and the farmers would also visit
their laboratories, so that their problems could be understood.
8. The witnesses then withdrew and the Committee adjourned for lunch at 12.50 P.M.
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. * * *
16. A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept.
17. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.21 
P.M.
***Relate to other Matters.

28
XIV
FOURTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 4th May, 2016 in Room No. '62', First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury — Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
3. Shri Bhupinder Singh
4. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
6. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
7. Kum. Sushmita Dev
8. Shri Ninong Ering
9. Shri Laxman Giluwa
10. Shri Daddan Mishra
11. Shri Chirag Paswan
12. Shri Nana Patole
13. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
14. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
15. Shri Nagendra Singh
16. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. * * *
3. * * *
28
***Relate to other Matters.

29
4. The Chairperson then informed the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and
adopt the draft 278th to 284th Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the
Ministries/Departments of Biotechnology, Space, Scientific and Industrial Research, Science & Technology,
Atomic Energy, Environment, Forest & Climate Change and Earth Sciences respectively.
5. The Committee, after considering the recommendations made in the draft reports, adopted the draft
278th, 279th and 280th reports relating to Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Departments of
Biotechnology, Space (with slight modifications) and Scientific and Industrial Research respectively. The
Committee also decided to meet next on 5th and 6th May 2016 to consider and adopt the remaining draft
reports.
6. The meeting of the Committee, then, adjourned at 3.55 P.M.