PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 198
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/KARTIKA, 1930 (SAKA)OCTOBER, 2008/KARTIKA, 1930 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY , 
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY-FIRST REPORT OF 
THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY
RD  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 23 OCTOBER, 2008)
RD  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 23 OCTOBER, 2008)
RD  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 23 OCTOBER, 2008)
RD  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 23 OCTOBER, 2008)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY-EIGHTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED
AND NINETY-FIRST REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS ON
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09) OF THE DEPARTMENT
OF ATOMIC ENERGY
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 23 RD OCTOBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 23 RD OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/KARTIKA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—13
4. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 15 —19
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETING .................................................................................................... 21—24

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2008-09)
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Dr. Ejaz Ali
7. Shri Jabir Husain
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Akbar Ahmad Dumpy
16. Shri Francis Fanthome
*17. V acant
18. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
19. Shri Brahmananda Panda
20. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
21. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
22. Shri Pratik P. Patil
23. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
24. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
25. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
26. Dr. Rampal Singh
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
29. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
30. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
31. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
* Shri Babubhai K. Katara ceased to be a member of the Committee Consequent upon his expulsion from the
membership of the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 21st October, 2008.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred and Ninety-eighth Report on the Action Taken by
the Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and
Ninety-first Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of
Atomic Energy.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Atomic
Energy on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Ninety-first Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Atomic Energy which was
presented to the Rajya Sabha on 29th April, 2008.
3. There were eighteen recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Ninety-first Report
of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received
from the Department on 22nd July, 2008.
4. In the meeting held on 13th October, 2008 the Committee considered the draft Action Taken
Report and adopted the same.
DR. V . MAITREYAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
October 13, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

1
REPORT
The report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Atomic
Energy (DAE) on the recommendations contained in the one hundred and Ninety-first Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Atomic Energy, which was
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 29th April, 2008. There were eighteen
recommendations in the One Hundred Ninety-first Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on
the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Department on 22nd July, 2008.
Recommendation (Para 4.3. and 4.4)
The Committee, however, notes with serious concern the curtailment of funds under the Plan
schemes in Research and Development Sector for premier institutions like Bhabha Atomic Research
Centre, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre, Raja Ramanna
Centre for Advanced Technology, Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research, Tata
Institute of Fundamental Research, Institute of Plasma Research, Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics,
Tata Memorial Centre, etc. The Power sector which is responsible for undertaking the ongoing
Nuclear Power Project under the Bharatiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Ltd. has also experienced a cut
in allocation. The Committee also notes the cuts in budgetary allocation under the non-plan schemes
which were intended for the operational budget in Industrial Sector in Heavy Water production,
Nuclear Fuel Complex, Board for Radiation and Isotope Technology, etc.
The Committee is of the opinion that curtailment of funds for premier Institutions engaged
in comprehensive research and development of frontline technologies, for harnessing nuclear energy
for the benefit of the society, would delay the endeavour of these institutions in achieving their
goals. The Committee fails to understand as to how the Department will manage to achieve its
targets, in the field of Atomic Energy, whi ch is highly capital intensive with such meager budgetary
allocations. The Committee hopes that in future the Planning Commission and the Ministry of
Finance would exercise utmost precaution before finalizing allocation for the Department.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendations of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology,- Environment & Forests has since been brought to the notice of Ministry
of Finance and to the Planning Commission for corrective steps so that utmost precaution is taken
by them before finalising the allocation for the Department in future.
Comments
The Committee hopes that the Department of Atomic Energy would henceforth put
forward its case for larger allocation of funds for its crucial programmes forcefully, so as
to ensure sufficient allocation of funds at the Budget Estimate stage itself.
Recommendation (Para No. 5.3)
The Committee desires that the existing monitoring mechanisms developed by the
Department to monitor and review the progress of the ongoing schemes/projects before
formulating/finalizing proposals for budgetary support should be effectively used to eliminate any
scope of shortage or surrender of funds at a later stage.

2
Action Taken by the Government
The existing monitoring mechanisms developed by the Department to monitor and review
the progress of the ongoing schemes/projects before formulating/finalising proposals for budgetary
support are being effectively used to eliminate the scope of shortage or surrenders of funds at a
later stage.
The recommendations of the Committee have been brought to the notice of all Heads of
Constituent Units/Autonomous Bodies and Public Sector Undertakings of the Department.
Comments
The Committee hopes that its recommendations will seriously be taken into account
in future also while formulating monitoring mechanisms.
Recommendation (Para 6.6)
The Committee feels that the reduction in the approved allocation vis-a-vis the proposed one
would somehow affect the programmes envisaged by the Department during the Eleventh Plan
some of which like upgradation and modernization are very crucial. The Committee is of the
opinion that the Department is in a better position to judge its requirements and hence surreptitious
or perfunctory reduction is untenable. Any compromise on major research programmes is not
acceptable to the Committee. This issue, therefore, needs to be seriously looked into by the
Government.
Action Taken by the Government
The concern expressed by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests has since been brought to the notice of Planning
Commission.
Comments
The Committee hopes that routine reduction in allocations would not be effected in
crucial programmes such as those conducted by the Department of Atomic Energy as it
affects the pace of the Research and Development.
Recommendation (Para 7.4)
The Committee is of the opinion that some precautionary measures should be taken by the
Department of Atomic Energy while irradiating food so that the possible health risks involved before
consumption of irradiated food could be effectively dealt with. In this connection a timebound
programme for evaluation of Radiological Safety, Microbiological Safety, Nutritional adequacy and
Toxicological Safety may be initiated since the irradiation of seed/food products is in a nascent
stage.
Action Taken by the Government
The concerns of possible health risks associated with the application of the technology have
already been addressed by several reputed institutions ar ound the world i ncluding Bhabha Atomic
Research Centre in studies devoted to testing wholesomeness and nutritional adequacy of irradiated
foods. These studies included testing of radiological, nutritional, chemical and microbiological safety
as well as feeding of animals and human volunteers. The results of these studies have been

3
thoroughly evaluated by Joint Expert Committees of the Food and Agricultural Organization, World
Health Organization and International Atomic Energy Agency, and no adverse effects have been
found. As a result, the Codex Alimentarius Commission and food and health authorities of several
nations including India have approved radiation processing of food.
At its own food irradiation facilities in V ashi and Lasalgaon, Department of Atomic Energy
is taking all the precautionary measures to ensure radiological safety, microbiological safety,
nutritional adequacy and toxicological safety of the irradiated food products. The dose employed
is specific for a technological purpose as approved by international regulatory agencies. It must
also be emphasized that irradiation is carried out on packaged food materials. Good laboratory
practices must be followed prior to and after packaging to ensure microbiological safety.
Department of Atomic Energy ensures these at its facilities and also carries out periodic testing of
samples for dose delivered as well as quality. The same requirements are insisted upon during and
after the transfer of knowhow to private sector irradiation facilities.
A detailed note providing therewith additional information regarding food irradiation is
annexed to this report (Annexure – A).
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply and appreciates the steps taken by the
Department to eliminate possible health risks and ensure safety during food irradiation and
hopes that this technology would be encouraged and popularised in the country.
Recommendation (Para 8.2)
The Committee feels that diagnostic radiopharmaceuticals are an important constituent of the
various diagnostic tools used for the detection of life threatening diseases like cancer, thaleseemia,
tumors etc. and therefore desires that efforts should be made by the Department to produce
sufficient radiopharmaceuticals in the country itself and provide it to the hospitals at cheaper rates
so that the poor patients can avail of the facility.
Action Taken by the Government
Radiation Medicine Centre (RMC), Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC) operates the
Medical Cyclotron and produces F-18 FDG (18-F-Fluro Deoxy Glucose) for supply to various
Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Centres, in Mumbai and Pune through Board of Radiation
and Isotopes Technology, for use in diagnosis and follow-up of cancer. It will be setting up a
Central Radiopharmacy for 
99mTc-radiopharmaceuticals, in collaboration with Board of Radiation and
Isotopes Technology, for regular availability of 99mTcO4- to users in Mumbai. These supplies are
expected to be cheaper since indigenous generators from Board of Radiation and Isotopes
Technology will be used in place of imported 
99mTc generators. Radiation Medicine Centre will
continue to work synergistically with Bhabha Atomic Research Centre and Board of Radiation and
Isotopes Technology to develop and evaluate newer radiopharmaceuticals with 188-Rhenium and
68-Gallium.
Radiation Medicine Centre offers very low-cost (free for poor patients) Nuclear Medicine
scans using 
99mTc and 18F-radiopharmaceuticals to patients referred by other hospitals. It is
proposed to procure a state-of-art PET-CT scanner, and SPECT gamma camera during Eleventh
plan to augment these facilities. Radiation Medicine Centre is also conducting post-graduate diploma
courses for clinicians (two-year DRM) and technologists (one-year DMRIT) who are the backbone
of the practice and propagation of Nuclear Medicine in India.

4
Comments
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Radiation Medicine Centre, Bhaba
Atomic Research Centre for production of low cost and cheaper varieties of diagnostic radio
pharmaceuticals and hopes that efforts would be made to make available these medicines
at various hospitals throughout the country.
Recommendation (Para 9.2)
The Committee is of the opinion that cancer is one of the most prevalent diseases in India
afflicting the population across the country and the treatment for the disease is very costly.
Telemedicine is one of the tools of reducing the treatment cost, as it can provide specialised
treatment even at the backward and remote regions of the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that efforts should be made to spread the telemedicine network by connecting more
hospitals across the country with the Tata Memorial Hospital.
Action Taken by the Government
The concept of networking all the Regional Cancer Centres (RCCs) through telemedicine
originated from the cancer desk of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The project
TELEMEDICINE - CANTELMED was assigned to Tata Memorial Centre. The important aims and
objectives of the project is (1) to standardise and ensure practice of Evidence Based Medicine
(2) to improve access to cancer care and cancer initiatives in underserved areas and finally provide
hub and spoke services in the peripheral areas. (3) to reduce costs of cancer care delivery (4) to
export clinical expertise, increasing the availability of cutting edge cancer protocols and procedures
to all affiliate facilities (5) to be used as a training tool to promote continuing education and
development (6) to coordinate and monitor research for the DAE funded research protocols in the
RCCs and (7) to provide links to other networks and organisations.
The implementation was envisaged in phases to ensure gradual acceptance and integration
of the telemedicine services with the cancer care delivery system at the participating Institutions
as stated below:—
PHASE 1 (September 2003 - April 2004)
Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai was connected with Dr B Borooah Cancer Institute,
Guwahati and Dr B K Walavalkar Hospital Dervan, (rural outreach programme of Tata Memorial
Centre (TMCROP)), near Chiplun, Maharashtra.
PHASE 2 A ( May 2004 – December 2004)
Tata Memorial Hospital (TMH) established linkages with 14 other Centres,
including six in North East India and two overseas.
PHASE 2 B (Jan 2005 – Dec 2005)
Nine Hospitals including six Regional Cancer Centres were included in the network.
Phase III (2006)
Six Regional Cancer Centres were added in this Phase.
Post Phase III 2007-2008
Five centres have been added to the network.
Usage till July 2008

5
No Telemedicine in TMH Sessions Patients
1 Teleconsultations 194 321
2 VC with MD Anderson Cancer Centre 09
3 Clinical Trial Meetings 06
4 Conference Broadcasts 27
(4 incoming 6 outgoing of which 2 were
multisite)
5 Clinical/joint clinic Meetings 07
6 Administrative Video Conferences
1. Technical Evaluation Committee 10
Meeting with Dr. B. Borooah Cancer
Insitute.
2. Planning Committee Meetings with Dr. 01
B. Borooah Cancer Insitute
3. Financial Negotiation Meetings with 03
Dr. B. Borooah Cancer Insitute.
4. Selection Committee Meeting with Dr. 01
B. Borooah Cancer Insitute
5. Dr B K Walavalkar Hospital Dervan 09
TMCROP Meeting
7  Work shop on ‘Latest Infection Prevention 01
and Sterlization Technology at BBCI
T
OTAL: 270 321
The network has 31 centres connected consisting of 15 RCCs and 16 other Hospitals as
well as 2 overseas centres. The network has been used by remote nodes 31 for over 900
telemedicine and telepathology consultations. 17 Conferences and Continuing Medical Education
(CMEs) have been beamed out as teleeducation sessions and 10 international conferences have been
received. Clinical trial meetings have been held for six sessions.
The telemedicine programme has been specially beneficial for the work up and treatment
planning for patients of BKW Hospital Dervan TMCROP for pre visit work up by the TMH
consultants. The patients taking advice at Hospitals in the North East have been spared a costly
and time consuming trip to Mumbai. Only 7 patients seen at remote sites were asked to come to
TMH for further or initial treatment. It is noticed that the patient satisfaction and comfort level is
very high. Satisfaction with consultation is very high and most would repeat a follow up
consultation. Physician satisfaction is also high overall. There was no limitation on their ability to
treat/diagnose. They rated most consults same as face-to-face.
Plans are in hand to expanding the reach of telemedicine through the Government of India
ONCONET Programme for Teleconsultations, medical education and also for connecting with
additional nodes on the ISRO network. It is also envisaged to increase patient education and

6
awareness for follow up from remote nodes. Further, it is indented to enhance the Value addition
through Regular CME by broadcasting weekly clinical meetings to the remote nodes and
Broadcasting lectures and demonstrations in Preventive Oncology and Early Detection, Nursing
Techniques, ICU care, Catheter Care, Infection Control etc.
All out effects are taken by the Department to spread the telemedicine network by
connecting more and more hospitals in the country.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply with satisfaction and urges that the work of
spreading the network is continued.
Recommendation (Para 10.4 and 10.5)
The Committee notes that, while allocations under some of the heads of the ‘Assistance to
Universities’ have been decreased, they have remained constant for most of the programmes like
public awareness and neighbourhood programme, exhibitions, symposia, etc. In some programmes
viz. fellowships, prospective research in funding, etc. insignificant increases have been effected.
The Committee is of the opinion that budgetary allocations under these heads are relatively meager,
keeping in view the fact that there is an urgent need to develop interest and awareness amongst
the masses and especially the younger generation towards the subject of Atomic Energy and to
dispel the negative impression of the public towards nuclear power. The Committee is of the
opinion that more funds should be allocated towards mass awareness programmes in the field of
nuclear science.
The Committee feels that the Department should concentrate on increasing its investments
significantly, in the field of research in nuclear science at University level, which would help in
inculcating interest towards nuclear science and attracting more students to this field. In this
direction the Committee recommends that a proactive system of funding should be initiated by the
department, which would focus towards bringing more and more universities across the country
under its coverage of grants.
Action Taken by the Government
The budget allocation towards Public Awareness and Neighbourhood Development
programmes referred to are pertaining to the allocation of expenditure towards this head only from
the DAE Secretariat (through its Public Awareness Division). In addition to this, its Public Sector
Undertakings (like Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited, Uranium Corporation of India
Limited etc.), Industrial Organisations (like Board of Radiation and Isotopes Technology, Heavy
Water Board, Nuclear Fuel Complex etc.) and R&D organizations (like Atomic Minerals Directorate
for Exploration and Research, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic
Research, Raja Ramanna Centre for Advanced Technology, Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre etc.)
are also carrying out such programmes in their respective neighbourhood. Both Nuclear Power
Corporation of India Limited and Uranium Corporation of India Limited conduct their own Public
Awareness and Neighbourhood development programmes in the villages surroundings their operating
facilities and also in the areas where they intend to set up new facilities. Thus, the overall
expenditure on Public Awareness and Neighbourhood Development is to the extent of requirement.
The Department of Atomic Energy (DAE) recognizes the need for funding the Indian
Universities and programmes are already in place to provide funding for carrying out R&D projects
on topics of interest to the mandate of the Department to leading universities, academic institutions
and recognized R&D labs in the country through the Board of Research in Nuclear Sciences

7
(BRNS). A typical distribution of BRNS funding for the past 10 years is shown in (Annexure-B).
The BRNS has not only helped several universities to establish excellent state-of-the-art labs/
facilities/centres enabling them to carry out high end research in the areas of nuclear science and
technology, but has also played a significant role in training human resources (both faculty and
students) in these areas.
In the past 2-3 years, there has been substantial increase in the efforts to enhance these
links further by proactive measures under BRNS by inviting senior faculty from local university /
colleges and NITs in the regional Theme Meetings for their larger participation in the DAE
programmes. A series of such meetings have already been conducted in the southern, Central and
northern region of the country which have yielded good return in terms of R&D projects,
registration of students for carrying out project work leading to post-graduate/doctoral degrees and
signing of several MoUs for tie-up with the DAE activities. Similar meetings are scheduled in other
parts of the country.
The DAE has also signed a MoU with Mumbai university for establishing a DAE-Mumbai
University-Centre of Excellence in Basic Sciences (CBS) in 2007 with a provision of total funding,
from BRNS, of Rs.52.00 crore during a period of five years. The Centre aims to offer integrated
MSc courses in physics, chemistry, life science, mathematics and computer sciences with major
emphasis on experimental science to the bright students in the country after (10+2) stage. While
the first batch in the Physics was started in 2007, batches in Chemistry and life sciences will be
commencing from Aug., 2008.
Department of Atomic Energy and University Institute of Chemical Technology, Mumbai
have entered into MoU for setting up the DAE-UICT Centre for Chemical Engineering Education
and Research in 2008 with an outlay of Rs.75.00 crore with the objectives such as: (1) to provide
Doctoral degrees to promising candidates with talent and aptitude for carrying out advanced
research and development activities in science and technology (2) to furnish a multidisciplinary,
flexible and innovative Ph.D research programme in Chemical Engineering with special emphasis
on, (a) Acquisition of proficiency in research, knowledge, data generation and analysis,
mathematical modeling, and management with sharpening skills in innovative experimental methods
and problem solving capabilities; (b) Creation of pool of young talented, dedicated and committed
individuals with passion and involvement in pursuing research and development as a career;
(c) inculcation of attitude, temper and outlook for developing social commitment as well as high
level of scientific ethics and integrity.
R&D units of Department of Atomic Energy such as Bhabha Atomic Research Centre,
Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Raja Ramanna Centre for Advanced Technology, Atomic
Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research etc. actively collaborate with local Universities
to motivate them to carry out research on topics of relevance to the Department of Atomic Energy.
Comments
The Committee appreciates the steps taken by the Department towards funding of
scientific institutions and various universities in carrying out research and development in
the field of Atomic Energy. The Committee also feels that the Department should initiate
such programmes at under graduate level to inculcate interest among the young science
students.
Recommendation (Para 11.5)
The Committee is of the opinion that the contribution to this sector is quite significant for
a developing economy like ours. There is a need to augment the existing programmes as it has a

8
direct bearing on the societal needs. Activities related to fuel fabrication, spent fuel recycling,
recovery of fissile and fertile materials, recovery of Uranium from secondary sources, etc. would
help the country to be less dependant on the external sources for pursuing our nuclear programme.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the allocation of funds to this sector be augmented
adequately to meet the needs of activities being pursued by the Department.
Action Taken by the Government
The activities related to fuel fabrication, spent fuel recycling, recovery of fissile and fertile
materials, recovery of Uranium from secondary sources etc., have been augmented in Eleventh Plan
period. Towards this end Bhabha Atomic Research Centre has envisaged three major projects which
would help the country to be less dependant on the external sources for pursuing nuclear
programmes. (1) “Spent Fuel Recycle Project” with an outlay of Rs.970.00 crore; (2) “PUSHP AK”,
Tarapur, with an outlay of Rs.990.00 crore; (3) “Integrated Reprocessing and Waste Immobilisation
Plant”, Vizag, with an outlay of Rs.900.00 crore.
The main objective is to set up facilities to reprocess spent fuel discharged trom Pressurized
Heavy water Reactors (PHWR) and manage radioactive waste arising from the reprocessing
operations. As per the Indian nuclear power programme based on a closed fuel cycle, spent fuel
received from PHWRs is to be reprocessed to recover fissile and fertile materials and recycle the
same in the nuclear power plants.
Plutonium and Uranium will be separated from spent-fuel and purified to the specifications
for further handling and reuse. Plutonium is required as a fuel for the Fast Breeder Reactors
(FBRs) for producing power as well as for converting Thorium into fissile Uranium. The Plants
will reprocess spent fuels from PHWRs at the rated capacity of 300 tons/year and the separated
Plutonium will be made available for reuse in FBRs.
The PUSHPAK, at Tarapur will reprocess spent fuel from PHWRs of 220/500 MWe to
generate the input material for the second (Fast Breeder Reactors) of three stage power programme.
The liquid and waste generated during reprocessing operations will be treated and conditioned in WIP-
3B project to ensure safety to environment and general public on a long term basis.
The Integrated plant for fuel reprocessing and waste management with a capacity of 300
Te/yr of HM and a reprocessing plant with a capacity of 400 tonnes/year of heavy metals will be
set up for achieving recovery of fissile material, which in turn helps to meet the part demand of
fresh fuel for the nuclear reactors. It also includes treatment and conditioning of liquid, solid and
gaseous waste generated during the process operations. The interim storage of Vitrified Waste
Product canisters and solid alpha waste packages before disposal to underground geological
repository.
Similarly, Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research is currently involved with technology
development of fuel fabrication and spent fuel reprocessing of Fast Reactors Fuels, besides
development of metanic fuels for future FBRs.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and reiterates that all such indigenous activities
which result in reducing dependence on external sources must be accorded top priority.
Recommendation (Para 12.2 and 12.3)
The Committee feels that both these technologies can prove to be boon for conservation
of nature and environment and for the society at large which is grappling with the problem of

9
disposal of sewage as well as solid waste generated in metropolitan cities and small towns. What
is required is the propagation and popularization of these technologies because their efficacy lies
in their use on a large scale. In view of the fact that environment protection is the need of the
hour as hazards of global warming and climate change are looming large, the urgency of such a
step becomes more prominent.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take effective steps for
marketing these technologies, if possible by creating a special cell for the purpose, within Radiation
Technology Development Section of Bhabha Atomic Research Centre. The cell should interact with
the municipalities/corporations/State Governments/Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of
Environment and Forests, etc. to demonstrate the merits of the technology.
Action Taken by the Government
Sludge Hygienization Research Irradiator (SHRI), in V adodara has provided valuable
experience regarding the design, operational parameters and irradiated sludge has been shown to be
useful as a fertilizer in agricultural practice. Efforts are on to popularize this technology by
constant interactions with large municipal bodies and Ministry of Urban Development.
The NISARGRUNA technology developed by Bhabha Atomic Research Centre offers a
comprehensive decentralized solution for handling the biodegradable waste materials. The process
combines aerobic and anaerobic degradation of the biodegradable waste materials and converts the
waste into biogas and organic manure. Department of Atomic Energy is interacting with the
Municipalities/State Governments, Ministry of Urban Development, Ministry of Non-conventional
Energy Sources and various other end-users in the public and private sectors. About 50
entrepreneurs have bought the technology document.
It is expected that units of 1,2, 5 and 10 ton per day capacities would be ideal for rural
areas and urban local bodies in the country. Thirty such NISARGRUNA plants are already operating
in various States and many more are in the process of being installed.
The Technology Transfer and Coordination Division of BARC is strongly promoting these
two technologies in rural as well as urban areas as applicable. For this purpose continuous
interactions are on with municipal bodies, industries, private entrepreneurs, local self Government
departments of State Governments, and NGOs active in rural areas. This activity is a part of
specially conceptualized initiatives such as AKRUTI (Advance Knowledge and Rural Technology
Implementation), KRUTIK (Knowledge and Rural Technology Implementation Kendra) and FORCE
(Farmers Organization for Rural Creative Entrepreneurship). Radiation Technology Development
Section and Nuclear Agriculture and Biotechnology Division of BARC shall be providing the
scientific and technological inputs for this propagation of these technologies.
Comments
The Committee commends the efforts of the Department in developing technologies
for societal benefit besides its main activities in the field of atomic energy research and hopes
that such urban waste disposal technologies would be popularized throughout the country.
Recommendation (Para 13.4)
The Committee is of the view that the need for exploring and extracting uranium from
reserves available in the country assumes utmost importance in the context of attaining greater self-
reliance for the country’s nuclear programme. The Committee, therefore, recommends that priority
be given towards this.

10
Action Taken by the Government
During the Tenth plan period, Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research
(AMD) had implemented seven plan projects with the approved Tenth plan outlay of Rs.107.00 crore.
The project “Augmentation of Uranium Resources” has successfully been implemented and
2433 tonnes (te) of additional uranium resources in Wahkyn (1681 te) and Lostoin (752 te),
Meghalaya was established. Heliborne Frequency Domain surveys were carried out over parts of
Gwalior basin, Madhya Pradesh and North Delhi Fold belt, Rajasthan and Haryana. Many potential
areas were identified in parts of Bhima, Gwalior, Vindhyan, Chhattisgarh and other Proterozoic and
Phanerrozoic basins of India for further investigations. The procurement of the heliborne Time
Domain Electromagnetic (TDEM) Geophysical survey system and exploratory mining at Gogi,
Karnataka are in progress. Technology Demonstration Pilot Plant (TDPP) has been commissioned
at Uranium Corporation of India Limited, Jaduguda and flow sheet for processing of Tummallapalle
ore using industrial oxygen as an oxidant has been developed under the project “Technology
Demonstration and Infrastructure Development”.
The projects (i) Evaluation and Augmentation of Rare Metal and Rare Earth and Beach Sand
Heavy Mineral Resources with the identification of many potential rare metal bearing pegmatities
and recovery of 19.185 te of columbite-tantalite concentrate and establishment of India’s biggest
beach sand heavy mineral deposit containing 120 million te of heavy mineral resources out of
which 60 million te is that of ilmenite at Brahmagiri, Puri district, Orissa. The envisaged target of
another project “Contract drilling for Uranium Exploration” has also been successfully achieved
with the establishment of 13,811 te of additional uranium resources at Rohil, Rajasthan: 2953 te;
Gogi, Karnataka: 3818 te; Koppunuru: 1240 te and Chitrial, Andhra Pradesh: 5800 te against the
target of 10,000 te. A total of 68,241 m of drilling was completed against a target of 1,36,000 m.
The target of contract drilling could not be achieved due to socio-economic/naxalite problem in
Andhra Pradesh, poor infrastructure facilities and logistics problem in Meghalaya and technical
problem (borehole deviation and drift) in Rajasthan. The project is being continued in Eleventh plan
to achieve the physical targets.
The Eleventh Plan programme of AMD envisages several projects aiming to identify 75,000
tonnes of uranium resources. During Eleventh plan, AMD would be implementing 18 plan projects
with the Eleventh plan outlay of Rs. 549.19 Crore. The main emphasis is being given to extensive
survey and exploration for locating high grade large tonnage unconformity related, hematite breccia
complex, quartz pebble conglomerate (QPC), sandstone and calcrete types of uranium deposits.
High tech technique like heliborne Time Domain Electromagnetic (TDEM) survey is being adopted,
for locating deep seated concealed unconformity related deposits in the Proterozoic Basins of India.
This technique is useful in locating deep seated electromagnetic conductor which is suitable
location for high grade large tonnage unconformity related uranium deposits as in Canada and
Australia and many Proterozoic Basins in India have similar geological setup.
The detailed project proposals have since been formulated accordingly and targets for
various activities have been set up, which are about 4 to 5 times higher as compared to Tenth Plan
programme. In order to achieve the desired objectives, thrust areas like Proterozoic Basins are
selected to identify concealed large tonnage; high grade unconformity related uranium deposits apart
from other areas like Mahadek Basin for sandstone type, North Delhi Fold Belt for vein/albitite type.
The R&D sector projects includes a comprehensive set of uranium exploration activities
including airborne geophysical survey (4.0 lakh line km), ground geological and radiometric (30,000
sq. km), geochemical (8,000 sq. km) and geophysical surveys (as per requirement) and
departmental reconnoitory and stratigraphic drilling (3.0 lakh m) with the expected outcomes of
discoveries of promising uranium occurrences and evaluation and prioritization of potential target

11
areas for detailed subsurface exploration. The I&M Sector project includes detailed subsurface
exploration through contracts for evaluation drilling of 4.3 lakh m which is expected to have a
outcome of augmenting the uranium resources of the country by 75,000 tonnes.
All the activities proposed, especially with regard to uranium exploration are interdependent
and synergistically welded together so as to realize the overall Eleventh plan objectives of AMD,
the most important of which is identification of 75,000 tonnes of uranium deposits.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that sustained efforts would be made
towards exploration/mining of uranium deposits within the country, to reduce dependence on
external sources.
Recommendation (Para 14.3)
The Committee is of the opinion that awareness regarding health hazards should be created
in the affected population before the mining activity starts and therefore recommends that mass
awareness campaigns should be conducted at regular intervals for the population residing near the
mining area. The issue of displacement of the local population and sufficient compensation for the
displaced, should also be dealt with sympathetically to avoid public discontentment at a later stage.
Action Taken by the Government
An intensive Public Awareness Programme is already being carried out by the Department
of Atomic Energy (through its Public Awareness Division) in collaboration with Uranium
Corporation of India Limited and Atomic Minerals Directorate for Exploration and Research in the
areas where uranium mining is proposed. These activities are being given further impetus. Specially
in Meghalaya, a mass contact programme in Khasi language is being launched which will consist
of distribution of pamphlets, providing scientific information through games made available on CDs,
seminars in Khasi language, quiz, essay and elocution competitions. Since last more than one year,
a primary Health Centre is being run by the Uranium Corporation of India Limited at Wahkaji in
the West Khasi Hills where we propose to set up uranium mine and processing plant. An integrated
rural development programme for the six villages in the immediate neighbourhood of Jaduguda,
Jharkhand is being carried out by Uranium Corporation of India Limited and the Department. The
Department ensures that the recommendations of the Committee is implemented in letter and spirit.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and reiterates that a greater sensitivity towards the
issue of displacement of local population due to mining activities be adopted by the
Department.
Recommendation (Para 15.6)
The Committee is of the opinion that Nuclear Energy is a very clean source of energy
devoid of any environmental pollution that the production of Thermal or Hydel energy causes.
Therefore, conscious efforts should be made to produce the maximum amount of energy from
Nuclear sources.
Action Taken by the Government
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) is involved in the first stage

12
programme of setting up a total Pressurised Heavy Water Reactors (PHWR) capacity of 10,000
MWe. Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited has been making all efforts towards this end
and has achieved several milestones in this endeavor. At present, a PHWR capacity of 3800 MWe
is in operation and 660 MWe under construction. The operation of nuclear power plants at high
capacity factors of about 90% and construction of nuclear power projects in about five years have
been achieved. The operational and safety performance of NPCIL’s plants have been excellent.
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited’s current plans include setting up of eight
indigenous PHWRs of 700 MWe each. The design of indigenous 700 MWe PHWRs has been
completed. Pre-project activities for four of the reactors, KAPP 3&4 and RAPP 7&8 are nearing
competion and the projects are poised for launch. Commencement of work on these projects is
linked to establishment of fuel linkages.
The second stage of Indian nuclear power programme consists of Fast Breeder Reactors
(FBRs). FBR programme can sustain a generation capacity of about 42231 GWe – year and expected
to provide energy security to our country in the long run. Bhartiya Nabhikiya Vidhyut Nigam Limited
is constructing 500 MWe Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR) at Kalpakkam. PFBR is the
forerunner of the second stage of India’s nuclear power programme and represents the
commencement of the commercial phase of the second stage. By constructing and operating the 500
MWe PFBR, India will be demonstrating techno-commercial viability of the second stage nuclear
power programme. It is planned to construct four more 500 MWe FBRs by year 2020. Indira Gandhi
Centre for Atomic Research will also initiate R&D design activities for 1000 MWe FBRs.
Comments
The Committee is of the opinion that the department should be able to achieve the
targets/schedules set, as regards the nuclear power projects and maximize nuclear power
generation in the near future.
Recommendation (Para 16.3)
The Committee is of the opinion that to gain self-sufficiency in the country’s requirement
of nuclear fuel, the Department has to make concerted efforts towards development of technology
which uses Thorium as Nuclear fuel instead of Uranium, keeping in view the vast reserves of
Thorium. The use of Uranium makes the country dependent on other countries and also results in
outgo of foreign exchange.
Action Taken by the Government
The three stages of the Indian Nuclear Power Programme are to be taken up sequentially.
The first stage is based on uranium and is already in commercial domain. The spent fuel from the
first stage reactors is reprocessed to recover plutonium and depleted uranium. The recovered
plutonium – depleted uranium is the fuel for the Fast Breeder Reactors for the second stage. Fast
Breeder Reactors produce more fissile material than they consume and thereby enable growth in
nuclear reactor installed capacity based on fast reactors. Physics characteristics of thorium can
enable sustaining a given installed capacity, but not its growth. Early deployment of thorium would
slow down growth of installed nuclear capacity based on fast reactors and is not desirable. While
it is proposed to set up an Advanced Heavy Water Reactor (AHWR) which would get 2/3rd of its
power from thorium, to acquire industrial scale experience in thorium, large scale introduction of
thorium has to wait till a large enough fast reactor installed capacity has been set up.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Department.

13
Recommendation (Para 17.2)
The Committee expresses its serious concern at the fact that the present remuneration being
paid to the scientists is not attractive enough to attract the best of scientific talent available in the
country. Further, to make matters worse, there is a high level of attrition of scientists from the
department, who move towards the private sector for better salaries and promotion prospects. The
Committee recommends that the case for grant of special allowance over and above the normal
salaries may be taken up emphatically with the Government, keeping in view the special
requirements of the department, and the scientific community at large, specially in view of the
tremendous contributions of the scientists in the field of Atomic Energy.
Action taken by the Government
The concerns expressed by the Committee have already been taken up at appropriate levels
in the Government.
Comments
The Committee strongly reiterates its recommendation and urges that the issue of
proper remuneration for the scientist be given top priority and taken up forcefully with the
Government.
Recommendation (Para 18.5)
The Committee is of the opinion that the agreement with the United States of America has
to be looked at from the larger perspective of national security as well as national interest. While
acknowledging the increasing energy requirements of the country, the thrust must be on the
indigenous ‘Three-stage Programme’ on which our scientists are working with great confidence
and optimism. The Indo-United States Nuclear Agreement has caused serious concerns with regard
to our foreign policy and security related issues on which our Parliament had to debate several
times. The sense of the Parliament needs to be taken into consideration.
Action Taken By The Government
Indigenous three stage programme is being pursued on priority. Autonomous pursuit of our
domestic nuclear programme as well as our foreign policy would remain independent of any
international civil nuclear cooperation which would be an additionality to strengthen our energy
security.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the domestic nuclear programme will
not be compromised in pursuit of international civil nuclear co-operation.

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE - A
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION ON FOOD IRRADIATION
No other method of food processing has been subjected to such a thorough assessment of
safety as the radiation processing. The various aspects of wholesomeness and safety of radiation-
processed foods have been studied in great detail. These include:
• Possibility of induced radioactivity
• Microbiological safety
• Safety of chemical changes
• Nutritional adequacy
• Animal feeding
• Human trials
At the energies of the gamma rays from cobalt-60 (1.3 MeV) and those recommended for
X-rays (7.5 MeV) and accelerated electrons (10 MeV), no induced radioactivity has been observed
in food. The microbiological aspects of radiation-processed foods have been studied in detail. None
of these studies have indicated that foods preserved by radiation pose any special problems in
relation to micro flora. It has been found that unique radiolytic products are not formed and most
of the free radicals in the system disappear depending on the nature of the commodity either
immediately after irradiation or during its post-irradiation storage and processing. Though the
composition of food remains largely unchanged, some minor losses in vitamins, comparable to
those from any other food processing method, may be encountered. Short-term or long-term animal
feeding studies have not shown any adverse effect.
International Approval
In 1980, a joint FAO/IAEA/WHO Expert Committee on Food Irradiation (JECFI) reviewed
the extensive data on wholesomeness of irradiated foods collected up to that time and concluded
that irradiation of any commodity up to an over all dose of 10 kGy presents no toxicological
hazards and introduces no special nutritional or microbiological problems. An Expert Group
constituted by WHO in 1994 once again reviewed the wholesomeness data available till then and
validated the earlier conclusion of JECFI (WHO, 1994). In 1997 another Expert Group constituted
by WHO af firmed the safety of food irradiated to doses above 10 kGy. In 2003 Codex Alimentarius
Commission revised its Codex General Standard for Irradiated Foods to include application of doses
higher than 10 kGy. The Agreements on Sanitary and Phytosnitary (SPS) Practices and Technical
Barriers to Trade (TBT) under the World Trade Organization (WTO) have provided for adoption
of irradiation as an SPS measure in international trade under the principle of equivalence. Thus,
irradiation can be applied to overcome quarantine barriers, and to hygienize products for
international trade. These agreements are administered under the standards, guidelines, and
recommendations of the international organizations such as Codex Alimentarius Commission,
International Plant Protection Convention (IPPC), and The International Office of Epizootics. In
2003 IPPC included irradiation as a plant quarantine measure. This was subsequently followed by
the final rule irradiation phytosanitary treatment of imported fruits and vegetables under USDA-
17

18
APHIS. Australia and New Zealand have also amended their food standard, FSANZ, allowing import
of radiation treated tropical fruits and vegetables. USFDA has further gone ahead with providing
key approvals that would benefit radiation-processing industry. These include increase in the energy
levels permitted for X-ray applications to 7.5 MeV and the approval for use of radiation for
microbial decontamination of molluscan shellfish at a dose of 5.5 kGy.
Today, some 40 countries worldwide including India have approved the use of food
irradiation for over 100 food items and about 30 of them are applying the technology on a limited
commercial scale.
Approval of radiation processing of food in India
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre has been engaged in R&D work on the technology of
radiation processing of foods for the past more than 50 years. The safety and wholesomeness of
the technology was endorsed in 1981 by world bodies like World Health Organization, Food &
Agricultural Organization, and International Atomic Energy Agency, and by the Codex Alimentarius
Commission that sets global standards for food, in 1983. Government of India constituted a
National Monitoring Agency in 1987, to oversee commercial application of food irradiation in India.
Subsequently, in 1991, Atomic Energy (Control of Irradiation of Food) Rules (amended in 1996)
were framed and in 1994, amendment of PFA Act rules was carried out to approve radiation
processing of onion, potato and spices. The PFA Act rules were further amended in 1998 and 2001
to approve additional items of food. Ministry of Health has been approached for approval of the
food and agricultural commodities on wider generic/class-wise basis for radiation processing, so
that the radiation processing plants could be operated around the year for better economic gains.
The draft notification for generic approval on class basis was published in May, 2007.
The Department of Atomic Energy has the necessary expertise and know-how for setting
up radiation processing plants. It has set up two technology demonstration units, one commissioned
in 2000 for high dose irradiation at Vashi, Navi Mumbai, primarily for hygienization of spices, and
another in 2002, a low dose irradiation facility, KRUSHAK at Lasalgaon, near Nashik, for sprout
control during storage in potato and onion and insect disinfestation of agricultural commodities.
In 2004 as a result of persistent efforts of FTD, the Ministry of Agriculture and Co-
operation, Government of India, amended the plant quarantine regulations, Plant Quarantine
(Regulation of Import into India) Order, 2003, to include irradiation as a phytosanitary treatment.
In 2006, the United States Department of Agriculture and Department of Agriculture and Co-
operation, Government of India, signed a Framework Equivalency Work-plan, to use irradiation as
phytosanitary measure for the export of mango to the US, and the USDA-APHIS final rule
‘Importation of Mangoes From India’ was published on March 12, 2007. More than 157 tons of
mangoes of different varieties were processed at KRUSHAK and exported to US after a gap of 18
years. This year the exports to US are likely to be higher. A landmark breakthrough was thus
achieved in demonstrating commercial feasibility of radiation technology in overcoming quarantine
barrier to international trade and obtaining market access, that would ultimately bring economic
benefits to mango farmers of the country.
Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Government of India, have
also given permission for use of radiation for microbial decontamination of medicinal herbs and
formulations.

19
ANNEXURE - B
Nat. Labs/
Instt.
Others
30%
IIT/IISc.
28%
Univ./College
42%
IIT/IISc.
Univ./College
Nat. Labs/Instt.
Others
Rupees in Lakhs
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
IIT/IISc.
Univ./College
Nat. Labs/Instt.
Others
Years
1998199920002001200220032004200520062007
19
Fig. 1 : Allocation of the Total BRNS Budget to academic/R&D./
Universities/Institutes for the period 1998-2007
Fig. 2 : Allocation of the Yearly BRNS Budget to academic/R&D./
Universities/Institutes for the period 1998-2007

MINUTES

22

23
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the 13th October, 2008 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty — In the Chair*
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Jabir Husain
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Shri Francis Fanthome
8. Shri Brahmananda Panda
9. Shri Jayasingrao Gaikwad Patil
10. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
12. Shri Sitaram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
2. The Committee took-up for consideration its draft ***, ***, ***, 198th, ***, and ***
Reports pertaining to the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the ***, ***, ***, 191st, *** and *** Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Departments of ***, ***, ***, Atomic Energy, ***, and *** respectively. The
Committee adopted all the reports with certain additions/modifications as suggested by some
Members.
23
* In the absence of Chairman, Dr. Sujan Chakraborty chaired the meeting.

24
3. ***, the Committee now decided to present those Reports to the House *** and 195th to
200th Reports on Action Taken by the Government on Demands for Grants (2008-09) Reports of
various Ministries/Department on the 23rd October, 2008. The Committee authorized its Chairman
and in his absence Shri Jabir Husain or Shri D. Raja to present the reports in Rajya Sabha and
Shri Francis Fanthome and in his absence Shri Thupstan Chhewang to lay the copies of the reports
on the table of Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.20 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.