PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH REPOR T
Action Taken by the Depar tment on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Three Hundred Ninth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2018-19)
of The Department of Biotechnology
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd January, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd January, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2019/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)
317
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTEENTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Department on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Three Hundred Ninth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2018-19)
of The Department of Biotechnology
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 2nd January, 2019)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 2nd January, 2019)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2019/Pausa, 1940 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE  .......................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION  ..................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS  .......................................................................................................... (iv)-(v)
4. R EPORT  .............................................................................................................. 1-21
Chapter I. Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
the Government .............................................................................. 1-13
Chapter II. Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not
desire to pursue in view of the Government’s replies ........................ 14-19
Chapter III. Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
the Government have not been accepted by the Committee................ 20
Chapter IV . Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Final Replies
of the Government are still awaited .................................................. 21
5. R ECOMMENDA TIONS/OBSERV A TIONS — A T A G LANCE  .................................................. 22
6. M INUTES  ............................................................................................................. 23-26

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1st September, 2018)
1. Shri Anand Sharma  ––  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri Anil Baluni
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
6. Shri Hishey Lachungpa
7. Dr. Raghunath Mohapatra
8. Shri Parimal Nathwani
9. Shri Sharad Pawar
10. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
15. Kumari Sushmita Dev
16. Shri Ninong Ering
17. Shri Laxman Giluwa
18. Dr. K. Gopal
19. Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar
20. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
21. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
22. Shri Daddan Mishra
23. Shri Chirag Paswan
24. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
25. Shri Hari Narayan Rajbhar

(ii)
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Vikram Usendi
29. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
#30. V acant
#31. V acant
SECRETARIAT
1. Shrimati  Sunita Sekaran, Joint  Secretary
2. Shri T. N. Pandey,  Director
3. Shri S. Rangarajan,  Additional Director
4. Shri Mohd. Salamuddin,  Additional Director
5. Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
6. Shri Harish Kumar,  Assistant Committee Officer
#  Shri Raghu Sharma and Shri Nagendra Singh ceased to be  members of the Committee consequent upon their resignation
from the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 21st December, 2018.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present  the Report on its behalf,
present this Three Hundred Seventeenth Report on Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on
the Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred and Ninth Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Department of Biotechnology, which was presented/laid in both
the Houses of Parliament on 13th March, 2018.
2. There were 37  recommendations/observations in the  Three Hundred and Ninth Report of the
Committee. Action Taken Notes on the Recommendations/Observations  of the Committee were received
from the Department on 28th May, 2018.
3 In the meeting held on 27th December, 2018,  the Committee considered the draft Report and
adopted the same.
New Delhi ;          ANAND SHARMA
27th December, 2018 Chairman,
Pausa 6,1940 (Saka) Department Related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests,
Rajya Sabha.

(iv)
ACRONYMS
ADMaC : Advance Animal Disease Diagnostic & Management Consortium
A TN : Action Taken Note
A TR : Action Taken Report
B E : Budget Estimate
BIG : Biotechnology Ignition Grant
BIPP : Biotechnology Industry Partnership Programme
BIRAC : Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council
BRBC : BIRAC Regional Bioinnovation Center
BREC : BIRAC Regional Entrepreneurship Centre
CEPI : Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations
CIMMYT : International Maize and Wheat Improvement Center 
DBT : Department of Biotechnology
DCGI : Drug Controller General of India
DPR : Detailed Project Report
EFCs : Expenditure Finance Committees
HESCO : Himalayan Environmental Studies and Conservation Organisation
ICAR : Indian Council of Agricultural Research
ICMR : Indian Council of Medical Research 
ICRISAT : International Crops Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics
IFR : Iron fortified Rice
IIPME : Industry Innovation Programme on Medical Electronics 
IRRI : International Rice Research Institute
MOU : Memorandum of Understanding
NER : North Eastern Region
NIAB : National Institute of Animal Biotechnology
NIAID : National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases

NIH : National Institutes of Health
P ACE : Promoting Academic Research Conversion to Enterprise
PSMC : Programme Steering and Monitoring Committee
QA : Quality Assurance
QC : Quality Control
R&D : Research and Development
RMRC : Regional Medical Research Centre 
SBIRI : Small Business Innovation Research Initiative
SCBI : Sugarcane Breeding Institute
SEED : Sustainable Entrepreneurship and Enterprise Development
SMEs : Small And Medium Enterprises
SOP : Standards Operating Practices
SPARSH : Social Innovation programme for Products: Affordable & Relevant
to Societal Health
TTOs : Technology Transfer Offices
UIC : University Innovation Cluster
WSSV : White Spot Syndrome Virus
(v)

REPORT
The Action Taken Report (ATR) of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Department
of Biotechnology on the recommendations/observations contained in Three Hundred Ninth Report of the
Committee on ‘Demands for Grants (2018-19) of the Department of Biotechnology’. The Report was
presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the Table of  Lok Sabha on the  13th  March, 2018.
2. Action Taken Note (ATN) has been received from Department of Biotechnology in respect of all
the thirty-seven Recommendations/Observations contained in the Three Hundred Ninth Report. This has
been categorized as follows:-
Chapter I: Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Government:
Para:-  2.2, 3.4, 3.7, 3.8, 3.9, 4.4, 4.5, 5.3, 6.4, 6.5, 7.3, 8.5, 8.6, 9.5, 9.6, 12.4,
13.4, 15.4, 15.11, 15.14, 15.15, 16.5, 17.4, 17.6, 18.7, 18.8 and 18.10.
(T
OTAL – 27).
Chapter II: Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in
view of the Government’s replies:
Para:- 3.3, 6.7, 10.3, 11.4, 14.2, 15.13, 16.7, 16.8  and 17.5
(T
OTAL – 9).
The Committee is convinced with the explanation furnished by the Department and, therefore, does
not want to pursue above-mentioned recommendations further.
Chapter III: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Government have
not been accepted by the Committee:
Para:-  (T OTAL-Nil)
Chapter IV: Recommendations/Observations in respect of which final replies of the Government
are still awaited:
Para:- 7.4.
(TOTAL- 1).
3.     The Committee desires that the Department should furnish the updated information regarding the
paragraph mentioned in Chapter IV of the Report.
4.     The details of the ATR have been discussed in the respective Chapters in the succeeding pages.
1

2
CHAPTER-I
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT DURING THE LAST FIVE YEARS
Recommendation/Observation
1.1 The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the funds utilisation capacity of the Department
during the last five years.
 Fund utilisation capacity of the Department is reflective of its financial
prudence and due diligence while making optimal utilisation of the budgetary allocation. (Para 2.2)
Action Taken
1.2 The Department thanks to committee for positive words and it is brought to the kind information
of the committee that the Department has utilized 99.1% of RE in Financial Year 2017-18.
BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2018-19
Recommendation/Observation
1.3 The Committee is also of the opinion that timely completion/realisation of the targets/objectives will
certainly help the Department to improve its performance both physically as well as financially and also
help in reducing the overhead costs resulting from the delayed progress.  Thus, the Committee recommends
the Department to strictly adhere to the time frame for the targets/objectives set and keep a continuous
vigil with the help of a robust internal monitoring mechanism in order to ensure that the fixed timelines
are met and the budgetary support provided for the purpose is utilised judiciously and optimally.
(Para 3.4)
Action Taken
1.4 The suggestions of Committee have been noted.
Recommendation/Observation
1.5 The Committee while sharing the ambitious and inspiring targets/objectives envisaged by the
Department is of the considered view that the adequate financial support needs to be made available
by the Government for the realisation of these targets/objectives set by the Department.  The Committee,
therefore, is of the firm view that the request made by the Department of Biotechnology for the additional
amount of 
` 1000.00 crore during the year 2018-19 is fully justified.  The Committee, therefore, desires
the Department to share its view with the concerned Ministry/Department of Government of India and
impress upon them and seek the requisite budgetary allocations at the RE stage for the successful
implementation of its Mission Programmes. (Para 3.7)
2

3
Action Taken
1.6 Ministry of Finance will be requested for an addition budget at RE stage.
Recommendation/Observation
1.7 The Committee also applauds the Department for establishment of a Biotech-KISAN Farmer Centric
Mission at Himalayan Environmental Studies and Conservation Organization (HESCO), Dehradun to
cover the agro-climatic zone of Western Himalayan Region.  The Committee further takes note that the
proposals for establishment of five more Biotech-KISAN Hubs in five agro-climatic zones viz. Central
Plain Zone, Lower Gangetic Plains Region, Southern Plateau and Hills, Eastern Himalayan Region and
East Coast Plains and Hills have also been developed by the Department. (Para 3.8)
Action Taken
1.8 So far, DBT has already sanctioned projects for establishment of Biotech-KISAN Hubs in six agro-
climatic zones viz. Western Himalayan Region, Central Plain Zone, Lower Gangetic Plains Region,
Southern Plateau and Hills, Eastern Himalayan Region and East Coast Plains and Hills.
Recommendation/Observation
1.9 The Committee while taking note of the above mentioned proposals for establishing five more
Biotech-KISAN Hubs hopes that the Department would work in tandem with the respective State Governments
and the other stakeholders of these regions to establish these five Hubs and completes the task in a time
bound manner .  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to constitute a high level Committee
consisting members from the Department and the respective State Governments to ensure that the deadlines
fixed for the completion of these hubs are strictly adhered to and zero tolerance policy be opted in the
matter in order to maximise the benefits of this programme for these regions. (Para 3.9)
Action Taken
1.10 The DBT has already constituted a Programme Steering and Monitoring Committee (PSMC) to
regularly monitor the progress of the on-going Biotech-KISAN projects vis-à-vis the objectives and
milestones and to recommend corrective measures as and when required. The representatives of the
respective State Governments will also be associated to ensure the progress and timelines set up in these
projects.
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES/PROJECTS
Recommendations/Observations
1.11 The Committee notes that in BE 2017-18, budgetary allocation of 
`1250.58 crore was made under
this head which was insignificantly increased to ` 1252.42 crore in RE 2017-18 of which also the
Department could only manage to spend ` 850.11 crore i.e. 67.87% utilisation of the funds allocated
till the end of January, 2018 leaving ` 402.31 crore to be spent only in 59 days. (Para 4.4)

4
1.12  The Committee, thus, expresses its displeasure over the underutilisation of funds made available
to the Department under this head during the year 2017-18.  The Committee feels that the financial
performance of the Department under the head Biotechnology Research and Development is not very
encouraging to note.  The Committee firmly believes that the R&D activities are in the core of all other
activities and of the greatest importance for any technological advancement to take place.  Thus, under-
utilisation of the budgetary allocation made for the purpose is perturbing.  The Committee is of the view
that the Department should have aligned its budgetary allocation with the activities undertaken during
this period and it should have been ensured that a constant vigil was taken while prioritising activities
and funds utilisation thereon.  The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department should
accord due focus and recognition to its R&D activities while making earnest efforts to utilise the
budgetary allocations so made fully and optimally . (Para 4.5)
Action Taken
1.13 The c oncern of the Committee regarding under utilization of funds till the end of January, 2018 has
been noted and it is submitted that because of requisite approvals of EFCs and SFC for continuation of
program beyond 12th plan, the pace of expenditure was slow till end of January, 2018. After getting all
requisite approval the Department could be able to utilize the funds at faster pace and `  1240.11 Crores
have been utilized by 31st March, 2018. Overall the Department utilized 99.1% of the Budget till 31st
March, 2018.
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation/Observation
1.14 The Committee notes the work done and progress achieved by the Department during the period
2016-17 and 2017-18 (upto 6th February, 2018).  The Committee is also happy to note the number of
technologies, i.e. 65, developed during this period by the Department.  The Committee, however, is little
dismayed to note the numbers of technologies which could actually be put to commercialisation.  The
Committee is at a loss to figure out the reasons due to which rest of the developed technologies of the
Department could not reach to the stage of commercialisation if they are well aligned with the technological
requirements of the concerned industry and as per its requirement.  The Committee is also of the view
that limited availability of well structured framework to facilitate and undertake technology transfer and
commercialisation and poor linkage between the Department and the industry adding to the poor
performance of the Department to put its developed technologies to commercialisation on a much greater
scale.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to take necessary action in the matter and
take on board the concerned stakeholders as well while identifying its industry oriented research work
so that the developed technologies are best suited and able to cater to the technological requirements of
the concerned industry.  The Department should also come out with a forward linkage forum where the
interface between the Department and the industry is further strengthened which in turn would help the
Department as well to keep pace with the latter’ s technological requirements. (Para 5.3)

5
Action Taken
1.15 The Department is taking necessary action for establishment of TTOs across the country to
facilitate technology transfer and commercialization activities. The Department through Biotechnology
Industry Research Assistance Council (BIRAC) is also implementing a program namely Promoting Academic
Research Conversion to Enterprise (PACE) which encourages academia to develop technology/products
(upto proof of concept stage) of societal/national importance and its subsequent validation by an industrial
partners.  The Department would further strengthen academia industry collaboration program. So far
through BIRAC nearly 100 Products and technologies are commercialized /ready for commercialization.
CROP BIOTECHNOLOGY
Recommendation/Observation
1.16 The Committee appreciates the efforts being undertaken and progress achieved by the Department
in the field of Crop Biotechnology during the year 2016-17 and 2017-18.  The Committee is hopeful
that with its earnest efforts in this direction the Department would be able to fetch the desired results.
The Committee, however, feels that the institutional linkage between the Department and the agricultural
universities along with ICAR further needs to be strengthened.  The Committee is also of the view that
the Department should collaborate with the International institutes of repute working in these fields.  The
Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to forge partnerships with such institutes to further
intensify its research activities in the field of agricultural biotechnology. (Para 6.4)
Action Taken
1.17 Department funds Extra mural research projects through competitive R&D grants. Projects funded
by the Department are implemented at ICAR institutions, State agriculture universities, other universities
and international institutions like ICRISAT/IRRI/CIMMYT. As recommended by Committee these efforts
are further strengthened through necessary MOU’s/Agreement.
Recommendation/Observation
1.18 The Committee also notes that the Department has been supporting a research and development
proposal for development of rust resistant variety in Brassica juncea and a proposal has also been
supported for dissecting the molecular interface between the biotrophic pathogen Sporisorium scitamineum
and its host sugarcane.  The Committee, however, feels that drought resistance varieties of sugarcane,
if made available, will ease out the problems, to a considerable extent, being faced by the sugarcane
growers in the country due to lack of irrigation facilities and dependence on the vagaries of monsoon.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to also start its research and development activities
in the direction of developing drought resistance varieties of sugarcane in the country.
(Para 6.5)

6
Action Taken
1.19 Sugarcane Breeding Institute (SCBI), Coimbatore has already developed drought tolerant transgenic
sugarcane for regulatory approvals for biosafety assessment. New projects for developing drought
tolerant sugarcane are considered under competitive R&D programme of Department as and when
received.
ANIMAL PRODUCTION
Recommendation/Observation
1.20  The Committee is appreciative of the progress made by the Department in the field of Animal
Production.  The Committee, however, feels that the Depar tment has a long way to go in this direction
considering the fact that Indian livestock production system still operates significantly on the traditional
knowledge.  It is noteworthy that a large section of our livestock has very dismal average productivity.
The Committee is also of the considered view that to deliver the technological advancements to the
targeted group, the Department needs to further strengthen its linkage with the stakeholders.
 The Committee,
therefore, recommends the Department to start a systemic designed outreach campaign to popularise
biotechnology among livestock farmers. (Para 7.3)
Action Taken
1.21 The Department has initiated outreach programme to popularize biotechnology among livestock
farmers through its autonomous institute viz. National Institute of Animal Biotechnology (NIAB), dedicated
for research activities in the area of livestock production and health.  Institute is strengthening its linkage
with the farmers through workshops/interactive sessions of different aspects of animal production and
health.  Two such meetings have been organized recently at Sambalpur (Odisha) on 5th Feb 2018 and
at Allahabad on 13th Feb 2018. Similar type of outreach programmes are proposed at different places
of country.
ANIMAL HEALTH (VACCINE & DIAGNOSTIC)
Recommendation/Observation
1.22 The Committee expresses its deep concerns over the loss to exchequer on count of Brucella infection.
The Committee, therefore, is of the considered opinion that given the quantum of economic losses to
public exchequer due to infection in animals and humans, the problem throws a huge challenge to the
Department of Biotechnology expecting biotechnological solution to this problem.  The Committee is
happy to note that the Department is seized of the issue and in its endeavour to address the issue making
efforts in the form of implementation of ‘Brucellosis Free Villages Mission’ on pilot scale in 50 villages
of 10 States in phased manner.  The Committee, however, feels that the Department needs to further
intensify this Mission Programme and reach out to all the States where the cases of Brucella infections
have been registered. (Para 8.5)

7
1.23 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should make a database for the purpose
and roll out the implementation of  ‘Brucellosis Free Villages Mission’ in rest of the States as well in
a time bound manner so as to not only provide the biotechnological solution to the problem but also
preventing the huge economic losses. (Para 8.6)
Action Taken
1.24 The objective of implementing pilot scale Brucella Free Village project is to demonstrate the feasibility
of achieving infection levels of 0.2% as per OIE (World Animal Health Forum) over a period of 5 years.
DBT shall demonstrate this project in 50 villages in a phased manner with 25 villages per year from 2017-
2022. Any expansion of this project in other States depends upon the lessons learnt from this pilot scale
programme. However, as suggested by the Committee by mid terms of the project, elaborate Standards
Operating Practices (SOP) shall be prepared with adequate data for use in other States. Further, audio
visual tools developed during the pilot project shall be widely disseminated in all the States in local
languages for creating awareness.
AQUACULTURE & MARINE BIOTECHNOLOGY
Recommendation/Observation
1.25 The Committee takes note of the work done/being done by the Department in the field of Aquaculture
& Marine Biotechnology.  However, it observes that health, feed and nutrition are the major challenges
to be addressed in marine and aquaculture sector.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department
to prepare a roadmap for developing requisite and efficient diagnostics and take prophylactic measures
to address these issues.  (Para 9.5)
Action Taken
1.26 Department of Biotechnology (DBT) has been supporting projects for addressing the challenges in
fish health, feed and nutrition in aquaculture and marine biotechnology sector. Efforts are being taken
towards the development of conventional and molecular diagnostics for detection of fish diseases and
also prophylactic measures for prevention and control of fish diseases.  DBT has developed several
sensitive and specific diagnostic assays for detection of viral diseases like White Spot Syndrome Virus
(WSSV) and some other pathogens. Immuzone a product of plant extract has been developed and
commercialized as a herbal immunostimulant for shrimp. More than 50 fish cell lines have been developed
and they are being used for  virological, toxicological  and gene expression studies. Projects are also
being supported for development of diagnostics and prophylactic measures in aquaculture sector.
Recommendation/Observation
1.27 The Committee also recommends that the Department should strive hard to complete the task of
setting up Centres of Excellence in theme based areas of Aquaculture and Marine Biotechnology to boost
up the research and development activities in a time bound manner and ensure that the time frame fixed
for the purpose is strictly adhered to. (Para 9.6)

8
Action Taken
1.28 Department has sanctioned a Centre of Excellence programme on genetic enhancement of economically
important freshwater fish catla catla  using genetic and molecular approaches at Central Institute of
Freshwater Aquaculture, Bhubaneswar. A programme for establishing a Center of Excellence for basic
and translational research on horseshoe crab is under consideration. Another programme for Center of
Excellence on nutrigenomics is in pipeline for boosting up the research and development activities in
Aquaculture and Marine Biotechnology Sector.
MATERNAL AND CHILD HEALTH
Recommendation/Observation
1.29 The Committee takes note of the efforts being made by the Department in the direction of maternal
and child health.  The Committee, however, is concerned to note that anemia, stunting, malnutrition and
micronutrient malnutrition cases are widespread in the country and the efforts being undertaken by the
Department in the form of development of Iron fortified Rice i.e. IFR-1 (fortified with iron) and IFR-
2 (fortified with iron, folic acid) is nothing less than a drop in the ocean.  The Committee is of the firm
view that the Department has to come up with out of box and innovative biotechnological solutions to
these problems.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to chalk out a roadmap in this
direction and make earnest efforts in providing scientific solution to these health problems related to
child health. (Para 12.4)
Action Taken
1.30 In the area of Public Health Food and Nutrition, DBT is making continuing efforts to address the
problem of anemia, stunting, malnutrition and micronutrient malnutrition which is widespread across the
country. Some of the new initiatives in the pipeline are as follows:
(i) Call for R &D Proposals on “Vitamin D deficiency in India: Public Health Significance and
interventions”: The Department received more than 500 concept proposals that are under
review.
(ii) The Department arranged a Brain Storming session in the area: “Multidisciplinary Research
in Food and Nutrition with an interface of Agriculture” on 20th April 2018 where discussions
were held on following thematic area:
(i) State of nutritional intake and stunting/anemia across the country – what is needed? And
setting the agenda.
(ii) Enhancement of Protein content of cereals like Rice, Wheat and Maize.
(iii) Enhancement of micronutrient content of cereals, vegetables and fruits.
(iv) Issues related to nutrient bioavailability and digestability of food crops.
The entire discussion in this Brainstorming session was focussed on approaches for enhancement
of protein in cereal crops and micronutrients in cereals, vegetables and fruits. The last part of the

9
discussion was on nutrient bioavailability and digestibility of food crops. This attempt would feed into
the “National Nutrition Mission” in the long run.
STEM CELL RESEARCH
Recommendation/Observation
1.31 The Committee takes note of the information furnished by the Department on the research work
going to understand the possible benefits of stem cells and observes that as of today, none other than
bone marrow transplantation or hematopoietic stem cells are accepted as standard line of treatment that
can cure disorders in human beings.  However, the Committee feels that the basic research work in this
direction needs further push to explore the untapped potential of stem cells in curing various disorders
in human being in collaboration with the Institutes with state-of-the-art facilities to facilitate such
research works and recommends that adequate funds be earmarked for the purpose so that financial
constrains would not hinder the research work in the country.  The Committee is of the opinion that the
advancements in biomedical research in the field of stem cell would help in offering scientific solutions
for treating a variety of disease such as diabetes, cancer, cardiology, neurology, etc.  The Committee,
nonetheless, would also like to caution the Department about the unscientific or unethical stem cell
therapy that continues to pose a threat.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to run
an awareness programme in the country under its CSR activities and reach out to the concerned stakeholders
apprising them about the rightful status of the stem cells and their applications on the basis of scientific
evidences.  The Committee is of the considered opinion that this awareness programme of the Department
would help understanding the whole gamut of stem cell research in the country.
(Para 13.4)
Action Taken
1.32 The Department of Biotechnology (DBT) is supporting basic research on various aspects of stem
cells at various institutes in the country to explore the untapped potential of stem cells . Further in order
to promote clinical research in the area of stem cells, the DBT has supported and created infrastructure
and facilities at various institutions and hospitals across the country.
1.33 The “National Guidelines for Stem Cell Research- 2017” formulated jointly by the DBT and the
ICMR was released in October 2017 by the Hon’ble Minister of State, Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare, Government of India to lay down standards for stem cell research and ensure that research with
human stem cells is conducted in a responsible and ethically sensitive manner in the country.   In order
to create awareness amongst researchers, ethics Committee members, students, clinicians as well as
faculties involved in biomedical and health research, a series of dissemination programs are being
organized jointly by DBT and ICMR across the country.
BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation/Observation
1.34 The Committee notes the work being done by the Department for the societal development with the

10
help of its biotechnological interventions.  The Committee, however, feels that the submission of the
Department lacks the factual data in terms of total numbers of self-employment generation through
diffusion of proven and field-tested technologies demonstration, training and extension activities, total
number of beneficiaries, number of projects supported under women and child health care, etc. to support
its claim. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to furnish a complete data inter alia
including number of beneficiaries under its various activities undertaken during the last three years by
the Department under the Biotechnology for Societal Programme. (Para 15.4)
Action Taken
1.35 Departm ent of Biotechnology supported Biotechnology based Programme for Societal Development
- the main objective of the programme is to promote the use of biotechnological processes and tools for
benefit of the society comprising of rural,  SC/ST population & women. The scheme aims to create a
platform for self-employment and livelihood generation among the target population by diffusion of
proven and field-tested technologies through demonstration, training and extension activities. Various
areas supported under this scheme are agriculture and allied sector; health, nutrition & sanitation; value
addition and post harvest management; agripreneurship development; biodiversity conservation and
sustainable utilization of bio-resources. During the last three years Department has supported 49 projects
under this program. Nearly 10,000 Rural, SC/ST & Women populations have been benefited through
training, demonstration, extension and awareness activities under the programme.
INDUSTRIAL AND ENTREPRENEURSHIP DEVELOPMENT
Biotechnology Parks and Bio-Clusters
Recommendation/Observation
1.36 The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the fund utilisation capacity of the Department under
this head.  The Committee further notes the action taken by the Department during the year 2017-18.
The Committee considering the fund utilisation of the Department under this head is hopeful that the
Department would continue its earnest efforts and make optimal utilisation of the funds made available
for the year 2018-19 and also make sincere efforts to achieve the physical as well as financial targets
envisaged. (Para 15.11)
Action Taken
1.37 Suggestions of the Committee have been noted.
Recommendations/Observations
1.38 Similarly, the Department has been taking action for establishment of 150 Technology Transfer
Offices across the country as a part of its strategy to achieve US$ 100 billion by 2025 under National
Biotechnology Development Strategy and targets to establish 15 such offices during the year 2018-19.
The Committee feels that if the Department achieves this target of establishing 15 Technology Transfer
Offices during the year 2018-19 and continues to maintain this pace year after year, it will be able to
reach the figure of 150 only in 2027 and not by 2025. (Para 15.14)

11
1.39 The Committee, therefore, is of the considered view that the Department should set its targets
pragmatically on the basis of its performance during last few years. (Para 15.15)
Action Taken
1.40 The concern of the Committee has been noted and it is submitted that the Department has taken
steps toward this by conducting a landscape analysis of existing facilities available in the country. A
Detailed Project Report (DPR) has suggested to support 32 TTOs in Hub & Spoke model in phase I.
Based on suggestions made in DPR the Department is taking action for resetting the target.
ASSISTANCE TO AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS
Recommendation/Observation
1.41 The Committee notes the increase in budgetary allocation under the head ‘Assistance to Autonomous
Institutions’ in BE 2018-19.  The Committee hopes that the enhanced budgetary allocation of 
` 748.98
crore will further help these Autonomous Institutions to manage their financial requirements in a better
way and also help them carrying out their mandate more effectively and efficiently.  The Committee,
therefore, recommends the Department to ensure that the budgetary allocation made in respect of these
Autonomous Institutions is optimally utilised and the financial as well as physical objectives/targets set
for the year 2018-19 are realised.   (Para 16.5)
Action Taken
1.42 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted.
BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY RESEARCH ASSISTANCE COUNCIL (BIRAC)
Recommendation/Observation
1.43 The Committee applauds the work being done by BIRAC in the advancement of biotechnology
sector in the country by way of fostering innovation and entrepreneurship, promotion of affordable
innovation, empowering start-ups and small and medium enterprises, helping in commercialisation of
biotechnological advancements. (Para 17.4)
Action Taken
1.44 Views of Committee have been noted.
Recommendation/Observation
1.45 The Committee while taking note that 84 patent applications have been filed in the last three years
by BIRAC and 8 patents have been granted expresses its concerns over the not so encouraging figure
of patents gained during the said period.  The Committee is of the considered view that gaining patent
on a technology is the acknowledgement of the novelty of the developed technology which can further
be scaled up by way of commercialising it.  Thus, the Committee strongly feels that BIRAC needs to be
more proactive in its approach and revisit its strategy so as to gain a higher number of patents in
future. (Para 17.6)

12
Action Taken
1.46 BIRAC has taken the following initiatives to increase the number of Patents:
BIRAC has started PATH scheme (Patenting and Technology Transfer for harnessing innovations)
for its grantees to support and encourage the patent filing and Transfer of technologies for the
projects submitted to BIRAC under different schemes.
Organizing Awareness Workshops across India on “IP & Technology Management” to address the
matters and issues associated with Patent filing, Patentability and Technology Transfer.
BIRAC has also initiated IP Law Clinic where such clinics will assist BIRAC grantees in a wide
variety of legal matters including IP Protection, commercialization strategies and operational issues.
Also strategies are expected to gain a higher number of patents in future.
PROMOTION OF BIOTECHNOLOGY IN NORTH EASTERN REGION (NER) OF INDIA
Recommendation/Observation
1.47 The Committee takes note of the R&D activities undertaken by the Department.  The Committee
appreciates the implementation of a   multi-centric network programme in 14 districts of NER.  The
Committee, however, feels that the programme being of immense value needs to be further extended and
implemented in other districts of North Eastern Region as well so that the fruits of this programme can
also be shared with these left out districts (Para 18.7)
Action Taken
1.48 DBT gratefully acknowledges the Committee’s appreciation for its programme on R&D activities
and Eco-Friendly Organic Farming.
Suggestion about expanding this programme in more districts will be explored in consultation with
farmers and other stakeholders in some of the 14 districts in NER, which NITI Aayog has identified
as “aspirational districts”.
Recommendation/Observation
1.49 The Committee further observes that a regional level Animal House facility at RMRC, Dibrugarh
to support the entire NER demand of using small animals for research and DBT-NER Centre for
“Advance Animal Disease Diagnostic & Management Consortium (ADMaC) are being established by the
Department under its Infrastructure Development Programme.  The Committee is of the view that
establishment of these infrastructures will play a pivot role in bridging the infrastructure gap in NER.
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to complete the task of establishment of these two
infrastructures in a time bound manner and the budgetary support must be made available to avoid any
dilly dallying. (Para 18.8)

13
Action Taken
1.50 DBT feels encouraged by the PSCs’s observations, and is committed to get these important
infrastructures established in a time-bound manner.
Recommendation/Observation
1.51 The Committee is displeased to note that during the year 2017-18, the Department could not fully
utilise the budgetary allocation earmarked for the North Eastern Region and only 75.86% of the total
budgetary support could have been utilised.  The Committee takes serious note of the fact that against
the total budgetary allocation of 
` 145.00 crore, the Department managed to spend only ` 110.00 crore.
The Committee strongly believes that the NER has immense potential to be converted into wealth for not
only this Region but in the overall well being of our nation.   The Committee, therefore, is of the view
that the Department should make earnest efforts to gauge the untapped potential of this Region with the
help of its biotechnological interventions and make optimal utilisation of the budgetary support earmarked
for the purpose. (Para 18.10)
Action Taken
1.52 It is informed that the figure of 75.86% utilization of funds was given till 13th February, 2018.  As
of 31st March 2018, the entire annual budgetary allocation earmarked for the North Eastern Region
(NER), for the FY 2017-18, was fully (100%) utilized. In addition, funds amounting to `  23.00 crores,
drawn from the core budget of DBT, were also utilized for the activities in the North Eastern Region
(NER) in the 2017-18. Therefore, it may please be noted that in the year 2017-18, a total of `  172.00
crores was utilized for various biotechnology interventions in NER.

14
CHAPTER – II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT DESIRE TO
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE GOVERNMENT’S REPLY
BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2018-19
Recommendation/Observation
2.1 The Committee takes note of the Action Plan contemplated by the Department for the year 2018-
19 and hopes that the Department would utilise the increased budgetary allocation of ` 2411.53 crore
in BE 2018-19 optimally and ensure that the targets/objectives set for the year 2018-19 are fully achieved
within the stipulated time frame. (Para 3.3)
Action Taken
2.2 The Department will make every effort to fulfill the targets fixed for FY 2018-19 within the
stipulated time frame.
CROP BIOTECHNOLOGY
Recommendation/Observation
2.3 The Committee expresses its displeasure over the poor financial performance of the Department in
terms of utilisation of the budgetary support made available in respect of above mentioned 19 yield
improvement projects.  It is disheartening and discouraging as well to note that the Department though
allocated 
` 37.33 crore for the purpose, could only spend ` 22.22 crore which is just 59.52 per cent
utilisation of the total financial support.  The Committee is of the considered view that the Department
fails to attach the due importance to these projects and could not take timely action to ensure that
budgetary allocation is utilised fully and optimally.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department
to furnish the detailed reasons for this poor utilisation of budgetary allocation. (Para 6.7)
Action Taken
2.4 Department has sanctioned projects for a period of three to five years related to yield improvement.
Sanctioned budget of `  37.33 crores is the total outlay of these projects and  `  22.22 crores is the
amount utilized so far. Department will release the balance amount of these projects on receipt of
financial documents from the grantee institutions. The utilization of fund is as per the targeted objectives
fulfillment.
MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS
Recommendation/Observation
2.5 The Committee is of the considered view that medicinal and aromatic plants sector has the immense
14

15
potential and untapped opportunities.  This sector in Committee’s view can play a significant role in
helping diversified livelihood of poor and vulnerable section of our society.  The Committee, thus,
appreciates the move of the Department and hopes that the financial support of 
` 50.00 crore as
earmarked for the Phyto-Pharma Plant Mission by the Department would be adequate to cater to the
financial requirements of the Mission and the objectives/targets would be achieved both in terms of
physical and financial targets as envisaged by the Department. (Para 10.3)
Action Taken
2.6 The DBT has already organized a “Brainstorming-cum-Consultation Meeting on Phytopharmaceutical
Mission for North East Region” on November 17, 2017 involving academia and industry representatives
to formulate a well-focused network translational programme on developing phyto-pharmaceuticals from
medicinal plants of North East Region. As a follow up of the above, a Project Formulation Group meeting
was also organized on January 29, 2018. As a result, the proposals have been developed for: (a) Setting
up a Quality Control (QC) and Quality Assurance (QA) facility for the Phyto-pharmaceuticals in North
East India, (b) Setting up of Pilot Scale Facility for the standardized extract preparation in medicinal
plants in NER, and (c) Development of phytopharmaceutical drug for diabetes from Ficus semicordata
as per regulatory guidelines of DCGI.
INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Recommendation/Observation
2.7 The Committee appreciates the progress made by the Department in the direction of vaccine development
of diseases like malaria, dengue, Japanese encephalitis, etc.  The Committee, however, did not find any
mention of the efforts being undertaken by the Department in the direction of Chikungunya and as to
what research and development activities have been undertaken by the Department during last few years.
The Committee is of the considered view that our country has been facing severe health issues with regard
to Chikungunya infection and the disturbing figures of the deaths registered during last few years on
account of this disease in our country. The Committee feels that there is a need to control mosquito
population which can to an extent be an attributed factor in spreading Chikungunya infection.  The
Committee also feels that the Department of Biotechnology can play an important role by finding
biotechnological solutions to keep mosquito population under control.  The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Department to intensify its R&D and product development activities for development of
safe, efficacious and inexpensive Chikungunya vaccine. (Para 11.4)
Action Taken
2.8 1. The Department has supported various projects for diagnosis and treatment of Chikungunya
from last one decade especially after the outbreak of this disease in 2006-2007 in Kerala and
Tamil Nadu.
2. A consortia based project has been supported since 2014 for the development of a diagnosis
kit for Chikungunya. The group is in process of developing universal CHIKV antigen detection
test.

16
3. The Department of Biotechnology organized an international workshop on Chikungunya Vaccines-
Challenges, Opportunities and Possibilities on the 5th and 6th of February 2018 at Delhi, jointly
with the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), and U.S. National Institutes
of Health (NIH), National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID). The main aim
of the workshop was to discuss the new research and developments in Chikungunya vaccine
development. In sequel, Department will be soliciting proposals to strengthen Chikungunya
vaccine development. Further as suggested, efforts will be focused in finding biotechnical
solutions to keep mosquito population under control.
PUBLIC HEALTH, FOOD & NUTRITION
Recommendation/Observation
2.9 The Committee takes note of the multi-centric Pan India study on the prevalence and predictors of
vitamin B12 deficiency initiated by the Department and the progress achieved thereon.  The Committee,
however, is little perturbed to note that the Department failed to furnish the complete details like the
total number of States identified for the study, time schedule fixed for the completion of the task,
physical targets envisaged, etc. in its Background Note.  The Committee is of the firm opinion that the
Department should have been more cautious and vigilant while submitting the information for the
consideration of the Committee.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to furnish a
detailed note in the matter for the consideration of the Committee. (Para 14.2)
Action Taken
2.10 The comments of the Committee have been noted and following information on  multi-centric “Pan
India study on the prevalence and predictors of vitamin B12 deficiency” is submitted.
(i) Total number of States identified for the study  is nine. These include Telengana, Madhya
Pradesh, Odisha, Meghalaya, Gujarat, West Bengal, Tamil Nadu, Assam and Rajasthan.
Sample collection has been completed from Telengana, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Meghalaya
and Gujarat. 
(ii) Time schedule fixed for the completion of the task : Proposed to be completed by June
2019.
(iii) Physical Targets envisaged :
The proposed study will help us in understaning the prevalence of vitamin B12 deficiency across
various regions of the country in three different age groups and gender. One of the important aspects
would be to understand the critical interplay of three micronutrients (B12, folate and iron) together which
has not been comprehensively studied in India till date in the representative population. This will enable
us to evaluate the effect of vitamin B12 in the context of anemia vis-à-vis iron and folate, which is a
major public health problem in the country. Since supplementation of iron and folate has failed to mitigate

17
the problem of anemia as evidenced by many studies and the results obtained from the present study
would help in redefining the strategy to combat the problem of anemia. Identifying genetic variants
associated with vitamin B12 deficiency will also help in dietary management of individuals that have
alleles associated with low vitamin B12 levels.
BIOITECHNOLOGY FOR SOCITAL DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation/Observation
2.11 The Committee shares the ambitious and inspiring action plan prepared by the Department for the
year 2018-19.  The Committee, however, is not very pleased with the numbers achieved on count of
startups, entrepreneurs and small & medium enterprises i.e. 220, 225 and 150 respectively supported by
the Department during the year 2017-18.  The Department, on the one hand, aims to nurture approximately
300-500 new startups each year but, on the other hand, the Department in the year 2017-18 could only
manage to support a total of 220 startups which is way too less than what the Department intends.  The
Committee is of the view that the Department while providing financial support to the startups should
also ensure the sustainability of the supported startups.  The Committee, therefore,  recommends the
Department to furnish a detailed note including inter-alia details on the status of the startups supported
by the Department during the last 3 years, how many of them are in operation, etc. (Para 15.13)
Action Taken
2.12 The concerns of Committee have been noted and following details are submitted:-
* The number of entrepreneurs (225) supported by BIRAC includes individuals who are on the way
to set up their enterprises. Therefore, the total count of startups nurtured by BIRAC during the 2017-
18 should be seen as 445 (Startups 220+ Entrepreneurs 225), which is in target range of 300-500.
* To ensure sustainability of the supported startups& entrepreneurs, BIRAC supports them through
several programmes meant for funding of mid to late stage research, validation, mentoring to protect IP,
Regularity compliance & Business mentoring of the startups to make them investible by Angels and
Venture Capitalists. BIRAC undertakes these activities under various programmes for sustained hand
holding of startups as summarized below:
* Funding programmes include SBIRI and BIPP for supporting startups and SMEs for validation
and scale up. The early stage funding for emerging startups & entrepreneurs schemes include BIG,
SPARSH and IIPME.
* SEED Fund and AcE (Innovation fund) are the equity based funds for startups.
* Business Mentoring programmes include National & International exposures
* IGNITE programme at the JBS, Cambridge, UK
* SLUSH
* Investor Meets with startups & Angels, VCs

18
* Networking and mentoring platforms Boot camp to train startups
* IP, Regularity, Technical training workshops
* BIRAC has set up 3 regional centres including BRIC (Hyderabad), BREC (Bengaluru) and
BRBC (Pune) offering spectrum of services needed to support Startups and nurture
entrepreneurs.
* BIRAC has supported 35 Bioincubators.
Over last 3 years, BIRAC has supported 650 startups (including 300 entrepreneurs) who have come
up with more than 50 products in the market and another 70 products that are in the late stage of
validation. More than 99% of the startups supported during last 3 years are operational.
ASSISTANCE TO AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS
Recommendation/Observation
2.13 The Committee notes that some of the Autonomous Institutions of the Department failed to utilise
the budgetary supports fully made in their favour during the financial years 2016-17 and 2017-18.  The
Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the under utilisation of the budgetary support by these
institutions.  The utilisation in terms of per cent has continuously gone down from 99.44% to 88.75%
and from 88.75% to 76.79% during the year 2015-16, 2016-17 and 2017-18 (till 31st January, 2018)
respectively.  The unsatisfactory financial performance of the Autonomous Institution during the year
2016-17 and 2017-18 (till 31st January, 2018) is a reflection of poor monitoring by the Department over
these institutions.  The Committee is of the view that had the Department monitored the financial
performance of these institutions on account of the budgetary support made in their favour, the sub-
optimal utilisation of funds could have been avoided.  The Committee is of the opinion that the
Department needs to be proactive in its approach and should not have the laid back attitude about the
financial position of these institutes. (Para 16.7)
2.14 The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should put in place a robust internal
monitoring mechanism in order to monitor the financial performance of these autonomous institutions
on a regularly basis and take remedial and corrective preventive measures if underutilisation is registered.
(Para 16.8)
Action Taken
2.15 The Department could be able to utilize 99.99.% of allocated revised budget under AIs head. The
Department would ensure optimal utilization of funds by AIs and in accordance with the recommendation
of committee the Department already has a very robust Monitoring mechanism which would be made
now proactive in monitoring of financial positions of these institutions.
BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY RESEARCH ASSISTANCE COUNCIL (BIRAC)
Recommendation/Observation
2.16 The Committee hopes that the proposed activities of BIRAC for the year 2018-19 such as setting

19
up of a Product Commercialization Fund for the startups and entrepreneurs, establishment of 10 new
incubators and 2 new regional centers, etc. would be completed within the time scheduled fixed for the
purpose and the budgetary support of ` 31.00 crore in BE 2018-19 would prove to be adequate to cater
to the financial needs of the Council and if not, the Department should seek more funds for the purpose
at RE stage. (Para 17.5)
Action Taken
2.17 (i) BIRAC’ s budget of `  31 cr. is meant for operational, administrative expenditure and certain
core activities including Entrepreneurship Development, Regional Centres, Partnership programs,
Capacity Building, IP services, etc.
(ii) BIRAC is also receiving budget from DBT for undertaking various schemes through which
we provide funding support to Startups, Entrepreneurs and SMEs; setting up of Incubators,
Equity funding. These schemes include BIPP, SBIRI, BIG, PACE, SPARSH, UIC, SEED, etc.
Committed activities related to setting up of 10 New incubators and 2 New Regional Centers
would be supported under this budget. Around allocation for 2017-18 was ` 141 crores.
Product Commercialization Fund is a new initiative and would be fully operational in this FY for
which additional funds would be requested at RE stage.  In addition, BIRAC also mobilizes resources
from other National and International bodies/ Departments.

20
CHAPTER – III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
-Nil-
20

21
CHAPTER – IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AW AITED
ANIMAL PRODUCTION
Recommendation/Observation
4.1 The Committee also recommends the Department to come out with a strategy paper in the matter
and prepare a roadmap to enhance the production and productivity of livestock in the country.
(Para 7.4)
Action Taken
4.2 Action has been initiated for preparation of strategy paper on Road Map to enhance production and
productivity of livestock through biotechnological intervention.
Further recommendation/Observations
The Committee feels that application of biological tools to enhance the productivity of livestock
sector through R&D interventions is extremely important.  The Committee recommends that
the Department would prepare strategy paper on the subject in a time bound manner and the
details of the same may also be shared with the Committee.
21

22
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS—AT A GLANCE
ANIMAL PRODUCTION
The Committee feels that application of biological tools to enhance the productivity of livestock
sector through R&D interventions is extremely important.  The Committee recommends that
the Department would prepare strategy paper on the subject in a time bound manner and the
details of the same may also be shared with the Committee. (Para 4.3)
22

23
MINUTES

V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 27th December, 2018 in Committee Room No. 4, ‘A’
Block, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma - Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shri Anil Baluni
4. Shri Parimal Nathwani
LOK SABHA
5. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Jakhar
8. Shri Ramesh Chander Kaushik
9. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
10. Shri Daddan Mishra
11. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
12. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
13. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary
Shri T.N. Pandey, Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He informed the
Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 317th, 318th, 319th, 320th,
25

26
321st, 322nd and 323rd reports of the Committee on Action Taken by  the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in reports of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2018-19) of the Ministries/Departments of Biotechnology; Science and Technology; Scientific and
Industrial Research; Space; Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Atomic Energy; and Earth Sciences
respectively. The Committee, then, considered the draft 317th to 323rd reports and adopted the same.
3. The Committee decided to present/lay its 317th to 323rd reports in both the Houses of Parliament on
the 2nd January, 2019. The Committee also authorised the Chairman to decide the names of the Members
for presentation/ laying of the reports in both the Houses of Parliament.
4. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3:25 
P.M.