PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA                     166 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND  TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT  AND  FORESTS 
  
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-NINTH REPORT OF THE 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS ON THE 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-2007) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 14TH DECEMBER, 2006) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK  SABHA ON THE 14TH DECEMBER, 2006) 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2006/AGRAHAYANA, 1928 (SAKA) 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING  
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND  TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT  AND  FORESTS 
  
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY-SIXTH REPORT 
 
ON 
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED FIFTY-NINTH REPORT OF THE 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS ON THE 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2006-2007) OF THE 
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 14TH DECEMBER, 2006) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF  THE LOK  SABHA ON THE 14TH DECEMBER, 2006) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI
 
DECEMBER, 2006/AGRAHAYANA, 1928 (SAKA) 
 

CONTENTS 
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE........................................................................................ (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................ (iii) 
3. R EPORT OF THE COMMITTEE................................................................................................ 1-21 
4. A NNEXURE ....................................................................................................................... 23-29 
5. M INUTES OF THE MEETING ................................................................................................ 31-33  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2006-07) 
 1. Shri P.G.Narayanan    –-----    Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. Prabha Thakur 
 #3. Vacant 
 4. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya 
 5. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
 6. Shri Kamal Akhtar 
 7. Shri Saman Pathak 
 8. Shri Jabir Husain 
 9. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
 10. Dr. Barun Mukherjee 
  LOK  SABHA 
 11. Shri Jashubhai Dhanabhai Barad 
 12.  Dr. Sujan Chakraborty 
 13.  Shri Thupstan Chhewang 
 14.  Shri Pankaj Choudhary 
 15.  Shri Francis Fanthome 
 16.  Shri Babubhai K. Katara 
 17.  Shri A. Venkatesh Naik 
 18.  Shri Brahmananda Panda 
 19.  Shrimati Neeta Pateriya 
 20.  Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil  
 21.  Shri Pratik Prakashbapu Patil  
 22.  Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat 
 23.  Shri K.C. Singh “Baba” 
 24.  Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
 25.  Shri Rakesh Singh 
 26.  Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli  
 27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar 
 28.  Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
 29.  Shri Mitrasen Yadav 
 30.  Shri Sita Ram Yadav 
*31. Shri Rampal Singh 
 
 SECRETARIAT   
 Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary  
 Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
 Shri Alok Kumar Chatte rjee, Deputy Secretary 
 Shri Jagmohan Sundriyal, Under Secretary 
 Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 I , the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, 
Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Comm ittee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One 
Hundred Sixty-sixth Report on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the recommendations 
contained in One Hundred Fifty-ninth Report of the Committ ee on Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests. 
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Fifty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th May, 2006. 
3. There were twenty-three recommendations contained in the One Hundred Fifty-ninth Report of the Committee. 
Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Ministry on 16th October, 
2006. 
4. In the meeting held on 12th December, 2006 the Committee considered the dr aft Action Taken Report and 
adopted the same. 
 
 
 
P. G. NARAYANAN 
N
EW DELHI ; Chairman, 
December 12, 2006 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REPORT 
 The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the 
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Fifty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests which was presented to Parliament on 18th May, 2006. There were twenty-three 
recommendations contained in the Report. Action Taken Note on all the recommendations was received from the 
Ministry of Environment & Forests on 16th October, 2006. 
 The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the Action Taken 
by the Ministry are set out in the succeeding paragraphs. 
BUDGETARY  ALLOCATIONS 
Recommendation 
 The Committee observes that during the Ninth Five Year  Plan (1997-2002), the percentage of funds utilization 
was 97.73 per cent. However, in respect of Tenth Five Year Plan (2002-07), which is in its final stage, the Ministry has 
anticipated only 88.77 per cent utilization of the approved outlay. The Committee is of the view that the drop in 
utilization percentage in the Tenth Plan as compared to th at in Ninth Plan reflects reduced activities of the Ministry. 
The Committee, therefore, feels that the Ministry needs to go  into the reasons for underutilization of funds during the 
Tenth Plan and evolve suitable mechanism in this regard to avoid such situation in the Eleventh Plan.(Para 8) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 The Table below gives information on Plan Outlays approved for the Ninth and Tenth Five Year Plans, outlays 
disbursed by the Planning Commission from Year to Year (BE) and the actual/anticipated expenditure during the Ninth 
and Tenth Five Year Plans: 
Utilization Ratios in Ninth and Tenth Five Year Plans 
(Rs. in crores) 
 Ninth Five Year Plan Tenth Five Year Plan 
 1997-98 to 2001-02 2002-03 to 2006-07 
Approved Five Year Outlay 3014 5945 
Approved Annual Plans (BE) outlays 3598 5724 
Actual Expenditure in Annual Plans 2946 5276 
Utilization Ratio ( 3 to 1) % 97.7% 88.7% 
Utilization Ratio ( 3 to 2) % 81.9% 92.2% 
 
 It may be seen from the above Table that the higher utilization ratio during the Ninth Plan, vis-a-vis Five Year 
approved outlays, is due to larger funds disbursed (larger than approved outlays) to the Ministry on an year to year 
basis through the Budgets. In contrast, during the Tenth Five Year Plan, year to year funds allocated by the Planning 
Commission for the Ministry’s Annual Plans through the Budgets are lower (at Rs 5724 crores) than the Tenth Plan 
approved outlay (of Rs 5945 crores). A more appropriate wa y of looking at utilization ratios in the two plans would, 
thus be to compare actual/anticipated expenditures with the actual outlays allocated by the Planning Commission 
during the Five years of a Plan throu gh the Budgets. Such a comparison (Row 5 of above Table) reveals that the 

utilization ratios are anticipated to increase from around 82% in Ninth Five Year Plan to around 92% in the Tenth Five 
Year Plan. 
 Fund utilization slippages in the Tenth Plan are mainly due  to factors like delays in approval of schemes, changes 
in financing pattern of schemes, matters being sub judice (Taj Protection scheme). Delays in approvals/investment 
approvals of schemes and other procedural delays, including delays in receipt of proposals, submissions of UC, may 
have also added to such slippages. For many schemes implementing agencies are state Governments/Forest 
Departments. Timely release of matching grants by those also impacts on the performance of such schemes. 
 Mechanisms evolved by the Ministry to ensure timely progress of plan expenditure include setting up of quarterly 
targets, regular review of plan expenditure against such targets and regular visits by Nodal Officers to follow up on 
pending issues with States/UTs. Guidelines have been issued to undertake independent reviews of all the plan schemes 
with a view to, inter alia, increase their efficiency, transparency and accountability and improving their quality of 
implementation. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the clarification furnis hed by the Ministry and would like to see  effective action for 
greater utilization of allocated funds. 
Recommendation 
 The Committee observes that despite su bstantial decrease in RE stage in all the above-mentioned schemes except 
Forests & Wildlife during last year, the Ministry has sought increased outlay for the year 2006-07. The Committee feels 
that the Ministry should provide the Committee with detailed reasons for the enhanced budgetary allocations. (Para 
12) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 It may be noted that the plan outlay of the Ministry for the Year 2005-06 was reduced from Rs 1234.91 crores, as 
approved by the Planning Commission, to Rs 1100.00 crores by the Finance Ministry mid way in the financial year. 
Not only was such financial reduction made at RE stage, but certain additional expenditures also sought to) be 
accommodated within this reduced outlay of  the Ministry. The cut in outlay was ma ndated by the Ministry of Finance 
and the Ministry of Environment & Forests had to adjust its scheme-wise allocations to this reduced outlay. 
 For the year 2006-07, the Ministry has been allocated an  outlay of Rs 1338.93 crores, an increase of 8.4 per-cent 
as against a rise of 7.4 per-cent in the preceding year. Of the total increase of Rs 104 crores in Annual Plan 2006-07 of 
the Ministry, an amount of around Rs 72 crores is accounted for the scheme of Integrated Forest Protection Scheme, 
which was not allocated any plan outlay in the BE of the pr eceding year on account of uncerta inty over its transfer to 
the States. Thus, enhancement in outlay by 8.4 per-cent (2.6 per-cent excluding the In tegrated Forest Protection 
Scheme) of the Ministry in 2006-07 can best be described as modest, given the overall rise in Central Plan Outlay of 
Ministries/Departments at 20.3 per-cent in 2006-07. 
Comments 
 The Committee feels that the Ministry must review it s budgetary planning and make sure that realistic 
physical and financial targets are proj ected in the budget. The Committee also  feels that it should take up the 
matter with the Ministry of Finance a nd persuade it not to reduce the budget ary allocation at RE stage, as such 
drastic cut can lead to the hampering of planned projects. 
Recommendation 
 The Ministry informed that the Annual Plan 2006-07 proposed seven new schemes. A total outlay of Rs 33.02 
crores was proposed by the Ministry on these schemes, wh ich was reduced to Rs 30.27 crores in Planning Commission 
discussions. However, given the lower allocation of outlays finally made by the Planning Commission and priority 

accorded to completion of ongoing schemes, only notional allocations have been made for these new schemes as shown 
in Table below: 
Table: New plan schemes proposed in the Annual Plan 2006-07 
(Rs. in crores) 
Scheme Outlay Outlay agreed Final 
 Proposed by at PC outlays 
 Ministry Discussions  
Organizational Strengthening 2.97 2.97 1.59* 
& Repositioning of EPCO    
National Coastal Management 4.00 4.00 0.10 
Programme    
Strengthening of 1.10 1.10 0.10 
Environmental Information    
Centre    
Capacity Building EIA & 0.20 0.20 0.10 
Revised Environmental clearance    
process    
Promotion of Bilateral 2.00 2.00 0.00** 
Cooperation    
Afforestation through PRI  - 10.00   0.10 
Protection of Wildlife outside 22.75 10.00 0.10 
protected Areas    
TOTAL : 33.02 30.27 2.09 
*    Externally aided scheme. 
* * Notional provision included under the scheme of International cooperation. 
 The Committee observes that with very low allocation approved for the proposed seven new schemes of the 
Annual Plan 2006-07, it will not be po ssible for the Ministry to attain it s objective in the proposed areas. 
Therefore, the Committee recommends th at the Ministry should take up this issue with the Planning 
Commission at RE stage of budgetary allocation and must strive for the success of these schemes. (Para 16) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 The low/notional allocations\for the proposed new sche mes in the 2006-07 Annual Plan of the Ministry is 
because these schemes are in various stages of getting ad ministrative/investment approvals. The amounts are meant to 
cater to small financial requirements, if any, for project preparation report etc. Planning Commission would be 
approached for higher allocations once the proposed schemes have obtained necessary approvals/investment approvals. 
Comments 
 The outlay proposed to the Planning Commission by the Ministry for the seven new schemes was Rs. 33.02 
crores and it was agreed to reduce the outlay to Rs. 30. 27 crores after discussion with Planning Commission. 
However, in the final outlay, a notional provision of Rs. 2.09 crores was made to  cater to small financial 
requirements. The Committee is constrained to note that th e even after a lapse of more  than six months in the 

financial year 2006-07, none of th e seven new schemes has be en approved and hence there seems to be remote 
possibility of these schemes being implemented this ye ar. The Committee feels that the approval process for 
these schemes needs to be expedited for their early implementation. 
Recommendation 
 The Committee observes that the reasons cited by the Minist ry for shortfall in utilization of the budgetary outlays 
during 2005-06 are mainly attributed to delay in getting appr ovals, appraisal, finalizing of contracts and non-receipt of 
sufficient proposals and other such procedural delays. This reflects the lackadaisical approach on the part of the 
Ministry to implement its programmes on timely basis. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should make 
every effort to avoid such procedural delays for effective and timely implementation of the schemes. It needs to have a 
pro-active approach in this regard. (Para 19) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 The proactive measures taken by th e Ministry for effective and timely implementation of its schemes include 
setting up of quarterly expenditure targets and their regular monitoring and review. Nodal Officers visit States/UTs 
regularly to follow up on pending issues with States/UTs. Th e Ministry also prepares an Outcome Budget defining the 
outcomes, scheme-wise, in terms of measurable and monitorable deliverables. 
 The National Environment Policy 2006, which has been approved by the Cabinet, would also entail suitable 
reforms in the formulation and implementation of plan schemes of the Ministry. Towards this, guidelines have been 
issued for independent evaluation of all the ongoing plan schemes of the Ministry to facilitate 
reprioritization/reengineering of plan schemes with a view to increasing their e fficiency, transparency and 
accountability and improving quality of their implementatio n. Other measures, as deemed necessary, would be taken 
towards avoiding procedural delays and ensuring an effective and timely implementation of schemes. 
Comments 
 The Committee is of the view that the measures taken by the Ministry so far have failed to bring the 
desired result. It is not sure whether the position w ill be better with the implementation of the National 
Environment Policy, 2006. 
RESEARCH 
Recommendation 
 The Committee feels that the scope of forestry resear ch should cover not only biological and technological 
aspects (forestry, forest products, conservation, wildlife), but also a wide spectrum of economic, environmental, 
sociological and policy research since the continuous and sustainable development of forestry would depend on 
research inputs in crucial areas and expanding the knowled ge in various fields. Moreover, Universities providing 
forestry research should be given gr ants-in-aid for strengthen ing their infrastructure and technical capabilities. 
Opportunities should also be provided for furthering the acad emic advancement of foresters/scientists/academicians in 
the field of forestry. The Committee would also like to know the achievements made out of these researches 
particularly during 2005-06 in which a number of research projects were undertaken/completed. (Para 25) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 Already research arena has been broadened by giving due emphasis to socio-economic, environmental and policy 
research. Grants-in-aid to universities engaged in forestry research are also being prov ided by Indian Council of 
Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE). Ministry has taken a note regarding providing opportunities for furthering 
academic advancement of foresters/scientists/academicians. Already a few long-term courses in the country are being 
sponsored by the Ministry. Few of the important achievements of the research projects completed by the Indian Council 

of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE) and Indian Plywood Industries Research and Training Institute (IPIRTI) 
are given below. 
(A) Indian Council of Forestry Re search and Education (ICFRE) 
Environmental Issues 
 Development and evaluation of eco-friendly wood preservatives. 
 Efficiency of organic vis-a-vis chemical fertilizer in improving the productivity of sodic soil. 
 Ecological survey of cold desert areas to select suitable species for afforestation. 
 Conservation and management of Coondapur mangroves, Karnataka. 
 Development of afforestation methodology for different types of mined areas in central India and ecological 
evaluation of rehabilitation areas. 
 The role of biofertiliser in ecorestoration of problematic site like mine reject soil in Goa. 
 Integrated nutrient management in shifting cultivation soil through green manuring and inorganic fertilizers 
 Study of the changes of morphological, physical and chemical properties of soil under shifting cultivation. 
Sociological Issues 
 Socioeconomic studies of some important medicinal plants in the tribal belts of Tamilnadu. 
 Studies on the drying behaviour of timbers used for handicrafts. 
 Phytosociological and socioeconomic impact of Joint Forest Management (JFM) in Tamilnadu. 
Economic Issues 
 Development of suitable field planting models using different combinations of indigenous species in lower 
hills of Himachal Pradesh including evaluation of their economics. 
 Development of alternative preservatives of more eco nomic value and schedules for their incorporation in 
wood. 
 Participatory agroforestry programmes for poverty alleviation and environmental restoration in Perur block. 
(B) Indian Plywood Industries Research  and Training Institute (IPIRTI) 
Institute projects 
 Effect of cyclic and Accelerated Water Resistance tests on bending properties of composites from wood and 
other natural fibres including bamboo (Phase 1: Plywood) 
 Study of alternate test method for 72 hours boiling test prescribed for plywood and block board in Indian 
Standard Specification. 
 Development of panels from bamboo using bamboo curtain for transport flooring . Strengthening of Non-
destructive test facilities and development of test methods for panel products . 
 Study on preferential absorption of chemicals in dip diffusion process of veneer treatment with fixed type of 
preservative CCB 
 Development of UF. resin with low formaldehyde emission for particle board 
 Design and Development of Mechanized Model of E-Tester 

 Development of Powder PF Resin for bamboo mat composites 
 Development of improved Cardanol phenol formaldehyde (CPF) resin 
Sponsored projects 
 Field Demonstration & Development of bamboo based composites/panels for housing in NE sponsored by 
MoEF (implemented in collaboration with BMTPC). 
 Upscaling of lab. Technology for making panels from banana sheath developed by Regional Research 
Laboratory, Trivandrum - sponsored by BMTPC. 
 Study on the suitability of plantation grown timbers for the manufacture of general purpose plywood -Phase 
II - sponsored by Tamilnadu Forest Development Corpn. 
 Joint Investigative study with TIFAC to prepare technology package for manufacture of Bamboo Board 
(Laminates) - sponsored by TIFAC, New Delhi. 
 Evaluation of Lindane 20 EC as a glue line additive for protection of plywood sponsored by MIs. Kanoria 
Chemicals & Ind. Ltd. 
 Suitability of plantation grown timber species received from Tamilnadu for the manufacture of plywood- 
Phase III - sponsored by Tamilnadu Forest Development Corporation. 
 Preparation of Pre-Feasibility Repor t for establishing particle board and plywood factories based on 
plantation timber in Haryana - sponsored by BIL T,. Haryana. 
Comments 
 The Committee commends the efforts made by the Minist ry in research arena. However, it would like the 
Ministry to review the usefulness of its research studi es as it requires vast skilled human resource base along 
with technological expertise and large scale investment . The Committee opines that the Ministry should take 
adequate measures in the direction of providing o pportunities for furthering academic advancement of 
foresters/scientists/academicians, because unless these prof essions are made more satisf ying and challenging, it 
would be difficult to allure best of the brains in this field. 
Recommendation 
 The Committee understands that establishment of a National Forest Data Centre, Centre for Continuing 
Education in Natural Resource Management and a Centre for Excellence in Medicinal Plants are the important physical 
targets for the Tenth Five Year Plan and in response to th e achievements made in these areas, the Ministry has stated 
that action has been initiated to set up these centers. Th e Committee feels that the Ministry should provide detailed 
information in this regard. (Para 30) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 The Centre of Excellence on Medicinal Plants and Traditional Knowledge was established at Foundation for 
Revitalisation of Local Health Traditions (FRLHT) in October, 2002.The details about the Centre are in Annexure-I. 
 In view of an urgent need for collection of forest statistics, their validation and dissemination, the Ministry of 
Environment & Forests decided to develop a National Forestry Database Management System (NFDMS) for the 
Forestry Sector. Subsequently, an Expert/ Advisory/Working Group was constituted for the development of NFDMS 
with the explicit mandate for preparation of Terms of Reference (TOR) and other such guidelines to achieve the 
integrated NFDMS in a comprehensive manner including strengthening of technology, institutional and human 
capabilities and to ensure continuing and effective dissemination and use of forest statistics. 

 The first meeting of the Expert Group was convened from 11-13lh July, 2005 in Delhi and the TORs for 
Information Need Analysis (INA), Regional and National Workshop and Capacity Building etc. were prepared. 
 Since, the SU Division did not have required funds, the proposal was submitted to IT Division for necessary 
allocation of funds. 
 After various rounds of discussion, a revised proposal for the preparation of blueprint for the development of 
NFDMS has again been submitted to IT Division, requesting to provide Rs. 1.23 crores from the IT Head during the 
financial year 2006-07. The proposal includes (i) Informati on Need Analysis (ii) Functional Requirement Study (iii) 
Organizing five Regional Workshops and one National Workshop etc. towards the development of the National 
Forestry Database Management System (NFDMS). 
Comments 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply and is distressed to note the half-hearted approach of the 
Ministry towards development of National Forestry Database Management  System. It’s the final year of Tenth 
Five Year Plan and the project is st ill reeling under administrative procedure.  It appears that the Ministry has 
not made the desired efforts in this respect. Furthermore, it has not furn ished any details regarding Centre for 
Continuing Education in Natural Resource Management. 
Recommendation 
 The Committee recommends that the rural people, particul arly the tribal community have an intimate knowledge 
of forest products, their species, their growth characteristic s, utility, medicinal value, etc. They are also well informed 
about the species that need to be planted in a given locality to satisfy specific requirements of fuel, fodder, timber, and 
other non-wood forest products. This knowledge should be utilized under the regeneration programme for the larger 
cause of environmental protection and benefit of the community. There is a need to take initiative for the management 
of the forests so that the objectives of the forest policy could be met with direct involvement of the people in the 
management and growth of forests. (Para 31) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 The Ministry acknowledges that the rural people have intimate knowledge of forest products, their species, and 
their other characteristics. In view of  this appreciation, the National Afforestation Programme (NAP) Scheme being 
implemented by the Ministry through a two-tier organizational set-up of Forest Development Agency (FDA) at the 
Forest Division level and Joint Forest Management Committees (JFMCs) at the village level places emphasis on micro-
planning for joint development and management of forests. The micro-plans are formulated in consultation with the 
local villages after a detailed Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) at the village level. It is envisaged that this PRA will 
bring ‘forth the document the local people’s knowledge about forests, the protection and management for their 
incorporation in the microplans. The Ministry has also issu ed an advisory to all States/Union Territories to give 
emphasis on documentation and use of traditional knowledge while conducting PRAs and preparation of microplans. 
Comments 
 The Committee appreciates the initiati ves taken by the Ministry in the management and growth of forests 
and observes that it must encourage  the participation of local communiti es since these are one of the core 
elements for regeneration of forests. 
Recommendation 
 Moreover, the need of the hour is to conserve whatever is left of natural forests. Apart from this, there is a need 
to develop a strategy to regenerate natural forests and conser ve the rare forest wealth. To  protect the different species 
from extinction, which are available in different forest ranges of the country, Government should initiate steps to set-up  

Gene Banks in different parts of the country, which can take care of promoting long term conservation of forests.                
    (Para 32) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 The State Forest Departments are undertaking a number of activities for conserving and regeneration of natural 
forests under various State as well as Ce ntrally sponsored forestry schemes, which include protection, assisting natural 
regeneration and undertaking soil and moisture conservation measures etc. The Indian Council of Forestry Research 
and Education (ICFRE), Dehradun is proposing to have a ‘N ational Bureau of Forest Genetic Resources’, which will 
help in preserving the germplasm of various forestry species in the country, in its institutes for promoting long-term 
conservation of forests. Provision for establishment of the Bureau is being made in the Eleventh Five Year Plan. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
NATIONAL  AFFORESTATION  AND  ECO-DEVELOPMENT  PROGRAMME 
Recommendation 
 The Committee has been given to understand that as per preliminary estimates of the State Forest Report (SFR) 
2003, forest and tree cover has increased to 23.68 per cent. The Committee appreciates the activities undertaken by the 
Ministry in achieving this target. The Committee, however feels,  that there is a long way to go as it is proposed to 
increase the forest cover upto 33 per cent by 2012. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should keep up the 
pace of its activities to achieve the proposed target on time. The Committee recommends that efforts should be made to 
increase forest cover in those states, which are short of the stipulated target so that a balanced proportion of forest cover 
can be maintained in all parts of the country. (Para 37) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 The Ministry acknowledges the concer n raised by the Committee with regard to the enormity of the task of 
achieving 33 per-cent forest and tree cover by 2012. However, the target is to be achieved nationally, not at individual 
State or Union Territory level. It is also to be considered th at in view of the enormity of the target all States and Union 
Territory should contribute to the achievement of the target, even though in States having larger vacant or degraded 
lands the scale of tree planting or forest regeneration needs to be much larger than other States. Accordingly, the annual 
tree planting target for each State and Union Territory under the 20 point programme is fixed keeping in view the area 
of the wastelands available in the State/Union Territory, thei r past performance in tree planting, and the requirement to 
achieve the national target of 33 per-cent forest and tree cover in time. 
Comments 
 The Committee acknowledges the efforts made by the Ministry in increasing the percentage of forest and 
tree cover in the country and is fully aware that the target of increasing it up to 33 per-cent by 2012 is a national 
task. However, it’s the task of the Ministry to keep up the pace of its sustained efforts in this direction along with 
the State and Union Territory Governme nts and maintain effective co-ordinat ion and monitoring  to attain the 
target in stipulated time-frame. 
ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION ‘TRAINING’ EXTENSION 
Recommendation 
 The Committee while appreciating the efforts of the Mini stry for creation of public awareness about environment 
through various activities, observes that apart from these meas ures the Ministry should also arrange fairs/exhibitions in 

different parts of the country with a view to enhancing the knowledge of the general public about the environment and 
to highlight the efforts to explore and exploit forest resources for sustainable growth. (Para 40) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 While it appears difficult for the Ministry to arrange such fa irs/exhibitions in different parts of the country, it will 
continue to financially support organisation of such fairs/exhibitions for enhancing the knowledge of the general public 
about the environment including utilisation of forests resources for sustainable development. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation 
 The Committee recommends that talented persons may be encouraged with remunerative schemes and attractive 
pay scales to do research on environment issues. Besides,  Ministry should also consider introducing research 
scholarships to school leaving students in order to motivate  them to join frontier areas of research in the field of 
environment. These initiatives may help in accelerating the pace of environmental research for the development of a 
strong knowledge base and its application for society at large. Efforts should also be made to include environment as a 
formal subject in the schools curriculum. (Para 41) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 Plan Scheme for encouraging research on environment issues is already in place. Recommendations of the 
Standing Committee will be kept in mind while supporting proposals under the scheme. Substantial progress has 
already been achieved in infusion of environment in the school curricula. This is an on-going process and apart from 
school curricula, appreciation courses on environment have also been started by IGNOU under the Plan Scheme. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
SURVEY 
Recommendation 
 The Committee is of the view that BSI should use modern technologies like remote sensing, GIS, GPS and plan 
appropriate strategies for sampling specific priority areas. Field methods need to be appropriately modernized with use 
of laptop computers for on-field data storage, photo camera for close images, digital photo camera for photo 
documentation. This would help quick capturing of field data and presentation in modern format. (Para 44) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 The Botanical Survey of India (BSI) has initiated work using modern technologies like remote sensing, GIS and 
GPS. Some Scientists of BSI have been trained in the use of these technologies in plant surveys. The BSI has in all 17 
Geographical Positioning Systems located in its Headquarters, Eastern, Central, Southern & Arid Zone Circles among 
others. These are used for survey work in the field to record the coordinates of species distribution. The BSI is 
collaborating with the Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS), Dehradun in ground leve l surveys of pl ant resources 
in Central India and Eastern India for developing landscape level database. The Scientists of IIRS and BSI have worked 
together to put data on Red List Plants in GIS platform. 
 In plant surveys Digital Cameras are being used and photo database on Indian Plants is being developed in BSL 
The BSI also uses laptops for on-field st orage of images of plants and data. The Digital Photographs taken in the field 
are being used. in presentations in meetings / conferences and in research publications. 

Comments 
 The Committee is happy to note that  various steps have been initiated by the Ministry to modernize the 
functioning of BSI and hopes that in fu ture also, it will keep itself abreast wi th latest technologies available in 
the market. 
NATIONAL RIVER CONSERVATION PLAN 
Recommendation 
 The Committee is deeply perturbed to note that the Yamuna Water at Delhi continue to be stinking and dirty. It 
notes with concern that the waste is still dumped in the Ya muna river through drains. It also notes with concern about 
the lack of public awareness and public participation in the cleaning of rivers. The Committee is, therefore, of the view 
that the cleansing of Yamuna has to go beyond cosmetic measures like removal of slums along the banks and greening 
of banks. Perhaps, the more concrete solution is to preven t the drainage wastes from entering the river and ensure the 
increase of the flow of the fresh water throughout the year. (Para 48) 
 The Committee is also of the view that  the Ministry, in coordination with the State Government of Uttar Pradesh, 
Haryana & Delhi, should plan a strategy for augmentation of water resources in the upper stretches of the Yamuna and 
for conserving water, both for domestic and irrigation purposes. (Para 49) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 Cleaning of a river is a mammoth task requiring the involvement of all the stakeholders in the project, viz. Central 
Government, State Government, Local Bodies, Implementing Agencies, NGOs, general public, users, etc. Pollution 
abatement is not a one-time effort and the demands of ri ver cleaning keep on increasing with the increase in the 
population and expansion of townships and the success of the scheme depend on sustained efforts to be made by all 
these agencies. The problem of continuing pollution of Ya muna in Delhi, apart from the normal problem of discharge 
of untreated sewage into the river, can be largely attributed  to large scale extraction of its water upstream of Delhi for 
drinking and irrigation purposes leading to negligible flow in the river beyond Wazirabad at Delhi. 
 A significant development on the issue has been that pursuant to the directions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court on 
4th August 2004, a High Power Committee was constituted by the Ministry of Urban Development for preparation of 
Integrated Action Plan for the abatement of pollution of River Yamuna in Delhi. The Integrated Action Plan so 
prepared was submitted to the Hon’ble Court in November 2004 with several agencies identified towards 
implementation of the Action Plan for pollution abatement in Yamuna in Delhi. 
 Further, a High Powered Committee under the chairmanship of Member, Planning Commission was constituted 
by the Ministry of Environment & Forests in January, 1998 with representations from ripari an States of river Yamuna 
namely, U.P., Haryana, Delhi, Himachal Pradesh & Rajasthan to consider the issue of maintenance of minimum flow in 
river Yamuna and to suggest remedial measures both short term and long term for maintaining the minimum flow in 
the river. 
 The Committee has already submitted its report on the minimum flow of river Yamuna to Hon’ble Supreme 
Court as per the orders in the Writ Petition No.537 of 1992 (Sureshwar Sinha and others Vs. Union of India). 
 The Committee has recommended on the requirement for maintaining a minimum flow of 10 cumecs (cubic 
metre/sec.) in the river and decided the ratio of shares of a ll the riparian States in order to meet the. minimum flow 
requirement. The report on minimum flow also recommends the need for taking other measures for improving river 
flow, such as timely completion of upstream storages, effective treatment of sewage generated and utilization of treated 
sewage, irrigation/horticulture, improving water use efficiency by the riparian states in irrigation and drinking water 
sectors etc. The issue of augmentation of water resources in the upper stretches of the Yamuna and water conservation 
are within the mandate of the Ministry of Water Resources. 

 Adequate steps are being taken for creating public pa rticipation & awareness towards achieving a clean Yamuna. 
Activities under Yamuna Action Plan Phas e-I (Y API) were taken up in U.P., Ha ryana and Delhi as part of the non-
sewerage interventions during 2000-03 with an objective of generating awareness regarding the pollution in river 
Yamuna, among the beneficiaries in the project area. Several lessons that were learnt from YAP-I and specific value 
added components have been includ ed in YAP-II. The PP&A programme unde r YAP-II shall invo lve public in 
decision-making process by utilizing numerous NGOs. YAP-II also includes public relations/information programme 
in Delhi, to be implemented by Delhi Jal Board. In Delhi PP&A component is to be implemented by Municipal. 
Corporation of Delhi through several grassroots NGOs. This  includes Clean Yamuna Manch at Delhi and other PP&A 
programme (Socio-economic and environmental upgradat ion of CTCs programme, school health and hygiene 
programme, and town specific innovative programme). At present, MCD is in the process of selecting NGOs for 
different components as mentioned above covering all the zones of Delhi. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply and observes that the Ministry should pursu e the Yamuna cleaning 
programme diligently and in a time-b ound manner as the target of cleani ng Yamuna is still far from being 
achieved. The Committee is also not aware about the fate of the report on the Minimum Flow of River Yamuna 
submitted to Hon’ble Supreme Court. A serious and concerted efforts need to be made in this direction. 
Recommendation 
 Cleaning of all major polluted rivers by 2007 is one of the important targets of the Ministry. The Committee, 
however, finds that the Ministry has not been able to meet the proposed target under this programme and with the 
present pace, it would not be possible to achieve the target of cleaning of the polluted rivers by 2007. It’s the final year 
of the Tenth Five Year Plan and the Ministry is not in a position to name a single river where the requisite results have 
been achieved. This reflects that lack adaisical approach and inadequate measur es adopted by the Ministry on such a 
major issue. The Committee expresses serious concern in this regard and recommends that all the phase-wise 
programmes need to be monitored and the Measure of the Performance (MoP) should be introduced to review the 
cleaning activities on urgent basis. (Para 50) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 Cleaning of major polluted rivers by 2007 is a monitorable target for the Ministry of Environment & Forests in 
the Tenth Plan. The present National River Conservation Plan covers all the major rivers in the country. These rivers 
are a part of the 14 major river basins of the country. Th e Plan envisages execution of works worth Rs.4736 crores 
leading to creation of sewage treatment capacity of 5365 mld out of which 1777 mld capacity has been created till 
March, 2006. Of this, 1051 mld capacity has been created in the first four years of Tenth Plan. The target for the current 
year has been fixed as 253 mld. Since the estimated expenditure for Tenth Plan is Rs. 1427 cr. only, it is obvious that 
the CCEA approved sewage treatment capacity of 5365 ml d under NRCP cannot be created during the Plan. The 
present approved cost of NRCP  is Rs. 4736 crores out of which GOl’s shar e is Rs. 4028 cr. Of this Rs. 928 cr. has 
already been spent during Ninth Plan. This leaves a balance of Rs. 3100 cr. which is required to clean the rivers as per 
the present approvals under NRCP against estimated expenditure of Rs. 1427 cr. for Tenth Plan. 
 The incremental pollution loads of sewage outweigh th e treatment capacity created, due to the exponential 
growth of the big cities on the banks of the major rive rs. Creation of capacity even to the identified pollution 
loads/stretches is not becoming possible due to the resource crunch as detail ed above. Problems in the operational level 
because of lack of infrastructure support by State Governments to the operation and maintenance of assets contribute to 
untreated sewage flowing into the rivers despite capacity being in place for treatment. 
 Inspite of the above constraints there has been a perc eptible improvement in the water quality of river Ganga 
since the launching of GAP-I. A statement of Biochemical Oxygen Demand and Dissolved Oxygen, key indicators of 
water quality during 1986 and 20 05 placed at Annexure-II clear ly shows that there is an  improvement in the water 

quality of river Ganga all along its stretch during this period. This water quality monitoring has been carried out by 
reputed independent agencies like Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur, Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd., Hardwar, 
Indian Toxicological Research Centre, Lucknow, Central Pollution Control Board etc. 
 In order to achieve the target of cleaning of major rive rs by 2007, huge amount of funds  are .required to treat the 
full quantum of identified pollution loads with projections for the project implementation period. Given the position 
that we are in the end of the Plan, the targets need to be inevitably carried to the next five year plan. 
 All the works under the National River Conservation Plan are done on the banks of major rivers in the towns and 
cities/locations in the identified polluted stretches of rivers across the country and identified lakes. Development and 
maintenance of a proper sewerage system inside the towns an d cities is primarily the responsibility of the respective 
State Governments and the prevention and control of industrial pollution is being taken care of by the Pollution Control 
Boards. 
Comments 
 The Committee observes that making  the major rivers of the country pollution free is a mammoth task 
before the Ministry and this can be done only with the cooperation of the concerned State Governments and 
people. For this, people have to be sensitized about th e importance of cleanliness of  these rivers and persuaded 
to extend their full cooperation in this task. Similarly, concerned State Governments h ave also to be impressed 
upon to cooperate in the best possible way. Merely shifting  the responsibility or putting  the blame on them will 
not help in achieving the gigantic go al. Besides this, the need for prudent budgetary planning with fixed time 
frame and will power cannot be over emphasized. 
PREVENTION  OF  AIR  AND  WATER  POLLUTION 
Recommendation 
 The Committee is of the view that Central and State Po llution Control Boards should have a more systematic 
approach to measure ambient air quality with a source-wise inventory and local concentration. The information should 
be collected on a regular basis, standardized for Metros and all urban sectors and should be regularly displayed 
publicly. The Central and State Pollution Control Boards should also monitor local impact of air pollution on health by 
commissioning epidemiological studies and create a comprehe nsive database for toxic effects of each of the emitted 
gases. (Para 52) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) has drawn va rious studies for the year 2006-07 and also includes 
systematic collection of information and monitoring of ambient air. quality. A total of 313 Ambient Air Quality 
Monitoring stations have been established in various cities and towns through concerned State Pollution Control 
Boards. Initiatives have been taken to set up Continuous Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Stations (CAAQMS) in 
sixteen identified cities namely Hyderabad, Patna, Ahmedabad, Faridabad, Jharia, Bangalore, Pune, Mumbai, Sholapur, 
Jodhpur, Chennai, Agra, Kanpur, Lucknow, Varanasi and  Kolkata. Besides this, CPCB is also setting up twelve 
stations on operational contract basis in four cities which cover Delhi, Chennai, Bangalore and Lucknow. 
 It is further proposed to increase the manual National Air Quality Monitoring Stations as well as introduce 
monitoring of toxic air pollutants at selected locations. Efforts have also been made by CPCB to transmit the air quality 
data on a daily basis to CPCB website through environmental data bank. 
 In order to assess and quantify sources of air pollution, source apportionment studies have been initiated in six 
cities namely Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai, Bangalore and Pune through institutions such as NEERI, Nagpur, The 
Energy Research Institute, Delhi, IITs at Mumbai and De lhi and Automative Research Association of India (ARAI), 
Pune etc. 

 To ascertain the correlation between Pollution and health impacts CPCB has initiated various epidemiological 
studies on the subject. Some of the studies initiated in this regard include : 
 Epidemiological Study to find the Effect of Air Pollutants especially Respirable Suspended Particulate 
Matter (RSPM) and other carcinogens on Human Health in Delhi-CNCI, Kolkata 
 A Study on Ambient Air Quality, Respiratory Symptoms and Lung Function of Children in Delhi-CNCI, 
Kolkata 
 Effects of Environmental Pollution on the Status of Human Health of Delhi Residents - AIIMS, New Delhi 
 Human Risk Assessment Studies in Asbestos Industries in India-ITRC, Lucknow 
 The Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) in a ssociation with the State Pollution Control Boards 
(SPCBs)/Pollution Control Committees (PCCs) and institutions is monitoring ambient air quality and is creating a 
database. The results of ongoing source apportionment studies in six cities would indicate the contribution from various 
air polluting sources for evolving a road map for air quality management. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
CONSERVATION PROGRAMME 
Recommendation 
 The Committee feels that the conservation of mangroves an d coral reefs scheme should be reviewed at regular 
intervals and must be accorded priority since mangroves not only protect the coastal communities from the fury of 
cyclones, coastal storms and tsunami, but  also promote sustainable fisheries and prevent sea erosion. In addition, they 
provide medicines and fuel wood. They also serve as the home of a wide range of flora and fauna. Mangroves plants 
survive high salinity, tidal extremes, strong wind velocity, high temperature and muddy anaerobic soil - a combination 
of conditions hostile for other plants. Mangroves  are successfully adapted in colonizing saline intertidal zone at the 
interface between the land and sea along the deltas, shallow la goons, mud flats, bays and backwaters in tropical and 
subtropical shelters coast lines.  (Para 57) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 The Ministry accords high priority to the conservation a nd management of mangroves in the country and seeks to 
sustain and augment the mangrove forests by both regulatory and promotional measures. The Coastal Regulation Zone 
Notification (1991) under the Environment Protection Ac t (1986) recognizes the ma ngrove areas as ecologically 
sensitive and categorizes them as CRZ-I (i) which implies that these areas are afforded protec tion of the highest order. 
Under the promotional measures, the Government has id entified 38 mangrove areas on a country-wide basis for 
intensive conservation and management. 
Details of achievements during Ninth and Tenth Plan 
Sl. No. Items Ninth Plan Tenth Plan 
1. Coverage 30 National sites 38 National sites for 
  for Conservation Conservation and Management 
  and Management of Mangroves 
  of Mangroves  
2. Quantum of 13.17 Crore 17.00 Crore 

 Assistance   
3. International - RA MSAR recognition for 
 Recognition  Bhitarkanika and UNESCO- 
   MAB recognition for 
   Sunderbans Biosphere 
   Reserve. Both Bhitarkanika 
   and Sunderbans are rich 
   in mangrove forests 
4. Formulation of - Based on inputs from various 
 Comprehensive  States, firs t draft of Guidelines is 
 Guidelines  ready 
5. New Proposals   Daman & Diu, Pondicherry 
 in Pipelines   
 Two tier system at National and State level are in ope ration for effective coordination to implement the 
Mangrove Conservation Programme. 
1. National level : 
 National Mangrove Committee has been constituted for giving advice on appropriate policies, research and 
training, identification of mangroves, review of progress of Management Action Plans. The National 
Committee on Mangroves & Coral Reefs last met on 5th December, 2005 and is scheduled to meet again on 
8.9.2006 at Tamil Nadu. 
 Research Sub-Committee on Mangroves has been constituted to supplement base line information on 
priority areas of research in form  of research projects through Univ ersities and research institutes for 
effective execution of MAPs. Two meetings of the Research Sub-Committee have been recently held viz. 
10th January, 2005 and 2nd June, 2006. 
2. State Level : 
 State level Steering Committee have been constituted under the Chairmanship of Chief 
Secretaries/Additional Chie f Secretaries/Principal Secretaries of Department concerned having members 
from subject matter departments/academicians/ stakeholders/representative from Central Government to 
discuss Management Action Plans and review conservation activities under taken from time to time. 
 In addition, the concept of Independent Evaluation by the State Government has also been invoked by 
introducing a special clause in the presidential sanction order itself and a modest budget is also being earmarked for the 
same. The Ministry is also contemplating independent evaluation of the Scheme during 2006-07. 
 In the light of foregoing, it will be noted that the scheme is being thoroughly reviewed at regular intervals. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply and acknowledges the various efforts made by the Ministry in the 
conservation of mangroves. However, it has not been en lightened about the action ta ken/proposed to be taken 
regarding conservation of coral reefs. 
WETLANDS 
Recommendation 

 The Committee feels that the Ministry should take up the matter with the State Governments as our country’s 
wetlands suffer more than other eco-systems. Many of the wetlands are encroached upon and the remaining are mostly 
polluted with the industrial waste, sewage, pesticides, etc. The Ministry should think of making a suitable law that can 
protect the identified wetlands with a provision for compatible community use. (Para 59) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 Realizing the importance of fresh water bodies for providing food, fodder, fuel and water for domestic, irrigation 
and industrial purposes; their role in supporting fisheries; number of rare and endangered species of flora and fauna; 
maintenance of natural biodiversity; helping in regulating hydrological regimes, flood control and recharging of 
aquifers etc., Government of India initiated National We tland Conservation Programme in 1987 in close collaboration 
with concerned State Governments. These steps were taken mainly due to degradation and shrinkage of water bodies 
due to encroachment, siltation, weed infestation, catchment erosion, and other resultant problems. 
Promotional measures 
(a) Based on the recommendations of the National Committee on wetlands in different meetings, 71 wetlands 
covering 22 States have been identified so far under National Wetland Conservation Programme under 
which 100 per cent assistance is given to the concerned State Governments. 
(b) Under Management Action Plans various conservation activities are funded which include - data collection 
and survey, identification of problems, mapping of wetlands, landscape planning, hydrology, control of 
encroachments, eutrophication and abatement, aquati c weed control, wildlife  conservation, fisheries 
development and environmental awareness on various aspects of wetlands functioning. 
(c) The management of wetlands is supplemented with research activities under which a Research sub-
Committee has also been constituted to identify more wetlands of national importance and to supplement 
Management Action Plan for intensive conservation on thrust areas of research. 
(d) 25 wetlands covering an area of 667131 hectare in the country have been designated as Ramsar sites of 
international importance so far. 
(e) Ramsar Conservation Award has been given to Chilika Development Authority during 2002 for ecological 
intervention of Chilika wetland. This is for the first time that any Asian country has been given such award. 
(f) Out of 71 identified wetlands, the Management Action Plans (M.A.P.s) for 39 wetlands have been approved 
so far and the process of sanctioning M.A.P.s for other identified wetlands is on. 
Increase in scale 
(a)  Number of wetlands under Wetland Conservation Programme increased from 27 between 1987 to 2002-03 
to 71 in 2004-05, an increase of 44 wetlands in last two years. 
(b) 9 States are new entrants to National Wetland Co nservation Programme. Number of States covered moves 
up from 13 to 22. 
(c) Tenth plan allocation of Rs 30 crores is almost doubl e that of the Ninth plan period at Rs 14.00 crores. 
During Tenth Five Year Plan, an assistance of Rs. 22.43 lakhs has been released till date. 
(d) An allocation of Rs. 90 crore has been sought for the Eleventh Plan Period. 
Regulatory Regime for Wetlands 
(a)  The National Environment Policy (NEP) envisages setting up of a legally enforceable regulatory 
mechanism for identified valuable wetlands to preven t their degradation, and enhance their conservation, 

formulation of conservation and prudent use strategi es with community participation; of eco-tourism 
strategies, integrated wetland conservation including c onservation of village ponds and tanks into sectoral 
development plans for poverty alleviation and livelihood improvement. 
(b)  An exercise is on in the Ministry to set up Regulatory Regime for wetlands on the basis of their 
categorization where regulation could be held at Central/State/local levels. Various parameters are being 
evolved for regulations of various activities at different levels. 
Training 
(a)  A National Training Programme for Integrated Water Resource Management & Wetland Conservation has 
been organized from 7-11 August, 2006 by Chilika Training Authority with the financial support from 
Ministry of Environment & Forests. 
(b)  Other institutes have been identified for organizing the regional training programmes which are : Centre for 
Water Resource Development & Management (CWRDM), Khozikod, , GEER Foundation. Gandhinagar, 
Environment Planning & Coordination Organization (EPCO), Bhopal, Wildlife Institute of India, Dehradun, 
Institute of Wetland Management & Ecological Designs, Kolkota/ Department of Science & Technology, 
Govt. of Assam. 
Monitoring 
 A three-tier system at national level, State level and local level is in operation for effective coordination to 
implement the programme. 
- A National Committee on Wetlands was constituted in 1987 for giving advice on policy guidelines for 
wetland conservation in the country. The Committee is headed by Additional Se cretary(Conservation) and 
has members from concerned Ministries dealing with wetland conservation programme and experts in the 
field. The Committee advises Government on appropriate policies and action programmes for conservation 
of Wetlands, research & training, identification of new wetlands for conservation, collaboration with 
international agencies on issues related to these Ecos ystems, and review of progress in the implementation 
of Management Action Plans. 
- The State Steering Committees have been constituted fo r the identified wetlands under the Chairmanship of 
Chief Secretaries in concerned States. 
- At local level, district level committees have been co nstituted under the Chairmanship of District Magistrate 
to monitor the implementation of the scheme. 
Evaluation 
 Ministry is also initiating exercise on evaluation of we tlands conservation activities in those States, which are in 
operation for more than five years. Expert institutions are being identified for evaluation and they will be asked to 
review activities component-wise both from physical & financial point of view. 
Comments 
 The Committee appreciates the activities undertaken by the Ministry in identifying wetlands and pursuing 
this programme with sincerity. 
PROJECTS/SCHEMES FOR NORTH-EAST REGION AND SIKKIM 
Recommendation 
 The gregarious flowering of muli bamboo is a natural ecological phenomenon having high social and economic 
implications. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Ministry of Environment & Forests should collaborate with the 
State Governments to gear up for the impending catastrophe, since the magnitude of the disaster could be very large. 

The Committee recommends that the focus areas in this re gard should be harvesting, regeneration of the area and 
rodent control. (Para 64) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 The Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of  India, in consultation with the representatives of the 
North-Eastern State Governments, concerned Ministries and Departments of the Government of India and other 
stakeholders, has prepared an ‘Action Plan’ for management  of gregarious flowering of muli bamboos in the North 
Eastern States to be implemented by the respective Stat e Governments. To supplement the efforts of the State 
Governments, the Ministry of Environment and Forests has initiated a new Centrally sponsored scheme for 
management of gregarious flowering of bamboos in the North-Eastern States. The total outlay for four years, 
commencing from 2005-06, is Rs. 85.00 crores. The major components of the ‘Action Plan’ are harvesting, 
regeneration, rodent control and awareness generation. A Central Monitoring Committee (CMC) has been set up by the 
Government of India under the Chairmanship of Director General of Forests and Special Secretary for periodic review 
of the progress of implementation of the action plan. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
Recommendation 
 The Committee feels that the Ministry has not done enough to persuade the international community to adopt 
stringent measures and provide enough cooperation in curbing illegal trade in wildlife parts. The international 
community has not been successful so far to put effective check on illegal trade in wildlife parts, especially tiger parts. 
Therefore, it is very important for the Ministry to take pr oactive and strong measure on this matter. It should take up 
this common issue with the international community through Convention on trade in Endangered Species on Wild 
Fauna and flora (CITES). (Para 66) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 The Ministry is aware of the illegal trade in wildlife and its derivatives and has raised the issue in various 
international fora / meetings including Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Flora and Fauna 
(CITES). Exchange visits by officers of  CITES - India and CITES - China were held in May-June, 2006 for improved 
understanding and enforcement of conservation issues in the two countries. A meeting within the India-China Protocol 
on Conservation of Tigers is proposed to be held in India later this year. The establishment of the proposed National 
Wildlife Crime Bureau which would include networking with international enforcement agencies, would greatly assist 
in curbing the international illegal trade. 
(A) India is a signatory to many international conventi ons responsible for protection of biodiversity and its  
 habitat. Important conventions include: 
(i) Convention on Biological Diversity, 
(ii) Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, 
(iii) World Heritage Convention, 
(iv) Convention on Migratory Species, and 
(v) Convention on Wetlands (Ramsar Convention). 
 India has played a key role in the CITES in adopting a resolution on conser vation of tiger and other endangered 
wild cats and the need for global support to contain illegal trade in wildlife, their body parts and derivatives are always 

emphasized in the meetings. Further, India has joined the Global Coalition against Wildlife Trafficking, and has a 
bilateral understanding with U.K. in this regard. In addition, India has bilateral arrangements with China and Nepal. 
These include: 
 Indo-Chinese Protocol in tiger  conservation. The protocol, inter-alia, stipulates joint measures to crack down 
illegal activities of poaching of tigers, smuggling and selling of  tiger bones and other parts of the tiger as well as its 
derivatives. 
 Action has been taken for hosting a Chinese delegation in the near future within the ambit of Indo-Chinese 
Protocol on Tiger Conservation. A response has also been received from China in this regard. 
 A bilateral discussion with the Chinese delegation took place at the level of the Minister of State for Environment 
& Forests in November, 2005. The issue of trafficking in tiger skins/body parts as well as body parts of other animals 
into China and Tibet from India, as reported in the media was discussed. 
 India hosted a CITES delegation from China in May, 2006, and issues on illegal trade in tiger and other wild 
animal body parts were discussed. China was also requested to join the global coalition against wildlife trafficking. An 
Indian delegation visited China in June, 2006 for further discussion in this regard. 
 A Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) exists with Nepal India to establish a Joint Task Force to check 
trafficking across the borders. 
 Draft Protocols for bilateral cooperation with other neighbouring tiger range countries (Myanmar, Bangladesh 
and Bhutan) have been sent to the Ministry of External Affairs for vetting and concurrence. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply and would like the Mini stry to ensure that its words should also be 
translated into actions and illegal trade in wildlife parts is curbed. The Ministry needs to review its programmes 
and plug the loopholes wherever necessary to implement them more vigorously. 
WILD LIFE PRESERVATION 
Recommendation 
 Keeping in view the aforesaid observat ions made by the Tiger Task Force in its Report. It is observed that the 
basics of the wildlife conservation demand for extremely devoted, trained and high quality performance of existing 
staff alongwith strong law enforcement. (Para 71 ) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 The States have been addressed in this regard and Central assistance for capacity building towards better 
performance of field personnel is provided to States. Specialized training courses are organized in the Wildlife Institute 
of India for the same. The States are also provided Central assistance under the ongoing schemes, like Project Tiger for 
deployment of ex-army personnel, home guards, CRPF, in addition to other patrolling strategy for complementing the 
initiatives of field staff for enforcement of law in protected areas. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation 
 Another factor, which the Committee feels is very important, is to provide special package for staff, amenities 
and incentives like hard area allowance, free rationing etc. for the forest protection guards combined with provision for 
basic infrastructure, such as wi reless sets, cell phones, vehicles etc. so that  these could be effective incentives to boost 

wildlife conservation. Fast track courts  for quick judicial settlements of wildlife crime cases, in the opinion of the 
Committee, can also do great justice towards conservation of endangered species in India like Tigers, Elephants, 
Rhinos, etc. (Para 72) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 Under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Project Tiger, a hardship allowance (project allowance) is provided to 
field staff as an incentive. Further, Central assistance is  also provided for creating basic amenities like hostels for 
children of staff posted in remote tiger reserves, procurem ent of field gear, arms, ammunition, vehicles, wireless sets 
for ensuring protection. The recommendations for providing free ration to field staff, cell phones and fast track Courts 
for quick judicial settlements of wildlife crime cases have been noted for needful action. 
Comments 
 While the Committee appreciates the efforts made by th e Ministry to minimize the hardships of the field 
staff, it must be ensured that field staff in remote tige r reserve should not feel deserted and neglected which can 
reflect in the discharge of their duties. 
Recommendation 
 For mitigation of human-tiger conflict, the minimization of livestock killings is an effective countering method 
towards socio-ecological constraints which may stand in the way of wild life conservation. To minimize the ill-effects 
of livestock killings on people, education and awareness programmes related to ecology and behaviour of tiger, genesis 
of tiger menace, possible mitigation strategies, need to be framed for the villagers in the important areas with a package 
for effective and quick compensation in genuine cases and effective participation of the village populace at the ground 
level which can immensely contribute for wild life conservation of endangered species. (Para 73) 
Action Taken by the Ministry 
 Central assistance under Project Tiger for compensation is provided towards depredation of livestock by wild 
carnivores, belonging to villagers living in the fringe areas of tiger reserves. Likewise, Central assistance is also 
provided for payment of ex-gratia to field personnel killed by wild animals apart from treatment for injury while on 
duty. To elicit the support of local people, Central assi stance for eco-development of fringe / buffer areas, based on 
participatory, village level micro plans, structured with the eco-development committee constituted for the purpose, is 
provided. There is a Memorandum of Understanding with local community while undertaking such initiatives, for 
securing their reciprocal commitment to assist the field staff towards wildlife protection. The site specific eco-
development plan contains a strategy for mitigating the man-animal conflict. Further, assistance is also provided for 
promoting awareness amongst the local people for wildlife conservation. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the steps being taken by the Ministry will help in mitigating 
the human-tiger conflict. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-I 
(Para-30) 
1.  THE SIX MAJOR ACTIVITIES OF THE CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE ARE AS FOLLOWS:  
P I Creation of a Bio-cultural reposit ory of Medicinal plants of India 
P2 Development of Educational Materials (on the rich traditional knowledge of the Medicinal Plants of 
India) 
P3-P4 Training to Village Botanists in identification and monitoring of Medicinal Plants 
P5 Establishment of an ethno-medicinal demonstration garden in Bangalore 
P6 Pharmacognostic studies on prioritised medicinal plants 
P7 Preparation of Medicinal Plants Distribution Maps using GIS 
2.  Progress / Achievements during 2005 - 06:  
 PI - Creation of a Bio-cultural repository of Medicinal plants 
 In the year 2005-06, a critical revi ew of the published medical & ethno- botanical literature was undertaken 
to arrive at reliable enumeration of the medicinal plants of India. The review has revealed that 6,200 unique 
species of medicinal plants have thus far been recorded in published literature. This figure has been arrived at 
after carefully eliminating synonymy which inflates the estimate of the species to 8,000 and above. 
Corresponding to this revision the enumeration of the species used by the four codified traditional systems of 
medicine viz., Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani, and Gso-rig-pa has also been pegged at 1,590 for Ayurveda, 1,130 for 
Siddha, 504 for Unani, and 253 for Gso-rig-pa. 
 On the basis of market and literature studies, the en umeration of traded species was also updated in the 
current year and enhanced from an earlier estimate of 880 sp ecies to 926 species. This suggests that only around 
15 per-cent of the known medicinal plants of India are in all India trade. The size of India’s medicinal plant 
resources is incidentally of the same order as that of the medicinal plants of China, which also has around 6,000 
ethno-medicinal species of which around 1,000 species are in active trade. 
 The FRLHT botanical team has discovered two sp ecies (Menispermaceae & Eriocaulaceae members) new 
to the botanical world and these have been sent for publication to Rheedea. Furthermore the team has also 
rediscovered in southern India two species viz., Hubbardia heptaneuron Bor  (POACEAE) & Madhuca 
insignis (Radlk.) HJ. Lam (SAPOT TACEAE) that were hitherto reported to be extinct by IUCN. 
 In 2005-06, the total percentage of medicinal plant species used by the different Indian systems of medicine 
captured in the repository has significantly increased and the cumulative picture is given in the tables below. A 
significant feature of the FRLHT herbarium is that it is fully computerized and can be searched both by 
vernacular names of plants as well as by their scientific  names. Another interesting feature is that the herbarium 
records are being digitized and as on December, 2005, 7,300 number of voucher specimens have been digitized. 
System of Medicine % of species captured until Dec. 05 
Ayurveda 60 
Unani 78 
Siddha, 77 
Gso-rig-pa 67 

Folk  
Total No. of sp., in all India trade: 926 % of traded species captured until Dec. 05 : 62 
 
P2 - Development of Educational Material on the rich  traditional knowledge of the Medicinal Plants of 
India 
 At the end of December, 2005, the Centre of Excellence has already completed three major CDs on 
medicinal plants viz., (i) Plants of Charaka Samhita, (ii) Traded Medi cinal Plants of India, (iii) Multidisciplinary 
Profile of the Clinically Important Plants of Ayurveda  included in the BAMS medical curriculum. Work on the 
following CDs is in progress viz. : 
 (a). Plants & Herbal Formulations used in Siddha medicine, 
 (b). Plants & Herbal formulations used Homoeopathy system of medicine, 
 (c). Plants & Herbal formulations used Unani system of medicine, and 
 (d). Critical analysis and identity of controversial plants of Ayurveda. 
P3 - P4 - Training to Village Botanists in identification and monitoring of Medicinal Plants 
 Another goal of the Centre of Excellence is an experimental project and relates to capacity building in the 
area of basic taxonomy of medicinal plants amongst “village botanists” in peninsular India. The village botanists 
are visualized to be rural persons, who have traditional knowledge about the local medicinal flora and who reside 
in the proximity of the 54 ‘forest gene banks’ that have been established by the state Forest Depts. of Karnataka, 
Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Maharashtra. 
 The village botanists trained under this program are expected to serv e the Forest Dept. local NGOs, local 
institutions like schools and colleges and tourists in matters like (a) plant identification including the correlation 
between local vernacular names and botanical names, (b) vegetation monitoring, and (c) providing cultural 
information to tourists about local plants. 
 They would generally be expected to function as freelance consultants in the same way as do other locally 
knowledgeable individuals such as folk-healers, traditional birth attendants, local pujaris, water-diviners etc. The 
village botanists are also being informed about the relevant  aspects of the Indian Bio Diversity Act so that their 
services are not misused. 
 A cadre of 100 village botanists from Karnataka, Maharashtra & Tamil Nadu has already been trained over 
the last 3 years. In 2005-2006 this work has been ex tended to Andhra Pradesh wh ere 40 VBs are undergoing 
training. The subjects on which they are being trained are plant morphology, identification, nomenclature, 
classification, herbarium methods, forest types, medicinal plants and their trade, medicinal plants included in Red 
List, CITES and Negative lists, field exposure to biodiversity rich and protected areas, patenting & intellectual 
property rights of Indian medicinal knowledge, national biodiversity act, documentation of medicinal and cultural 
information of plants, seed bank, nursery and propagatio n techniques. A directory of the VBs of Tamil Nadu has 
been published. A formal training manual for VBs has been prepared in Tamil and Telugu. 
P5 - Establishing an ethno-medicinal demonstration garden 
 A 5-acre medicinal plant garden comprising around 600 medicinal plant species has been established on the 
FRLHT campus. In 2005-2006 the following thematic sub-gardens have been established in the main garden viz., 
Garden of Zodiac signs, Garden of Aromatic medicinal plants and Plants used as antidote for poison The garden 

has also developed a nursery to serve households and ins titutions in Bangalore city In 2005-2006 the nursery in 
the garden has distributed 12,000 numbers of plantlets to households and institutions in Bangalore city. 
P6 - Pharmacognostic studies on prioritised medicinal plants 
 The botanical identity of several medicinal plants, can not be ascertained from their “parts” that are used as 
medicine and transacted in trade. The root, sometimes even the small seed, bark, stem pieces, gums, etc , when 
viewed in isolation, cannot be easily linked to a bota nical entity. In several cases there are also specific 
recommendations related to collection procedures related to time and habitats for collection and one does not 
know from the external appearance of the sample if these collection prescriptions were actually carried out. 
 In the Pharmacognosy laboratory a significant study was undertaken to establish the correct botanical 
identity of a plant called Vai-vidang that is very ex tensively used in the Indian systems of medicine. 
Phytochemical analysis (TLC, HPLC) of candidate samples indicated that whereas the literature suggests that 
only Embelia ribes corresponds to Vai-vidang, a field survey revealed that the species E. ribes, E. tsjeriam 
cottam, Maesa indica and Maesa ramenltaceae are being used in practice The study reveals that Embelia ribes 
and E. tsjeriam cottam contained the active ingredient Embellin and therefore can both be accepted as valid 
sources of Vai-vidang However the species Maesa indica, which is also traded as Vai-vidang did not posses this 
compound and should therefore be declared to be an adulterant Molecular (RAPDPCR) and microscopy methods 
have been developed to distinguish the authentic botanicals from the adulterants. In the current year innovative 
and cost-effective field kits for chemical identification and semi-quantification of the active ingredients of two 
important medicinal plants have been developed, tested and validated by users and independent labs. These kits 
represent a creative and useful application of chromatogr aphy for the medicinal plant sector. They will be of 
enormous use to smallscale industry in order for them to implement the good manufacturing practices (GMP) that 
are now mandated by law. 
 In such cases benchmarking of the chemical and ge netic profile of the parts of a properly identified 
botanical entity and collected in the prescribed way, can serve to establish its identity and quality. A substitute or 
adulterant or an improperly collected sample can be detected by matching its chemical and genetic profile with 
the benchmarked profiles of the original botanicals and their prescribed varieties 
 Pharmacognostic studies on ‘prioritised’ species in tr ade wherein adulterants and substitutes are currently 
prevalent are being carried out. 
 Elaborate comparative study of Embellia species mark eted as Vai-vidang has been done using botanical 
trade & Ayurveda information alongside using modern scientific techniques including physico-chemical 
parameters microscopy, assays & chemical fingerprint (TLC, HPLC). The molecular differences (DNA level) 
have also been studied using RAPD-PCR technique. The aim of the study is to resolve issues of controversial 
botanical correlations of Ayurvedic drugs. 
 Molecular studies have been done for candidates used as Vidari and specific PCR products have been 
selected for sequencing from two authentic candidates for Vidari, namely Ipomea mouritiana and Puraria 
tuberosa. Using SCAR technique, specific primers would be made and tested for the purposes of authentication. 
 Field Kits for authentication of identity and semi-quantification of active ingredients in two medicinal 
plants namely, Andrographis paniculata and Withania somnifera were developed. The kits have been tested by 
volunteers and validated by other scientific labs and found to be dependable, simple and scientific. User-friendly 
instructions have been printed for use by small-scale traditional medicine manufacturing units in a non-laboratory 
environment. 
P7 - Medicinal Plants Distribution Maps using GIS 

 Altitude, Rainfall, Soil Type and Forest type maps for India were digitised as base work for mapping. 500 
Geographical Distribution Maps of medicinal plants sp ecies of conservation concern and 80 Eco-Distribution 
maps of Threatened / Endemic Indian Medicinal Plant Sp ecies were prepared. A prototype of Digital atlas of 
prioritized medicinal plants of India is under preparation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANNEXURE-II 
(Para-50) 
WATER QUALITY DATA FOR RIVER GANGA  
(Summer Average i.e. March-June) 
S.No Station/Location 1986 2005 
  DO (mg/I) BOD(mg/l) DO(m.g/1) BOD(mg/l) 
1. Rishikesh 8.1 1.7 8.50 1.00 
2. Hardwar D/s 8.1 1.8 8.10 140 
3. Garhmukteshwar 7.8 2.2 7.80 200 
4. Kannauj U/S 7.2 5.5 8.50 1.70 
5. Kannauj D/S NA NA 7.60 4.50 
6. Kanpur U/S 7.2 7.2 6.20 4.30 
7. Kanpur D/S 6.7 8.6 4.70 5.40 
8. Allahabad U/S * 6.4 11.4 8.50 5.50 
9. Allahabad D/S * 6.6 15.5 8.40 3.10 
10. Varanasi U/S * 5.6 10.1 8.60 2.00 
11. Varanasi D/S * 5.9 10.6 8.30 2.30 
12. Patna U/S 8.4 2.0 7.44 2.00 
13. Patna D/S 8.1 2.2 8.00 2.20 
14. Rajmahal 7.8 1.8 7.40 1.80 
15. Palta NA NA 7.00 3.10 
16. Uluberia NA NA 5.40 2.60 
Bathing Water Quality Criteria DO equal to or more than 5.0 mg/1 
                              BOD equal to or less than 3.0 mg/1 
*—>Summer averages (March ’05) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

V 
FIFTH  MEETING 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 12
th
 December, 2006 in Room No. '63', First Floor, Parliament 
House, New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Shri P.G.Narayanan    –----    Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi 
 3. Shri Saman Pathak 
 4. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy 
 5. Dr. Barun Mukherjee 
  LOK  SABHA 
 6. Shri Francis Fanthome 
 7. Shri Brahmananda Panda 
 8. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli 
 9. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar 
 10. Shri Mitrasen Yadav 
 11. Shri Sita Ram Yadav 
  SECRETARIAT 
  Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
  Shri Alok Kumar Cha tterjee, Deputy Secretary 
  Shri J. Sundriyal, Under Secretary 
  Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
2.  The Committee took-up for consideration its draft ***, ***, ***, 166th, ***, *** and *** Reports on the Action 
Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in its ***, ***, ***, 159th, ***, *** and *** reports on 
Demands for Grants (2006-07) pertaining to the ***, ***, *** Ministry of Environment & Forests; ***; ***; and ***. 
The Committee adopted all the reports with some minor changes. 
3.  The Committee decided to present all the seven reports (163rd to 169th) *** which was adopted by it in its 
meeting held on 6th November, 2006. The Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence  
Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy to present the reports in  Rajya Sabha and to lay the copies of the reports on the 
Table of Lok Sabha by Shri Francis Fanthome and in his absence by Shri Brahmananda Panda. 
4. * * * 
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.40 
P.M. 
 