COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/49threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:05]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1996-97)
FORTY-NINTH REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1997-98) OF THE
 DEPARTMENT OF ELECTRONICS (DEMAND NO. 90)
(Presented on St& May, 1997)
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI
May, 1997/Vaisakha, 1919 (Saka)
CONTENTS
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2. REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
3. ANNEXURES
4. MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE COMMITTEE  
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMEN­TARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1996-97)
Shri V. Narayanasamy-Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.    Shri Ramdas Agarwal
3.    Shri Brahmakumar Bhatt
4.    Shri N. Giri Prasad
5.    Shri K. R. Jayadevappa
6.    Shri Pranab Mukherjee
7.    Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty
8.    Shri Narendra Pradhan
9.    Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar
10.    Dr. Mahesh Chandra Sharma
11.  Shri G. Swaminathan 12.  Shri Prakanta Warisa
*13. Vacant **14.  Vacant
LOK SABHA
15.    Shri Mahabir Lal Bishvakarma
16.    Shri Ranjib Biswal
17.  Shri A.B.A. Gani Khan Choudhury
18.  Prof. Jitendra Nath Das
19.
    Shri Mohd. Ali Ashraaf Fatmi
20.    Shrimati Maneka Gandhi
21.    Shri K. C. Kondaiah
22.    Dr. Ramkrishan Kusmaria
23.    Shri Guman Mal Lodha
24.    Shri Shivaji Mane
25.    Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta
26.    Shri Punnu Lal Mohle

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/49threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:05]
27.    Shri Sharad Pawar
28.    Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
29.    Shri- N. K. Premchandran
30.    Shri Kalpnath Rai
31.    Shri A. Raja
32.    Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
33.    Shri P. V. Rajendran
34.    Shri K. B. Raut
35.    Shri S. Ramachandra Reddy
36.    Shri Harivansh Sahai
_______________________________________________________________________
*Shri K. Karunakaran ceased to be a Member of the Committee due to his retirement from Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 21st
 April, 1997.
**Prof. Saif-Ud-Din Soz was nominated w.e.f. 31st December, 1996 and ceased to be a Member of the Committee on
 his appointment as Minister w.e.f. 20th February, 1997.
(i)
37.   Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj
38.            Shrimati Vijayaraje Scindia
39.   Kumari Selija
40.   Capt. Satish Sharma
*
41.Shri Surender Singh
42.   Shri Soumya Ranjan Patnaik
43.   Sushri Uma Bharati
44.   Shri Srikanta Dutta Wadiyar
#
45.Vacant
 
        SECRETARIAT
        Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
        Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary
        Shri Alok Chatterjee, Under Secretary
        Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer
REPORT
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests having been authorised by
 the Committee to submit the report on its behalf, present this Forty-eighth Report, on the Demands for Grants pertaining
 to the Department of Electronics for the year 1997-98 (Demand No. 90).
2. In the meeting of the Committee held on the 15th April, 1997, the Secretary and other officers of the Department
 of Electronics gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Committee Sought clarifications on
 various aspects  of the performance of the Department particularly in the field of electronics programme and related
 aspects to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of the Department of Electronics for their cooperation
 and answering the queries raised by Members on various aspects on programmes initiated by the Department.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the draft report at its meeting held on the 28th April, 1997.
5. Electronics is the backbone of the entire industrial activity. It is the fastest growing sector of the industry.
 Department of Electronics (DoE) is entrusted with the task of formulation, implementation and review of policies in the
 field of electronics. It is the promotional department of the Government of India committed to development of Indian
 industry and applications of Information Technology and Electronics in the general walk of life in the country. DoE
 undertakes technology forecasting exercise which have an impact on society. Computer networking was one such area
 identified 10 yean ago by the Department before it was perceived by. other agencies in the Country. In a similar
 approach the Department initiated a programme called ERNET (Educational Research Network) to focus on
 development of national capability in computer network in the country. It has led to the movement similar to Internet
 which was infact not known in those days. DoE has played a pioneering role in introducing E-Mail and subsequently
 providing it for the country.
6. DoT (Department of Telecommunications) and DoE au complimentary agencies in furthering the total area on
 Information Technology (IT), electronics and telecommunications. While DoE is the promotional agency' for

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/49threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:05]
 electronics in the country, Department of Telecommunications is the nodal agency in the field of telecommunications
 and it has played a big role ia tile development of telecommunications in the country. Therefore, the two agencies have
 to· work together to cover the technology level in telecommunications and IT electronics.
7. DoE has one attached office of Standardisation Testing. and Quality Certification Directorate, three public sector
 undertakings namely Computer Maintenance Corporation (CMC), Electronics Trade and Technology, Development
 Corporation Ltd. (ET&T), and Semi Conductor Complex Limited (SCL). Besides, a  large number  of Autonomous
 Bodies/Registered Societies including  C-DAC, ER&DC, STPI,  SAMEER, CEDT, DOEACC, NCST.  DoE also has a
 large outfit of STQC laboratories allover the country. These agencies act as the arms of the Department in fulfilling its
 goals.
8. The Department of Electronics is entrusted with the task of formulation and review of national policies in the field
 of electronics. The objectives of the Department are (i) to provide a focal point for Government's attention to electronic
 sector and also to act as a coordinator within and outside the Government, (ii) to bring the benefit of electronics to every
 walk of life in the country and (Hi) to make the Indian electronics industry a global player. The major programmes of
 the Department are in the field of (i) Technology Development and (ii) Industrial electronics Promotional Programme .
. 9. The Department has a budget provision contained in its Demand No. 89 for 1997-98 as follows:-
BUDGET PROVISIONS
 
   (Rs. in Crores)
 Plan Non-Plan Total
Revenue 103.15 20.45 123.60
Capital 32.45 - 32.45
 135.60 20.45(*) 156.05
e) The total Non-Plan provision of Rs. 20.45 crores comprises of Rs. 17.45 crores towards Administrative
 Expenditure (Sect.), Standardisation Testing and Quality Certification and Grants-in-aid to Department's Societies etc.
 and Rs. 3.00 crores towards adjustment of value of equipments received as aid from Foreign Governments. Details
 witb,regard to allocations on different heads/projects are set out in Appendix-I.
Plan provision of Rs. 135.60 crores comprises of Rs. 130.00 crores as local component and Rs. 5.60 crores as external
 Aid.
10. The Committee was informed that Electronics and Information Technology was fast becoming the largest sector
 for increasing productivity in the factories, offices and home. One rupee invested; in this sector has the capacity to
 double every two years through the benefit of higher productivity in all other sectors through automation equipment,
 instrumentation and computer control systems. Major investment to the tune of Rs. 5,000 crores during VIII Plan took
 place in areas of consumer electronics, computer, communication and broadcasting, strategic electronics, components
 and materials. During the IX Plan, the investment requirement is estimated at Rs. 29,000 crores. It would be largely met
 by private and corporate sector with Government investment playing a facilitator's role.
11. Regarding the employment generation by ,the electronics industry, the Committee was informed that presently
 the capacity was about eight lakhs and was expected to be about 21 lakhs by the year 2001-02, with a productivity
 growth of about 10%. Department of Electronics has been implementing a number of programmes to strengthen
 manpower development for electronics industry. Project IMPACT, which covers 32 participating institutes and 5
 Resource Centres, is spearheading high quality and industry-oriented education in electronics and computers in the
 country. The programme on Development of Manpower for computers has enabled initiation of computer courses in
 over 250 institutions all over the country. In order to involve the private sector in the manpower development efforts for
 computers and to ensure high quality training by private institutions, a scheme known as DOEACC is being
 implemented. Under the scheme which is approved by All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE), institutes
 meeting the norms and standards laid down are given accreditation. for conducting computer courses of various levels
 viz., '0' level (foundation course), 'A' level (Diploma), 'D' level (Graduate) and 'c' level (postgraduate). In order to create
 awareness and develop elementary knowledge in computer among school students, a programme called CLASS
 (Computer literacy and Studies in School) is being implemented jointly with Ministry of Human Resource Development.
 About 3,000 schools are implementing the programme.
12. Training of teacher has been an important component of DoE initiative for manpower development. Further, a
 large number of industry professionals have been trained through continuing education schemes, workshops and
 seminars. Seven Centres of Electronics Design and Technology have been set up for imparting training in design and

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/49threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:05]
 manufacturing aspects of electronic products and to strengthen electronics industry in· their respective regions.
13. The growth of electronics industry is the fastest sector of the Indian economy. It is likely to grow at a cumulative
 growth rate of 22% during the Eighth Plan as against targeted 27.7%. In the terminal year 1996-97, the total production
 would be Rs. 48,410 crores as against Eighth Plan target of Rs. 36,000 crores. The cumulative rate of growth of
 Electronics hardware in going to be about 17.4% with terminal year estimates of Rs. 22,110 crores as against WI Plan
 target of Rs, 33,400 Crores having cumulative growth rate of 27%. The Consumer Electro11ics is growing, @15.1%;
 Industrial Electronics @ 14.1%; Computer Systems @2S.8%; Communication and Broadcasting Equipment @ 19.9%.
 The production of Electronic components is likely to grow at 17.2%. The Export Oriented Electronics hardware would
 be growing @ 36.5%. The electronics production and exports alongwith Cumulative Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) in
 various sub-sector of electronics industry in the terminal year of VIII and IX Plans are appended (Appendix-II).
14. Regarding consumer electronics, the Committee was informed that it is an important segment of electronics
 industry in India as it accounts forabout 30% of the total electronic hardware production in the country, Production of
 the Consumer Electronics has increased from Rs. 3,300 crores during 1992-93 to Rs. 5,400 crores in 1995-96. In the
 terminal year of the VITI Plan, production of Rs. 6,250 crores is anticipated. Achievement of the revised target is 80% .
14.1 Production of radio received is under estimated. Based on the radio packs supplied by the industry, it is
 estimated to be 7.5-8.0 million during 1995-96. In case of 'IV, shortfall in production is due to high prices arising out of
 the devaluation of Rupee in 1991, high excise levies and also high sales tax rates. During 1995-96 CTVproduction was
 1.8 million sets whereas production of B/W 'IV was 5.6 . million sets.
14.2 Demand and hence production of radio/TV sets is closely linked with quality of software on the respective
 media. While considerable improvements have been made in the programme content/duration/choice of programmes in
 case of 1V, improvements in radio programmes are yet to take place. In this context widespread PM coverage is
 important. Items exported are BIW and colour 1V, clocks, watches and pre-recorded audio/video cassettes.
15. The industrial electronics sector continues to playa vital role for modernization through instrumentation and
 '8~tomation in India's manufacturing, public utility service and infrastructure sector. Major industrial manufacturing
 sector such as steel, cement, fertilizer, chemicals, petrochemicals, textile, jute, metal processing and fabrication,
 industrial castings, leather are some of the technology for improvement in productivity, cost efficiency, safety etc. Large
 service sectoD like railways, power are also major beneficiaries and have contributed considerably to the growth of
 electronics sector. The production in this sector has increased from Rs. 1,700 crores in 1992-93 to an estimated
 production figure of Rs.2,900 crores in tile terminal year of the VIII Plan i.e. 1996-97. Department of Electronics has
 been able to establish Some appropriate technologies in this area for various industry and service sectors. These are 200
 MWI200 KV HVDC systems, microprocessor based interlocking system for railway signalling, digital drive control
 system for railway signalling, digital drive control system for 5000 HP electric locomotives, transporter based Advanced
 Plant Automation and Control System, Computer Aided Factory Integration and Management system, etc.
 Demonstration projects in the area of Distribution Automation for tile power sector have also bee initiated in this period.
16. Standardisation Testing and Quality Certification Programme (STQC) is the major infrastructure of Department
 of Electronics (DoE) set up with the objective of assisting the Indian Electronics industry in improving the Quality and
 Reliability of electronic products, 10 that they can compete globally. The STQC programme has been in existence since
 1977, and was conceived on the recommendations of Bhabha Committee. The present status of STQC Directorate is
 "Attached Office" under Department of Electronics, Government of India.
16.1 STQC Directorate has established 21 laboratories (13 labs as Subordinate offices of DoE/DTQC and 8 labs
 under the control of the State Government). STQC has emerged as a strong certification body. STQC's certification
 schemes (SQ and S mark schemes) have been accredited by RV A, Netherlands-international accreditation body for
 accreditation of certification bodies.
16.2 Seventy industries certified under Quality management System viz., SQ (ISO 9(00) Scheme, thirteen industries
 certified under safety ('S' Mark), twenty-four Industries certified under IECQ (component Certification system) and one
 industry certified under EMC compliance (EMC mark). ISO 9000 Certification has been expanded to cover other
 technical areas in addition to electronics.
16.3 STQC has developed its own assessor resources comprising more than 50 Qualified Auditors, 8 Certified
 Quality Analysts, 4 Tick IT Qualified Auditors and 5 SEI Assessors located at STQC labs and Certification group of
 STQC Headquarters.
16.4 STQC Successfully implemented Indo-German technical co-operation project 'Quality improvement of India
 Electronic Products' covering Hardware and Software support in 11 topical areas at 10 STQC laboratories. With the
 success of the above project, STQC has initiated another project with German assistance, viz., Basic and Further
 Training of Experts in the field of Test Engineering and Quality Assurance in Electronics.
17. The Committee was informed that Electronics research and development in the country is persued through the

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/49threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:05]
 various laboratories under Department of Space, Department of Atomic Energy, Department of Electronics, Department
 of Defence (R&D), Department of Telecommunications, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, IITs and other
 academic institutions. Besides, some of die production agencies have strong in-house R&D base. The technology
 development is also carried out in major public undertakings and private industries as part of in-house development.
 Under the Department of Electronics a 1l\llOber of R&D projects have been initiated for technology development
 through Technology Development Council (TOC), the National Radar Council (NRC), the National Electronics Council
 (NMC), Electronics Material Development Council (EMDC), and National Photonics Council (NPC). Time-bound
 projects are implemented through separate scientific societies like Centre for Advanced Computing (C-DAC), Society
 for applied Microwave Electronics Engineering and Research (SAMEER), etc. Stage-I of the National High Voltage
 Direct Current (HVDCP) project is already over and Stage- II is in the progress. Other projects like Fibre-Optics. System
 Development, Advanced Technology Programme on computer Networking (ERNET), development of Higher Power
 Devices, etc. are making satisfactory progress. In order to encourage application-oriented research, design and
 development, the Electronics Research and Development Centres (EROCs) have been strengthened. These projects
 contribute towards establishment of a technology based and generating trained manpower in advanced technology areas.
17.1 The Committee was further wormed that in order to coordinate the efforts of various
 Departments/Organisations towards R&D in Electronics and to implement a synergistic programme in this regard,
 Department of Electronics proposes to set up Electronics R&D Coordination Council (ER&DCC). The Council would
 also act as an organ of Science Advisory Council (SAC) of the Cabinet for implementation, evaluation and feedback on
 policies and initiatives of SAC in respect of Electronics as well as provide an interface with the industry.
RECOMMENDATIONS
18. The Committee feels that the information technology has come to playa key role 10 the industrial
 transformation all over tile world. There is, therefore, a need to exploit fully the benefit of this technology. The
 Committee feels the need to set up an "PO level national information infrastructure which can_ coordinate with the
 various Ministries like Department of Telecommunications (Dot), Ministry of Information & Broadcasting, Ministry  of
 Human Resource Development and others 10 that a time-bound programme can be chalked out for the development
 and exploitation of this potential. The Committee further recommends that the Electronics and Information Technology
 Industry should be classified as a basic growth "infrastructure" industry which should enjoy  all the fiscal incentives
 available to the power and ~ sectors so that the technology Is within the reach of common man.
19. The Committee recommends that tile Department of Electronics should identify Joint R&D projects with other
 countries based on  mutual strength to participate 10 RAD on global  basis. Special efforts should he made to initiate
 technology development leading to more exports and development of Infrastructure to help boost the exports.
 Accordingly, R&D In few selected areas should be pursued keeping in view the high rate of obsolescence In electronics,
 the strategic need for making optimal use of national resources in order to derive the total benefit for the country. The
 Committee feels that the up of Electronics Research and Development Coordination Council (ER&DCC) is a welcome
 step as this would facilitate commercial exploitation of technologies with close interlace with the Industry.
19.1. At the same  time the Committee  feels the  need for substantial investment in the development of Human
 Resources in  view of our global Image In the area of software development.
20. In order to improve quality of and gain international recognition  for Indian products. The Committee
 recommends that the Department  should develop STQC as resource organisation for Quality Cel1iftcation In
 International activities. The present services of ITQC should be expanded to cover related areas such as
 environmental/energy management systems, energy auditing IT and telecommunication sectors.
21. The  Committee Is of the view  that National Testing and Calibration facility be created for process control
 automation components like actuators, transmitters and  sensors. An independent facility which can help control
 automation systems both with regard to hardware and software particularly of special applications is a must and could
 be set up on advanced lines.
22. The Committee observes that the use of internet facilities has been increasing worldwide.
The Committee has  been given to understand  that the number of  internet users in the world is of the order of 100
 million because the  facility  has come to be known as most effective medium for high speed  interphase particularly for
 accessing critical  data 8Dd communicating with others  users. In India the Viclesh Sanehar Nipm Ltd. (VSNL) is both
 the regulator as well as the service provider for  about 30,000 users of internet. At the lI8IJIe time, there are three other
 registered  service providers namely ERNET for educational  research, Software Technology Parks and National
 Information Centre essentially for Government departments. However, many internet users or potential users would

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/49threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:05]
 notbe covered by anyother service providers apart from VSNL. The Committee feels that in a large country like ours it
 would be difficult for a single monopolistic service provider to provide satisfactory services, more so, because the
 present ratio of the lines available to users is 1:20 against the international standard of 1:15. At the same time, the
 communication speed in vogue in  our country Is 28.8K whereas the standard of 64K is the prevalent international level
 for enhancing the efficiency of internet operations. There Is thus a need for recognising  the potential requirements for
 use of Internet as at present It is largely confined  to the metropolitan cities. There is therefore a need to install an
 additional capacity exchange of about 500 lines. At the same time, there is also Deed to formulate long term planning to
 meet the growing demand.
23. The Committee observes that the growth in Industrial electronics  sector could have been much higher and
 therefore the declining rate of contribution of industrial electronics to total electronics production needs to be attended.
24. The Committee was Informed of the Introduction of several state-of-the-art technologies In the field of Industrial
 electronics like various sensors, actuators, etc. but the Committee is constrained  to note that they have been through
 Imported option only. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Department should explore avenues for creating
 indegenous strength  on such areas.
25. There are three public enterprises, namely, Semi-Conductor Complex Ltd., Computer Maintenance Corporation
 Ltd. and Electronics Trade and Technology Corporation Ltd. all under the control of Department of Electronics. In case
 of Semi-Conductor Complex Ltd., the plan allocation has gone up from Rs. 12 crores (BE as well as RE stage of 1996-
97) to Rs. 26 crores in the BE of 1997-98. Likewise, the plan expenditure in the case of Electronics Trade and
 Technology Ltd. has gone up from Rs. 10 laths (BE as well as RE stage of 1996-97) to Rs. SO lakhs BE stage of 1997-
98. Incase of CMC, the non-Plan expenditure has gone up from Rs. 7.90 lakhs (BE as well as RE stage of 1996-97) to
 Rs. 22 lakhs BE stage of 1997-98.
25.1 The Committee sees justification in the hike in plan allocation for rehabilitation of Semi-Conductor Complex
 Ltd. which had been destroyed due to fire a few years ago.
25.2 In case of ET &T Ltd., the Committee visited its offices at Hyderabad and O1ennai in January, 1997, and was
 informed that in view of its mounting losses it needed to be restructured. The Committee was further informed that its
 entire capital has been wiped out . Even the salaries in respect of the staff. employed by it were being borne at present by
 the Department of Electronics. During 1995, it achieved a turnover of Rs. 30.51 crores. During 1996-97, for which
 figures are not yet available, it is expected to achieve a turnover of Rs. 45 crores.
25.3 During the year, the operations of the Company were in the field of manufacturing pentium series of computers
 for marketing to the Government sector, packaged software and computer peripherals, networking, UNIX and Windows
 Platforms, consumer electronics such as CIV and B&W TV sets, electronics test and measuring instruments and
 computer education.
25.4 The Committee sees potential for the corporation and feels if sincereattempts are made to revive it, it can turn
 the comer. The Committee, . therefore, recommends that a suitable ad viable  package be worked out for its revival.. In
 that light, it Justifies the hike in the Budgetary support given to the Corporation.
26. The Committee finds that in the ease of Semi-Conductor Complex Ltd. located at Mohali a meagre allocation of
 Rs. 40 crores has been provided in the Budget Estimates for 1997-98 against the requirement of Rs. 89 crores for
 completing the project during 1997-98 as per the approved revised cost estimates. The Committee has been given to
 understand that the development of component sector in the electronics industry Is very critical whereas in most of the
 Asian countries, where electronics sector II growing rapidly, mega fabrication facilities have been set-up or are in the
 process of being set up for making semi-conductors. The Committee observes that the semi-conductor industry has a
 major role in the development of the components sector. It therefore recommends that the requirement of funds of
 Semi­-Conductor Complex maybe met in full as the project is required to play a critical role in the development of the
 component industry particularly in the strategic sector.
27. In the representation submitted by the Electronic Component Industries Association (ELCINA), New-Delhi, it
 has been stated that the customs duties on finished components produced by Electronics Component Industry has been
 reduced from 40% to 25% ad then to 20% since 1994. However corresponding reduction in customs duties OD inputs of
 components have not been done. Added to this, in the recent budget concessional duty of 10% has been withdrawn on
 more than 300 items of inputs. The representation further stated that this has resulted in a state of demoralisation in
 electronics component industry because the inputs have DOW to be imported at duties varying from 30% to 40%
 rendering the indigenous component industry uncompetitive in exports.
27.1 The Committee has been further informed that the industry has been pleading for a lower excise duty of 8% on
 all electronic components instead of the present 18% in most cases and 13 % in a limited few. The industry has pleaded
 that since excise on components is, in any case, modvattable, Government does Dot stand to lose revenue while the
 indigenous component industry will get some relief by way of global financial outlays on this account.

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/49threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:05]
27.2 The matter was taken up with the Department of Electronics who informed that during the Budget exercise
 while pruning the Dumber of end use exemptions, Ministry of Finance deleted around 300 items of raw-materials from
 concessional duty and brought them under Tariff Duty of 30% to 40%. These items are in the nature of chemicals,
 ferrous and non-ferrous metals, alloys and piece parts used for the electronics component industry. Subsequently,
 ELCINA provided a list of 44 items for reinstatement of concessional duty which has already been forwarded to the
 Ministry of Finance recommending the inclusion of these items for concessional duty @ 10%.
27.3 The Department has further stated that with regard to ratlonalisatlon of Customs Duty on electronic
 components, an electronics associations unanimously agreed on this proposal. Based on their suggestions the
 Department of Electronics had recommended a unanimous rate of Excise Duty on all electronic components @ 10% to
 the Ministry of Finance which has in turn, during the Budget, created three levels of Excise Duty @ 8%, 13% and 18%.
 In the post-Budget recommendations, the Department of Electronics has proposed the unanimous rate of Excise Duty on
 electronic components @. 8% so as to fit it into the revised structure.
The Committee recommends that the proposals may be considered.
28. Further, the information technology related items have a high rate of obsolescence. The normal depredation
 provisions under the Income Tax Act do not provide any encouragement to the investors in the matter of depreciation.
 The Committee recommends that the case for providing a higher rate of depredation, even 100% depreciation in the first
 year itself, needs to be examined.
28.1 Besides, this year's budget has provided several benefits for Information Technology Industry but this has
 resulted in some anomalies. Firstly, export profits have been exempted under MAT under Section 80 HBC but not under
 Section 80 HHE which regulate software export profits. Software exports have done exceedingly well in 1996-97 when
 practically all other exports have decelerated, withdrawal of this incentive for software exports, it is pointed out would
 have an adverse impact hence, the need to exempt export profit of software industry under Section 80 HHE from MAT.
 The Committee recommends examination of the above anomalies.
29. After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics and assessing the progress of various
 important programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs.
 156.05 crores, as sought by the Department of Electronics for the year 1997-98, under Demand, No. 90, may be
 approved.
NEW DELHI;
April 28, 1997
V. NARAYANASAMY,
                       Chairman,
                                                                                    Committee on
 Science and Technology,
                                                                                                               
 Environment and Forests.
 
                                            
 
MINUTES
XXXI
THIRTY -FIRST MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. Oft Monday the 28th April, 1997 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House,
 New Delhi.
  PRESENT
         Shri V. Narayanasamy - Chairman
           RAJYA SABRA
2.      Shri Pranab Mukherjee
           LOK SABRA
3.      Prof Jitendra Nath Das
4.       Smt. Maneka Gandhi

COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/49threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:12:05]
5.       Dr. Ramkrishan Kusmaria
6.       Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta
7.       Shri Kalpnath Rai
8.       Shri A. Raja
9.       Smt. Vasundhara Raje
10.     Shri P.V. Rajendran
11.     Shri K.B. Raut
12.     Shri Harivansh Sahai
13.     Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj
14.     Kumari Selja
15.     Shri Surender Singh
           SECRETARIAT
 
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Deputy Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Under Secretary
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Committee Officer
2. The Committee took up the consideration of the draft Forty-Eighth, Forty-Ninth and Fiftieth Reports on Demands for
 Grants (1997-98) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Department of Electronics and Department of Space and
 adopted the Reports with minor amendments.
3. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri Pranab Mukherjee to present the reports to the Rajya
 Sabha and Shri Ajit Kumar Mehta and in his absence Prof. Jitendra Nath Das to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok
 Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 11.45 A.M.
 
 
* Nominated w.e.f. 4th February, 1997.
# Smt. Alka Nath ceased to be a Member of the Committee due to her resignation from Lok Sabha w.e.f. 31st December, 1996.