PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED THIRD REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Two Hundred Ninety-fifth  Report of the Department-
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology,  Environment  and  Forests  on  the
Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the
Department of Biotechnology
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th January, 2018)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)
303
REPORT NO.


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
THREE HUNDRED THIRD REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations
contained in the Two Hundred Ninety-fifth  Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology,  Environment  and  Forests  on  the
Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the
Department of Biotechnology
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th January, 2018 )
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th January, 2018)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
January, 2018/Pausa, 1939 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................ (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................ 1-20
5. M INUTES .............................................................................................................. 21-24

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2017-18)
(Constituted on 1st September , 2017)
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
5. Shri Rajkumar Dhoot
6. Shri C.P. Narayanan
7. Shri Parimal Nathwani
8. Shri Sharad Pawar
9. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
10. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Maulana Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri P .P . Chauhan
16. Kumari Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20 Shrimati V asanthi M.
21. Shri Daddan Mishra
22. Shri Prabhubhai Nagarbhai Vasava
23. Shri Chirag Paswan

(ii)
24. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
130. Vacant
231. Vacant
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
1 Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f. 12th December, 2017.
2 Shri Nana Patole ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his resignation from the Lok Sabha w.e.f.
 14th December, 2017.

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report
on its behalf, present this Three Hundred Third Report on the Action Taken by the Department of
Biotechnology on the recommendations/observations contained in the Two Hundred Ninety-fifth Report
of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2017-18) of the Department of Biotechnology, which was
presented/laid in the both the Houses of Parliament on 31st March, 2017.
2. There were 42 recommendations/observations in the Two Hundred Ninety-fifth Report of the
Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations/observations of the Committee were received
from the Department on 5th June, 2017.
3. In the meeting held on 1st January, 2018 the Committee considered the Report and adopted the
same.
  N
EW D ELHI; ANAND SHARMA
1 January, 2018 Chairman,
Pausa 11, 1939 (Saka) Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests
Rajya Sabha.

ACRONYMS
BIRAC : Biotechnology Industry Research Assistance Council
CIAB : Centre of Innovative and Applied Bioprocessing
MoPNG : Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
NER : North Eastern Region
NABI : National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute
R&D : Research and Development
SAM : Severe Acute Malnutrition
TRPVB : T ranslational Research Platform for Veterinary Biologicals
(iv)

REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on
the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Ninety-fifth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2017-2018) of the Department of Biotechnology, which was presented to both the Houses
of Parliament on 31st March, 2017. There were forty two recommendations/observations in the Report
of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee was received from the
Department on 5th June, 2017.
The Committee's recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the
action taken by the Department of Biotechnology are set out in the succeeding paragraphs:-
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE  OF THE DEPARTMENT DURING THE 12TH FIVE YEAR PLAN
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the Department of Biotechnology had proposed a budgetary allocation
of 
` 18000.00 crore for the entire 12th Five Year Plan (2012-17) whereas the Department got approval
of only ` 7876.8 crore as allocation which is less than 50 per cent. The Committee is perturbed to note
that against the approved budgetary allocation of ` 7876.8 crore for the entire period of 12th Five Year
Plan, the Department of Biotechnology has actually received ` 7497.00 crore (at RE stage) during the
Plan period. The Committee is of the considered view that the basic concept of a Five Year Plan is to
formulate long gestation schemes/projects by drawing long-term and mid-term projections. However , if
the strategic policy interventions envisaged are not adequately funded, negative impact on the successful
execution of schemes/projects is inevitable. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department
should sensitise the concerned Ministry/Department of the Government of India about the higher financial
requirements of the Department more vigorously so as to enable it to smoothly discharge its mandate.
(Para 3.2)
Action Taken
Although Budgetary allocation was less than the originally proposed amount, it is important to note
that in 2016-17 there was no cut at RE stage and on the contrary at RE stage an enhanced allocation
of ` 97.23 crores was received.
During 2017-18, the Department has been allocated ` 2222.11 crores as BE 2017-18 which is a
~ 15.9 % increase over RE 2016-17. The Department will utilise the allocated budget efficiently and will
again request Ministry of Finance for an additional budget at RE stage. Additional Budget will be
requested for Mission Programs approved.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the steps taken in this
direction.

2
Recommendation
The Committee further expresses its unhappiness to note that the utilization capacity of the Department
has continuously gone down from 99.19 per cent in 2013-14 to 96.36 per cent, 95.67 per cent and 85.49
per cent in 2014-15, 2015-16 and 2016-17 (as on 14th February, 2017) respectively. The Department's
performance of utilising 99.19 per cent of the total allocation in 2013-14 is indicative of the capabilities
of optimally utilising the resources made available to it. However, the Department appears to have failed
to rise to its true potential and could spend only 85.49 per cent of the allocated resources during
2016-17 till 14.02.2017. The Committee, therefore, feels that the Department should have been more
prudent in optimally utilising the funds made available to it for the year 2016-17. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends the Department to review its financial performance during 2016-17 and identify
the shortfalls responsible for underutilisation so as to avoid its recurrence in future and revisit its scheme
of allocation of funds under the various schemes/programmes/projects to make them more result oriented.
(Para 3.3)
Action Taken
During Financial year 2016-17, the Department was able to utilize ~ 99% of allocated budget which
was inclusive of enhanced RE. During 2017-18, the Department will not only utilize 100% of BE but
as stated an effort would be made to utilize the additional budget received.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
BUDGET  ALLOCATION FOR THE FINANCIAL YEAR 2017-18
Recommendation
The Committee hopes that the Department would utilise the budgetary allocation of 
` 2222.11 crore
in 2017-18 optimally and ensure that the targets envisioned for the year 2017-18 in the Action Plan
would be achieved in a time frame fixed by the Department. The Committee is of the considered view
that timely completion of the targets/objectives will not only help the Department to improve its performance
both physically as well as financially but also helping cut down the overhead costs. Thus, the Committee
recommends the Department to monitor the time frame for the envisaged targets and keep a continuous
vigil with the help of a robust internal monitoring mechanism so as to ensure that the fixed timelines
are met and the budgetary support provided for the purpose is utilised judiciously and optimally.
(Para 4.3)
Action Taken
The Department will ensure that the budgetary allocation of ` 2222.11 crores in 2017-18 will be
optimally utilised. The Department is continuously monitoring the time lines for envisaged targets and has
set up a robust internal monitoring mechanism to ensure that the targets are achieved within time lines
and budget is utilised judiciously and optimally.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

3
Recommendation
The Committee shares the enthusiasm of the Department with regard to its mission programmes and
is of the considered opinion that the requisite financial support should be provided by the Government
for the purpose. The Committee feels that the request made by the Department for additional amount
of 
`1000.00 crore during 2017-18 is fully justified and urges the Department to share the sentiments of
the Committee with the concerned Ministry/Department and impress upon them and seek the requisite
budgetary allocations at RE stage so that the mission programmes which are very vital for benefiting
the society as they intend to provide solutions through biotechnological interventions, can successfully
be implemented by the Department. (Para 4.6)
Action Taken
The Department thanks the Committee for supporting its request and will take up the matter with
Ministry of Finance and will seek additional budget for implementing Mission programmes at RE stage.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the steps taken in this direction.
Recommendation
The Committee further feels that the concerned Ministry/Department of the Government while
allocating or making financial allocation in favour of the scientific Departments/Ministries should also
consider that our scientific organisations deserve a lot more financial backing of the Government to not
only sustain their growth but also to venture into new scientific assignments without having the fear of
failure. The Committee strongly feels that scientific endeavours of our scientific Departments should be
supported by the Government open heartedly by giving them adequate financial support so as to enable
them to carry out their mandate efficiently and for optimal utilisation of their capacities in the direction
of scientific advancement in the country. (Para 4.7)
Action Taken
The Department has been allocated ` 2222.11 crores in the year 2017-18 against the ` 1917.23
crores RE in the year 2016-17. The Department hopes that an additional budget will also be received at
RE stage and Department will be able to carry out its mandate efficiently in the direction of scientific
advancement in the country.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
CENTRAL SECTOR SCHEMES/PROJECTS
BIOTECHNOLOGY RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation
The Committee notes that in BE 2016-17 budgetary allocation of 
` 920.00 crore was made
under the head Biotechnology Research and Development which was increased to ` 1016.71 crore in

4
RE 2016-17 and in BE 2017-18, the budgetary allocation has further been increased to ` 1250.58 crore.
The Committee, however, is perturbed to note the underutilisation of the budgetary allocation during the
year 2016-17. The Committee notes that the Department has managed to spend only 
` 801.78 crore (upto
January, 2017) which is 78.60 per cent of the total allocation made under the Scheme. The Committee
feels that the financial performance of the Department is not very heartening. The underutilisation of
the budgetary allocation does not speak well about the Department's focus towards Research & Development
in the Biotechnology sector especially when the budget allocation has been increased at RE stage. The
Committee strongly feels that underutilisation of funds is directly related to the performance of a Scheme.
The Committee is of the view that the Department should accord due recognition to Research &
Development in Biotechnology sector while utilising the budgetary allocations and make all efforts to
utilise the funds optimally. (Para 6.2)
Action Taken
The Department has utilised 99.27% budget allocated under the head biotechnology research and
development in RE 2016-17. The Department has continuously made an effort to ensure 100% utilisation,
since there is a huge demand. The surrender of funds is normally on account of restriction of moving
budget between GIA for Capital and GIA for General. Since these are R&D project, it is difficult to
predict requirement of small equipments. Ministry of Finance has been requested that Secretaries of
Science Departments should be given the power to re-appropriate between the two heads mainly because
all GIA is from Revenues.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the development achieved in this
matter.
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation
The Committee was informed that the Department supports nearly 1200 research projects each year
in Basic, Discovery and Translational Research in the areas of Agriculture and allied areas including
Animal Biotechnology and Aquaculture, Healthcare including Vaccine, Drugs, Medical Devices and
Implants, Bio-engineering, Food and Nutrition, Environment and Clean Energy and Industrial
Biotechnology. The Committee notes that during the period (2015-2017), 5724 proposals were received,
out of which only 542 (9.46%) proposals/projects have been funded so far. (Para 7.1)
Action Taken
The Department has 15 different task forces in multi-disciplinary scientific domains and the Research
and Development. Projects are funded based on competitive grant system considering the recommendations
of the Task Forces. It is important to supporting only high quality projects with the required minimum
funding rather than supporting large number with sub critical level of funding.

5
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
BASIC RESEARCH
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that making potable water available to our citizens is one of the
biggest challenges facing our country. The Committee feels that the Department of Biotechnology has
the potential to devise a technology to convert the filthiest of the water into potable water . The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should include developing technologies for
extracting safe drinking water from available water resources to lessen the problem of drinking water
in the country. (Para 8.2)
Action Taken
Treatment of waste water for pollutant remediation and converting it reusable for purposes like
agriculture, urban is one of priority research area of the Department. Reclaiming water for reuse
applications instead of using freshwater supplies can also be one of water-saving measure, which can
increase the availability of freshwater for drinking purposes. Department has supported R&D projects
on various aspects of waste water treatment process. Recently completed Indo-EU project on 'Water for
Crop' given significant scientific leads, which are being pursued further. Department has also initiated
one Indo-Dutch programme on pilot scale demonstration of replicable technologies for recycle and reuse
of urban sewage waste water. Department has also identified some other R&D projects on various
aspects of river cleaning process which are being considered for financial support.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
AGRICULTURE & ALLIED AREAS: CROP BIOTECHNOLOGY
Recommendation
The Committee appreciates the achievement realised by the Department in the field of crop
biotechnology. The Committee is of the view that agriculture, alongwith its allied sectors, is the largest
livelihood activity in our country and it is the need of the hour that we all should work in tandem to
improve our crops productivity with the help of technological advancements and sustainable technologies
by establishing a dissemination network so that the innovations reach the last point. (Para 9.2)
Action Taken
Through individual R&D projects, networks, Centres of Excellence and joint collaborative research
projects under bilateral/multilateral agreements with various countries, the Department has supported
various projects to improve crop productivity using biotechnology tools and processes with the ultimate
aim of societal development and welfare of the poor and marginal farmers. Regarding establishing a
dissemination network for the innovations to reach the last point, the Department will pursue the matter
in association with other relevant Ministries/Departments/State Agriculture Departments.

6
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the steps taken in this direction.
Recommendation
The Committee also feels that out of box thinking is required to tap the potential lying in our
agricultural activities. The Committee recommends the Department to take necessary steps in the direction
of untapped potential with the help of its biotechnological strategic interventions so as to address the
issues of not only the crops productivity but also for mitigation of post harvest loss and enhancing the
nutritional value as well. (Para 9.3)
Action Taken
The Department has already supported projects for enhanced crop productivity, mitigation of post
harvest loss and enhancing the nutritional value of various crops using biotech tools. The DBT Aided
Autonomous Institutes National Agri-Food Biotechnology Institute (NABI) and Centre of Innovative and
Applied Bioprocessing (CIAB) have the mandate of Nutritional improvement and Post harvest techniques.
The institutes have taken up these programs. The Department also has a special Task Force on Food
and Nutritional which also has supported major programs in this area.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
ANIMAL HEALTH
Recommendation
The Committee notes the activities undertaken by the Department in the field of animal biotechnology
and animal health. The Committee, nonetheless, is of the opinion that the rate of commercialisation of
the technologies developed by the Department is not very encouraging and it reflects that the technologies
so developed by the Department either are not as per the requirements of the industry or there may be
flaws in the technologies restricting their commercialisation. Hence, the Committee desires the Department
to take market driven research activities so that the technologies developed by it are well received by
the industry. (Para 11.2)
Action Taken
In order to encourage the rate of commercialisation of the technologies developed in the projects
supported by the Department, the DBT in collaboration with Tamil Nadu Veterinary and Animal Sciences
University has established a Translational Research Platform for Veterinary Biologicals (TRPVB). The
main objective of the platform is to facilitate the translation of technologies having proof of concept in
the area of veterinary vaccines and diagnostics through validation and regulation for development and
commercialization of products. About 10 products/technologies have been commercialized by this platform
during 2012-17 and more than a dozen products are in various stages of development/validation.

7
Further, in order to understand the market/industry demand of the animal products/technologies, the
Department has also supported a project to know the status of Veterinary Vaccines and Diagnostics in
India and the study undertaken has been published as "Animal Biotechnology - Vaccines and Diagnostics
- Markets and Investment Opportunities".
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee also feels that the Department needs to augment its research activities in the
direction of disease resistance in our indigenous livestock. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
Department to take necessary action in these directions. (Para 11.3)
Action Taken
The Department has proposed to initiate a network program on Genome sequencing of indigenous
livestock breeds and genomic selection in cattle for understanding gene functions and regulation of
important traits such as milk production, disease resistance and overall health and productivity.
The Department has already supported research projects on disease resistance and recently a project
on identification of novel gene(s) underlying host-pathogen interaction in PPRV infection has completed
its tenure. Another project on genome-wide association study for identification of novel loci associated
with resistance to Theileriosis in India is under progress.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee is further of the view that the Department should also adopt more focused approach
towards increasing the productivity of the indigenous varieties of cows in the country; establishment of
sperm banks so as to make available hybrid indigenous sperm of high quality and standards; etc. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take necessary action in this regard.
(Para 11.4)
Action Taken
To enhance the productivity of indigenous cattle breeds, the Department conducted a Brainstorming
Meeting on livestock genomics of indigenous cattle breeds and it has been decided to initiate genome
sequencing of important indigenous cattle breeds. As far as establishment of sperm bank/semen bank is
concern, this is a domain area of Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

8
AQUACULTURE & MARINE BIOTECHNOLOGY
Recommendation
The Committee notes that India has a coastline of over 8000 kms. and ranks 2nd in global fish
production, inland capture and aquaculture. The Committee, however, feels that sustainable productivity
and management has been a concern area where the Department of Biotechnology needs to take the
required strategic policy interventions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
take necessary biotechnological measures to address the issues of sustainable productivity and management.
(Para 12.2)
Action Taken
Department of Biotechnology (DBT) has been addressing the issues of sustainable productivity and
management through biotechnological interventions by fish stock assessment using metagenomics approach,
sea ranching, in captive breeding and through new mariculture technologies. DBT has been addressing
these measures in a holistic manner in joint collaboration with related Departments including ICAR,
MoES-NIOT and other Fishery Technology networks. Under the Department's Task Force Aquaculture
& Marine Biotechnology priorities have been explored for aquaculture and marine biotechnology addressing
sustainable development and production and productivity with eco-friendly approach with the interventions
pertaining to freshwater, brackishwater and marine eco-systems. Research emphasis is given on developing
breeding techniques, larval rearing and culture technology of new candidate species in different aquatic
environments to increase the production. Feed and health management are the major concerns which
need to be addressed for which DBT has been developing different types of nutritious feed for fish/
shrimp with different feeding habits at low cost. Health and disease free seeds of different cultivable
species are being developed to help the farmers to increase the aquaculture production. Diagnostics and
prophylactics are being available with the industry through R&D interventions of DBT to help the
aquaculture practitioners to keep the farms free from specific pathogens to stock SPF seeds to get the
crop without any loss due to diseases. Advanced and cost effective low cost vaccine, immunnostimulants,
antiviral compounds and dsRNA are being developed and some of the products have been extended for
the benefit of farmers to avoid the huge losses due to disease outbreaks in the aqua farms.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the steps taken by the Department would
yield the desired results.
Recommendation
The Committee is also of the opinion that health of the aquatic animal predominantly depends on
the health of the aquaculture eco-system. Thus, development of healthy brood stock of all cultivable fin
and shell fishes assumes greater importance and the Committee feels that the Department of Biotechnology
can play a crucial role on this count. The Committee, therefore, recommends the Department to take
necessary strategic measures to develop high health brood stock. (Para 12.3)

9
Action Taken
Department of Biotechnology has taken initiatives to develop pathogen free brood-stocks to produce
healthy brooders for production of post larvae for stocking the aquaculture pond system. With the
R and D leads programmes are being initiated to develop WSSV-resistance in shrimp, Aeromonas hydrophila
resistance in carps and nodavirus resistance in Asian seabass. Various biotechnological tools like
transcriptomics analysis would help to understand the genes involved in the resistance in fish and shrimp.
This would help to develop healthy fish and shrimp brooders. In addition, vaccines and antiviral compounds
are also being developed.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee is of the opinion that the biological diversity of the marine resources along the
Indian coast in the form of creeks, estuaries, deep seas and continental shelf offer enormous scope for
the discovery of novel products and processes which have application in biomass and food production,
production of polymers, biocatalysts, biomedical products, and organics; bioremediation and biomining
etc. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department should work out a roadmap for the
purpose and put earnest efforts in this direction. The Committee is hopeful that with the help of right
policy interventions, the Department can write a new chapter of biotechnological advancements in the
field of aquaculture and marine bio-technology. (Para 12.4)
Action Taken
Department of Biotechnology has been promoting sustainable exploitation and bio-prospecting of
marine bio-resources. The subject area Task Force Aquaculture and Marine Biotechnology has promoted
coastal bio-resources for high value chemicals, pharmaceuticals, bio-surfactants, polymers, bio-acatalysts
and nutraceuticals etc. from marine organisms. Research is being carried out in network mode concentrating
on different biological activities such as antiviral, antibacterial, antifungal, antihelmintic, anti-inflammatory,
analgesic activity, antiallergic activity, antithrombotic activities, hypolipidaemic activity, hypoglycaemic
activity hypotensive activity, antihypertensive activity, immunomodulatory activities, hepatoprotective
activity and anticancer activity. Marine source including sponges, Coelenterates, Sea anemones, Corals,
Bryozoans, Molluscs, Echinoderms, Sea-urchins, Tunicates and sea weeds are being screened using
standard protocols for above mentioned biological activities. Various in vitro models including fish cell
lines are studied for toxicological studies. Also marine organisms are being screened for biopolymer,
enzymes, biofuel and bioremediation. Some of these projects were taken up in joint collaboration between
ICAR, MoES-NIOT, CSIR institutes in a network mode. These measures would certainly help to obtain
the potential leads in product and process development.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

10
MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the various activities undertaken under Medicinal and Aromatic
Plants. The Committee observes that the Department has been supporting the salient aspects of the Indian
medicine system through its research activities. The Committee, however, feels that the Department has
to keep pace with the increasing attention about the medicinal and aromatic plants among the urban
population and take necessary measures to tap the unlimited potential of these plants with the help of
its biotechnological capabilities. (Para 13.2)
Action Taken
DBT has been implementing a programme on translational research and biotechnological interventions
for development of products and processes from medicinal and aromatic plants. Efforts will be further
intensified towards this direction in view of increasing attending about medicinal and aromatic plants
among the urban population.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
MISSION INNOV ATION - ACCELERATING THE CLEAN ENERGY REVOLUTION
Recommendation
The Committee notes the work done so far by the Department in the direction of biofuels. However,
lot more is yet to be achieved on this count. The Committee hopes that the Department, along with other
related agencies of the Government, will continue its concerted efforts and will work in tandem to realise
the targets set for biofuels. (Para 14.2)
Action Taken
The Department has set up four Centres for Bio-energy, the DBT-ICT Centre has successfully
developed for the first time the 2G Ethanol Technology from Agriculture Waste. DBT has worked with
Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas (MoPNG) and transferred the 2G Ethanol Technology to 2 Oil
Marketing Companies (HPLC and BPCL) for commercialisation.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that the Department should also chalk out a policy initiative and set
up Bioenergy based incubation centres across the country so as to provide a platform to have interface
between academia and industry. If required, the Department should seek budgetary support for the
purpose at RE stage. The Committee also recommends that the Department should focus on nurturing
start-ups in this direction. (Para 14.3)

11
Action Taken
DBT has already supported incubation centres through BIRAC and a few start-ups have been
supported under this programme in the area of Biofuels. Steps will be taken to enhance this.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
NANOBIOTECHNOLOGY
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that the application of nanotechnology can play a very important and
crucial role in the areas of agriculture, health, food, environment, etc. The Committee feels that the
Department should continue its activities in this direction and also explore the possibilities to address the
challenges posed to our agriculture, health, food and environment with the help of advancement in the
field of the nanotechnology. (Para 15.2)
Action Taken
The Department will continue its activity in the area of Nanobiotechnology considering its importance
and wider applications in the field of Agriculture, health, food and environment.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the efforts of the Department would certainly
benefit the concerned areas.
MEDICAL BIOTECHNOLOGY AND RELATED AREAS: INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Recommendation
The Committee is of the opinion that a diagnostic test kit for TB patients is the need of the hour
so as to enable early detection of TB. The Committee also feels that the Department should in coordination
with Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and ICMR devise innovative technologies for the purpose.
(Para 16.3)
Action Taken
The Department has signed a MoU with ICMR on Biomedical and Health Research wherein
Tuberculosis was marked as a critical area of partnership with prime focus on TB diagnostics. A DBT-
ICMR Expert Group has been constituted for the evaluation of indigenous Indian diagnostic technologies
for MDR/XDR-TB diagnostics.
The TrueNat Rifkit developed by Bigtec Bangalore is at par with the internationally recognized
diagnostic kit in terms of sensitivity, specificity and detection of Rifampicin resistance.
The Department through its PSU BIRAC has also supported a number of start-ups for developing
Diagnostic kit for TB. Along with USAID a special TB Grand Challenge for TB Diagnostics has also been
supported. Some kits are now at advanced stage of validation.

12
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the development on the
above fronts.
Recommendation
The Committee is also of the view that the Department should undertake an awareness campaign
to popularise its technological advancements and sensitise all the State Governments as well as medical
colleges about the diagnosis and clinical symptomatic diagnosis of TB so as to provide an important
breakthrough in the early detection of the disease. (Para 16.4)
Action Taken
In order to take this joint effort forward, the Department is interacting with key stakeholders
including Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, Department of Health Research to have awareness
towards TB in the country.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the efforts of the Department would help
spreading awareness of TB in the country.
Recommendation
The Committee expresses concerns on the issue of mosquito breeding which appears to have gone
out of control. The Committee is of the view that the Department of Biotechnology should play a
significant role by devising technology to keep the mosquito population under control and should
examine the genda flower like pyrethrum for the purpose. Similarly, the Department should take research
work on pheromone traps for the female mosquito. (Para 16.5)
Action Taken
DBT is exploring the potential of various medicinal and aromatic plants. Suggestions on work, on
pheromone traps for Mosquitoes are well taken and noted.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would also like to be informed of the steps taken in
this direction.
BIODESIGN PROGRAMME
Recommendation
The Committee notes the scientific improvements brought with the support of its research activities
in the field of medical biotechnology and related areas. The Committee hopes that the Department would
continue its focus on this sector and further strengthen its activities in the areas of human genome
research, vaccines, infections, chronic disease biology, stem cells and regenerative medicine and the
biodesign programmes. (Para 17.2)

13
Action Taken
The focus of the Department will continue in this priority area. Major programmes have been
supported and this will be further strengthened and explored.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
FOOD AND NUTRITION
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the activities of the Department in the direction of Food and Nutrition.
The Committee, however , is of the view that the Department should further intensify its activities to
address the issue of Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM) so as to tackle the stunting in the children of our
country which can lead to developmental problems. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the
status of the approval of FSSAI to the formulation consisting of a mix of seven minerals and thirteen
vitamins in a sachet aimed for treatment of severely malnourished children. (Para 18.3)
Action Taken
The Department is supporting a program on "Biology of Childhood Under nutrition and Healthy
Growth with an emphasis on Linear Growth Retardation".
As regards Status of approval of FSSAI to the formulation consisting of a mix of seven minerals
and thirteen vitamins; an application for product approval was submitted to FSSAI as per guidelines laid
down by FSSAI that time (about two years back). The product approval (PA) advisory was on stay by
the order of Hon'ble Supreme Court and that no action could have been taken till final decision. The
FSSAI has now come up with new guidelines on nutraceuticals, health supplements, food for medical
purpose etc. as per Gazette of India No. 465 dated 26.12.2016. As per these new guidelines, there is
slight difference in the quantities of minerals and vitamins of developed product which had been developed
as per WHO standards. BIBCOL is waiting for final Gazette Notification for product approval from
FSSAI and then only intends to take up the issue of product approval of mineral-vitamin mix product.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the development in the
matter.
Recommendation
The Committee also recommends that the Department should publicise its demonstration unit
developed by IIT, Kharagpur to the various States of the country and sentise and encourage them to
make use of the technology in their respective States to combat Severe Acute Malnutrition (SAM).
(Para 18.4)
Action Taken
The Department would work with IIT, Kharagpur to prepare a background note on the technology
developed along with the demonstration unit and work towards sending this to various States of the
country.

14
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee is also of the view that the Department should in co-ordination with the FSSAI take
necessary action in the direction of making oil fortification mandatory so as to retain its nutritional
value. (Para 18.5)
Action Taken
The Department is coordinating with FSSAI and Ministry of Woman and Child Development in this
important area.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation
The Committee is of the considered opinion that with the help of right technological interventions,
we can bring the marginalised sections of our society into the mainstream and make them more productive
for the overall growth of the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
further intensify its activities in the directions of societal development and take necessary steps for
creating platform for self-employment generation in the industrially backward areas of the country.
(Para 19.2)
Action Taken
Department's Biotechnology Based Programme for Societal Development is helping to take forward
the leads developed through DBT supported R and D projects at the community level. Some of the low
input biotechnology interventions are being promoted for the benefit of target communities viz. SC/ST,
youth, women and farmers. These interventions are pertaining to agriculture and allied sector health,
nutrition and sanitation, value chain and post harvest agripreneurship development, biodiversity conservation
and rehabilitation and restoration measures for natural calamity. Major emphasis is given on skill development
among the youth to gain adequate knowledge for self employment through the training and demonstration
activities conducted. These projects are mainly rural based, village based and resource based and specifically
supported for creation of platform for the self employment generation in the backward region of the
country.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that the Department of Biotechnology can play a very important role
to address the issue of clean drinking water with the help of its technological advancements. The

15
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should chalk out a roadmap for the purpose and
further strengthen its activities in this direction. (Para 19.3)
Action Taken
With the objective to provide various possible wastewater clean-up options, DBT has identified
priority research areas such as in-situ detection, mapping and quantification of pollutants with innovative
approaches, development and demonstration of wastewater specific effective bioremediation options like
natural attenuation to bio-stimulation, bio-augmentation or a combination of filtration, phyto-remediation
and microbial degradation etc. As recommended, DBT will further strengthen R and D activities in this
direction.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the steps taken in this direction.
INDUSTRIAL AND  ENTREPRENEURSHIP  DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation
The Committee observes that the Department could not optimally utilise the allocation made for
'Industrial and Entrepreneurship Development Scheme' during the years 2014-15 and 2015-16. The
Committee is of the view that the Department needs to monitor its schemes periodically and recommends
that the Department should devise a monitoring mechanism whereby all its schemes are periodically
monitored and underutilization of funds is avoided. (Para 20.10)
Action Taken
The Budget was completely used in all PPP activities. It was only for new Bio-clusters which
required necessary approval and agreements that Budget could not be fully utilized. The Department has
now taken all necessary approvals and set up robust monitoring mechanism.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee takes note of the activities contemplated by the Department for the year 2017-18
and hopes that the envisioned objectives of the Department would be realized with the help of concerted
and earnest strategic steps. (Para 20.11)
Action Taken
The Department is taking all necessary steps to ensure implementation of all decisions in the
strategy.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

16
Recommendation
The Committee believes that the Department plays an instrumental and pivotal role in the areas of
transfer of technology, licensing, validation and in creation of infrastructure for commercialisation of
technologies. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take necessary action
in the matter and also chalk out a strategic roadmap for setting up technology development centres,
incubator facilities, etc. across the country for our aspiring entrepreneurs to prosper by creating sustainable
rural industrialisation in the field of biotechnology. (Para 20.12)
Action Taken
The Department is taking action for setting up of TTOs, incubators etc. across the country to
facilitate aspiring entrepreneurs. A plan of action to scale up of incubators has been proposed.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the steps taken in this direction.
Recommendation
The Committee strongly feels that the Department should make its presence felt in the technologically
backward States like Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, etc. and should
take necessary action in the direction of establishing Bio-technological Centres/Centre of Excellence in
these States as well. (Para 20.13)
Action Taken
Detailed interactions are being held with State Governments for setting up of Biotech Parks and
Centre of Excellence. Necessary steps are being taken to focus its efforts in initiating network programs
and Centres of Excellence in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Madhya
Pradesh.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the efforts of the Department would result
in establishment of Biotech Parks and Centers of Excellence in these States.
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation
The Committee appreciates the effort being made by the Department in strengthening and creation
of infrastructure across the country in biotechnology sector, which provides immense opportunity for
promoting innovative research and training and capacity building. The Committee is of the view that
state-of-art infrastructure provides opportunities for Human Resource Development and employment but
in the absence of the efficient human resources, the very purpose of putting state-of-art infrastructure
gets defeated. The major challenge, therefore, is the availability of adequate trained personnel to manage
this infrastructure and the Committee observes that Department in partnership with the Skill Development
Councils is addressing the issue. The Committee feels that infrastructure in itself can only provide the

17
conducive atmosphere to work in. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should take
all necessary measures to ensure that additional requirement of adequate trained personnel is made
available and the infrastructure created is utilised optimally. (Para 21.8)
Action Taken
The Department is implementing an integrated Human Resource Development Program in
Biotechnology comprising of post graduate teaching program, short term training courses for up-gradation
of skills of mid-career scientists and faculty engaged in teaching and R&D. Industrial training of students
fellowship for doctoral and post-doctoral research training in frontier areas of life sciences and
Biotechnology. Under HRD scheme, Department is generating critical mass of trained and skilled manpower
required for overall development of Biotechnology in the country.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
ASSISTANCE TO AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS
Recommendation
The Committee hopes that the increased allocation of 
` 708.53 crore under the head would help
these Autonomous Institutions in meeting their financial requirements and also enable them to carry out
their mandate more effectively. The Committee recommends that the Department should ensure that the
proposed activities of these Institutions are completed in scheduled time frame and there is no delay in
the activities proposed to be undertaken. (Para 22.3)
Action Taken
The recommendation has been noted for necessary action.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be informed of the actual action taken
in this regard.
Recommendation
The Committee notes that during the financial years 2013-14, 2014-15 and 2015-16, the budget
allocation for Autonomous Institutions could not be utilised fully and the gap between the budgetary
allocation and release of this allocation to these Institutions has increased on yearly basis. Except (i)
National Brain Research Centre, Gurugram; (ii) National Institute for Plant Genome Research, New
Delhi; (iii) Regional Centre for Biotechnology, Faridabad; and (iv) International Centre for Genetic
Engineering and Biotechnology, New Delhi, no other Autonomous Institution could be released 100
percent funds during the three years. In 2014-15, out of 16 Institutions, only 5 Institutions were able to
fully utilise their allocated budget. The financial performance of Institute of Bioresources and Sustainable
Development, Imphal has not been upto the mark during the three years and during 2015-16, the Institute
could avail only 
` 9.79 crore out of the budget allocation of ` 30.68 crore. The unsatisfactory financial

18
performance of the Autonomous Institution indicates that the physical performance of the Institutions
must have been adversely affected. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
monitor the financial performance of the autonomous institutions and evaluate their physical performance
as well and if found sub-optimal, necessary corrective preventive measures must be taken against them.
(Para 22.5)
Action Taken
The Department is monitoring the financial performance of AIs time to time and will ensure full
utilization of allocated budget.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the monitoring by the Department would
help improve the financial as well as the physical performance of the autonomous institutions.
PUBLIC SECTOR UNDERTAKING
BIOTECHNOLOGY INDUSTRY RESEARCH ASSISTANCE COUNCIL (BIRAC)
Recommendation
The Committee notes the work done by BIRAC for the advancement of biotechnology sector in the
country by way of fostering innovation and entrepreneurship, promotion of affordable innovation,
empowering start-ups and small and medium enterprises, helping in commercialisation of biotechnological
advancements. The Committee hopes that BIRAC will continue its endeavour and the budgetary allocation
of 
` 30 cr. for the year 2017-18 will further help it to take on new areas of biotechnology with greater
potential. (Para 23.5)
Action Taken
The Department noted the recommendation and will continue to support new area of Biotechnology
and the startups accordingly.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
PROMOTION OF BIOTECHNOLOGY IN NORTH EASTERN REGION (NER) OF INDIA
Recommendation
The Committee learns that in the year 2017-18 the schemes have been merged and support to the
Autonomous Institutes has been indicated under non-scheme. Accordingly the mandatory allocation of
10% for North East Region is now reflected only against the scheme budget which is ` 145.36 crore.
However, the budgetary support which would be provided to the Autonomous Institutes in the North East
has not been reflected. The Department has informed that in actual value the budgetary support will not
be decreased during the current year. (Para 24.3)

19
Action Taken
The Department has noted the recommendations.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that Autonomous Institutes of North-East must
be supported by making adequate allocation.
Recommendation
The Committee further notes that through the concerted efforts of the Department, during the last
five years, it has been able to initiate unique scheme/programes for NER which resulted in R&D capacity
building of more than 800 NER scientists/ researchers/faculty, creation of best of the R&D infrastructure
at almost all R&D institutions and universities of NER through infrastructure support, setting up of
Centre of Excellence (CoEs) as well as Unit of Excellence (U-Excel) around meritorious scientists of
NER, training of NER scientists/faculty in reputed overseas institutions and specialised training of
scientists/researchers/ students under various schemes/ programmes. The NER researchers published more
than 300 research papers in the peer reviewed journals. Entrepreneurship Development Programmes in
Biotechnology were also initiated by the Department during the last two years and as of now 2 entrepreneurs
have already established their ventures in NER. (Para 24.6)
Action Taken
Encouraging observation and appreciation by the Committee is gratefully acknowledged. This will
inspire and motivate DBT to continue to do its best in leaving no stone unturned for the development
of NER. DBT will continue to find new ways to reach the unreached, conceptualize new R&D programmes
and initiate livelihood schemes.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee is perturbed to note that since the year 2012-13 the Department could not fully
utilise the budgetary allocation earmarked for the North Eastern Region. The underutilisation of the
financial assistance given for the advancements of the scientific activities of the Department in the
Region is reflective of the poor fund management by the Department. The Committee takes serious note
of the fact that against the total budgetary allocation of 
` 796.67 cr., the Department managed to spend
only ` 676.39 cr. which is only 84.90 per cent of the total allocation. Taking into account the importance
of the North East Region in the overall scientific growth of the country, the Committee recommends that
the Department should make all out efforts to utilise the budgetary allocation and ensure that the funds
earmarked are optimally utilised for undertaking scientific research activities and creation of skilled
human resource in the North East Region. (Para 24.8)
Action Taken
DBT will make concerted efforts and take necessary action for the Autonomous Institute to improve
their budget utilization so as complete the 100% budget earmarked for this region by DBT.

20
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the efforts of the Department would yield
the desired results.
Recommendation
The Committee is of the considered opinion that North Eastern Region of our country has innumerable
potential given the taxonomy of this Region. The Committee feels that the Department can play a vital
role with the help of its technological achievements and hand-holding, various commercially viable
activities can be taken up such as pineapple processing industry in Sikkim, etc. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the Department should take the concerned agencies on board and come up with a
doable proposal to give technological boost to the local industries of this Region to give sustainable
livelihoods to the people. (Para 24.9)
Action Taken
DBT acknowledges valuable suggestion made by the Committee about initiating commercially viable
activities in partnership with local industries. In the new financial year, DBT will focus on devising/
launching schemes aimed at promoting livelihood activities.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee during its meeting held on 15th February, 2017 had observed that people of the
country including elected representatives are not aware of the excellent work in the field of Biotechnology
being done by the Department or much about the Department itself which may be beneficial for a very
big segment of the society like farmers, fishermen, students, research scholars etc. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should prepare a comprehensive awareness programme with
a calendar of events using social media platforms, radio, television etc. meant for students and general
public but most importantly for all the elected representatives right from district level i.e. Members of
Zila Panchayats, Legislative Assemblies and Councils and Members of Parliament. The Committee
strongly feels that elected representatives can play an important role in making their constituents aware
of scientific development and ultimately developing scientific temperament in the public at large.
(Para 24.10)
Action Taken
Very important recommendation. Noted and necessary action will be taken.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the steps taken in this direction.

21
MINUTES

II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 1st January, 2018 in Room No. '63', First Floor,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Anand Sharma — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S. R. Balasubramoniyan
3. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury
4. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
5. Kum. Sushmita Dev
6. Dr. K. Gopal
7. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
8. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
9. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
10. Shri Nagendra Singh
11. Shri Vikram Usendi
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri T. N. Pandey, Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Additional Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and wished
them a happy and prosperous new year. He informed the Members that the meeting had been convened
to consider and adopt the draft 302nd to 308th reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the
Government on the recommendations/observations contained in reports of the Committee on the Demands
for Grants (2017-18) pertaining to Ministry of Earth Sciences, Departments of Biotechnology, Science
and Technology, Scientific and Industrial Research, Space, Atomic Energy and Ministry of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change respectively. The Committee, then, considered the draft 302nd to 308th
Reports and adopted the same.
23

24
3. The Committee also decided to present/lay its 302nd to 308th reports to both the Houses of
Parliament on the 4th January, 2018. The Committee authorised the Chairman and, in his absence, Shri
S.R. Balasubramoniyan, M.P. and Shri Prasanna Acharya, M.P. respectively to present the reports in the
Rajya Sabha and Shri Shivaji A. Patil, M.P. and in his absence, Kumari Sushmita Dev, M.P. to lay the
reports on the Table of Lok Sabha.
4. *** *** ***
5. *** *** ***
6. *** *** ***
7. *** *** ***
8. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3:45 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.