PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 194
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY FOURTH REPORT
ON
THE COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION FUND BILL, 2008
ND  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 22 OCTOBER, 2008)
ND  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 22 OCTOBER, 2008)
ND  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 22 OCTOBER, 2008)
ND  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 22 OCTOBER, 2008)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY FOURTH REPORT
ON
THE COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION FUND BILL, 2008
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 22 ND OCTOBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 22 ND OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/ASVINA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—7
4. A NNEXURE I TO VII .............................................................................................................. 9—38
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................ 39—56

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2008-09)
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Dr. Ejaz Ali
7. Shri Jabir Husain
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Akbar Ahmad Dumpy
16. Shri Francis Fanthome
*17. V acant
18. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
19. Shri Brahmananda Panda
20. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
21. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
22. Shri Pratik P. Patil
23. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
24. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
25. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
26. Dr. Rampal Singh
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
29. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
30. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
31. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
*Shri Babubhai K. Katara ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his expulsion from the
membership of the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 21st October, 2008.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred and Ninety-forth Report of the Committee, which
relates to the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008.
2. In the meetings of Committee held on the 30th May, 6th June, 3rd, 14th, 29th July and
12th August, 2008 Secretaries/representatives of the Ministry and various other organizations/
experts/individuals etc. having knowledge and expertise in the field tendered oral evidence on the
various aspects related to the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministries/Departments and
representatives of the various organizations for rendering their valuable views/clarification sought by
the Members of the Committee.
4. The Committee considered the Bill clause-by-clause in its meeting held on 21st August, 2008
and adopted the draft Report at its meeting held on 3rd October, 2008.
DR. V . MAITREYAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
October 3, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

1
REPORT
The Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha in pursuance of
Rule 270 (b) of the Rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees,
referred* the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008 (Annexure-I) as introduced on
5th May, 2008 in Lok Sabha and pending therein, to the Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests for examination and Report.
2. The Committee held its first meeting with the representatives of Ministry of Environment
and Forests, for a general discussion on the various provisions of the Bill. The Committee then
decided to issue a press Communique in leading national dailies in English, Hindi and other regional
languages inviting memoranda on the subject matter of the Bill from the interested organizations/
institutions/individuals having knowledge and expertise in the field. The Committee also decided to
give wide publicity to the contents of the Press Communique through All India Radio and
Doordarshan. Accordingly, a press communique was issued on 4th June, 2008.
3. In all 13 memoranda containing comments/suggestions on the various provisions of the Bill
were received by the Committee from various organizations and individuals, etc. (A list of
individuals/organisations is at Annexure-II), which were sent to the Ministries of Environment and
Forests and Law and Justice for their comments/observations. As the Bill has a bearing on State
Governments the views/suggestions of the State Governments and Union Territories were also
sought. In all seven State Governments responded and placed their views before the Committee.
(A list of the State Governments which placed their views/suggestions before the Committee is at
Annexure-III). The Committee also heard the views of four experts on the subject on 6th June and
3rd, 14th and 29th July, 2008 (Names of experts at Annexure-IV). The Committee then took up
clause-by-clause consideration of the ‘Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008’ in its meeting
held on the 21st August, 2008. Finally, the Committee adopted the report at its meeting held on
the 3rd October, 2008.
BACKGROUND
4. The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008 owes its genesis to the interim order of
the Supreme Court delivered in T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad vs. Union of India [Writ Petition (C)
No. 202 of 1995] on 29th October, 2002. As the Ministry of Environment and Forests did not
come up with a plan for utilization of Compensatory Afforestation Fund, the Supreme Court in its
interim order directed inter-alia that a Compensatory Afforestation Fund be created in which all
the monies received from the user agencies towards Compensatory Afforestation, additional
Compensatory Afforestation, penal Compensatory Afforestation, Net Present Value of the diverted
forest land, Catchment Area Treatment Plan, etc. shall be deposited and also that Government of
India shall frame comprehensive rules regarding creation of a body and management of
Compensatory Afforestation Fund. Accordingly, Ministry of Environment and Forests issued an
order on 23rd April, 2004 constituting a body for the management of Compensatory Afforestation
Fund known as Compensatory Afforestation Management and Planning Authority (CAMPA). But
owing to non-operationalisation of CAMPA even after two years, the Supreme Court on 5th May,
2006 directed that an ad hoc Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority
(CAMPA) be constituted till such time as regular CAMPA comes into operation and also that the
money recovered on behalf of CAMPA but lying with States/UTs be centrally pooled into it. In
accordance, with the above direction over Rs. five thousand crores as collected by the State
*Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II dated the 12th May, 2008

2
Governments and Union Territories have been placed under the ad hoc CAMPA and deposited in
the nationalized Banks.
OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
5. The Committee enquired as to when the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 and Forest
(Conservation) Rules, 2003 provided for Compensatory Afforestation and also for creation of
Special fund by State/UT Government to which the user agency will make its deposits for
Compensatory Afforestation and its utilization by competent agency, what prompted the Supreme
Court to issue directions for creation of CAMPA? It was informed that from 1980 to 2001, State
Governments used to collect money to take up Compensatory Afforestation works from the user
agencies and it was found from the data available that only approximately 30 per cent of the fund
collected was utilized for the purpose. Forestry had been a low priority area in most of the States
and some State Governments had even gone to the extent to use the fund so collected for non-
forestry purposes and that is why the Supreme Court had to intervene.
6. The Committee sought the names of the States and the extent to which diversion of fund
was resorted to by them. The Ministry of Environment and Forests, based on checks conducted
by State Accountant Generals to ascertain diversion of funds, misappropriation and other related
issues could furnish the list of only five such States (Annexure-V) namely: Andhra Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Haryana, Punjab and Karnataka. The total alleged diversion in these States amounted
roughly to Rs.475/- crores. The nature of such diversion ranged from loss of interest by not
keeping the funds in fixed deposits; non- recovery of amounts due from user agencies; diverting
of amount to Government Accountant; remitting of amount into treasury instead of keeping in fixed
deposits to depositing of an amount of Rs.197.79 crores collected during 1993-94 to 2004-05 as
Karnataka Forest Development Fund. The Ministry submitted — 
“these are the few examples
available. Further detailed audit is required to be done to ascertain the complete picture.” The
Committee is, therefore, of the view that the Ministry had not presented the real and
complete picture of diversion of funds before the Supreme Court or before this Committee,
nor did it take pains to suitably defend the case. The Ministry also admitted that at some
stage or the other the directions of the Supreme Court should have been contested, but the
same had not been contested.
7. The Committee is not inclined to accept that the extent and proportion of diversion
of Compensatory Afforestation Funds by States was so huge and so alarming as to warrant
a sweeping change in the mechanism which was in existence for over twenty years — 1980
to 2002. Firstly, because between 1980, when the Forest (Conservation) Act, came into
existence till 2003, the user agencies were required to pay at the rate of Rs.20,000/- per
hectare to Rs.45,000/- per hectare for compensatory afforestation and the amount as such
was not very huge. Secondly, the Committee was informed that till the creation of CAMPA
in 2004, whatever fund was collected for Compensatory Afforestation was being properly
utilized by States as per the laid down rules and regulations. It was also informed that out
of Rs.75.36 crores collected by Karnataka Government from 1980 to April, 2004 from Wind
Energy Companies Rs.72.41 had been utilized covering 38,347 hectares (Annexure VI). The
Committee was further informed that besides Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Tamil Nadu, Gujarat – most other States had done reasonably well. Thirdly, diversion is not
a phenomenon peculiar only to Compensatory Afforestation Fund but common to various
other schemes implemented by States with the assistance of Central Government. Moreover,
it is ultimately the State Governments who have to implement Compensatory Afforestation
Schemes by the fund routed through CAMPA. It is the DFO, the ranger, the forester or
the Guard of concerned State Governments who would be utilising the fund. The only
difference lies in the fact that by creating a superbody in the name of CAMPA, an attempt

3
is being made to centralize control in the Central Government which is not supported by
the federal character of our Constitution.
8. The Committee feels that the establishment of the proposed new Authority would
prolong and delay the process of Compensatory Afforestation as the amount collected by
State/Union Territories Governments will have to be pooled in a Central fund and then
devolved back to them as per whatever formulae worked out by the Central Authority. It
is therefore of the view that as the States generate the funds and also utilise the same,
an instrument to facilitate utilization needs to be put in place at the State level.
9. The Committee is of the view that this is a case of negligence and laxity on the part
of the Ministry of Environment and Forests and that this bill was prepared without
examining all aspects of the matter and alternatives available under the Forest
(Conservation) and the Environment (Protection) Acts.
10. The Committee is of the view that in order to address the issue of alleged diversion
of Compensatory Afforestation Fund by State/UT Governments the Ministry of Environment
and Forests should have, instead of waiting for direction from Supreme Court taken
proactive administrative measures by issuing necessary directions or taking such other steps
as it deemed appropriate in the matter. The Committee is constrained to observe that the
Ministry has badly failed to explore other administrative and persuasive measures at its
command to settle the issue.
11. The Committee feels that Ministry of Environment and Forests has not made adequate
efforts before 2002 to effectively handle the funds accumulated by State Governments and
the same remained unutilized. The damage or loss caused this way is far more serious than
the alleged diversion of Compensatory Afforestation Funds by a few States.
12. The Committee is of the opinion that the Bill in its current form gives the
impression that it is a step in the direction of legitimatising monetary compensation for
diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes. It is based on the assumption that
collection of more and more monetary compensation and tree plantation is the answer to
forest conservation. But this assumption proves to be totally false if seen in the light of
pace of diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes which has gained momentum since
2002 when the Supreme Court direction came. A comparative analysis of the statement
showing cases (State-wise) approved for diversion of forest land during the period from
1.11.2002 to 31.07.2008 and 25.10.1980 to 31.10.2002 (Annexure-VII) suggests that while
within a period of six years, seven thousand nine hundred ninety six cases of diversion were
approved, only nine thousand eight hundred twenty four cases were approved in the
previous twenty two years. During the former period pace of diversion was 30,997.34 hectare
per year while during the latter it had been 20,639.99 hectare per year.
13. While the Committee is aware of the necessity of economic development, however,
at the same time it underlines the need for protection and preservation of forests/forest
eco-systems which are unique endowment and our natural heritage and hence feels that
reckless, indiscriminate and avoidable use of forest land should be discouraged because
degradation of forest has an adverse impact on various systems such as water resources,
agriculture, biodiversity, environment, climate and human health besides upon subsistence
living of tribal and other communities. It takes hundreds of years to create green cover and
compensation in terms of its compensatory mechanism over that period is never envisaged.
The Committee is of the opinion that no amount of compensation, howsoever, hefty it may
be is condign enough to compensate the irreparable loss caused to forests. And all this
stands in stark contrast to the commitment of achieving 25% forest and tree cover by 2007

4
and 33% by 2012 made by Government. The main thrust of the proposed Bill, therefore,
should have been on checking the indiscriminate diversion of pristine forest land while
striking a fine balance with developmental activities which was at the heart of the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980.
14. Functions of General Body of the proposed CAMPA bill as outlined in Chapter-IV, Clause
11 surprisingly does not include Compensatory Afforestation as one of the components which must
have been there as the caption of the Bill - Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008 signifies.
Instead clause 11, sub-clause I (i) includes overseeing programme known as “Green India” for
massive afforestation of the degraded forest land of the country. There is a difference between
Compensatory Afforestation and massive afforestation. Compensatory Afforestation is an
afforestation exercise undertaken to undo the damage caused due to diversion of forest land for
non-forest purposes and it carries certain conditions. Broadly, these conditions include:—
(i) Compensatory afforestation shall be done over equivalent area of non-forest land;
(ii) As far as possible, the non-forest land for compensatory afforestation should be
identified contiguous to or in the proximity of Reserved Forest or Protected Forest to
enable the Forest Department to effectively manage the newly planted area;
(iii) In the event that non-forest land of compensatory afforestation is not available in the
same district, non-forest land for compensatory afforestation may be identified
anywhere else in the State/UT as near as possible to the site of diversion, so as to
minimize adverse impact on the micro-ecology of the area;
(iv) Where non-forest lands are not available or non-forest land is available in less extent
to the forest area being diverted, compensatory afforestation may be carried out over
degraded forest twice in extent to the area being diverted or to the difference between
forest land being diverted and available non-forest land, as the case may be; and
(v) The Compensatory Af forestation should clearly be an additional plantation activity and
not a diversion of part of the annual plantation programme.
15. The Green India Programme through which massive afforestation is envisaged does not
contain any of the above conditionalities. This is also not altogether a new programme as it was
there in the Tenth Plan named as National Afforestation Programme. No assessment of the National
Afforestation Programme has been carried out and presently a new programme is proposed.
16. The Committee is, therefore, of the view that Green India Programme may be run
separately by the Ministry of Environment and Forests out of the Budget allocated by
Planning Commission and if required by mobilizing additional resources by way of
assistance/borrowing from financial institutions/international agencies with appropriate
legislation in place. The fund collected for Compensatory Afforestaion should exclusively be
used for that particular purpose only. Otherwise, judicial scrutiny of the diversion of funds
for deviation from the direction of the Supreme Court cannot be ruled out.
17. While diversion of forest land in certain cases may be justified for the development
of the country but there could be no justification, in the opinion of the Committee for
diversion of money collected for Compensatory Afforestation as mentioned in Clause 11 (1)
(x) and sub-clauses (ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) of Clause 4 of the Bill, which provide for incurring
of expenditure on such heads respectively as communication, social mobilization, monitoring
and evaluation and salary and allowances payable to officers and employees, etc. of the
proposed CAMPA.
18. When the Committee enquired as to whether funds collected from individual States shall be
given back to the respective States, the Ministry answered in the affirmative and drew the attention

5
of the Committee to Sub-clause (i) of Clause 6 of the Bill, which provides that the fund shall be
utilized in States and UTs having regard to land in respect of which such payments have been
received. But the Committee finds that Sub-clause (ix) of Clause 11 (1) provides that the
Governing Body of CAMPA shall adopt a principle of allocation to States and UTs and that
it shall formulate a broad policy framework including the allocation formula to States and
the UTs. Such provisions in the bill create doubts in the mind of the Committee that the
Central Government will play a major role in the allocation of funds collected from States
and the possibility of States suffering in the process can not be ruled out.
19. The Committee is of the opinion that the establishment of such a fund, in the
manner proposed in the bill, will allow the Central Government to exercise hegemony
through concentration of financial power with the Central Government and encroach upon
the normal powers and functions of the State Governments. The Committee also expresses
its serious concern over the fact that the Central Government may completely bypass the
duly elected State Governments and the various State bodies and provide funds directly to
the Joint Forest Management Committees, for the implementation of the afforestation
programmes of the States, thereby undermining the very concept of federalism which is
enshrined in our constitution. The role of local bodies such as Gram Panchayats/Gram
Sabhas etc. has been completely ignored in the Bill.
20. The Committee further notes that the collection of the Net Present Value (NPV) in addition
to the already existing Compensatory Afforestation, started in 2004, only on the directions of the
Supreme Court, based on the recommendations of the Central Expert Committee and the NPV is
being collected merely on the basis of a guideline to that effect, issued by the Ministry of
Environment and Forests without approval of Cabinet. The Committee expresses its serious
concern at the fact that no legislation or rule has been formulated so far and placed before
the Parliament, regarding the collection of NPV . The Committee is of the opinion that the
collection of NPV has no legal sanction.
21. The proposed Authority (CAMPA) as provided in Clause 7 (3) of the Bill in itself is a top
heavy superbody. It consists of four groups—Governing body, Executive body, Monitoring Group
and Administrative support mechanism. The Governing Body consists of five Ministers including
the Minister of Environment and Forests as its Chairperson, Deputy Chairman Planning Commission
and five Secretaries to the Government of India besides 10 other officials and eminent non-
Government organization experts. How best and how far this body would be able to engage itself
in clearing hundred of proposals for utilization of compensatory funds received from States and
UTs could be anybody’s guess. The proposed body shall meet at least once in six months as
proved in sub clause (3) of Clause 11. In such a situation the Committee is of the view that
its functioning will not serve the intended purpose.
22. Further, Sub clause (viii) of Clause 12 (1) of the proposed Bill provides that on being
satisfied that the funds released to a particular State or UT are not being properly utilized, the
Executive Body shall withhold or suspend the release of funds. The malady i.e., diversion of funds
that led to the origin of the Bill, still remains where it was and as it was. The problem of diversion
of funds by States is not addressed in the present bill. So, the question arises—why this bill and
authority, if the ills are not remedied?
23. The Committee observes that the issue of displacement of forest-dwellers and tribals/
adivasis has found no mention in the Bill. The Committee is of the opinion that forest is a source
of food and livelihood for a large number of forest-dwellers and adivasis who live in forests and
depend on forest produce like fruits, food items, saleable tendu/kendu leaves, fuelwood, medicinal
herbs, etc. In addition forests also contain water bodies, grazing areas, common lands and other
areas that people depend on for their livelihood. Diversion of forest land as well as any large scale

6
afforestation programme on acquired land, would result in the further displacement and thereby the
livelihood of these forest-dwellers and tribes/adivasis would be adversely affected.
24. The Committee is of the view that acquiring, of the forests land for afforestation purposes
would deprive forest dwellers and tribals/adivasis of some or all of their lands and adversely impact
their livelihoods and basic needs— for which they are neither informed, nor consulted, nor
compensated. The Committee understands that, the Bill in its present shape does not take into
account the loss to the forest-dwellers and tribals/adivasis on account of compensatory
afforestation and does not provide any monetary compensation to these people. In the Bill there is
no mention of the Ministry of Tribal Affairs or the experts/non-government organisations who are
involved in the betterment of these people. The Committee expresses its concern at the fact
that the work of Afforestation has been entrusted to the Joint Forest Management
Committees without any involvement of forest dwellers, etc. The Committee is of the view
that diversion of forest land whenever necessary should be done through a democratic
process and local people should always be involved in that. The Gram Sabha should be the
key body and should be consulted and involved both during forest diversion and during
afforestation. The rights of people under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest
Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act should be adhered to.
25. The Committee is also of the view that the existing contradiction and conflict between the
tribal community and the State shall further sharpen as the Compensatory Afforstation Fund Bill,
2008 will lead to erosion of traditional tribal rights and command of tribals over common resources
such as forests, pastures, water resources, etc. on which they depend to meet their basic survival
needs. The present Bill gives fillip to the tendency to see all such resources as sources of profit
at the cost of the poor who are being deprived and denied of whatever access they traditionally
had to such natural resources. The Committee in the context of the present bill expresses its
serious concern over the fact that forest conservation has found a strange companion in industrial
forestry. While the rights of forest dwellers are severely curtailed on the pretext of forest
conservation, forests are increasingly shaped to suit the needs of industry. Displacement of tribal
people thus caused lead to multidimensional trauma-physical, occupational, cultural, etc. with far
reaching impacts which can not easily be compensated. According to an unofficial estimates while
the tribals constitute 8.08% of the total population they are 40% of the total displaced/affected
persons. Their rehabilitation and resettlement record is very dismal. The Committee is of the view
that development devoid of and insensitive to the cause of those affected and displaced is
no development in true sense of the term and such developments would never herald the
country in peace, prosperity, harmony and social and economic progress.
26. The Committee strongly feels that States’ involvement in the process of formulation
of this bill should have been ensured, so that their interest could have been taken care of.
But no such effort seems to have been made by the Central Government. The Committee,
therefore, feels that the Bill is an exercise aimed at centralization of power and funds at
the cost of the interests of the States and the people.
27. The Committee is of the view that the purpose of the Bill seems to be to make use
of the money which the Ministry has accumulated for Compensatory afforestation.
28. The Committee, therefore, is of the considered opinion that this is an ill-conceived exercise
and the purposes proposed to be achieved through this bill should be achieved by making enabling
amendments in the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. The Committee, therefore, recommends
that the present bill be withdrawn.
29. In order that the fund accumulated in CAMPA be utilized in right earnest and the States are
not made to further suffer, the Committee suggests an alternative mechanism for consideration:—

7
1. National Afforestation and Eco-development Board (NAEB) in the Ministry of
Environment and Forests, should be made the single Nodal agency for dealing with the
CAMPA funds.
2. All the funds collected so far and to be gathered in future, shall go into a single account
under the NAEB with the authority to draw, disburse and maintain accounts of the
CAMPA fund.
3. The CAMPA funds collected so far and to be collected in future should be divided in
to two separate units of accounting:
3.(a) The first part consisting of amounts gathered from the user agencies under the provisions
of the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 and Forest (Conservation) Rules 2003, consisting of the
(a) compensatory afforestation deposits, (b) the penal compensatory afforestation deposits,
(c) catchments area treatment works fund, (d) the buffer zone development, (e) soil and moisture
conservation, and (f) the protection of diverted areas etc. and the second part consisting of
amounts collected from user agencies for the net present value and the partial use of nature
preserves, like wildlife sanctuaries, national parks, tiger reserves etc.
3.(b) Funds collected through first part be transferred to the State forest departments from whom
they have been collected, for the purposes they have been collected.
3.(c) Funds collected through second part should be placed at the disposal of Special Purpose
Vehicles (SPV) created under the Environment (Protection) Act 1986 as a major Public Undertaking
as a conservation/eco-development society established for each State. This SPV will be registered
as an eco-development society to deal with afforestation of identified degraded forests and past
poorly stocked plantations, at twice to four times the extent of forest area diverted. Rules be made
under section 26 of the Act and this same be brought before Parliament for approval.
Such an arrangement would not only take care of the funds collected already but future
collections also.
The SPV should be under the control of the State Government and should consist of
representatives from the various areas affected by forest destruction. It should release and spend
the money in accordance with plans suggested by the Panchayats affected by the forests
destruction and operationalised through the Gram Sabha (or, in the case of Schedule V and VI
areas, the traditional institution).
The Committee is also of the view that the existing system of forest diversion is non-
transparent and undemocratic and that merely levying higher monetary charges through NPV has
not served as an effective method of protecting forests. On the contrary, it enables the powerful
to buy the right to destroy the most pristine forests simply because they have the financial
resources. The Committee suggests that the Ministry should overhaul the system to ensure that
forest diversion is decide through a rigorous democratic processes in which local adivasi and forest
dweller communities are empowered to be part of decision-making. This process should also decide
how environmental damage can best be mitigated in each case, rather than simply assuming that
afforestation is a remedy for all forest destruction.

ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN L OK S ABHA
5 MAY , 2008
Bill No. 42 of 2008
THE COMPENSATORY AFFOREST ATION FUND BILL, 2008
A
BILL
to provide for the establishment of a fund and crediting thereto the
monies received from the user agencies towards compensatory
afforestation, additional compensatory afforestation, penal
compensatory afforestation, Net Present Value and all other
amounts recovered from such agencies under the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980; constitution of an Authority for
administration of the Fund and to utilise the monies so
collected for undertaking artificial regeneration (plantations)
assisted natural regeneration, protection of forests,
infrastructure development, Green India Programme, wildlife
protection and other related activities and for matters
connected therewith or incidental thereto.
W
HEREAS the Supreme Court in Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of
1995-T.N. Godavarman Thirumalpad Vs. Union of India and others
has observed that a Compensatory Afforestation Fund be created in
which all the monies received from the user agencies towards
compensatory afforestation, additional compensatory afforestation,
penal compensatory afforestation, Net Present Value of the diverted
forest land or Catchment Area Treatment Plan shall be deposited;
A
ND WHEREAS  it has also been observed that the money
received from the user agencies in cases where forest land diverted
falls within Protected Areas, that is areas notified under the Wild
Life (Protection) Act, 1972 for undertaking activities related to
protection of bio-diversity or wildlife shall also be deposited in this
Fund;
11
35 of 1972.

12
AND  WHEREAS  the Court as directed that besides artificial
regeneration (plantations), the Fund shall also be utilised for
undertaking assisted natural regeneration, protection of forests,
infrastructure development, wildlife protection and other related
activities and an independent system of concurrent monitoring and
evaluation should be evolved and implemented through the
Compensatory Afforestation Fund to ensure effective and proper
utilisation of funds;
A
ND WHEREAS  in its direction dated the 5th May, 2006, the
Supreme Court had directed that since the Government had not
constituted a Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and
Planning Authority, (CAMPA), an ad hoc CAMPA should be constituted
till CAMPA becomes operational and directed to centrally pool the
money recovered on behalf of CAMPA lying in the States and Union
Territories into the ad hoc CAMPA;
A
ND WHEREAS  in compliance of the directions of the Supreme
Court including its order dated the 5th May, 2006, over rupees five
thousand crores as collected by the State Government and Union
Territories have been placed under the ad hoc CAMPA, and deposited
in the Nationalised Banks;
N
OW, THEREFORE , based on the above orders, directions and
observations of the Supreme Court, it is proposed to create a
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority
by an Act of Parliament under Entry 17A of the Concurrent List of the
Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, to implement the directions of the
Supreme Court to create a Fund namely, Compensatory Afforestation
Fund, to bring all the funds so far collected under this Fund, and to
create the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning
Authority.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-ninth Year of the Republic
of India as follows:—
CHAPTER-I
PRELIMINARY
1. ( 1) This Act may be called the Compensatory Afforestation
Fund Act, 2008.
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of
Jammu and Kashmir.
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall come into
force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in
the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Authority” means Compensatory Afforestation
Fund Management and Planning Authority constituted under
section 7;
Short title,
extent and
commenc-
ement
Definitions.
5
10

13
(b) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the
Authority;
(c) “compensatory afforestation” means afforestation
done in lieu of the diversion of forest land for non-forestry
use under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980;
(d) “environmental services” means—
(i) provision of goods such as wood, non-timber
forest products, fuel, fodder, water and provision of
services such as grazing, tourism, wildlife protection
and life support;
(ii) regulating services such as climate regulation,
disease control, flood moderation, detoxification, carbon
sequestration and health of soils, air and water regimes;
(iii ) non-material benefits obtained from
ecosystems, spiritual, recreational, aesthetic, inspirational,
educational and symbolic;
(iv) supporting such other services necessary for
the production of ecosystem services, biodiversity,
nutrient cycling and primary production;
(e) “Fund” means the Compensatory Afforestation Fund
established under sub-section ( 1) of section 3;
(f) “Green India Programme” means locating a land area
of one acre or more of degraded forests or other land for
reforestation projects or such other afforestation projects as
may be determined by the Central Government in this regard
and planting the area by trees or other woody plants by
utilising the Compensatory Afforestation Fund having regard
to the conservation of ecology and environment;
(g) “Net Present Value” means the quantification of the
environmental services provided for the forest area diverted
for non-forestry uses, as may be determined by an expert
Committee appointed by the Central Government trom time to
time in this regard;
(h) “penal compensatory afforestation” means
afforestation work to be undertaken over and above the
prescribed compensatory afforestation under the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980, in lieu of the extent of area over
which non-forestry activities have been carried, out without
obtaining prior approval of the competent authority under the
Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980;
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the
Central Government;
69 of 1980.
15
20
5
10
15
69 of 1980.
20

14
(j) “user agency” means any person, organisation or
company or Department of the Central or State Government
making a request for diversion or de-notification of forest
land for non-forest purpose or using forest land for non-
forest purpose in accordance with the provisions contained in
the Forest (Conservation)Act, 1980 and the rules and
guidelines issued thereunder.
CHAPTER-II
E
STABLISHMENT , MANAGEMENT  AND UTILISATION  OF C OMPENSATORY
AFFORESTATION  F UND
3.  ( 1) With effect from such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of this
Act, a special Fund to be called the “Compensatory Afforestation
Fund” under public account of lndia.
(2) The Fund shall be under the control of the Central
Government and managed by the Compensatory Afforestation Fund
Management and Planning Authority in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) On the date of the establishment of the Fund, all monies
collected by the State Governments and Union Territories, which,
has been placed under the ad hoc Compensatory Afforestation
Fund Management and Planning Authority and deposited in the
Nationalised Banks, under the management of the Central
Government, in compliance of the directions of the Supreme
Court dated the 5th May, 2006, shall be credited in the
Consolidated Fund of India, which shall be transferred to the
Fund under the Public Account of India.
(4) There shall be credited into the Fund —
(i) receipt of all monies from user agencies towards
compensatory afforestation, additional compensatory
afforestation, penal compensatory afforestation, Catchment
Area Treatment Plan or any money for compliance of
conditions stipulated by the Central Government while
according approval under the provisions of the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980;
(ii) the unspent funds already realised by the States or
Union Territories and not transferred to the Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority for
crediting into the Fund by the respective States or Union
Territories from user agencies within six months from the
date of commencement of this Act and any compensatory
afforesation funds which have not yet been realised shall
be realised by the States and Union Territories and
transferred to the Authority for crediting into the Fund;
69 of 1980.
25
30
35
40
45
69 of 1980.
50
Establish-
ment of
Compensa-
tory
Afforestation
Fund.

15
(iii) the funds recoverable from the user agencies in
cases where forest land diverted falls within the protected
areas, that is, areas notified under sections 18, 26A or 35 of
the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 for undertaking
activities relating to the protection of biodiversity and the
wildlife to be maintained under a separate head; and
(iv) Net Present Value of the forest land diverted for non-
forestry purposes, collected under the Forest (Conservation)
Act, 1980, and the rules and the guidelines issued thereunder
and in pursuance ofthe judgment of the Supreme Court dated
the 29th October, 2002 from the user agencies.
(5) The monies received in the Fund shall—
(a) be an interest bearing fund.under public account of
lndia; and
(b) the balance in the Fund shall be non-lapsable and get
interest as per the rate declared by the Central Government
on year-to-year basis.
4. The Fund shall be utilised for meeting—
(i) development, maintenance and protection of forests and
wildlife and the Green India Programme;
(ii) the non-recurring as well as recurring expenditure for the
management of the Authority including the salary and allowances
payable to its officers and other employees by utilising a part of the
income by way of accrued interest on the funds invested by the
Authority excluding income from the funds recoverable from the
user agencies in cases where forest land diverted falls within the
protected areas, that is, areas notified under section 18, 26A or 35
of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 for undertaking activities
related to protection of biodiversity and the wildlife;
(iii) the expenditure incurred on monitoring and evaluation;
(iv) disbursement on such other projects relating to
afforestation as the Central Government may prescribe.
(v) expenses of the Authority in the discharge of its
functions having regard to the purposes for which such grants
or loans as are received and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto;
(vi) expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by, or
under, this Act.
5.  The Central Government may, by rules, prescribe an
accounting procedure to regulate the manner of crediting the monies
already collected, to the Fund as provided in 35 sub-section ( 3) of
section 3, crediting of all future receipts in the Fund as provided in
sub-section ( 4) of section 3 and for transferring the fund to the
Authority for the purpose of utilisation as contained in sub-section ( 4)
of section 3 in a year.
5
35 of 1972.
69 of 1980.
10
15
20
25
35 of 1972.
30
40
Utilisation
of Fund.
Accounting
Procedure.

16
6. ( 1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Fund shall be
utilised in States and Union Territories having regard to lands in respect
of which such payments have been received.
(2) The Authority shall accomplish the afforestation for which
money is deposited in the Fund within a period of one year or two
growing seasons after project completion, as may be appropriate, after
receipt of the money.
(3) The money received towards compensatory afforestation,
additional compensatory afforestation and penal compensatory
afforestation may be used as per the site specific schemes received
from the States and Union Territories along with the proposals for
diversion of forest land under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
(4) The money received in the Fund towards Net Present Value
shall be used for artificial regeneration (plantation), assisted natural
regeneration, forest management, protection, infrastructure development,
Green India Programme, wildlife protection and management, supply of
wood and other forest produce saving devices and other allied activities.
(5) All monies realised from the user agencies in accordance with
the decision taken by the Standing Committee of the National Board for
Wild Life constituted under section 5A of the Wild Life (Protection)
Act, 1972 or the orders of the Supreme Court involving cases of
diversion of forest land in protected areas shall form the corpus and
the income therefrom shall be used exclusively for undertaking
protection and conservation activities in protected areas of the States
and the Union Territories and in exceptional circumstances, a part of
the corpus may also be used subject to prior approval of the Authority.
(6) The Authority shall release monies to the concerned State and
Union Territory in predetermined instalments through the State
Management Committee as per the annual plan of operation finalised by
the concerned State and the Union Territory.
(7) The monies received in the Fund trom a State or Union
Territory as specified in sub-section ( 4) and the income earned thereon
after deducting the expenditure incurred by the Authority on its
establishment, monitoring and evaluation on a pro rata basis, shall be
used only in that particular State or Union Territory and in cases of
trans boundary forestry or environmental implication of diversion of
forest land for non-forestry purposes in a particular State or Union
Territory, if found expedient and necessary by the Authority, the monies
received trom that particular State or Union Territory may be used, in
such proportion as may be determined by the Authority for the
purpose, in the adjoining State or Union Territory to mitigate
transboundary adverse impact on forest or environment.
(8) All work at the ground level shall be executed through Joint
Forest Management Committee except in matters where the nature of
work demands execution by any other agency.
Disbursement
of Funds. 40
45
69 of 1980.
5
35 of 1972.
10
15
20
25

17
CHAPTER-III
CONSTITUTION  OF A UTHORITY
7.  ( 1) With effect from such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint
in this behalf, there shall be constituted an Authority to be called
as the “Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and
Planning Authority”,
(2) The Authority shall be responsible for the management of the
Fund and its utilisation for the purposes of the Act.
(3) The Authority shall consist of a Governing Body and shall be
assisted by an Executive Body, Monitoring Group and administrative
support mechanism.
(4) The Governing Body of the Authority shall consist of the
following, namely:—
(i) Minister of Environment and Forests — Chairperson:
(ii) Minister of Finance — Member:
(iii) Minister of Science and Technology — Member;
(iv) Minister of Rural Development — Member;
(v) Minister of Panchayati Raj — Member;
(vi) Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission — Member;
(vii ) Secretaries of the Ministries of Environment and
Forests, Finance (Department of Expenditure), Science and
Technology, Rural Development, Panchayati Raj, Government of
India — Members;
(viii) Director General of Forests and Special Secretary,
Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India—
Member;
(ix) Additional Director General of Forests (Wild Life)
Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India —
Member;
(x) Financial Advisor, Ministry of Environment and Forests,
Government of India — Member;
(xi) three Principal Chief Conservator of Forests, one from
six regions, to be nominated every year by the Ministry of
Environment and Forests on rotation basis — Member;
(xii) Inspector General of Forests (Forest Conservation),
Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of lndia —
Member;
(xiii) threee eminent non-Government organization experts,
one each in the field of forestry, wildlife and ecology, for a period
of two years subject to not more than two consecutive terms—
Member.
40
45
5
10
Constitution
of Authority.

18
(5) The Central Government may appoint an officer of the
rank of an Inspector General of Forests as the Chief Executive
Officer who shall be the Member-Secretary of the Governing Body
and the Executive Body.
8. ( 1) The Governing Body of the Authority shall, in performance
of its functions and powers under the Act, be assisted by the Executive
Body and the Monitoring Group.
(2) The Executive Body shall consist of the following, namely:—
(i) Director General of Forests and Special Secretary, Ministry
of Environment and Forests, Government of India — Chairperson;
(ii) Additional Director General of Forests (Wild Life) Ministry
of Environment and Forests, Government of lndia — Member;
(iii) Inspector General of Forests (Forest Conservation),
Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India —
Member;
(iv) Financial Advisor, Ministry of Environment and Forests,
Government of India — Member;
(v) A representative each of the Ministries of Finance
(Department of Expenditure); Science and Technology; Rural
Development and Panchayati Raj, Government of India — Members;
(vi) Chairman, National Bank for Agriculture and Rural
Development — Member;
(vii) three non-official experts, one each from the field of
forestry, forest economy development and wildlife — Members;
(viii) Chief Executive Officer of the Authority — Member
Secretary.
(3) The Monitoring Group shall consist of six experts in the field
of environment, economics, wildlife, forests and social sector.
(4) The following officers shall be appointed by the Authority
for a period not exceeding five years, to assist the Executive Body
in performance of its functions and powers under the Act:—
(i) Joint Chief Executive Officer of the rank of
Conservator of Forests;
(ii) Financial Advisor and Chief Accounts Officer of the
rank of Director in the Government of India; and
(iii) Deputy Chief Executive Officers of the rank of
Deputy Conservator of Forests.
9. The terms of office and other conditions of the service of the
members of the Authority, Executive Body, Monitoring Group shall be
such as may be prescribed.
10. A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a
member of the Authority, Executive Body, Monitoring Group, if he—
Executive
Body and
Monitoring
Group of
Authority.
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Term of
office and
conditions of
service of
members.
Disqualifica-
tions.

19
(i) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an
offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government,
involves moral turpitude; or
(ii) is an undischarged insolvent; or
(iii) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by the
competent court; or
(iv) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the
Government or organisation or undertaking owned by the
Government; or
(v) has in the opinion of the Central Government, such
financial or other interest in the Authority as is likely to affect the
duties discharged by him of his functions as a member.
CHAPTER-IV
P
OWERS AND FUNCTIONS
11. (1) The functions of Governing Body of the Authority shall
inter alia, include:
(i) overseeing programme known as Green India for massive
afforestation of the degraded forest land of the country, utilising
financial resources, partly provided under the Fund and the
remaining fund mobilised from the market, development partner
associations, carbon credits, income from tree felling at ecologically
appropriate intervals and to augment funds, and service debts;
(ii) overseeing watershed development of forest conservation
works within forest areas undertaken and financed under the
Fund;
(iii) maintaining a separate account in respect of the funds
received under the provisions referred to in clause ( iii) of sub-
section ( 4) of section 3 and allocate the earmarked funds for
wildlife protection as well as to provide funds for activities
approved by the National Board of Wildlife;
(iv) laying report each year in Parliament on the progress of
the Green India programme and other works under the Fund as
well as present it as a Report to the Public;
(v) creating transparency for Green India and mobilise
citizens support therefor;
(vi) mobilising additional resources to scale up the activity
under Green India programme;
(vii ) enlisting assistance from Financial Institutions for
afforestation;
(viii) working towards making the Authority eligible for
international assistance under the climate change agenda;
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Functions and
powers of
Authority.

20
(ix) adopting a principle of allocation to States and Union
territories based on the share contributed by them and having
regard to the Supreme Court orders;
(x) earmarking at least five per cent of the funds for
communication, social mobilisation, monitoring and evaluation.
(2) The Governing Body of the Authority shall—
(i) formulate the broad policy framework including the
allocation formula to States and the Union territories;
(ii) approve the rules for the management of Compensatory
Afforestation Fund, to be notified by the Central Government;
(iii) monitor the progress of the utilisation of funds released
by the Authority;
(iv) approve the annual report and audited accounts of the
Authority;
(v) review reports on decision taken by Executive Body
including investment decisions and Monitoring, Group.
(3) The Governing Body of the Authority shall meet at least once
in six months.
(4) The Governing Body, Executive Body and the Monitoring
Group of the Authority shall meet at such places and shall observe
such rules and procedures in regard to transaction of business at its
meetings (including the quorum thereat) as may be prescribed.
12. ( 1) The Executive Body shall decide:
(i) approval of work plans and deployment of funds;
(ii) deployment of staff on contractual basis or on deputation;
(iii) financial procedure;
(iv) delegation of financial or administrative powers;
(v) other day-to-day working in respect of receipts of funds
(vi) investment of funds;
(vii) expenditure on establishment and other overheads
including office accommodation subject to the approval of the
annual budget by the Governing Body;
(viii) on being satisfied that the funds released to a particular
State or the Union territory are not being utilised properly, the
Executive Body shall have the power to withhold or suspend the
release of remaining funds or part thereof provided that reasons
shall be recorded on such action and submit the same to the
Governing Body for approval;
(ix) to present its decisions to the Governing Body for
information;
40
5
10
15
20
25
Power and
functions of
Executive
Body.

21
(x) maintain and update a public information system on the
Authority and present all information on its transaction in the
public domain.
(2) The Executive Body shall meet at least once in every three
months.
13. ( 1) The Monitoring Group shall—
(i) evolve independent system for concurrent monitoring and
evaluation of the works implemented in the States and Union
territories utilising the funds released by the Authority to ensure
effective and proper utilisation of funds by utilising the services
of the Regional Offices of the Central Government in the Ministry
of Environment and Forests;
(ii) monitor and evaluate the implementation of the Green
India programme;
(iii) inspect and undertake financial audit of works executed
by utilising the funds released by the Authority in the States and
Union territories;
(iv) devise measures for transparency and accountability.
(2) The Monitoring Group shall meet at least once in three months.
CHAPTER-V
F
INANCE, ACCOUNTS , AUDIT AND ANNUAL R EPORT
14. ( 1) The Central Government may, after due appropriation
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants
and loans of such sums of money as that Government may consider
necessary, which shall be credited to the Fund to be utilised for the
purposes of this Act.
(2) There shall also be credited to the Fund—
(a) grants or aid received;
(b) any loan taken by the Authority;
(c) any other sums received by the Authority by way
of benefaction, gift or donations.
15. ( 1) The Authority shall prepare in such form and at such time
in each financial year as may be prescribed, its budget for the next
financial year showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the
Authority and forward the same to the Central Government.
(2) The Authority, with the prior approval of the Central
Government, shall adopt financial regulations and procedures, in particular
the procedure for drawing up and implementing the Authority’s budget.
16. The Authority may invest its funds (including any reserve
fund) in the securities of the Central Government and in scheduled
banks in such manner as may be prescribed:
Functions of
Monitoring
Group
30
35
40
Grants and
loans to
Authority
5
10
15
Budget of
Authority
Investment
of funds.

22
Provided that the grants received from the Central Government
shall not be invested and shall be utilised for the purpose and in the
manner attached to it.
17. (1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such
form as may be prescribed in consultation with the Comptroller and
Auditor-General of India.
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the
Comptroller and Auditor-General at such intervals as may be specified
by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit
shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor-
General.
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General and any other person
appointed by him in connection with the audit of the accounts of the
Authority shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General
generally has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts
and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of
books accounts connected vouchers and other documents and papers
and to inspect the office of the Authority.
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller
and Auditor-General or any other person appointed by him in this behalf
together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded annually to
the Central Government by the Authority.
(5) The Comptroller and Auditor General may, within a period of
six months from the date of commencement of this Act, audit the
accounts of the Fund for a period comprising of the date of its
inception, that is, the 29th October, 2002 and the date of commencement
of this Act and shall submit the report to the Central Government under
this section.
(6) The Central Government shall have the power, to conduct the
special audit or performance audit of the Fund and of the Authority
through the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
18. ( 1) The Authority shall prepare in such form and at such time
for each financial year, as may be prescribed its annual report, giving
a full account of its activities during the previous financial year and
forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.
(2) The annual report shall, inter alia, provide for—
(i) the number and location of each reforestation,
afforestation and construction activity subject to the requirements
of this section;
(ii) the amount and location of lands in acres cleared,
conserved and planted in connection with the activity; and
(iii) the amount of afforestation money collected and
expended.
20
Accounts and
audit of
Authority.
25
30
35
40
5
Annual
Report of
Authority.

23
19.  The Central Government shall cause the annual report
together with a memorandum of action taken on the recommendations
contained therein and the audit report to be laid as soon as may be
after the reports are received before each House of Parliament.
CHAPTER VI
M
ISCELLANEOUS
20. ( 1) The Central Government may, in consultation with the States
and the Union territories, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules
for constituting the State Management. Committee, State Steering
Committee and Joint Forest Management Committee, their composition,
powers and functions for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act and such
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—
(a) manner of management of Fund by the Authority under
sub-section ( 2) of section 3;
(b) the disbursement of fund for such other projects relating
to afforestation under clause ( iv) of section 4;
(c) the accounting procedure regulating the manner of
crediting the monies under section 5;
(d) terms of office and conditions of service of members of
the Authority, Executive Body, Monitoring Group under section 9;
(e) rules for the transaction of business at meetings of the
Governing Body, Executive Body and the Monitoring Group of the
Authority under sub-section ( 4) of section 11;
(f) the form and time of preparing budget under section 15;
(g) the manner of investment of fund under section 16;
(h) the form of annual statement of accounts to be
maintained by the Authority Under sub-section ( 1) of section 17;
(i) the form and time of preparing annual report under
section 18;
(j) any other matter which is required to be or may be
prescribed.
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may
be after it is made before each House of Parliament, while it is in
session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not
be made, the rule shall, thereafter have effect only in such modified
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any
such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the
validity of anything previously done under that rule.
Annual report
and audit
report to be
laid before
Parliament.
Power of
Central
Government
to constitute
State
Management
Committee,
State Steering
Committee
and Joint
Forests
Management
Committee
and to make
rules.
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

24
21. ( 1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act,
the Authority shall in exercise of its powers or the performance of its
functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of
policy, as the Central Government may give it in writing from time to
time.
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question
is One of policy or not, shall be final.
50
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.

25
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
As the diversion of forest land for non-forestry purposes was causing loss
to the valuable forests, the Forests (Conservation) Act, 1980 was enacted to
maintain a rational balance between the objectives of conservation and
development. Briefly, the Forests (Conservation) Act, 1980 makes provision for
conservation of forests and provide for the basic framework for regulating
indiscriminate diversion or use of forest for the developmental needs of a State.
It intends to harmonize development with that of conservation of forests and
forest eco system. The compensatory afforestation envisages additional plantation
activities by utilizing the money deposited by the user agency for the purpose.
2. The Supreme Court in its order dated 29th October, 2002 in T.N.
Godavarman Thirumalpad Vs. Union of India [Writ Petition (C) No. 202 of 1995]
observed that a Compensatory Afforestation Fund may be created in which all
the monies received from the user agencies shall be deposited. The Court
directed that the Fund shall be utilized for plantations, protection of forests,
wildlife protection and other related activities. Presently, in compliance with the
direction of the Supreme Court, all monies collected under the scheme has been
placed under an adhoc CAMPA and deposited in the nationalised banks.
3. During the years, a substantial amount of monies have been deposited in
this regard by the user agencies towards compensatory afforestation, additional
compensatory afforestation, penal compensatory afforestation, Net Present Value
of the diverted forest land or Catchment Area Treatment Plan. The Government
intends to articulate its one of the objectives and undertake a massive
afforestation programme called “Green India” which precisely envisages massive
afforestation of the degraded forest land of the country by utilizing the financial
resources available in the Fund and other sources such as mobilisation from
market, developmental partners associations, carbon credit etc. Accordingly, it is
proposed to enact a legislation, namely the Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill,
2008 to provide for the establishment of a statutory Fund and a Management
Authority, who shall be responsible for the management of the Fund and
administer the programme of afforestation.
4. The Authority constituted under the Bill shall consist of a Governing
Body and be assisted by an Executive Body, Monitoring Group and administrative
support mechanism. The duties, powers and functions of Authority shall
inter alia , include:—
(a) overseeing programme known as “Green India” for massive
afforestation of the degraded forest land of the country, utilizing financial
resources, partly provided under the Fund and the remaining fund mobilised
from the development partner associations, carbon credits;
(b) overseeing watershed development or forest conservation works
within forest areas undertaken;
(c) keep Parliament abreast of the progress of the “Green India”
programme through laying of reports;
25

26
(d) creating transparency for “Green India” and mobilise citizens
support therefor;
(e) adopting a principle of allocation to States and Union Territories
based on the share contributed by them and having regard to the Supreme
Court orders;
(f) to invest its funds in the securities of the Central Government and
in such Scheduled banks; and
(g) to maintain proper accounts and relevant records and prepare an
annual statement of accounts, prepare its annual report giving full account
of its activities.
5. The Bill will provide the required legal backing to the scheme and put
in place the “Green India” programme throughout the country.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW D ELHI; S. REGUPATHY
The 25 th April, 2008.

27
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Sub-clause (1) of clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of the
Compensatory Afforestation Fund. Sub-clause (3) provides that all monies
collected by the State Governments and Union Territories, which has been placed
under the ad hoc Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning
Authority (Authority) and deposited in the nationalised banks, shall be credited in
to the Consolidated Fund of India, which shall be transferred to the Fund under
the public account of India. Sub-clause (4) provides for the details of the
receipts of monies credited into the Fund. Sub-clause (5) makes out the
purposes for which the Fund shall be utilized.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 7 of the Bill provides for constitution of the
Authority and sub-clause (3) thereof provides that the Authority shall be assisted
by an Executive Body, Monitoring Group and administrative support mechanism
to guide, direct and oversee the activities of the Authority. Sub-clause (5)
provides for appointment of an officer of the rank of Inspector General of
Forests as the Chief Executive Officer who shall be the Member-Secretary of
the Governing Body and the Executive Body.
3. Sub-clause (4) of clause 8 provides for the appointment of a Joint Chief
Executive Officer of the rank of Conservator of Forests, a Financial Adviser and
Chief Accounts Officer of the rank of Director in the Government of India and
two Deputy Chief Executive Officers of the rank of Deputy Conservator of
Forests to assist the Executive Body in performance of its functions and powers
for a period not exceeding five years.
4. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve from the
Fund a recurring expenditure of rupees one crore seven lakhs fifty thousand per
annum and a non-recurring expenditure of rupees twenty eight lakhs fifty
thousand.
27

28
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (2) of clause 3 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to
make rules providing for the manner of regulation of the Fund by the
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Management and Planning Authority. Clause 4
authorises the Central Government to utilize the Fund for the purposes specified
therein and to prescribe the other projects of afforestation.
2. Sub-clause (1) of clause 20 of the Bill empowers the Central Government
to make rules in consultation with the States and the Union Territories for
constituting the State Management Committee, State Steering Committee and Joint
Forest Management Committee, their composition, powers and functions for
carrying out the provisions of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) enumerates the provisions
of the Bill which authorises the Central Government to frame rules for different
specified purposes.
3. The rules framed under the Bill shall be laid, as soon as may be, after they
are made, before each House of Parliament.
4. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are generally matters
of procedure and administrative details and it is not practicable to provide for them
in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal
character.
28

29
29
ANNEXURE-II
A LIST OF INDIVIDUALS/ORGANISATIONS WHO HAVE SENT THEIR VIEWS
ON THE COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION BILL, 2008
Sl. No. Name/Address of Persons who have sent views on the Bill
12
1. Dr. N.S. Adkoli IFS (Retd.)
Treelands Development Services (P) Ltd.,
C/o Bamboo Society of India, Vana Vikas Building, 18th Cross,
Malleswaram,
Bangalore-560003
2. Dr. Archana Prasad, Reader
Centre for Jawahar Lal Nehru Studies, Naom Chomsky Complex,
Maulana Mohamed Ali Jauhar Marg, Jamia Millia Islamia, New Delhi
3. Shri Shankar Gopalakrishnan,
Campaign for Survival and Dignity,
Q-1, Hauz Khas Enclave, New Delhi 110016.
4. Shri Amar Prasad, Chief Executive Officer,
Gramin Vikas Trust, 5th Floor, A-Wing, Kribhco Bhawan,
A-10, Sector-1, Noida (U.P.) 201301.
5. Shri Ashok Kumar, Vice-Chairman,
Wildlife Trust of India.
6. Shri S.B.S. Chauhan, Adviser,
Federation of Indian Mineral Industries,
301, Bakshi House, 40-41,
Nehru Place, New Delhi-l10019
7. Dr. Seema Purushothaman, Convener,
Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and Environment,
No. 659, 5th Main, Hebbal, Bangalore-560024.
8. G . Venkateswarlu, S.O.  (G)
SERC, CSIR Campus, Taramani
Chennai-113
9. Shri Sharafuddeen,
Shannovre, Mele Vettipuram, Pathanmthitta P.O., Kerala-689645
10. Shri Sachidanandan Samanta
P.O. Paschimchilka, P.S. Panskura, Distt. Purba Medinipur, West Bengal
11. Orissa Krushak Mahasangha,
585, Saheed Nagar, Bhubaneswar-7

30
12
12. Shri Shiv Kumar Diwedi,
A-10, Janta Colony, 1st Floor,
Near Deendayal Circle, Jaipur, Rajasthan
13. Shri Har Pal Singh, President,
Gram Vikas Manch Thengora, Block-Arneia,
Bulandshahr, U.P.

31
ANNEXURE-III
LIST OF STATE GOVERNMENTS WHO HAVE SENT THEIR COMMENTS/VIEWS
ON THE COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION BILL, 2008
Sl. No. Name of States who have
sent views on the Bill
1. Gujarat
2. Chhattisgarh
3. Himachal Pradesh
4. Madhya Pradesh
5. Bihar
6. Tripura
7. Arunachal Pradesh
31

32
ANNEXURE-IV
LIST OF EXPERTS WHOSE ORAL EVIDENCE WAS HEARD ON
THE COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION BILL, 2008
Sl. List of Experts Date of hearing
No.
1. Shri Shankar Gopalakrishnan,
Campaign for Survival and Dignity, 6th June, 2008
New Delhi.
2. Shri Amar Prasad,
Chief Executive Officer, 3rd July, 2008
Gramin Vikas Trust,
Noida.
3. Dr. Archana Prasad, Reader
Centre for Jawahar Lal Nehru Studies, 14th July, 2008
Jamia Millia Islamia,
New Delhi.
4. Dr. N.S. Adkoli, IFS (Retd.) 29th July, 2008
Treelands Development Services (P) Ltd.,
Bangalore.
32

33
ANNEXURE-V
LIST OF STATES WHICH HAD DIVERTED/UTILIZED FUNDS FOR THE
PURPOSE OTHER THAN THE COMPENSATORY AFFORESTATION
The following details are based on the checks conducted by the State Accountant Generals
to ascertain the diversion of funds, misappropriation and other related issues.
Andhra Pradesh
Diversion of CAMPA Fund of Rs.25.19 lakhs in one case and in another case Rs.5 crores
towards compensatory afforestation was diverted to Government Accountant instead of keeping in
specially created fund.
Maharashtra
Loss of interest of Rs.15.48 lakhs in one case and Rs.6.75 lakhs in other case.
Haryana
Loss of interest of Rs.8.96 lakhs by remitting an amount of Rs.83.38 lakhs received from
User Agencies in to Treasury instead of keeping in fixed deposits. In another case amounts to the
tune of Rs.78.72 lakhs and Rs.26 lakhs is due for recovery from the user agency.
Punjab
Loss of interest of Rs.31.03 lakhs by not keeping the funds in Fixed deposit accounts.
Karnataka
An amount of Rs.197.79 crores as on 14th December, 2004 collected for compensatory
afforestation during 93-94 to 2004-05 was deposited as Karnataka Forest Development Fund.
These are the few examples available. Further detailed audit is required to be done to
ascertain the complete picture.
33

34
ANNEXURE-VI
PAYMENT OF NET PRESENT V ALUE (NPV) FROM
WIND ENERGY COMPANIES IN KARNATAKA
(A) Amount received from 1980 Amount spent Area treated (in ha.)
till April 2004 (Rs. in crores) (Rs. in crores)
For compensatory 75.36 Up to April 56.60 Up to April 34,492.58
afforestation 2004 2004
For Net Present – From May 15.81 From April 3,854.75
Value 2004 to 2004 to
For other works – 31.3.2008 March 2008
(apprx.)
TOTAL: 75.36 T OTAL: 72.41 T OTAL: 38,347.33
(B) Amount received from April 2004 to till date (Rs. in crores)
For compensatory afforestation 37.03
For Net Present Value 494.69
For other works (apprx.) 12.81
TOTAL: 544.53
(C) Amount transferred to CMPA fund at New Delhi Rs. in crores)
For compensatory afforestation 34.02
For Net Present Value 446.69
For other works (apprx.) 9.95
TOTAL: 490.66
(D) Amount received for CA Area treated (ha.) after
transfer to funds –Nil–
34

35
35
ANNEXURE-VII
STATEMENT SHOWING CASES (STATE-WISE) APPROVED FOR DIVERSION OF
FOREST LAND UNDER FOREST CONSERV ATION ACT, 1980
During the period : 01.11.2002 to 31.07.2008
Pos : NPV Period As on : 08.08.2008
State/UT No. of cases Area diverted
in (ha.)
12 3
Andaman and Nicobar Island 18 147.10
Andhra Pradesh 198 10172.49
Arunachal Pradesh 44 481 1.02
Assam 108 1651.95
Bihar 59 1053.09
Chandigarh 8 14.22
Chhattishgarh 180 19787.00
Dadar and Nagar Haveli 63 24.34
Daman and Diu 1 3.95
Delhi 6 16.54
Goa 24 421.23
Gujarat 414 11311.84
Haryana 1039 693.60
Himachal Pradesh 725 3594.10
Jammu and Kashmir 0 0.00
Jharkhand 96 8764.93
Karnataka 278 9999.39
Kerala 36 10204.44
Lakshadweep 0 0.00
Madhya Pradesh 213 47920.07
Maharashtra 282 16648.02
Manipur 7 291.60
Meghalaya 16 5.55
Mizoram 3 66.47

36
12 3
Nagaland 0 0.00
Orissa 131 8884.80
Pondicherry 1 0.96
Punjab 1905 67138.36
Rajasthan 200 8847.34
Sikkim 146 978.85
Tamil Nadu 68 562.77
Tripura* 83 360.51
Uttar Pradesh 366 28601.12
Uttaranchal 1263 31570.80
West Bengal 15 862.87
T
OTAL: 7996 295411.29
* Diversion of 2,95,411.28 ha. includes 65,670.26 ha. diverted under Punjab Land Preservation Act (PLPA), 2,770.1947
ha. for Regularization of Encroachment and 40,986.81 ha. for conversion of Forest villages into Revenue villages.
Therefore, total forest land diverted for  Developmental Projects is 1,85,984.00 ha. during the period, which is
30,997.34 ha. per year.
** Diversion of forest land Pre 1980 is 41,35,000.00 ha., which is 1,37,833.33 ha. per year between 1951-1980.

37
37
STATEMENT SHOWING CASES (STATE-WISE) APPROVED FOR DIVERSION OF
FOREST LAND UNDER FOREST CONSERV ATION ACT, 1980
During the period : 25.10.1980 to 31.10.2002
Pre : NPV Period As on : 08.08.2008
State/UT No. of Cases Area Diverted
In (ha.)
12 3
Andman and Nicobar Island 64 2618.02
Andhra Pradesh 319 27230.84
Arunachal Pradesh 85 39345.61
Assam 129 5710.20
Bihar 25 1328.91
Chandigarh 14 34.48
Chhattishgarh 232 68360.37
Dadar and Nagar Haveli 134 263.17
Daman and Diu 0 0.00
Delhi 2 3.59
Goa 67 1234.88
Gujarat 794 55148.35
Haryana 350 7924.64
Himachal Pradesh 514 7535.93
Jammu and Kashmir 8 1500.09
Jharkhand 133 6016.83
Karnataka 427 32846.65
Kerala 182 30775.53
Lakshadweep 0 0.00
Madhya Pradesh 679 342739.58
Maharashtra 1202 74438.14
Manipur 16 869.35
Meghalaya 75 392.53
Mizoram 22 25148.79
Nagaland 0 0.00

38
12 3
Orissa 310 34739.34
Pondicherry 0 0.00
Punjab 535 9827.84
Rajasthan 408 16144.75
Sikkim 132 1247.58
Tamil Nadu 341 4314.43
Tripura* 162 7506.83
Uttar Pradesh 222 13157.52
Uttaranchal 2174 29280.25
West Benaal 67 3165.85
TOTAL: 9824 850850.85
* Diversion of 8,50,850.85 ha. includes 1,19,984.69 ha. diverted for Regularization of Encroachment and 31,192.34 ha.
for mutation of Zudpi Jungle in Maharashtra State. Therefore, total forest land diverted for Developmental Projects is
699673.82 ha. during the period, which is 31803.36 ha. per year.
# Diversion of 6,99,673.82 ha. also includes 2,45,660.097 ha. of forest land diverted for Regularization of
Encroachment (approval accorded finally instead of Stage-I approval during the period) therefore, total land diverted for
developmental project is 4,54,013.73 ha. during the period which is 20,636.99 ha. per year.
** Diversion of forest land Pre 1980 is 4135000.00 ha., which is 137833.33 ha. per year between 1951-1980.

39
MINUTES

40

41
XXIII
TWENTY THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 30th May, 2008 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Dr. Ejaz Ali
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Francis Fanthome
9. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
10. Shri Brahmanand Panda
11. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
12. Shri Jayasingrao Gaikwad Patil
13. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
14. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
16. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
17. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Shri G.K, Prasad, Additional Director General (FC)
2. Shri Ansar Ahmed, Inspector General of Forests (FC)
3. Shri K.B. Thampi, Inspector General of Forests
4. Dr. Dalip Kumar, Controller of Accounts
41

42
2. * * *
3. The Chairman informed the Members that the Committee had decided to hear the views of
the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests in connection with the ‘‘The Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008’’. However, the Secretary had written that due to some prior
commitments, she could not appear before the Committee and had deputed Shri G.K. Prasad,
Additional Director General of Forests, Ministry of Environment and Forests on her behalf for a
presentation on the said subject.
4. The Chairman then welcomed Shri Prasad, Aditional Director General of Forests and other
representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests and requested him to make a
presentation on the aspects related to ‘‘The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008’’. He made
a visual presentation on the subject and explained the reasons for the introduction of the said Bill
and its salient features. The Members then sought clarifications on the points arising out of the
presentation and the witnesses replied to them.
The officials then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then decided to hear the views of the representatives of a NGO namely
Campaign for Survival and Dignity, New Delhi on the aspects relating to aforesaid Bill in its next
meeting to be held on the 6th June, 2008.
6. The Committee also decided to invite written memoranda containing suggestions/views/
comments of individuals/institutions/organizations interested in the subject matter of the Bill.
7. The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 6th June, 2008.
*** Relates to other matters.

43
XXIV
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Friday, the 6th June, 2008 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Jabir Husain
4. Shri D. Raja
5. Dr. Ejaz Ali
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
7. Shri Francis Fanthome
8. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
9. Shri Brahmananda Panda
10. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
11. Shri Jayasingrao Gaikwad Patil
12. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
13. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
14. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Campaign for Survival and Dignity, New Delhi
1. Shri Shankar Gopalkrishnan, Secretary
2. Ms. Priya Srinivasan
3. Shri Vijay Bhai
4. Shri George Monipally
2. The Chairman welcomed Shri Gopalkrishnan, Secretary and other representatives of the
Campaign for Survival and Dignity and requested him to present his views on the Compensatory
Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008. Shri Gopalkrishnan made a presentation on the subject. The Members
then sought clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation and the witnesses replied to
them.
43

44
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 12.40 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 13th June, 2008.

45
XXVI
TWENTY SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 3rd July, 2008 in Committee Room ‘C’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Dr. Ejaz Ali
7. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
9. Shri Francis Fanthome
10. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
11. Shri Brahmananda Panda
12. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
13. Shri Pratik P. Patil
14. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
15. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
16. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
17. Shri Akbar Ahmad Dumpy
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives of the Gramin Vikas Trust, Noida
1. Shri Amar Prasad, Chief Executive Officer
2. Shri K.S. Sandhu, Zonal Programme Manager
3. Shri V .K. Viz, Zonal Programme Manager
4. Shri Arun Joshi, Head NLRI
5. Shri S. Bhattacharyya, Sr. Programme Officer.
45

46
2. * * *
3. The Chairman then welcomed Shri Amar Prasad, Chief Executive Officer and other
representatives of the Gramin Vikas Trust and requested him to present his views on ‘‘The
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008’’. Shri Prasad made a presentation on the subject. The
Members then sought clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation and the witnesses
replied to them.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. * * *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 12.20 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 14th July, 2008.
*** Relates to other matters.

47
XXVII
TWENTY SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday, the 14th July, 2008 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri D. Raja
6. Dr. Ejaz Ali
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
9. Shri Francis Fanthome
10. Shri Brahmananda Panda
11. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
12. Shri Jayasingrao Gaikwad Patil
13. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
14. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
15. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
16. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
17. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
18. Shri Akbar Ahmad Dumpy
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESS
Dr. Archana Prasad, Reader, Centre for Jawaharlal Nehru Studies, Jamia Millia Islamia,
New Delhi.
2. The Chairman welcomed Dr. Archana Prasad and requested her to present her views on The
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008. Dr. Archana made a presentation on the subject. The
Members then sought clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation and the witness
replied to them.
47

48
The witness then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 11.50 A.M.

49
XXVIII
TWENTY EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Tuesday, the 29th July, 2008 in Room No. ‘139’, First
Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Saman Pathak
4. Shri D. Raja
5. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
7. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
8. Shri Francis Fanthome
9. Shri Brahmananda Panda
10. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
11. Shri Jayasingrao Gaikwad Patil
12. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
13. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
14. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
15. Shri Rampal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESS
Shri N.S. Adkoli, IFS (Retd.), Chairman, Treelands Development Services (P) Ltd.,
Bangalore.
2. The Chairman welcomed Shri N.S. Adkoli and requested him to present his views on The
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008. Shri Adkoli made a detailed presentation on the
subject. The Members then sought clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation and
the witness replied to them. The Chairman also requested him to send any further suggestion
relating to the Bill.
The witness then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
3. The Committee then adjourned at 1.10 
P.M.
49

50
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 12th August, 2008 in Committee Room
‘B’ Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Jabir Husain
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
8. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
9. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
10. Shri Akbar Ahmad Dumpy
11. Shri Francis Fanthome
12. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
13. Shri Brahmananda Panda
14. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
15. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
16. Shri Pratik P. Patil
17. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
18. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
19. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Representatives from the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Shri Vijai Sharma, Secretary
2. Shri P.R. Mohanty, DGF & SS
3. Shri G.K Prasad, ADG (FC)
4. Shri Ansar Ahmed, IGF (FC)
50

51
5. Shri K.B. Thampi, IGF (NAEB)
6. Shri C.D. Singh, Sr. AIGF
7. Shri B.K. Singh, Sr. AIGF
Representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri K.V. Kumar, Assistant Legislative Counsel
2. ***He stated that in connection with The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008, the
Committee had already heard the views of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, some experts
and NGOs connected with the subject. He further stated that the suggestions/views received from
the experts/NGOs and comments of the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the various points
raised by them have been circulated to the Members. He informed the Members that the Secretary,
Ministry of Environment and Forests and the representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice have
been called to the meeting of the Committee to seek further clarifications on the said Bill.
3. He then welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests and representatives of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department). Thereafter,
the Chairman requested the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests and Joint Secretary and
Legislative Counsel, Ministry of Law and Justice to make a brief presentation on the aspects related
to ‘‘The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008’’. Both of them made a presentation on the
subject and explained the reasons for the introduction of the said Bill and its salient features. The
Members then sought clarifications on the points arising out of the presentation and the witnesses
replied to them.
The witnesses then withdrew.
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.20 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 21st August, 2008.
*** Relates to other matters.

52
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 21st August, 2008 in Committee Room
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Jabir Husain
6. Shri D. Raja
7. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
9. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
10. Shri Francis Fanthome
11. Shri Brahmananda Panda
12. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
13. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
14. Shri Pratik P. Patil
15. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
16. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
17. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
18. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
19. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
Officials of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
1. Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
2. Shri K.V . Kumar, Assistant Legislative Counsel
52

53
2. The Chairman welcomed the officials of the Ministry of Law and Justice (Legislative
Department) and requested Members to express their views on the various provisions of ‘‘The
Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008’’ one by one. Thereafter, the official of the Ministry
of Law and Justice gave his clarifications to the various issues raised by Members.
The officials then withdrew.
3. * * *
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.00 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 29th August, 2008.
*** Relates to other matters.

54
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 5th September, 2008 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Jabir Husain
6. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
8. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
9. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
10. Shri Francis Fanthome
11. Shri Brahmananda Panda
12. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
13. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
14. Shri Pratik P. Patil
15. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
16. Shri Akbar Ahmad Dumpy
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman commended the Secretariat for preparing an excellent report on
‘‘The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008’’ by including all the concerns expressed by the
Members of the Committee on the various issues of the Bill. The Committee then took-up for
consideration its draft One Hundred Ninety-fourth Report on the said Bill. After discussions the
Committee decided to incorporate a para from a Report of an Expert Group to Planning
Commission on the suggestion given by a Member. It was also decided that the modified version
of the report be given to the Members at its next meeting.
54

55
3. The Committee further decided to hold its next meeting on 12th September, 2008 to
consider its future programme.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 4.10 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 12th September, 2008.

VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 3rd October, 2008 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Jabir Husain
6. Shri D. Raja
7. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
LOK SABHA
8. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
9. Shri Francis Fanthome
10. Shri Brahmananda Panda
11. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
12. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
13. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
14. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
15. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
2. The Committee took up for consideration its draft One Hundred Ninety-fourth Report on
‘‘The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008’’. After some discussion the Committee adopted
the report with certain additions/modifications.
3. * * *
4. The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 
P.M. to meet again at 11.30 A.M. on 13th October, 2008.
56
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.