100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
 
HUNDREDTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2002-2003)
OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF SPACE 
(DEMAND NO. 92) 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 2ND  MAY, 2002)
(LAID IN THE LOK SABHA ON THE 2ND  MAY, 2002)
                                                                            
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2002/VAISAKHA, 1924  (SAKA)
 
C O N T E N T S
                                     
 
1.     COMPOSITIONOFTHECOMMITTEE                                                           
2.     INTRODUCTION                                                                                                   
3.     REPORT OFTHECOMMITTEE                                                                                                                   
4.     SUMMARYOF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                                                                                          
5.     ANNEXURES                                                                                                                                            
6.       MINUTES  OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                     
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2002)
-----------
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
           
RAJYA SABHA
 
     #2.   Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
3. Smt. S. Gokula Indira
4. Shri C. Apok Jamir
5. Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
6. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
7. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
8. Smt. Savita Sharda
9. Shri B.P. Singhal
     &10.Shri M. V. Rajashekaran
     J11.Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
     *12.Vacant
     f13. Vacant
        b14. Vacant
        ¥15. Vacant
        
LOK  SABHA
 
16. Smt. Margaret Alva
17. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                    
18. Smt. Bhavna Devrajbhai Chikhalia                     
19. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
20. Adv. Suresh Ramrao Jadhav                             
21. Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
22. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
    %23.Kunwar Akhilesh Singh
 
24. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
25. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
26. Shri Kailash Meghwal
27. Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
28. Shri Rupchand Murmu
29. Shri S. Murugesan                                
30. Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                              
31. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik            
32. Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
33. Shri Ajit Kumar Panja   
34. Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
35. Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
36. Shri Prahlad Patel         
37. Prof. R.R. Pramanik                             
38. Shri Naresh Puglia                                
39. Shri Ganta Srinivasa Rao          
40. Prof. I.G. Sanadi
41.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh 
42. Shri Vishvendra Singh   
43. Shri V. Vetriselvan
44. Shri Balram Singh Yadav
45. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
      Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
      Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
      Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary    
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
      Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
INTRODUCTION
 
      I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests,
 having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Hundredth Report of the Committee.  This
 Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the Department of Space (Demand No.92).
 
2.  In the meeting of the Committee held on the 9
th  April, 2002 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of Space gave an
 overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of
 the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
 
3.  The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the Members and
 placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Space.
 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on 24th April, 2002.

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
 
 
NEW DELHI;
April 24, 2002   
                      C. RAMACHANDRAIAH, 
Chairman,
Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests.
 
R E P O R T
1.         The Space Commission and Department of Space (DOS) were set up in 1972 to promote the development and application of
 Space science & technology for national development. The DOS is responsible for implementing the policies framed by Space
 Commission.  These are carried out through Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) and the Grant-in-aid institutions.  ISRO has
 established Nine Centres/Units for carrying out research and development activities as well as for undertaking various projects and
 programmes in the area of Satellites, Launch Vehicles, Space applications and Space science research.
2.         The Indian Space programme is characterized by a vision to use space technology for national development.  The primary
 objective of the Space Programme has been to establish operational space services in a self-reliant manner in the thrust areas of
 satellite communications, satellite based information to assist in Survey/management of natural resources and satellite meteorological
 applications.  The indigenous development of satellites, launch vehicles and associated ground segment for providing these services
 is integral to these objectives.
3.         The Indian space programme has established two indigenously built operational space systems, namely, the Indian Remote
 Sensing Satellites (IRS) and the Indian National Satellite System (INSAT).  The constellation of Indian Remote Sensing Satellites
 comprises of five satellites viz., IRS-1B, IRS-P3, IRS-1C, IRS-1D and India’s first oceanographic satellite (IRS-P4) providing a
 range of spatial resolutions, spectral resolutions and coverage cycle.  The IRS system is among the best in the world for generating
 information useful for natural resources management besides providing data worldwide.  The multi-purpose INSAT satellite system,
 with currently four satellites in orbit viz., INSAT-2C, 2DT, 2E and 3B, is one of the largest domestic communication satellite
 systems in the world and is the mainstay for television broadcasting services, for remote areas and transmission of developmental
 programmes in rural areas, educational training of developmental programmes in rural areas and educational training.  India’s Polar
 Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV) is well proven through four successive successful flights and provides launch capability to orbit
 Remote Sensing satellites of 1.2 ton class in polar sun-synchronous orbits.
4.         The first successful test flight of Geo-synchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV) from Sriharikota on April 18, 2001 was
 the most significant milestone of the Indian space programme during the year 2001-02.  The launch unequivocally demonstrated
 India’s capability to place satellites into geo-synchronous transfer orbits.  India is among the six nations in the world to achieve such
 a capability.  The launch of GSLV is the culmination of efforts of several DOS centers and other institutions that involved complex
 interfaces between scientific and technological disciplines, industries and research institutions.
5.         Another important milestone during the year was the successful flight of PSLV-C3 on October 22, 2001 from Sriharikota.  In
 this fifth consecutively successful flight, PSLV placed three satellites –– India’s Technology Experiment Satellite, TES, Belgian
 Project for on-Board Autonomy (PROBA) and German Bispectral and Infrared Remote Detection (BIRD) into their intended polar
 sun-synchronous orbit.  The requirement of a higher orbit for the Belgian PROBA compared to other two satellites was successfully
 met by a flight manoeuvre.  Both German and Belgian satellites were launched under commercial agreements.  The flight has clearly
 established the reliability of PSLV for launching not only the Indian remote sensing satellites, but also, multiple  satellites  thus
 making it an attractive  vehicle for the  international  space community to
launch their satellites.  PSLV is also planned to be used for a geo-synchronous transfer orbit mission for launching India’s METSAT
 in 2002-03.
6.         The INSAT system for telecommunication, television broadcasting and meteorology has received further boost during the year
 with the successful launch of INSAT-3C on January 24, 2002.  INSAT-3C will not only augment the present INSAT system but also
 continue the services of some of the satellites that need to be phased out at the end of their mission life.
7.         Besides, the remote sensing applications continue to expand to several new areas; the data has been used to assess damage due
 to floods, earthquakes, etc and for helping in relief operations.  The announcement of Remote Sensing Data Policy (RSDP) during
 the year will help to streamline the availability of remote sensing data from Indian and foreign satellites to users in India.
8.         In the field of space sciences, the cryogenic sampler that had been developed by ISRO for Geosphere-Biosphere Programme,
 has been used to detect micro-organisms in the stratosphere, which could have far reaching implications on the understanding of the
 origin of life on earth.  Detailed analysis of the samples collected were going on in scientific research laboratories in India and
 abroad.
9.         Educational and research institutions in India continue to participate in the space programme taking up projects under the
 Sponsored Research scheme of DOS.  During the year, 22 new projects were initiated under the scheme.  The task team constituted
 to study the feasibility and scientific objectives for undertaking an unmanned mission to the moon has made substantial progress in
 their work.
10.       The Committee  observes that  with sustained efforts of DOS end-to-end capability in space for vital application in
 communications, broadcasting, meteorology and natural resource information which have direct relevance for national development,
 has secured India a unique place in the International Community.  However, the committee is of the view that front ranking scientific
 investigations in the field of astronomy, atmospheric sciences and long term climatic research using satellites, balloons, sounding

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
 rockets and ground instrument may lead us to new areas of technology.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
11.        It has been stated that the Ninth five-year plan has witnessed significant progress and achievements in the space programmes.
     The total expenditure of the Department during the 9 th plan period would come to approx. Rs.7905 crores consisting of Plan
 component of Rs.6603 crores and Non-plan component of Rs.1302 crores against the approved  outlay of Rs.6511.72 crores.  Thus,
 the plan allocation for the Department for 9th plan was fully utilised.
The major missions planned during the Ninth Plan period and their current status are at Annexure I.
12.        Asked about the Programme/Projects where funds have remained unutilized during 2001-2002 and steps taken to complete
 them in 2002-03, the DOS  informed as follows ––
Taking note of the reduced ceiling for RE fixed by the Ministry of Finance and also the progress status of the projects, the
 provision in RE 2001-02 has been reduced in respect of GSLV project, IRS-P5, METSAT, GSAT-2 and certain new Projects
 like GSLV MKIII, GSLV Continuation & GSAT-3
 
The steps taken by the Department to complete them in 2002-03 include:
(a)    The provision in RE  in respect of GSLV project has been reduced by rescheduling of payments related to Cryo contract
 based on the revised milestone payment schedules. Provision has been incorporated in BE 2002-03 to complete these
 milestone payments.
(b)    The reduction in RE in respect of IRS-P5 project is based on the revised delivery schedules of certain contract items
 (imported) such as Data Compression System, Solid State recorder and hi-rel electronic components.  The progress in
 respect of these contract items is being monitored periodically to ensure the actual delivery of these items in 2002-03. 
(c)    The provision in respect of METSAT & GSAT-2 projects has been reduced in RE due to postponement of expenditure
 related to spacecraft testing, launch and post launch mission support based on the launch schedule. The Department has
 accelerated the work on METSAT & GSAT-2 projects and the payloads are in advanced stages of completion. METSAT
 & GSAT-2 are now targeted for launch during 2002-03. 
(d)    The provisional amounts shown in BE 2001-02 in respect of new projects like GSLV MkIII, GSLV-Continuation &
 GSAT-3, have been reduced in RE as these new projects have not yet been approved.  However, the budgetary support
 required for the pre-project R&D related to these initiatives have been met from the respective Centre’s budget. The
 project proposal for GSLV MkIII is in advanced stages of approval.  The formulation of proposals for GSLV
 Continuation & GSAT-3 are in progress and will be taken up for approval shortly.  It has been planned to complete the
 approval cycle and initiate the development work on all these new projects in 2002-03.
13.        The Budget Estimates 2002-03 works out to Rs.2264.99 crore with a Plan component of Rs.1951.10 crore and Non-Plan
 component of Rs.313.89 crore.  The details of this provision are set out in  Annexure-II.
14.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department continues  with the practice of having detailed reviews at various
 levels in the organization in order to arrive at the minimum essential cash flow for each Project, Programme and Centre/Unit, based
 on the programmatic priorities, total cost, scheduled targets, progress achieved  and the milestone planned for the budgeting period. 
 The Committee  finds that consistent with the programme directions and targets envisaged for the 10
th Five year Plan period, the
 specific activities/projects to be undertaken and the performance milestones to be achieved have already been prioritized while
 finalising  the Budget Estimates for 2002-03.
15.       The Committee observes that during 1999-2000, the Department had utilized the funds to the extent of 99.76 percent.  In
 2000-2001 the fund utilization  was about 99.56 per cent.    The Committee thus notes with satisfaction that the Department has made
 optimum utilization of the funds allocated to it during 1999-2000, 2000-2001 as also in 2001-2002.
16.        The Committee has been informed that the tenth five year plan proposals have been drawn up under the frame work of a long
 term plan after extensive interactions, detailed studies and consultations within the organisation as well as with user community.  The
 total budgetary requirement  for  the  missions  planned  for  the 10
th  Plan  as  well  as  the  advance  investments required for the
 missions planned for the beginning years of the 11 th Plan works out to be Rs.20.593 crores.  Out of this, the non-plan budgetary
 support expected during the 10 th Plan would be Rs.2000 crores approximately.  Thus, the plan outlay requirement for 10 th Plan
 period would be Rs.18, 593 crores.
GEO STATIONARY SATELLITE SERVICES
17.        The Geo-stationary Satellites which are placed in an orbit, about 36,000 km over the equator are used for telecommunication,
 television broadcasting and meteorological services.  India established the geo-stationary satellite system, namely, Indian National
 Satellite (INSAT) system in 1983.  INSAT is one of the largest domestic communication satellite systems in the Asia Pacific Region
 with five satellites, INSAT-2C, INSAT-2DT, INSAT-2E, INSAT-3B and INSAT-3C in operation.  INSAT system also includes
 eleven transponders that have been leased from other agencies to augment the INSAT capacity. Beside, INSAT-1D which was,
 launched in June 1990, is used for meteorological imaging and a few other services even after eleven years of its operation. INSAT-
2B launched in July 1993 which was decommissioned from regular services during the year, is still used for Satellite Aided Search
 and Rescue and Data Relay Services and two of its transponders are used for scientific experiments.
            One of the major accomplishments during the year was the realisation of INSAT-3C, and its launch on board an Ariane-4

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
 launch vehicle on January 24, 2002.  INSAT-3C being a communication satellite, is a replacement for INSAT-2C whose life ends by
 the end of 2002.
18.        METSAT is an exclusive meteorological satellite to be flown on PSLV.  It will support the India Meteorological Department
 by providing meteorological services from geostationary orbit, including Cyclone Warning Dissemination Services, Meteorological
 Data Collection and Weather Imagery on a continuous basis.  The meteorological payload on METSAT comprises a 3-band VHRR
 instrument for providing imageries in visible, thermal IR and water vapour bands and a weather data relay transponder.
19.        Asked as to whether the amount of Rs.35 crores sought in this year BE will be adequate to meet the stated objective of
 METSAT i.e. to design, develop, fabricate, test, launch an exclusive meteorological satellite with a very high resolution radiometer
 (VHRR) to provide meteorological data and weather imagery on a continuous basis.  The Department has informed that the total
 approved cost of METSAT project is Rs.75 crores. Out of this an expenditure of Rs.25 crores is planned in RE 2001-02. The budget
 provision of Rs.35 crores sought in BE takes into account the requirements towards fabrication charges, test consumables, pre-launch
 and post-launch mission expenses of METSAT and is consistent with the overall project cost estimates. Currently, the fabrication and
 testing of the METSAT payload is nearing completion.  The integration of the spacecraft is in progress.  With the projected budget
 for BE 2002-03 and the current status of progress, the METSAT is targeted to be launched and operationalised by Mid 2002-03
 providing the meteorological data for weather forecasting on a regular basis. 
20.       GSAT-1 are experimental satellites which were launched during the development test flights of India’s Geo-synchronous
 Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV).  The first satellite, GSAT-1 was launched by the first developmental GSLV flight in April 2001.
21.        GSAT-2 would be launched by the second development flight which would carry instruments  to  conduct experiments  like 
 total  radiation dose monitor, surface  charge  potential monitor, coherent radio beacon experiment and solar X-ray spectrometer. 
 During the year, assembly of flight structure and dynamic analysis have been completed.  Fabrication of solar array deployment
 mechanism components, C- band reflector components have been completed. All control simulations have also been completed.
22.        The Committee has been informed that planning of INSAT-4 series of satellites has been initiated.  It is proposed to have
 seven satellites in the series.  INSAT-4A through INSAT-4G with INSAT-4D as a spare.  The transponder capacity has been worked
 out after a detailed evaluation of the projected requirements by the various users.  It is expected that by 2007, INSAT would have 251
 transponders in various bands catering to a demand of up to 11 GBPS capacity.
23.       The Committee feels that the major thrust of the INSAT programme plan should be  towards augmenting the space segment
 capacity of the INSAT system with fourth generation INSAT-4 series of satellites to meet the increasing demands for transponders in
 various sectors including government and social sectors.  The Department should therefore interact with the users and service
 providers in both government and non-government sectors, and then endeavour to achieve space segment capacity of transponders in
 INSAT system. The Department should also endeavour to complete the ongoing INSAT-3E satellite followed by next generation
 INSAT-4 series (INSAT-4A to G) during the 10
th plan period.  The indigenous GSLV Mk II capable of launching 2000 kg INSAT
 type of satellites should be fully utilized for launching INSAT-4 satellites.  The Department should examine the feasibility of using
 low cost experimental GSAT satellites for the development flights of GSLV. Besides, an Advanced Communication Technology
 Satellite (ACTS) should be planned with a view to develop and demonstrate advanced communication techniques & technologies for
 future generation INSATs. 
24.        The Committee is of the view that an advanced meteorological satellite, should be planned to provide valuable inputs for
 climatic / numeric weather prediction model studies related to vertical profile of temperature & humidity. It would enhance the
 quality of the Meteorological services aimed at accurate weather forecasts.
25.        Telemedicine is a recent application of the satellite communications that makes specialized medical facility available to the
 remote areas of the country.  The expert consultancy could be obtained for the patients in remote areas from specialists in speciality 
 hospitals in cities.  Five VSAT terminals have been set up for telemedicine in Chamarajanagar, Kenchanahalli, Bangalore, Kolkata
 and Tripura which are networked with a hub on shared basis.  Port Blair in Andaman Nicobar islands, and Leh in Jammu & Kashmir
 and Lakshadweep are also being provided with telemedicine facilities.  ISRO has already provided its SPACENET terminals to a
 private hospital at Chennai and a rural Hospital at Argonda in Andhra Pradesh for telemedicine network.  The Hospital at ISRO’s
 SHAR Centre, at Sriharikota is also being connected to this spacenet for telemedicine.
26.        A Standard Time and Frequency Signal Dissemination Service (STFSDS), using a Radio Networking (RN) type of CxS
 carrier on INSAT-2B, is being operated by the National Physical Laboratory (NPL).  This service is available round-the-clock in a
 broadcast mode in S-band and it can be received on a system consisting of a 2.4 m diameter antenna, a front-end converter, an FM
 demodulator and a microprocessor controlled signal decoder.  The STFSDS consists of a train of frequency modulated 5 kHz burst
 signal.  The time has a precision better than one micro-second and an accuracy better than 20 micro seconds.
27.        An exclusive 24 hours Educational TV (Gyandarshan) is being operated by Doordarshan.  Curriculum-based programmes are
 produced with active involvement of State educational active involvement of State educational administrators and teachers and
 programmes for school children are produced by the State Institutes of Educational Technology (SIET) –– Marathi at Pune, Gujarati
 at Ahmedabad, Oriya at Bhubaneshwar and Telugu at Hyderabad –– which are relayed by all transmitters in the concerned Sates. 
 Hindi programmes are produced at State Institutes of Educational Technology at Delhi, Lucknow and Patna.  Programmes for
 university students are produced by Education Media Research Centres and Audio Visual Research Centres at different places. 
 These programmes provide quality education, within the reach of students in small towns and villages.  Syllabus-based programmes
 for students enrolled in Indira Gandhi National Open University (IGNOU) are also relayed on this channel.
28.       The Committee is happy to note the introduction of Telemedicine through  application of the satellite communication. 
 However, it recommends that the establishment of a tele-medicine network connecting district health care hospitals to specialized
 health centers in cities supported by INSAT transponders should be a thrust area of the application.

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
The Committee feels that considering the potential of the satellite based network for development purposes as demonstrated
 through pilot projects in 9 th plan, a major target should be to establish a country-wide Satellite based GRAMSAT Network for
 development applications and evolve a suitable institutional framework for its implementation.  The satellite-based educational
 network (Tele-education) should also be expanded to include technical / engineering / medical education, university / technical /
 training institutes (including all state open universities and continuing professional education), school education and adult education. 
 The Committee also recommends that  new communication services including Satellite based Aircraft Navigation system, Mobile
 Communications, Digital Audio and Data Broadcast services and Emergency Communication Systems should be developed for the
 benefit of country as a whole.
EARTH OBSERVATION SYSTEM
29.        Earth Observations System (EOS) is an important space infrastructure that has been established by the Department of Space
 (DOS).  This system,  which was commissioned in 1988 with the launch of Indian Remote Sensing Satellite, IRS-1A, has the world’s
 largest constellation of five satellites (IRS-1C, IRS-1D, IRS-P3, IRS-P4 and TES) presently in operation.  It provides space-based
 remote sensing data in a variety of spatial resolutions and spectral bands meeting the needs of various applications.
            The EOS definition, development, operation and its application are co-ordinated by the National Natural Resources
 Management System (NNRMS), for which DOS is the nodal agency.  NNRMS is an integrated resource management system aimed
 at optimal utilization of country’s natural resources by a systematic inventory of resource availability using EOS data in conjunction
 with conventional techniques. NNRMS is supported at the national level by the Planning Committee of NNRMS (PC-NNRMS),
 which provides guidelines for implementation of the system and also oversees the progress of remote sensing applications for natural
 resources management in the country. 
30.        The Committee has been informed that the IRS-P4 (Oceansat), successfully launched on May 26, 1999,  is  oriented towards
 oceanographic, land and atmospheric applications.  The data from IRS-P4 also help in conducting specific experiments that are of
 relevance for future developments.
            The IRS-P5 (Cartosat-1) satellite envisages an advanced Space based mission with enhanced spatial resolution for large-scale
 thematic mapping applications and to further stimulate applications in the newer areas of cartography, urban management, disaster
 assessment and relief planning and management, environmental assessment and GIS applications.  The satellite is scheduled for
 launch on-board PSLV in 2003-2004.
            The objective of IRS-P6 (Resourcesat) is to provide continued remote sensing data services on an operational basis for
 integrated land and water resources management at micro-level with enhanced multi spectral / spatial coverage and stereo viewing
 capability.  The satellite is targeted for launch in 2002-2003 on-board PSLV.
The IRS-IIA (Cartosat-2) Project envisages design, development, fabrication, testing and launching of an advanced remote
 sensing satellite carrying on-board a Panchromatic camera capable of providing scene-specific imageries of normal 1 m spatial
 resolution to meet the information requirements for urban and rural planning, micro water shed development, geo-engineering
 applications, etc.  The budgetary allocation in the year 2002-03 for IRS-II (Cartosat-2) satellite has significantly gone up to RS.60.56
 crores as against Rs.40 crores and 38.30 crores last year at both BE and RE stages respectively. When asked to explain the reasons
 for  this significant hike, the Department informed that the IRS-II (Cartosat-2) project was initiated in June 2000. The total approved
 cost of the project is Rs.216.73 crores. The preliminary design has been completed and the procurement action for major items have
 been initiated. The activities  planned for 2002-03 include procurement of major contractual items, parts and materials (substantial
 part) and subsystem development. Accordingly, enhanced budget provision has been sought in BE 2002-03.
31.       The Committee appreciates that the  thrust in the Earth Observations application programmes during 10
th plan would be on the
 Natural Resources Census (NRC)  thus addressing the need for a regular census activity of the nation’s Natural Resources (NR) and
 generation of a “State of the Country’s Environment Report”. The Committee notes that the system would also assess “NR Hot-
Spots” that are cause for concern and lead to identification of environmentally sensitive areas which require urgent conservation /
 management action.  However, the Committee recommends that priority should be given to establishment of the National Spatial
 Data Infrastructure (NSDI) in a phased manner mainly as a spatial data repository with specialized information services on natural
 resources.  The Committee feels that the Department should ensure that  Earth Observations data are used for developmental
 programmes by various user agencies which may include rural roads connectivity analysis, drinking water mission, water shed
 development programme, urban / city master plan preparation, coastal zone regulation and other developmental projects involving
 private sectors.  Perhaps a long-term, multidisciplinary, operational oceanographic database for prediction of the ocean state and
 contributing to climate change and variability studies may be useful.
DISASTER MANAGEMENT    
32.        Landslide Hazard Zonation (LHZ) mapping on 1:25,000 scale is being carried out for all major pilgrim and tourist routes in
 the Himalayan region in Uttaranchal and Himachal Pradesh.  Data base has been created for the entire 2000 km long corridor and
 LHZ maps has been prepared.   The routes covered  include:  Rishikesh-Rudraprayag-Chamoli-Badrinath, Rishikesh – Gaumukh,
 Rudraprayag – Okhimath and Pithroragarh – Malpa, all in Uttaranchal; Shimla – Manali, Shimla-Sumdo and Dalhousie – Brahmaur
 in Himachal Pradesh.  The maps are used by State Public Works Departments (PWD), Border Roads Organisation and some NGOs.
Gujarat Earthquake:  The Space based imagery along with aerial remote sensing provided inputs to the Gujarat State
 Administration during the Earthquake in January 2001 in terms of locating the worst affected towns, to assess the changes in the
 terrain features and damage assessment.  The satellite news gathering terminal was also moved from the Space Applications Centre
 and set up at Bhuj which was the only link till February 2, 2001 to co-ordinate rescue and relief operations.
33.        The Committee observes that the Disaster Management Support (DMS) should be a key area of space applications. 

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
 Therefore, the DOS should evolve a space based system to support the disaster management services in the country on a reliable and
 timely basis.  These include  mapping and monitoring support for disaster management, preparation of flood hazard zonation maps
 based on close-contour information, development of reliable and fail-safe emergency communication system for disaster
 management support and undertaking pilot projects with user agencies in the areas of drought monitoring and forest fire detection.
SPACE TRANSPORTATION
34.        Space Transportation system includes the satellite launch vehicles to place satellites like INSAT and IRS and scientific
 satellites in the required orbits as well as the sounding rockets for carrying out short duration scientific experiments.  India made a
 modest beginning in this area with the launch of a 75 mm diameter sounding rocket in 1963 for investigation of ionosphere over the
 geo-magnetic equator over Thumba, near Thiruvananthapuram.  Since then, the country has established a substantial capability in the
 design, development and operationalisation of a series of sounding rockets for scientific investigations, Polar Satellite Launch
 Vehicle (PSLV), for launching Indian remote sensing satellites and Geo-synchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle (GSLV), for
 launching geo-stationary communication satellites.
            The maiden developmental flight of GSLV-D1 on April 18, 2001 which successfully injected the GSAT-1 satellite in Geo-
synchronous Transfer Orbit (GTO) is a historic milestone for the Indian Space Programme.  This has validated the complex vehicle
 and mission design aspects, soundness of a number  of new vehicle systems such as cryo stage, liquid strap-ons, hot separation of
 first stage,  large diameter payload firing, launch hold release mechanism, launch pad facilities for handling and filling earth storable
 and cryogenic stage has been completed and based on its outcome the preparation for the second developmental flight of GSLV is in
 progress.  The subsequent flights, GSLV-D2 and GSLV-D3, respectively carrying G.SAT-2 and G.SAT-3, are targeted for launch in
 the timeframe 2002-2003.
35.        The objective Cryo Upper Stage (CUS) Project is to realize an indigenous cryogenic stage employing liquid oxygen and
 liquid hydrogen as oxidizer and fuel respectively for upper stage of GSLV.  In this technologically complex area, significant
 developmental efforts have been carried out resulting in the realization of the second cryogenic engine.  A series of ground
 qualification tests are planned to evaluate the engine.  The first flight of indigenous cryo stage is targeted for flight-testing by GSLV
 in 2003-2004.
The budgetary allocation amounting to Rs.16.38 crores for Cryogenic Upper Stage Project (CUSP) in BE 2002-03 are less as
 compared to Rs.21.30 crores and Rs.20.31 crores at BE and RE stages respectively in 2001-02. Asked whether this would affect the
 project adversely the Department informed  that the total budget approved for the Cryogenic Upper Staged Project was  of Rs.335.89
 crores. The cumulative expenditure of the project till March 2002 is Rs.288.48 crores i.e. Rs.85.9%. As substantial part of the total
 project cost has already been incurred, the budget sought in BE 2002-03 is relatively less compared to RE provision of last year. The
 budget provision in 2002-03 is based on the planned progress in engine and stage fabrication activities and hence does not affect the
 project’s progress, though it appears less compared to RE of last year.
36.        The successful launch of PSLV-C3/TES mission on October 22, 2001, was a significant milestone in the operational PSLV
 programme.  The mission met all its objectives by placing into desired orbit the main satellite – Technology Experimental Satellite
 (TES) of India and in addition two auxiliary satellites, Project for on-Board Autonomy (PROBA) of Belgium and Bispectral and
 Infrared Remote Detection (BIRD) of Germany, on a commercial basis.  With  this, PSLV has once again demonstrated the multiple
 satellite launching capability.  One significant feature of this mission was the orbit-raising manoeuvre carried out for PROBA for
 placing it in an elliptical orbit, different from the orbit of the main satellite.  A high-performance composite solid propellant upper
 stage motor for PSLV has been successfully test fired.  The PSLV C4-C6 flights are targeted for completion in 2002-2004.
37.        The Secretary informed the Committee that DOS was working on several critical technologies, which are related to Reusable
 Launch Vehicle System.  This would bring down the cost of space transport.  In this direction the Department is currently working on
 the concepts of the Reusable Transportation Vehicle, including engines, air breathing and so on.  The Secretary further informed that
 the Department has also started working on Space Capsule Recovery Module.  Explaining this he said that the idea was to place a
 Capsule in space and use it for some experiments and then retrieve it back to earth. 
38.        In the area of Launch Vehicle Development, the Committee desires that DOS should strive to complete the development
 flights and operationalise the GSLV (with indigenous cryogenic upper stage) for launching 2T INSAT class of satellites. 
 Considering the trend towards going for bigger and heavier spacecraft for satellite communications, the Department should  initiate
 development of an advanced GSLV Mk III capable of launching 4T INSAT class of satellite.  Besides, in tune with the long-term
 vision of low cost access to space, advanced R & D in Reusable Launch Vehicles (RLV) should be pursued. To this end smaller-scale
 technology demonstrator in the areas of air breathing propulsion technology and space capsule recovery missions could be planned.
LAUNCH VEHICLE INFRASTRUCTURE
39.        The launch infrastructure at SHAR Centre, Sriharikota supported the launch of GSLV-D1 and PSLV-C3 during the year.  The
 first developmental test of GSLV has completely validated the modified mobile service tower along with the propellant service
 facilities including the cryogenic propellants.  In reply to a question about present position with regard to development of Second
 Launch Pad the Department has informed that the project has made significant progress in 2001-02. The order placement for all
 major subsystems has been completed. All the civil works except part of Vehicle Assembly building and Jet Deflector duct were
 complete. All the structural fabrication works have been completed and major structures were under final erection at site. Electrical
 and AC equipments have been received at site and their erection was nearing completion. The procurement of components for the
 checkout system has been completed and the integration of the checkout system has commenced. Site erection work related to
 process and mechanical equipments has also commenced.
40.        In the course of his presentation before the Committee the Secretary, DOS anticipated the completion of the second launch
 pad by the end of this year (December, 2002) when it would be ready to take on our new series of launches. It would serve as a

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
 launch pad for our future systems.  He however added that the commissioning of the second launch pad would be possible by early
 part of the next year. 
When asked about the reasons for reduced budgetary allocation amounting to Rs.45 crores for 2002-03 as against Rs.132
 crores in BE & RE 2001-02 for Second Launch pad and common facilities and that the programmes which were likely to be affected
 by the reduction in allocation and whether the amount was fully spent last year the DOS stated as follows:
·         The amount allotted during RE 2000-01 has been fully spent and the amount allotted in RE 2001-02 was also expected to
 be fully utilised.
·         The total approved cost of second launch pad project was Rs.305.22 crores. Out of this a sum of Rs.261.12 crores was
 expected to be spent by end of March 2002. Therefore, the remaining amount of Rs.45 crores has been sought in BE 2002-03
 taking into account the project milestones planned and also the balance of funds available with respect to the total approved
 cost of the project.
41.       The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in 77th Report for according priority to the work relating to second launch
 pad. Accordingly, the Committee would like the Department to speed up the pace of the project in case it was lagging behind
 scheduled. This would open up the opportunities for commercialisation of the Indian Space Programme
SPACE SCIENCES.
 42.       The Indian space programme encompasses research in space science besides space technology development and its
 application.  Space science research is mainly carried out at Physical Research Laboratory (PSL), at Ahmedabad, Space Physics
 Laboratory (SPL), at Thiruvananthapuram and ISRO Satellite Centre, at Bangalore.  The National Mesosphere – Stratosphere –
 Troposphere Radar Facility (NMRF) near Tirupati, which is an autonomous society established and funded by the DOS, is available
 to scientists from universities and research institutions for atmosphere research.  Space science research institutions through the
 ISRO’s Advisory Committee for Space Science (ADCOS) as well as through Sponsored Research (RESPOND) programme of DOS.
43.       The Committee observes that Space Science & Environment research has been an important component of the Indian Space
 Programme.  The Committee feels that the thrust of the Space Science Programme should be towards investigations in the new,
 emerging and challenging areas of Space Science research including Planetary Science / exploration and Micro gravity Science.  A
 dedicated and state-of-art Indian Multi-wavelength Astronomy satellite could be of immense value for detailed scientific
 investigations on celestial X-ray sources.  The Committee is also of the view that something needs to done for the study of tropical
 weather system for climate research area.
LUNAR MISSION
44.        The Committee has been given to understand that ISRO has constituted a Moon Mission Task Force to study the technical
 feasibility of various scientific proposals and to determine realistic and optimum mission objectives.  The task team comprises
 scientists and engineers from the various centres of ISRO, as well as, those from Physical Research Laboratory and Tata Institute of
 Fundamental Research. Further the task team has held elaborate discussions and was analyzing the various options of the scientific
 objectives and associated instruments to be flown, the spacecraft configuration, the spacecraft trajectory, feasibility of using India’s
 PSLV to launch the spacecraft and aspects related to cost, schedules and technology issues. The report was expected to be received in
 the near future. A decision for undertaking the mission would be taken after the report was received and reviewed. 
45.        Replying to the queries of the Members about the Lunar Mission during the presentation before the Committee the Secretary,
 DOS explained that there were many missions being contemplated to explore the various objects of solar system and this would be an
 era of planetary exploration.  To that end they were required to build up impressive capability in this space and having undertaken
 major missions there was no reason why the Department of Space should not consider the feasibility of being a part of that kind of an
 adventure, which has science in it and technological content in it.  However, he said, it would be very premature to imagine that India
 should undertake a manned mission to the moon. He added that the question of manned mission has its own implications.  A long-
term strategy of doing as a partner of planetary, not exploration, but exploitation, then quite obviously, lunar bases were very
 important.  There was a lot of thinking how to create lunar bases, how the human settlement could take place in lunar regions.   Even
 a rocket take-off would be much easier from the Moon than from the Earth.  Hydrogen is there; many other fuel elements were there. 
 It was possible to have a sustainable space to fly rockets, but Department of Space would go step by step and see where they could
 really meet.
 46.      The Committee notes that ISRO has constituted a Moon Mission Task Force with a view to study the technical feasibility of
 various scientific proposals and to determine realistic and optimum mission objectives.  The Committee would like the Department
 of Space to take an objective and dispassionate view on the Lunar Mission. 
            The Committee also recalls that at the time of making its recommendation on the subject last year some newspapers had
 reacted on this recommendation.  Their observations hinged on the aspect whether it was at all necessary to send such mission to
 moon at the cost of taxpayer’s money.  The Committee take this opportunity to clarify that in making recommendation on the subject
 the Committee was solely guided by the consideration that the Department of Space should obtain technological superiority and
 should have the capability of sending a Lunar Mission and not for any fancy the moon has traditionally offered to human beings.
            The subject of Space, or for that matter be it the Moon has all along been an objective of the curiosity of scientists from late
 sixties or may be even earlier.  After all what did America gain by sending Neil Armstrong to Moon in 1969.  What have we gained
 in conducting, for that matter, Pokharan test.  Have we not spent taxpayer’s money on these programmes.  The Committee reiterates
 that its sole mission was for providing food for thought to scientists whereby they technically equipped themselves in sending a
 Lunar Mission.  The Space still remains a matter of curiosity for the scientists and they continue to explore  by   spending   millions 
 and  millions  again  from  taxpayer’s  money.  What   for? 

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
Perhaps in order to find out whether there is life at these planets and if so in what form?  Whether there is habitation on these planets
 or is the habitation feasible.  These are some of questions with scientists continue to face inquisitively. Sooner or later they have to
 answer these questions for which such missions are necessary. 
The Committee agrees with the reported remark of the Secretary, Department of Space that news reports about India’s Planned
 Mission were blown out of proportion and further, “it is not a question of whether we can afford it.  It’s whether we can afford to
 ignore it”.
47.       The Committee looks forward to the Report of the Moon Mission Task Force set up by ISRO.  However, it feels that the
 proposed mission to moon is expected to provide an impetus to the advancement of science in India and a challenge to technologists. 
 This can also serve as a test bed for future missions that could be undertaken by India to explore the outer world in the new
 millennium, thus providing challenging opportunities to the younger generation scientists of the country.  The Committee also
 understands that the mission is  expected to result in the development of new technologies that could have various spin-off
 applications, which could be of direct relevance to the common man.  Also, the moon is going to be the target of international
 attention in coming decades (as a take off point for planetary explorations), the Committee is therefore of the view that India should
 possess the capability of reaching the moon which will assert its right and presence there.  Hence, the Committee recommends that
 India should go step by step, from orbiters to landers, and then to crafts which could return with samples, along with more
 explorations of other planets, before it could think of a manned mission.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
48.        The Committee is happy to note that the DOS continues its efforts towards safeguarding the technologies and products
 developed in its Centres.  Scientists and engineers at all DOS Centres were being encouraged to patent their innovations in
 accordance  with the international developments.
            The Committee has been given to understand that a number of workshops, training programmes, tutorials, lectures, etc, have
 been organised in that direction.  DOS was also having regular interactions with national agencies and other associated agencies to
 keep abreast of the developments in the area of IPR.
            As a result of  efforts made in the course of  the year  towards managing IPR activities have resulted in an increase of patent
 applications filed by DOS Centres in areas covering mechanical, chemical, electronics, etc. DOS patent portfolio now consists of 122
 patents filling of which 59 patents and 5 copyrights have been granted.
            The following patents were granted during the year:
·         Improved Universal Testing Machine
·         Improved process for providing dielectric substrates with multi-layer anti-reflector coatings. 
·         Improved impact testing machine for measuring dynamic fracture toughness of engineering materials.
49.       The Committee commends the efforts made by DOS in the field of IPR movements.  However, it feels that DOS should set a
 formidable goal of achieving more patents in areas of its interest.  Also, the Department should create a Patent Facilitating Cell which
 may assist in completing of all formalities for filing of patents.
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
50.        International co-operation has been an important aspect of India’s Space Programme.  DOS has entered into agreements or
 signed memoranda of understanding with several countries and space agencies.  These include: Australia, Brunei, Canada, European
 Space Agency, France, Germany, Hungary, Indonesia, Peru, Russia, Syria, Sweden, Italy, Norway, U.K., U.S.A, and Ukraine.
 During the year, MOU’s were signed with China and Thailand and the MOU with European Space Agency (ESA), renewed.
            ISRO and the French National Space Agency (CNES) have entered the Phase-B of the joint satellite mission, “Megha
 Tropiques”, which is aimed at the study of the tropical atmosphere and climate.  The mission envisages joint development of
 scientific instruments to be carried on a French satellite platform (Proteus) and the satellite is programmed to  be launched by India’s
 PSLV in 2006.
            The Modular Opto-electronic Scanner (MOS) instrument from the German Aerospace Centre (DLR) which was flown on the
 Indian Remote Sensing Satellite, IRS P3, launched on India’s PSLV continues to provide valuable data.  The data was being received
 and analysed  by scientists in India.
51.          India plays an active role in several international bodies such as the United Nations Committee on the Peaceful Uses of
 Outer Space (UN-COPUOS).  United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UN-ESCAP), the
 international COSPAS-SARSAT system for search and rescue operations, the International Astronautical Federation (IAF), the
 Committee on Earth Observation Satellites (CEOS), the Committee on Space Research (COSPAR), the Inter Agency Debris
 Coordination Committee (IADC), the Space Frequency Coordination Group (SFGC), the Coordinating Group on Meteorological
 Satellites (CGMS), the International Global Observing Strategy (IGOS), the International Space University (ISU), the Asian
 Association for Remote Sensing (AARS) and the International Society for Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing (ISPRS).
52.        India has been selected by the United Nations for establishing the Centre for Space Science & Technology Education in Asia
 and the Pacific (CSSTE-AP) which was formally inaugurated on November 1, 1995, at New Delhi.  The centre has been established
 around the facilities of the Indian Institute of Remote Sensing (IIRS), Dehradun, Space Applications Centre (SAC), Ahmedabad and
 Physical Research Laboratory (PRL), Ahmedabad.  The Centre offers Post-Graduate education courses, leading to award of
 M.Tech/M.Sc(Tech) degrees in Remote Sensing and Geographical Information Systems, Satellite Communications, Satellite
 Meteorology and Space Sciences to students of different countries in the region.

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
53.       The Committee feels that India has achieved considerable success in the areas of communication and remote sensing satellites,
 launch vehicles and applications of space technology.  The DOS should therefore explore more avenues of cooperation with major
 space agencies and commercial tie-ups with private operators with a view to share country’s experience with developing  countries 
 and also to market products  and services from other countries.  In a step towards this direction, PSLV can be considered for launch
 of small and medium class of satellites into different orbits on cooperation and commercial basis.
54.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Space and assessing the progress of various programmes and
 projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs.2264.99 crores, as sought by the
 Department of  Space for the year 2002-2003, under Demand No. 92, may be approved.
RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS AT GLANCE
 
  1.       The Committee  observes that  with sustained efforts of DOS end-to-end capability in space for vital application in
 communications, broadcasting, meteorology and natural resource information which have direct relevance for national development,
 has secured India a unique place in the International Community.  However, the committee is of the view that front ranking scientific
 investigations in the field of astronomy, atmospheric sciences and long term climatic research using satellites, balloons, sounding
 rockets and ground instrument may lead us to new areas of technology.
                       (Para 10)         
2.         The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Department continues  with the practice of having detailed reviews at various
 levels in the organization in order to arrive at the minimum essential cash flow for each Project, Programme and Centre/Unit, based
 on the programmatic priorities, total cost, scheduled targets, progress achieved  and the milestone planned for the budgeting period. 
 The Committee  finds that consistent with the programme directions and targets envisaged for the 10
th Five year Plan period, the
 specific activities/projects to be undertaken and the performance milestones to be achieved have already been prioritized while
 finalising  the Budget Estimates for 2002-03.
          (Para 14)          
3.         The Committee observes that during 1999-2000, the Department had utilized the funds to the extent of 99.76 percent.  In
 2000-2001 the fund utilization  was about 99.56 per cent.    The Committee thus notes with satisfaction that the Department has made
 optimum utilization of the funds allocated to it during 1999-2000, 2000-2001 as also in 2001-2002.
          (Para 15)          
4.         The Committee feels that the major thrust of the INSAT programme plan should be  towards augmenting the space segment
 capacity of the INSAT system with fourth generation INSAT-4 series of satellites to meet the increasing demands for transponders in
 various sectors including government and social sectors.  The Department should therefore interact with the users and service
 providers in both government and non-government sectors, and then endeavour to achieve space segment capacity of transponders in
 INSAT system. The Department should also endeavour to complete the ongoing INSAT-3E satellite followed by next generation
 INSAT-4 series (INSAT-4A to G) during the 10
th plan period.  The indigenous GSLV Mk II capable of launching 2000 kg INSAT
 type of satellites should be fully utilized for launching INSAT-4 satellites.  The Department should examine the feasibility of using
 low cost experimental GSAT satellites for the development flights of GSLV. Besides, an Advanced Communication Technology
 Satellite (ACTS) should be planned with a view to develop and demonstrate advanced communication techniques & technologies for
 future generation INSATs. 
          (Para 23)          
5.         The Committee is of the view that an advanced meteorological satellite, should be planned to provide valuable inputs for
 climatic / numeric weather prediction model studies related to vertical profile of temperature & humidity. It would enhance the
 quality of the Meteorological services aimed at accurate weather forecasts.
         (Para 24)           
6.         The Committee is happy to note the introduction of Telemedicine through  application of the satellite communication. 
 However, it recommends that the establishment of a tele-medicine network connecting district health care hospitals to specialized
 health centers in cities supported by INSAT transponders should be a thrust area of the application.
The Committee feels that considering the potential of the satellite based network for development purposes as demonstrated
 through pilot projects in 9
th plan, a major target should be to establish a country-wide Satellite based GRAMSAT Network for
 development applications and evolve a suitable institutional framework for its implementation.  The satellite-based educational
 network (Tele-education) should also be expanded to include technical / engineering / medical education, university / technical /
 training institutes (including all state open universities and continuing professional education), school education and adult education. 
 The Committee also recommends that  new communication services including Satellite based Aircraft Navigation system, Mobile
 Communications, Digital Audio and Data Broadcast services and Emergency Communication Systems should be developed for the
 benefit of country as a whole.
         (Para 28)           
7.         The Committee appreciates that the  thrust in the Earth Observations application programmes during 10th plan would be on the
 Natural Resources Census (NRC)  thus addressing the need for a regular census activity of the nation’s Natural Resources (NR) and
 generation of a “State of the Country’s Environment Report”. The Committee notes that the system would also assess “NR Hot-

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
Spots” that are cause for concern and lead to identification of environmentally sensitive areas which require urgent conservation /
 management action.  However, the Committee recommends that priority should be given to establishment of the National Spatial
 Data Infrastructure (NSDI) in a phased manner mainly as a spatial data repository with specialized information services on natural
 resources.  The Committee feels that the Department should ensure that  Earth Observations data are used for developmental
 programmes by various user agencies which may include rural roads connectivity analysis, drinking water mission, water shed
 development programme, urban / city master plan preparation, coastal zone regulation and other developmental projects involving
 private sectors.  Perhaps a long-term, multidisciplinary, operational oceanographic database for prediction of the ocean state and
 contributing to climate change and variability studies may be useful.
          (Para 31)          
8.         The Committee observes that the Disaster Management Support (DMS) should be a key area of space applications.  Therefore,
 the DOS should evolve a space based system to support the disaster management services in the country on a reliable and timely
 basis.  These include  mapping and monitoring support for disaster management, preparation of flood hazard zonation maps based on
 close-contour information, development of reliable and fail-safe emergency communication system for disaster management support
 and undertaking pilot projects with user agencies in the areas of drought monitoring and forest fire detection.
        (Para 33)
9.         In the area of Launch Vehicle Development, the Committee desires that DOS should strive to complete the development
 flights and operationalise the GSLV (with indigenous cryogenic upper stage) for launching 2T INSAT class of satellites. 
 Considering the trend towards going for bigger and heavier spacecraft for satellite communications, the Department should  initiate
 development of an advanced GSLV Mk III capable of launching 4T INSAT class of satellite.  Besides, in tune with the long-term
 vision of low cost access to space, advanced R & D in Reusable Launch Vehicles (RLV) should be pursued. To this end smaller-scale
 technology demonstrator in the areas of air breathing propulsion technology and space capsule recovery missions could be planned.
          (Para 38)          
10.       The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in 77th Report for according priority to the work relating to second launch
 pad. Accordingly, the Committee would like the Department to speed up the pace of the project in case it was lagging behind
 scheduled. This would open up the opportunities for commercialisation of the Indian Space Programme
          (Para 41)          
11.        The Committee observes that Space Science & Environment research has been an important component of the Indian Space
 Programme.  The Committee feels that the thrust of the Space Science Programme should be towards investigations in the new,
 emerging and challenging areas of Space Science research including Planetary Science / exploration and Micro gravity Science.  A
 dedicated and state-of-art Indian Multi-wavelength Astronomy satellite could be of immense value for detailed scientific
 investigations on celestial X-ray sources.  The Committee is also of the view that something needs to done for the study of tropical
 weather system for climate research area.
         (Para 43)           
12.        The Committee notes that ISRO has constituted a Moon Mission Task Force with a view to study the technical feasibility of
 various scientific proposals and to determine realistic and optimum mission objectives.  The Committee would like the Department
 of Space to take an objective and dispassionate view on the Lunar Mission. 
            The Committee also recalls that at the time of making its recommendation on the subject last year some newspapers had
 reacted on this recommendation.  Their observations hinged on the aspect whether it was at all necessary to send such mission to
 moon at the cost of taxpayer’s money.  The Committee take this opportunity to clarify that in making recommendation on the subject
 the Committee was solely guided by the consideration that the Department of Space should obtain technological superiority and
 should have the capability of sending a Lunar Mission and not for any fancy the moon has traditionally offered to human beings.
            The subject of Space, or for that matter be it the Moon has all along been an objective of the curiosity of scientists from late
 sixties or may be even earlier.  After all what did America gain by sending Neil Armstrong to Moon in 1969.  What have we gained
 in conducting, for that matter, Pokharan test.  Have we not spent taxpayer’s money on these programmes.  The Committee reiterates
 that its sole mission was for providing food for thought to scientists whereby they technically equipped themselves in sending a
 Lunar Mission.  The Space still remains a matter of curiosity for the scientists and they continue to explore by spending millions and
 millions again from taxpayer’s money.  What for?  Perhaps in order to find out whether there is life at these planets and if so in what
 form?  Whether there is habitation on these planets or is the habitation feasible.  These are some of questions with scientists continue
 to face inquisitively. Sooner or later they have to answer these questions for which such missions are necessary. 
The Committee agrees with the reported remark of the Secretary, Department of Space that news reports about India’s Planned
 Mission were blown out of proportion and further, “it is not a question of whether we can afford it.  It’s whether we can afford to
 ignore it”.
          (Para 46)          
13.        The Committee looks forward to the Report of the Moon Mission Task Force set up by ISRO.  However, the Department of
 Space feels that the proposed mission to moon is expected to provide an impetus to the advancement of science in India and a
 challenge to technologists.  This can also serve as a test bed for future missions that could be undertaken by India to explore the outer
 world in the new millennium, thus providing challenging opportunities to the younger generation scientists of the country.  The
 Committee also understands that the mission is  expected to result in the development of new technologies that could have various
 spin-off applications, which could be of direct relevance to the common man.  Also, the moon is going to be the target of

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
 international attention in coming decades (as a take off point for planetary explorations), the Committee is therefore of the view that
 India should possess the capability of reaching the moon which will assert its right and presence there.  Hence, the Committee
 recommends that India should go step by step, from orbiters to landers, and then to crafts which could return with samples, along
 with more explorations of other planets, before it could think of a manned mission.
        (Para 47)
14.        The Committee commends the efforts made by DOS in the field of IPR movements.  However, it feels that DOS should set a
 formidable goal of achieving more patents in areas of its interest.  Also, the Department should create a Patent Facilitating Cell which
 may assist in completing of all formalities for filing of patents.
          (Para 49)          
15.        The Committee feels that India has achieved considerable success in the areas of communication and remote sensing
 satellites, launch vehicles and applications of space technology.  The DOS should therefore explore more avenues of cooperation
 with major space agencies and commercial tie-ups with private operators with a view to share country’s experience with developing
 countries and also to market products and services from other countries.  In a step towards this direction, PSLV can be considered for
 launch of small and medium class of satellites into different orbits on cooperation and commercial basis.
          (Para 53)          
16.        After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Space and assessing the progress of various programmes and
 projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs.2264.99 crores, as sought by the
 Department of  Space for the year 2002-2003, under Demand No. 92, may be approved.
        (Para 54)
 
ANNEXURES
ANNEXURE – I
MAJOR  MISSION PLANNED DURING NINETH PLAN PERIOD
 
Mission Launch Vehicle Current Status
IRS-1D PSLV-C1 Launched on 29th Sep.97 by PSLV-C1 & Operational
IRS-P4 (Oceansat) PSLV-C2 Launched on 26
th May 99 by PSLV-C2 & Operational
IRS-P6 (Resourcesat) PSLV-C5 Under advanced stages of development. Launch
 planned in 2002-03.
IRS-P5 (Cartosat) PSLV-C6 Under development
INSAT-2D Procured Launch Launched on 4th June 1997. Mission aborted.
INSAT-2DT (Arabsat) On-orbit acquisition Acquired in orbit in Dec. 97 & Operational
INSAT-2E Procured Launch Launched on 3rd April 1999 & Operational.
INSAT-3A Procured Launch Under advanced stage of development.
INSAT-3B Procured Launch Launched on 22nd March 2000 & Operational.
INSAT-3C Procured Launch Launched on 24th January 2002 & Operational.
INSAT-3D GSLV-C1 Under development
GSAT-1 GSLV-D1 Launched on 18th April 2001by GSLV D1.
GSAT-2
 
GSLV-D2 Under advanced stages of development for launch by
 GSLV D2 in 2002-03.
GSAT-3 GSLV-D3 Under development
         
ANNEXURE - II
REVISED ESTIMATE S 2001-02 AND BUDGET ESTIMATES 2002-03
(Rs. in Crores)
SL.        PROGRAMMES/PROJECTS              BUDGET         REVISED                    BUDGET
NO.                                                                              2001-02           2001-02           2002-03
(A)       SPACE TECHNOLOGY

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
I           LAUNCH VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY
1 .        Geo-Synchronous Satellite Launch      98.66                    83.86                101.13
Vehicle (GSLV) Project
2.         Cryogenic Upper Stage                          21.30                20.31                  16.38
            (CUS) Project
3.         PSLV-Continuation Project                    105.00              100.00              60.28
4.         GSLV MK-III                                         5.00                   1.00               180.00
Development
5.         C-20 Cryo Stage Development                 0.20                   0.00                 0.00
6.         Large Solid Stage/Booster (S-200)        0.20                      0.00                 0.00
7.         Space Capsule Recovery Experiment       0.00                  0.00                20.00
8.         GSLV-Continuation                                 5.00                  0.00                25.00
9.         Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre              206.89               194.43              176.79
            (VSSC)
10.        ISRO Inertial Systems                           14.13                13.84                  10.13
Unit (IISU)
11.        Liquid Propulsion Systems                  97.59                    75.88                  73.90
            Centre (LPSC)
II        SATELLITE TECHNOLOGY
12.        IRS-P4 (Oceansat)                                 0.50                1.55                 0.00
13.        IRS-P5 (Cartosat)                                            34.71                21.85                17.20
14 .       IRS-P6 (Resourcesat)                                       30.54                30.00                17.00
15.        IRS-IIA(Cartosat-2)                              40.00                38.30                60.56
16.        IRS-II B/C                                            5.00                   0.00                  5.00
17.        G.SAT-1                                                            3.00                   5.75                  0.00
18 .       G.SAT-2                                               30.00                20.00               10.00
19.        G.SAT-3                                               10.00                0.10                 10.00
20 .       Direct to Home (DTH) Satellite                          0.10                  0.01                    0.00
 
SL.      PROGRAMMES/PROJECTS               BUDGET                     REVISED         BUDGET       
NO.                                                                  2001-02           2001-02           2002-03
21 .       METSAT                                               50.00              25.00                  35.00  
22.        RISAT – 1                                              0.00                  0.00                  30.00
23 .       ISRO Satellite Centre (ISAC)                125.01              83.09               104.40
24 .       Laboratory for Electro-                           18.35               16.94                 14.19
            Optics Systems (LEOS)
III        LAUNCH SUPPORT, TRACKING NETWORK & RANGE FACILITIES
 25.       SHAR Centre                                      91.57                93.80                101.34
26.        ISRO Telemetry, Tracking &               30.17                30.54                  35.27
             Command Network (ISTRAC)
27.        Second Launch Pad &                           132.00              132.00                 45.00
            Common Facilities
28.        Radar Development Cell                         1.28                     1.49                    1.58
   TOTAL : (A) – SPACE TECHNOLOGY   1156.20             989.74                1150.15
(B)       SPACE APPLICATIONS
1.         Space Applications Centre (SAC)          94.10                91.74                112.48
2.         Development & Educational                   21.89                10.29                  34.92

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
Communication Unit (DECU)
3.         Remote Sensing Applications                   6.00                6.10                     8.10
Mission (RSAM)
4.         National Natural Resources                      17.19             19.21                  40.13
Management System (NNRMS)
5.         Regional Remote Sensing                        5.62                5.27                      5.70
Service Centres (RRSSCs)
6.         National Remote Sensing                       11.30                11.15                  10.02
Agency (NRSA)
including aid Equipment
7.         Digital Photogrammetric                         0.60                 0.60                      0.00
            Work Station etc.
  
SL.      PROGRAMMES/PROJECTS              BUDGET         REVISED          BUDGET
NO.                                                                            2001-02            2001-02              2002-03
8.       Integrated Mission for                              0.10                  0.00                      0.00
Sustainable Development(IMSD)
9.         North Eastern - Space Applications        5.00                   5.00                                 5.00
            Centre (NE-SAC)
10.        Diasaster Management Support
            System                                                 2.00                  2.00                    10.00
 TOTAL : (B) – SPACE
APPLICATION                                   163.80              151.36                      226.35
(C)      SPACE SCIENCES
1.         Physical Research Laboratory(PRL)        25.72             29.96                26.52
2 .        ISRO Geosphere-Biosphere                                  2.50                 2.20                  2.50
            Programme
3.         IMAP - Continuation                               0.10                  0.10                  0.10   
4.         Sensor Development                                4.26                  4.93                16.40
5.         Megha Tropiques Project                         3.50                  2.04                  5.35
6 .        National MST Radar Facility(NMRF)       2.03                  2.03                  2.98
7.         Sponsored Research (RESPOND)                       7.00                  7.00                  7.00
8.         Other Schemes                                       4.23                  4.48                  7.60
             TOTAL :(C)-SPACE SCIENCES          49.34              49.74              69.45              
(D)      DIRECTION & ADMINISTRATION/
OTHER PROGRAMMES
1.         Department of Space (DOS)                               4.18                  3.82                3.85
2 .        Indian Space Research                          12.72                14.10                14.00
            Organisation (ISRO)Headquarters
3.         Civil Engineering Division (CED)         13.48                  13.48                14.25
4.         International Cooperation                        5.40                  5.40                  4.40
5.         Others                                                  78.82               51.45                26.46
           TOTAL:(D)  - DIRECTION &               114.60                 88.25                     62.96
 
SL.     PROGRAMMES/PROJECTS                  BUDGET       REVISED       BUDGET
NO                                                                   2001-02            2001-02           2002-03

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
            ADMINISTRATION/OTHER
PROGRAMMES
(E)       INSAT OPERATIONAL
1          INSAT-2 Satellites                                35.20                62.96                0.00
2.         INSAT-3 Satellites                                190.00              150.00              194.70 
3.         INSAT-3 Launch Services                    310.00               405.00              100.00
4.         INSAT -4 Satellites                               0.00                      0.00              100.00
5.         INSAT –4 Launch Services                   0.00                     0.00               335.00
6.         Master Control Facility (MCF)               15.81                  17.10                26.38
            TOTAL: (E) – INSAT                         551.00                 635.06                        756.08
OPERATIONAL
 
            GRAND TOTAL :           GROSS        2034.95                 1914.15          2264.99
 
 
PROVISION UNDER BROAD OBJECTS OF EXPENDITURE- 2002-2003
                                               
(Rs. in Croes)
Classification Expenditure
Manpower 270.37
Administrative Expenses 68.92
Materials. Equipment & Machinery 1085.38
Civil Works Including Housing 67.70
Grants-in-aid to NRSA, PRL, NMRF & NE-SAC 44.50
Procured Launch Services 435.00
Other Items 293.12
TOTAL 2264.99
 
M I N U T E S
V
FIFTH MEETING
 
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 9
th April, 2002 in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1. Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
3. Smt. S. Gokula Indira
4. Shri C. Apok Jamir
5. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
6. Smt. Savita Sharda
7. Shri Lachhman Singh
8. Shri B.P. Singhal
 
LOK SABHA
 
9. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                    
10. Dr. Charan Das Mahant

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
11. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
12. Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
13. Shri Rupchand Murmu
14. Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                              
15. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik            
16. Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
17. Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
18. Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
19. Shri Prahlad Patel                     
20. Prof. R.R. Pramanik                             
21. Shri Naresh Puglia                                
22. Shri Ganta Srinivasa Rao          
23. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
24. Shri V. Vetriselvan       
25. Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K.Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SPACE
 
Dr. K. Kasturirangan, Secretary
Shri S.S. Meenakshisundaram, Additional Secretary
Shri V.V. Bhat, Joint Secretary
Shri Chandy Andrews, Chief Controller of Accounts
Smt. Jayashri Krishna, Deputy Secretary
Shir V. Sundaramaiah, Scientific Secretary, ISRO
Dr. K.N. Shankara, Director, SCPO
Shri S.S. Balakrishnan, Director, LVPO
Shri V. Jayaraman, Director, EOS
Shri Mukund Rao, Deputy Director, EOS
Shri S. Krishnamurthy, Director, P&PR
Shri K.R. Sridharamurthy, Executive Director, ACL
Shri H.N. Madhusudhan, Director, BEA
Shri K.S. Krishnan, OSD
 
2.   *                                                                            *                                                       *.
3.   *                                                                            *                                                       *.
4.         The Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other officials of the Department of Space and congratulated the Secretary on his
 being conferred with the second highest civilian award of the country-Padma Vibhushan. The Committee also conveyed its
 appreciation to the Secretary and Scientists of Department on the successful launch of PSLV-3 as well as successful testing of
 indigenously built cryogenic engine.
5.         Chairman then requested the Secretary to make a brief presentation regarding the Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the
 Department.  Thereafter the Secretary made an audio-visual presentation regarding the major activities and achievements of the
 Department.  The Secretary also explained briefly the budgetary allocations on different heads as also the functioning of the
 Department.  Thereafter Members sought clarifications on the points that emerged out of the presentation of the Secretary. 
      The witnesses then withdrew.
      A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6.   The Committee then adjourned at 5.40 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 10.04.2002.
 
 
 
 
______________________________________________________________________________
***  Relates to other matters.
VIII

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
EIGHTH  MEETING
 
      The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 24th April, 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.                  Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.                   Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
3.                   Shri C. Narayana Reddy
 
LOK SABHA
 
4.                   Smt. Margaret Alva
5.                   Smt. Bhavana D. Chikhalia
6.                   Shri Babubhai K. Katara
7.                   Dr. Charan Das Mahant
8.                   Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
9.                   Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
10.               Shri S. Murugesan
11.               Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                              
12.               Shri A. Venkatesh Naik            
13.               Shri Prahlad Patel                     
14.               Prof. R.R. Pramanik
15.               Prof. I. G. Sanadi                                 
16.               Shri Ram Prasad Singh
17.               Shri V. Vetriselvan       
18.               Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
      Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
2.   The Committee took up for consideration the draft *** & 100
th Reports of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2002-03)
 of the *** and Department of Space.  The Committee considered and adopted each of the reports.
3.   The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri Manoj Bhattacharya to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha
 and Smt. Bhavana D. Chikhalia and in her absence Smt. Margaret Alva to lay the Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha.
4.   The Committee then adjourned at 10.15 A.M. & to meet again at 10.30 A.M. on 2nd May, 2002.
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________
*Relates to other matters.
 
# Nominated w.e.f. 4th January, 2002. 
& Nominated w.e.f. 24th April, 2002. 
J Nominated w.e.f. 24th April, 2002.
*Shri Cho S. Ramswamy ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.15th February, 2002 on his resignation  from the membership
 of
   the Committee.
f  Dr. Raja Ramanna ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.18th February, 2002 on his resignation from  the membership of
 the
   Committee.

100th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/100threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:39]
b  Shri Peter Alphonse & Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray  ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of his term  in the Rajya
 Sabha  
   w.e.f.  2nd  April, 2002.
¥ Smt. Chandresh Kumari and Shri Lachhman Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of his term in the Rajya
 Sabha 
   w.e.f. 9
th  April, 2002.
% Nominated  w.e.f. 26th April , 2002.
 
 
 