PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED-SECOND REPORT
 
ON DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2002-2003)OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (DEMAND NO. 70)
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 7TH MAY, 2002)
(LAID IN THE LOK SABHA ON THE 7TH MAY, 2002)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2002/VAISAKHA, 1924  (SAKA)
 
E-Mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Web site: http://parliamentofindia.nic.in
 
 
           C O N T E N T S
              
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
2.         INTRODUCTION
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                             
4.         SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS
5.         ANNEXURES   
6.         MINUTES  OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE     
            COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2002)
 
 
1.         Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
           
RAJYA SABHA
 
 #
2.      Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Smt. S. Gokula Indira
Shri C. Apok Jamir
Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
Smt. Savita Sharda
Shri B.P. Singhal
&
10.     Shri M. V. Rajashekaran
J11.      Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
*12.      Vacant
f

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 13. Vacant
b14. Vacant
¥15. Vacant
        
LOK  SABHA
 
Smt. Margaret Alva
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                   
Smt. Bhavna Devrajbhai Chikhalia                   
Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
Adv. Suresh Ramrao Jadhav                            
Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
Shri Babubhai K. Katara
%
23.     Kunwar Akhilesh Singh            
Dr. Charan Das Mahant
Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
Shri Kailash Meghwal
Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
Shri Rupchand Murmu
Shri S. Murugesan                               
Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                            
Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                       
Shri B.K. Parthasarathi
Shri Ajit Kumar Panja  
Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
Shri Prahlad Patel        
Prof. R.R. Pramanik                            
Shri Naresh Puglia                               
Shri Ganta Srinivasa Rao         
Prof. I.G. Sanadi
Shri Ram Prasad Singh
Shri Vishvendra Singh  
Shri V. Vetriselvan
Shri Balram Singh Yadav
Shri Akhilesh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary   
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
 Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred-Second Report of
 the Committee.  This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the Department of Science &
 Technology (Demand No.70).
 
2.         In the meeting of the Committee held on the 10
th  April, 2002 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of
 Science & Technology gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on
 various aspects of the performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
 
3.         The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the
 Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the
 Department of Science & Technology.
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on  2nd May, 2002.
 
 
NEW DELHI;
                                                                                                      C.RAMACHANDRAIAH,
May 2,2002                                                                                                                                   Chairman,
                                                                          Committee on Science& Technology, Environment & Forests.
       R E P O R T
 
            The Department of Science and Technology (DST) was established with the primary objective of promoting new areas of
 Science and Technology and to play the role of a nodal department for organising, co-coordinating and promoting S&T activities
 in the country.  The mandate given to DST includes, among others:Formulation of policy statements and guidelines on
 S&TPromotion of new areas of scientific researchCo-ordination of inter-departmental S&T effortsSupport basic and applied
 research in universities and other institutionsInternational S&T Co-operationSupport high quality research in autonomous
 bodiesCatalyzing S&T interaction in societal programmes, and entrepreneurship development Science popularisation,
 communication and S&T Management Information SystemPromotion of Commercialisation of home grown technologySupport
 to technology development programmes, technology information andassessmentProviding services in the areas of:Surveying &
 Mapping by Survey of India & National Atlas & Thermatic Mapping Organisation. Meterology by India Meteorological
 Department & National Centre for Medium Range Weather Forecasting. Technology Development and Application by
 Technology Development Board. The Committee was apprised of the recent initiatives taken by the Department for Innovation
 Foundation in order to promote grass root level invention, Swarnajayanti Fellowships for outstanding young scientists, Fund for
 Improvement of S&T Infrastructure (FIST) in universities and related Institutions, Kishore Vigyanik Protsahan, Technopreneur
 Promotion Program (TePP), Indian Climate Research, Establishing high performance computing network facilities for research
 purposes Executed Joint Technology Development projects with industry and socio-economic Ministries, Strengthen Seismcity
 programme, Modernizing autonomous research institutions, Setting up of a National Accreditation Board for Testing and
 Calibration (NABL), Setting up a Patent Facilitating Cell in order to provide support to scientists and technologists on all aspects
 of patenting.
2.
                  The Committee has been informed that the endeavor of the Department in the 9th plan has been to focus on building
 and sustaining a strong Science & Technology base in the country, develop centres for excellence in areas of Science
 & Technology.  In keeping this philosophy of fostering and promoting Science & Technology the Prime Minister has
 assured an increased allocation to Science & Technology up to two percent of GNP in a period of five years.  
 Keeping this in view the 10
th five-year plan proposal has been formulated with an outlay of Rs.8618.19 crores. 
 Continuing the strategy from the 9th plan, the department would focus during 2002-03 on the following areas
Research and Development Support
Strengthen support to basic research in frontier areas of science and technology
Encouragement to young scientists
Creation of Centres of Excellence in R&D in Universities and Institutions
Modernize autonomous S&T institutions
Update S&T Management Information System (NSTMIS)
Support to students at school level onwards to take interest in scientific pursuit.
Technology Development
Financial assistance for commercialisation of indigenous technologies through TDB and to play a proactive role in areas identified
 in “Vision 2020”.
Promote R&D in Drugs and Pharmaceuticals through joint projects with the industry.
Promote S&T Mission Mode Projects
Technology for Bamboo Products
Provide support to technopreneurs for developing innovative ideas.
To provide and integrate S&T output with the programmes of socio-economic Ministries.
TIFAC Technology Vision 2020 Mission Mode Projects.
Seismology      
Science and Technology Programme
Replication of societal initiatives (weaker sections, tribal, women etc.) in co-ordination with related departments.
Encourage S&T entrepreneurship development and employment generation
Science Communication and Popularisation
International Co-operation
Consolidate initiatives in bilateral, regional and multilateral S&T Cooperation
Promotion of Centres of excellence for international scientific exchange.
Programme to support visit of Indian Scientists for using large-scale research facilities abroad.
Scientific Services
Enhance quality of forecast for agricultural, aviation meteorology and other related fields any cyclone warning.
Medium Range Weather Forecasting
Earthquake Risk Evaluation Centre (EREC)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
Strengthening of the seismological observatory network.
District Planning map series for micro level planning
Provide survey and mapping support.
Others
State S&T Programme
Implementation of EAP-UNDP Projects.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS
3.         The Department of Science & Technology has been allocated Rs.1014.25 crores (Plan Rs.615.00 and Non-plan Rs.399.25
 crores) for the year 2002-03 (Annexure-I). The Committee was informed that the Planning Commission made a plan allocation of
 Rs.625.00 crores for the year 2002-03 of which Rs.10.00 crores were to be transferred to the Ministry of Urban Development for
 incorporation in the Budget document of that Ministry for Capital Works to be executed during 2002-03.  The corresponding
 allocations at B.E. and R.E. stages during the year 2001-02 were as follows:
            (Rs. in crores)
Budget  Estimates  Revised Estimates  Budget Estimates  
 2001 -2002  2001 -2002  2002 -2003  
Plan Non-
Plan
Total Plan Non-Plan Total Plan Non-Plan Total  
400.00 429.62 829.62 398.00 402.12 800.12 615.00 404.83 1019.83  
 5.65*   7.87*   5.58*   
* Recoveries
            When asked as to how the increased allocation is proposed to be utilized, the Department gave the following breakup of
 allocation for each head under which the proposed allocation is to be utilized.
                         (Rs. in crores)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
 
12.
Research and Development support
Technology Development Programme
S&T Programme for Socio-Economic
 Development
International Cooperation
State Science & Technology Programme
Survey of India
NATMO
India Meteorological Department
NCMRWF
Autonomous Institution
Development Cooperation between India and
 UNDP }
Technology Projects in Mission Mode
(i)Seisomology
(ii) Technology for Bamboo Products
 
210.00
23.00
31.00
20.00
10.00
15.00
1.00
55.00
10.00
200.00
10.00
 
10.00
20.00
615.00
 
4.         It was further stated that the increase in Plan provision of 2001-02 as compared to R.E. 2001-02 was mainly due to
 increased allocation for ‘Research and Development Support’ as also Aided Institutions.  Two new Mission Mode Projects viz.
 Seismology and Technology for Bamboo Products were also to be taken up with an allocation of Rs.30.00 crores.  Similarly,
 under Non-Plan, there were increases largely under Survey of India; India Meteorological Department; Autonomous Institutes
 and Professional Bodies; Secretariat and National Atlas and Thematic Mapping Organisation mainly to cater to the enhanced
 level of expenditure under Salaries, Traveling Expenses and Other Expenditure viz; Telephone, Postages, Stationery,
 Petrol/Diesel, etc.
5.         It appears that there is no allocation in the current year for  R&D programmes.  When asked to explain this phenomenon,
 the department informed that all programmes of R&D have been integrated under the scheme ‘Research & Development
 Support’. Besides, the activities like Instrument Development has been merged in Technology Development Programme (TDP)
 for which a plan provision of Rs.23.00 crores has been proposed for the year 2002-03.
6.         When asked about increase in allocation by Rs.3.14 crores to Indian Association for Cultivation of Science (IACS),
 Calcutta, the Department informed the Committee that IACS was a premier institute working in the advanced areas of science
 like Molecular Science, Physics and Chemistry of Materials and Biological Sciences.  The research programmes for which
 additional grants have been allocated include:
(a)        Programmes in advanced nano-materials and condensed matter physics were critical dependent on the ready availability of
 liquid Helium.
(b)        Biocomputing and computational genomics were two major programmes to be taken up which require setting up of
 parallel computing facility and replacing the present low speed LAN by a high speed one.
(c)        Femto Chemistry and Single Molecule Spectroscopy are topmost priority to the ongoing activities in the area of
 spectroscopy requiring fresh fiscal in puts and also funds for modernization of essential old facilities.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
7.         Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences & Technology, Thiruvananthapuram has been allocated Rs.29.50 crores
 in the year 2002-2003 as against Rs.22.60 crores as B.E. & R.E. stage in the year 2001-2002.  When  asked to give  the details of
 research projects to be undertaken with the enhanced allocationthe Department informed that enhanced grant has been provided
 for some of the Prioritised programmes like Neonatal and pediatric clinical and surgical services including genetic unit, metabolic
 laboratory and Centre for epidemic investigations, Intraoperative diagnostic facilities, Facilities & equipments for image guided
 neuro-surgery and neuronavigation and amma knife, Functional imaging tools SPECT and PET,  Major programme of  the
 Institute focuses on the promotion of the Indian Medical Device Industry to globally competitive levels, utilizing a holistic role-
model of a Catalyst, Facilitator and a Strategic Investor.  The activities envisaged in this are Targetted R&D to strengthen
 indigenous technology base, national Test Centre for medical device evaluation, Biomedical Information Centre, Modular
 Flexible Manufacturing Facility for pilot production and market seeding, Training Facility for manpower development.
8.The Committee would like that  the Department should make  an effort to reduce the  non-plan  expenditure by  way of
 generating  the Internal  Extra  Budgetary  Resources (IEBR) through imparting training programmes and transfer of technology
 to the industry etc. so that Department would not depend solely on budgetary allocation.
SCIENCE AND ENGINEERING RESEARCH COUNCIL (SERC)
9.Science and Engineering Research Council (SERC) seeks to promote research in  emerging and frontier areas of science and
 engineering including multidisciplinary fields, promote the general research capability in relevant areas of science and
 engineering taking into account capability of the  institute, encourage young scientists to take up challenging R&D activities, give
 special encouragement  to projects from less endowed university departments, encourage patenting facilities to scientists  and
 technologists in the country for Indian and foreign patents on a sustained basis.
10.The Committee was informed that during the year 2002-03 the emphasis would be on supporting more fundamental research
 projects in the academic sector, particularly in the Universities with a view to tap the expertise available.  Based on the inputs
 provided by the various Programme Advisory Committees about 350 programmes were likely to be approved.  Some of the
 programmes might be in the areas of agricultural sciences, new areas of boundary layer modeling, crystal engineering, Earth
 Sciences application for societal needs, Mathematical Sciences application to industry etc.
11.Support was being provided to 100 scientists and science students through SERC fellowships during the year.  In order to train
 manpower in critical areas of S&T, 20 SERC schools/training workshops, were likely to be organized along with few contact
 programme for Young Scientists. Apart from the above projects and Centres/Facilities support would be continued for on-going
 projects and programmes like the Kishore Viagyanik Protsahan Yojana (KVPY), DST-JNC Summer Student Fellowship, SERC
 Visiting Fellowship, Integrated Science Olympiad Programme etc.
12.The allocation for Multi Disciplinary Research in Science and Technology (SERC) has been increased to Rs.212.00 crores for
 the year 2002-2003 from Rs.87.10 crores in B.E. and Rs.84.90 crores in R.E. stage.  The Department was asked to give the details
 of the programmes to be undertaken with this increased allocation, the Committee has been informed that this was mainly for
 catering to the need of supporting large number of approved proposals which could not be supported last year and new
 projects/programmes and Centres of Excellence being evolved in frontier areas such as organic light emitting display systems,
 Laser Physics, non-destructive testing related activities, high priority areas in organic chemistry, NMR facilities, low-temperature
 high magnetic field facilities, Gamma Detector Array, Aspheric Lense facility etc.  In addition, a major new initiative was the
 launching of a National Programme on “Nano Materials Science & Technology Initiatives”.   Besides, the enhanced allocation
 2002-03 would be utilized for providing support to a large number of already recommended departments of Universities etc.,
 which could not be supported last year.
13.The Committee notes with satisfaction the  increased allocation for SERC. The Committee feels that there should be a periodic
 review of the Programmes in order to avoid wasteful expenditure.
OPPORTUNITY FOR YOUNG SCIENTISTS
14.The programme seeks to provide Opportunity to Young Scientists (OYS) for pursuing exciting and innovative research ideas,
 provide opportunities for interaction and exchange of ideas with the scientific community  both at  the national and international
 levels,  involve Young Scientists in national S&T development process, encourage S&T institutions, professional bodies and
 other agencies including State S&T Councils for development of  S&T programmes involving Young Scientists.
15.The Committee observes that very few talented students are  motivated to come forward to take-up R&D as career.   It is
 necessary that efforts should, therefore, be made not only to increase the number of schemes/projects, the schemes should also be
 innovative and students should be provided with the state of art laboratory facilities and expert care should be provided to
 encourage them to test their ideas.  In case there is dearth of ideas, suggestion could be invited from all & sundry and a list could
 be drawn up to keep it handy for those who need it.
INSTRUMENT DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
16.The Committee has been informed that the objective of this programme is to  formulate coordinate and implement programmes
 leading to indigenous development and upgradation of instruments. During the year the Department aims to pursue the  following
 Programmes :
(i)         Major projects in areas of  Portable urea sensor & measuring system for detection of adulteration in milk, Strain gauge
 force transducer to measure applied force etc.
Besides, the Department proposes to initiate programmes in mission mode in the areas of Analytical/Scientific instrumentation: X-
ray based instruments; Mass spectroscopy based instruments; chromatography based instruments; Laser based analytical
 instruments etc. Medical instrumentation: Diagnostic instruments; Instruments for patient care/treatment; Fibre optic laser based
 instruments; Image processing and visualization etc. Instruments for Environment/Pollution monitoring & control; Food
 processing; Energy monitoring & control etc; imaging technologies & instrumentation including MRI system for healthcare &

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 Thermal imaging systems.
17.The Committee feels that in order to avoid chances of research being stolen/copied etc. care should be taken by the Department
 in initiating steps for registering of the patents at the earliest in order to escape from conflicts over them. Besides, Know-how of
 instruments developed should be transferred to industries for commercial production. 
NATIONAL ACCREDITATION BOARD FOR TESTING AND CALIBRATION LABORATORIES (NABL)
18.The Board seeks to provide, coordinate, guide, implement and maintain an accreditation system for laboratories suitable for the
 country in accordance with the relevant national and international standards and guides.
19.The Laboratories ensure that all measurements, either during calibration or testing by accredited laboratories, conform to
 appropriate national/international standards maintained at National Physical Laboratory (NPL) and at Bhabha Atomic Research
 Centre (BARC) through an unbroken chain of comparisons; encourage Proficiency Tests/Inter-laboratory comparisons in order to
 ensure accuracy, reliability and reproducibility of test results; establish and maintain strong linkages with international and
 regional laboratories such as International Laboratory Accreditation Conference (ILAC), European Accreditation Cooperation for
 Laboratories (EAL), Asia Pacific Laboratory Accreditation Cooperation (APLAC) etc. and to achieve Mutual Recognition
 Arrangement through international peer evaluation so that test results of NABL accredited laboratories are accepted across the
 frontiers of the countries and thereby promote international trade.
20.       The Committee has also been informed that during 2002-03 number of accredited laboratories would be increased from the
 current level of 366 testing and 120 in the field of calibration to around 450 testing and 150 calibration laboratories. Joint
 assessment of Forensic Science Laboratory by NATA would be intensified.
21.       NABL would organise seminars and workshops on Uncertainty in Measurement, Inter-Laboratory Proficiency Testing,
 Calibration and Traceability, Validation of Test Method and Accreditation of Clinical/Food Testing/Drug Testing etc. for creating
 better awareness in the  months to come.
22.       The Committee feels that the large-scale food and drug adulteration can be prevented only if sufficient number of food and
 drug testing laboratories are available  in all major cities. Besides that training of staff involved in testing and calibration
 processes about the new standards is necessary for better results.
PATENT FACILITATING CELL (PFC)
23.       The PFC has been engaged in many activities related to intellectual property rights (IPR) with the objective of introducing
 patent information as a vital input in the process of promotion of R&D programmes, Provide patenting facilities & secretarial
 support to scientists and technologists of the country for Indian and foreign patents on a sustained basis, keep a watch on
 developments in the area of IPR and provide knowledge of important  issues  to policy makers, scientists, industry etc, Create
 awareness and understanding relating to patents and in sight of  challenges and opportunities in this area, undertake study and
 analysis of policy and operational matters emanating from the TRIPs agreement and other agreements under the World Trade
 Organisation and  act as a focal point in this matter within DST.
24.       The Committee was informed that Twenty four patent awareness workshops were organized during last year, which were
 attended by about 2,500 scientists and  technologists.  Regular “Patent Clinics” were being conducted with IIT, Delhi, to advise
 and guide the IIT scientists on individual basis on various aspects relating to patenting their inventions.
25.       The Committee is of the view that Patent Facilitating Cell should be reorganised into a vibrant nodal and referral agency
 for developing countries in Asia and Africa which could provide consultancy services for industry, universities, R&D institutions,
 government, NGOs and individuals, databases, video and multi-media products, undertake and support research and futuristic
 studies on IPR related topics. Besides, efforts should be made to develop Patent Facilitating centres at state levels in State S&T
 Councils, Universities, colleges; industry association for easy access to IPR related information at the local level.
DRUGS & PHARMACEUTICALS RESEARCH
26.       The Department initiated the scheme on Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research in 1994-95 for promoting R&D in drugs and
 pharmaceuticals sector.  The thrust of the programme is on enhancing capabilities of the Indian Drugs and pharmaceuticals
 industry  towards development of new drugs by synergising the strength of National Institutions and drug industry. Financial
 support is provided to national labs and academic institution for the research projects which are conceived jointly by the industry
 and public funded R&D institutions.  An important feature of this programme is that it supports drug development for all types of
 medicinal systems, be it traditional Indian medicinal  system or the modern one.
27.The Committee was informed that the Department would continue its efforts to support collaborative research projects  for
 drug development in the area of diseases like Tuberculosis, Leprosy, Malaria, Skin disorders like Leucoderma, Gastrointestinal
 disorder like Diarrhoea, Diabetes, Hypertension, Cardio-vascular disorders and other prevalent infectious diseases, which
 involves an expenditure of 3.5 crores.
28.Development of “Veterinary Drugs” would be promoted by financially supporting collaborative projects for development of
 “Drugs for various veterinary diseases” during 2002-03 on a pro-active mode. An amount of Rs.2.50 crores was to be utilized to
 sustain ongoing projects.
  29.Asked about the progress made under the   activities for  “facility for screening of anti-viral activity” and on “transgenic and
 knock out mice”, the Department replied that, in addition to the new projects sanctioned during the year, committed expenditure
 made for a number of on-going collaborative projects/national facilities sanctioned in the previous years have to be met.  B.E. and
 R.E. for the programme was Rs.3.5 crores during 2001-2002. The  facilities earlier proposed needed heavy investment.  In view
 of this, the National Facility for Transgenic and knock-out mice had been taken up during the financial year (2001-02).  The
 overall approved cost of this project was for Rs.5.77 crores, out of which DST’s share was for Rs.2.30 crores and the rest had to
 be borne by CSIR.  With the limitation on the budget provision, only a part of the overall commitment for this facility could be
 released during that year. The establishment of National Facility for screening of anti viral activity would be taken up in the

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 financial year   2002-03.
30.The Committee observes that given the recent scare of anthrax and reappearance of plague in some parts of India efforts must
 be renewed to counteract these diseases.  With its traditional knowledge the country can perform pioneering role in tackling these
 diseases.
31.       The Committee is constrained to note the snails pace in the development of herbal medicines when they have the potential
 to cure dread disease like AIDS & Cancer besides the disease like diabetes, Hypertension etc.  Not only the herbal medicines,
 there is need to open big hospitals based on the Indian System of medicines.  The Committee is given to understand that the
 Indian System of medicine notably ayurveda did miraculous healing to the victims of Chernobyl disaster.  This lead the Russians
 to take more interest ink this system of medicine so much so that they evinced interest in the learning of the system.  Likewise the
 United States America is reported to have set up a very big hospital in one of its states based on the Indian System of medicine. 
 If it really be so, it is indeed unfortunate we have not used our system of medicine in such a big way to set up hospitals of that
 scale.  The Committee feel it is time Government thinks over the matter irrespective of the fact whether Department of Science &
 Technology is individually concerned in the matter.
TECHNOLOGY INFORMATION, FORECASTING AND ASSESSMENT COUNCIL (TIFAC)
32.Technology Information Forecasting and Assessment Council (TIFAC), a registered society under Department of Science and
 Technology, was set up in 1988 to look ahead in Technologies and energize action in the select areas.         The main objectives
 of TIFAC include generation of Technology Assessment (TA) / Techno-Market Surveys (TMC) reports, providing technology
 related information, promotion of  technology and evolving suitable mechanism for testing of technology, technology transfer and
 commercialization as well patent  information system.
33.TIFAC activities & achievements have emerged as a knowledge network in action, covering all facets of technology
 development to commercialization and to delivery.  Its focus has been to make technology work for people in various sectors like
 Agriculture and Agro Food Sector, Road Construction and Transportation Equipment, Textile Machinery upgradation, Health
 Care Services, Upgradation of Science & Engineering Colleges & Targeted Programme in Other Important Areas.
34.The Committee is of the view that effective technology transfer process to industry may also help in challenging the
 technologies coming from abroad.  Besides, the technology transferred to the industry is to be cost effective and also retain
 certain safeguards to prevent industry from exploiting the research.
SPECIAL COMPONENT PLAN FOR SCHEDULED CASTE
35.The Department informed the Committee that a special plan was undertaken  with a view to promote research, development
 and adaptation of technology for improving the life of the economically weaker sections such as scheduled castes in urban/rural
 areas,  to promote activities such as workshop, seminars, publications, jathas, etc. which would help in achieving the objectives as
 above.  
36.It was further informed that the Department undertook an All India Coordinated Programme on waste recycling and
 management; nine individual projects were funded in different municipalities and town areas.  Projects have been initiated  for
 improving skill and efficiency of occupations like leather tanning & carcass utilization to make value added products; optimizing
 the design of cycle rickshaws to reduce drudgery and increase income and improving competence of target beneficiaries in
 maintenance and management aspects, low cost self-help habitat upgradation programme  for the benefit of Scheduled Caste
 Bastis in rural areas through low cost construction technique and use of locally made building materials.  Training programmes
 were conducted for  rural Scheduled Castes for setting up low investment micro-enterprises both in rural & urban areas based on
 local resources like manufacturing of briquettes from agricultural waste.  Introduction of improved methods/tools used by the
 scavenging community for managing night soil including introduction of rapid composting techniques for income generation and
 for improving the quality of life of scavenger was also under implementation.
37.The Committee notes with satisfaction the programme undertaken for the benefit of weaker sections of the society.  The
 Committee desires that the benefits of these programmes should reach the large population living in rural areas and smaller towns
 who might be unaware of these programmes.The Committee feels that effective coordination should be established with other
 Departments who are involved in similar activities to prevent overlapping of schemes.
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY FOR WOMEN
38.The Committee was informed that Science & Technology Programmes for Women were being undertaken to promote
 research, development and adaptation of technology, improve the working conditions and opportunities for gainful employment
 of women especially in rural areas, to increase the contribution of women to science and technology and development, to
 motivate scientists and technologists for applying their expertise to solve the problems of women in rural areas,   to improve
 existing tools/implements and equipment used by women and introduction of new  techniques,  to replicate successful 
 technology  models  relevant to women, to  establish the two-way referral system for identifying felt needs at the grass root level
 and linking it to proactive R&D, aimed at formulating future programme for location specific intervention and take up relevant
 activities which were conducive to attainment of the above objectives. 
39.Some of the technology areas identified for attention are fuel & energy, ergonomically designed and user friendly tools and
 implements for women in agriculture, drinking water management, post harvest technology, horticulture, organic farming, pest
 control, essential oil extraction, occupational health vermicomposing, biopestcides, hydroponic, low cost diagnostic kits, paper
 technology, and IT software.
40.The programme on cultivation of medicinal plants will be enlarged to include preparation of herbal formulation and quality
 control by women cooperatives.  Women’s Health intervention programmes will continue to be the focus of support to include
 women in the adolescent, child bearing and post menopausal age.  Development of health & hygiene products for women and
 their popularization will be a part of all the health initiatives.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
41.The Committee would like the Department to consider starting more such programmes which should lead to development, self
 employment and income generation of women and other weaker sections of the society.  The Committee recommends that special
 incentives should be given to marketing the products manufactured  women cooperatives.
VIGYAN PRASAR
42.This programme aims to undertake, aid, promote, guide and coordinate efforts in popularisation of science and inculcation of
 scientific temper among the people and to enhance the knowledge, awareness and interest about science and technology among
 all segments of the society.
43.The Committee was informed that over the years, the activities of Vigyan Prasar have ranged from development of a variety of
 software for Science & Technology communication and popularization to national campaigns, the use of various media and 
 providing information services on various aspect of Science & Technology.  An effort has been made to promote effective
 linkages on a continuing basis among various scientific institutions, agencies, educational and academic bodies, laboratories,
 museums, industry, trade and other organizations for effective exchange and dissemination of S&T information.
44.While commending the Department for accepting its recommendation for an increased allocation for Vigyan Prasar from
 Rs.1.00 crores during B.E. & R.E. in the year 2001-2002 to Rs.2.00 crores for the year 2002.2003, the Committee asked the
 Department the areas where enhanced allocation would be utilised the Department  informed that the existing
 programmes/activities viz., publication programme, Vigyan Prasar Information System, Vigyan Prasar Network of Science
 Clubs, Training Programmes, use of Media for S&T popularization, production of Radio/TV programmes etc., would be
 reinforced.  In addition, new initiatives in the North-East and S&T communications through satellite Radio and Television have
 been taken up.  The development & dissemination of S&T software was to be further strengthened and expanded.  HAM radio
 activity, especially in the disaster prone areas, was to be promoted.
45.The Committee is of the view that the young generation should be encouraged to take up the study of science through easy-to-
do practicals and other innovative ways, incentives, ‘earn while you learn’ schemes etc. to help build scientific temper.
46.The Committee is also of the view that use of HAM radio should be popularized in regions/areas prone to natural disasters and
 this can be done if in schools training of HAM radio’s taken up as an extra curricular activity.
NATURAL RESOURCES DATA MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NRDMS)
47.Natural Resource Data Management System (NRDMS) is a Multi – Institutional and multi disciplinary Science & Technology
 programme of DST to develop methodologyand techniques for operationalising the concept of local level planning.It provides for
 creation of a database on natural resources and construct a socio-economic profile on district and sub-district levels to meet the
 information needs of the local administration forimplementing integrated micro level  planning.  The Geographic Information
 System (GIS) technique is adopted for storage, retrieval, analysis of the data collected from different sources on natural resources
 and socio-economic pattern of the area under investigation to produce useful information that helps in decision making.  Several
 national R&D and academic institutions are being involved for evolving the Decision Support Systems (DSS) in areas like
 watershed development, energy management, infrastructure development and land-use planning, by extending financial support
 to short duration research projects in spatial data management technology with focus  on following areas:
GIS Data Bases Centres
            The programme Strengthened the existing centres by updating them with state-of-the-art technologies like integrated
 database design, spatial decision support system for the identified sectors etc.  Supported creation of new databases centres in
 Lucknow in UP and Jallpaiguri in West Bengal.
Software Development
            An interface between indigenously developed GIS package, GRAM++ and hydrological model Soil Water Assessment
 Tool (SWAT) has been tested for land management in selected Upper Gandheswari Watershed in Bankura and Rampatna
 Watershed in Kolar.
Landslide Studies
            Landslide hazard zonation mapping have been completed in parts of Chamoli and Pithoragarh District of Uttaranchal State
 using remote sensing and GIS techniques.
            The Committee has been informed that during the year the Department proposes to Create  new NRDMS Database Centres
 to have a better coverage of variation states such as Tamilnadu, Nagaland, Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal. Development and
 dissemination of spatial data management tools for integrated rural development planning, evolve R&D projects in the area of 
 software development and upgradation of GRAM ++ and GIS software.
48.       The Committee observes that even though the country has  made  technological advances there are frequent cases of
 landslides.  In order to prevent this, it is necessary to have a complete hazard zonation map clearly demarcating landslide prone
 areas similar to the  one for earth quake prone areas.       Besides GIS data received from GRAM ++ should be utilized for the
 agricultural development
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION
49.       International Cooperation involves collaborative programmes in selected areas of mutual interest,  including exchange
 visits of scientists, fellowships  and  training, joint workshops, joint projects and collaborative R&D progrmmes; Travel support
 for Indian scientists for S&T Fellowship Programmes for training-cum-research with Eurpoean countries USA, Japan, Israel,
 Australia etc.
50.       When asked for reasons for not making any allocation for international programmes like Integrated long Term Programme
 of Cooperation between  India and Republic of CIS etc the Department informed that S & T Programme of Cooperation with
 Developing/Developed countries  have been clubbed together  during the financial year 2002-2003.  All collaborative S&T
 Programmes would  continue as per the arrangements agreed upon with  different countries and the entire expenditure will be met

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 out of the approved grants under the budget head “S&T Cooperation with other countries”
INDO-US SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY FORUM
51.       An Indo-US S&T Forum was established under a bilateral agreement  as an autonomous society with Department of
 Science &Technology as the administrative department for the forum. The aim of the Forum is to facilitate and promote the
 interaction in India and the United States of America, of Government, academia and industry in Science & Technology and other
 related areas towards achieving the following objectives:
The forum seeks to  focus on issues of common concern and activities of mutual benefit while exploring trends in S&T and  create
 comprehensive electronic reference source for Indo-US S&T cooperation in bid to promote electronic exchange and
 dissemination of information and opportunities in bilateral S&T cooperation.
            The forum seeks to commission studies, reports and papers and promote Indo-US cooperation in R&D and transfer of
 technology.
            The Committee was informed that Joint workshops and conferences in the advanced areas of Nano Technology in USA
 and Nano Computing in India have been funded.  Joint workshop in the emerging areas of Brain Research; Weather & Climate
 Modeling and Fuel Cells have been identified for being organized in India and the US for developing bilateral research projects.
52.       The Committee hopes that joint research projects in areas of Mutual interests in new emerging areas like genomics, nano
 technology and implementation technology would help both the countries to forge bonds of friendship between the two
 countries. 
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR MEDIUM WEATHER FORECASTING (NCMRWF)
53.         The  objectives of the project include setting up of major infrastructure facilities like super computer, front-end
 processors and communication network and the on-line linkages with IMD and other Agro-meteorological research centres,
 development of global and regional numerical weather prediction models for medium range weather forecasting, and  
 development of appropriate data assimilation techniques for preparing initial conditions for the model. Preparation of NWP
 model  output and dissemination of the same to IMD for preparation and issue of medium range weather forecasts (3 to 10 days
 in advance) and development, preparation and dissemination of Agro-meteorological operation advisories including advisories
 for contingency crop practices to the end users through the Agro-meteorological research centres to be designated as
 experimental Agro-meteorological field units (AMFUs). Besides the project seeks to Promote and undertake studies on region
 crop-weather relationship and impact of  weather and climate on pest and diseases.
 
54.       The Committee feels that the thrust of weather forecasting should be on its accuracy.  The Committee observes that
 Department should consider enhancing the spatial resolution, range and accuracy of forecasts and advisories by constantly
 improving forecast models with use of available satellite data and techniques.
GUJARAT EARTHQUAKE – MISSION INITIATIVES IN REBUILDING & REHABILITATION
55.       In the wake of disastrous damages by the earthquake in Gujarat on 26
th January, 2001 the Advanced Composites Mission
 of TIFAC has come forward to contribute to the national efforts of re-building and rehabilitation.  A wide array of innovative
 composite products suitable for low-cost building & construction sector and bio-medical appliances has been developed by the
 Advanced Composites Mission.  Jute-coir composite boards, rice husk particle boards, FRP toilet blocks, multipurpose FRP
 handcarts and composite artificial limbs etc. address the crucial need of the hour – post-disaster relief at the quickest possible
 time.  The TIFAC Rehab Project at Bhuj was now fully operational in terms of complete occupancy of 400 shelters (20’12’). 
 Besides, 128 community toilet units constructed by the Mission were also in service.
56.       The Committee appreciates the work being done by the Department for rebuilding and Rehabilitation of Quake victims in
 Gujarat.  However it feels that in view of the massive destruction that took place there as a result of  the quake Department should
 involve certain financial agencies like Housing Urban Development Corporation (HUDCO)/ National Housing Bank (NHB) etc.
 for providing low interest loans for rebuilding so that these missions are a success. Besides, effective coordination and
 management of relief measures was very necessary.
Besides, these products must be popularized   for use in building and other similar activities in other quake prone areas in India to
 prevent loss of life and property.
SURVEY OF INDIA
57.       Survey of India, a national surveying and mapping organization acts as adviser to the Government of India on all Survey
 matters viz. geodesy, photogrammetry, mapping and map reproduction.  The main functions and responsibilities are
 establishment and maintenance of geodetic plan and height control network in the country, gravity and geomagnetic surveys, tidal
 surveys including tide predictions etc. topographical control surveys and mapping,   production of geographical map and other
 special maps, spelling of geographical names, demarcation of external boundaries of Republic of India, their depiction on maps
 and advice on the demarcation of interstate boundaries.
It transpires that an allocation of Rs.17.75 crores made in B.E. for the year 2001-2002 was increased to Rs.21.80 crores in R.E.
 last year for Publication of Map/Charts etc., and Rs.21.60 crores allocated for the year 2002-2003 did not seem justified. To this,
 the Department justified. The Committee has been informed that the activities of the Survey of India  relate to Publication of
 Maps, Charts and Reports etc., were carried out throughout the year.  The B.E. 2001-2002 was Rs.22.60 crores and the allocation
 in R.E. was raised to Rs.26.65 crores, in anticipation of increased work orders from client Departments.  It was also explained
 that the anticipated increases in work orders had not materalised. 
58.       The Committee feels it is time that Survey of India thought  of diversifying its activities.  Apart from preparing and
 bringing out political & physical maps of the country, it should endeavour to bring out maps of tourist interest of National
 Highways, towns and cities to meet the local needs.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
INDIA METROLOGICAL DEPARTMENT (IMD)
59.       IMD is engaged in forecasting of Storms, Cyclones and severe weather conditions and provide climatological statistics for
 operation and Planning in the field of Agriculture, Aviation, Water Conservation, Oceanography etc.; maintaining of Network of
 large number of observations for acquisition of surface and upper air weather data; issue of forecast and timely disaster warning
 of severe weather conditions/phenomena including tropical cyclones, monitoring of Seismic activities and to locate intensity and
 center of earthquakes to understand their processes and mechanism;  to carry out and promote research and development in
 Atmospheric and Meteorological Sciences;  imparting of Meteorological training to persons of developing countries under World
 Meteorological Organisation (WMO) programmes and to Departmental persons;  monitoring and Forecasting of Occurrence of
 Snow & Avalanche over Himalayan Mountainous region at 10 km resolution, Monitoring & Analysing the air pollutants in
 sample survey observations; monitoring of Ozone depletion.
            During the Year, of the  two Doppler Radars received, one has been installed at Chennai and other is likely to be installed
 and commissioned at Kolkata in  2002,  procurement of three Doppler Radars, High Wind Speed Recorders (HWSR), Digital
 Cyclone Warning Dissemination Systems (DCWDS) were being finalized under World Bank Assisted Project for Andhra
 Pradesh.  High Wind Speed Recorder (HWSR) have already been installed.
Action was in progress for upgradation of existing Earth Station for METSAT and one complete Receiver Earth Station for
 INSAT-3.  Establishment of Seismo  Observation at Sihor & Bhavanagar and digitization of seismic charts were in progress,
 three  Seismographs has been installed under Seismological Telemetry System.
60.       The Committee expresses its concern over delay in commissioning of Doppler Radars which are needed for accurate
 weather forecasting.  Besides, In India occurrence of cyclones is a regular feature every year, the Commissioning of Digital
 Cyclone Warning Dissemination System (DCWDS), should be given a priority. The Committee would appreciate if these could
 be installed before the beginning of Monsoon Season.
S& T WING NDIAN MISSION ABROAD
61.       The Committee has been informed that the Department has S&T Wings at Indian Missions in Tokyo, Japan; Berlin,
 Germany and Washington, USA where wide range of programmes were conducted with a view to intensify cooperation between
 the countries.
            The following programmes were conducted by the Missions to strengthen Cooperation.
Tokyo, Japan
            The S&T wing in Japan collected, collated and transmitted important scientific developments and policy decisions in
 Japan to various Department/institutions in India.  It identified institutions undertaking advanced scientific research and conveyed
 information to relevant institutions in India with a view establish link for collaboration in advanced area of research.
             The wing facilitated signing of a MOU between IIT-Madras and the Nagoya University. The MOU proposes to promote
 exchange of students, professors, researchers, scientific materials and information as well as undertaking joint research activities.
Berlin, Germany
            In order to intensify joint research programs in the field of Biotechnology, India  and Germany signed a special
 arrangement of cooperation at Forschungszentrum, Juelich as a part of the overall Indo-German S&T cooperation arrangements. 
 They agreed for cooperation in the fields of functional genomics; drug/vaccine development; tissue and cell culture;
 bioinformatics; NMR spectroscopy and cancer & Tuberculosis research.
            The University of Freiburg organized an Indo-German joint workshop on ‘Viral Hepatitis’ in June 2001.  An eight-
member delegation sponsored by ICMR attended the workshop, which resulted  in identifying a few major projects on the subject.
            The Indo-German workshop on ‘Nano materials Technology’ was held in June 2001 at Berlin.  An eleven member Indian
 delegation took part in the three-day event as an outcome of which joint projects were being worked out.
Washington, USA
            A High Level Indo-US Round Table on Science and Technology was held in Washington, DC, on the occasion of the visit
 of the Prime Minister to USA.  Distinguished scientists and administrators from both the countries participated in these meetings. 
 The Round Table was aimed at discussing new directions for the 21
st century in Indo-US collaborations in science and
 technology.
            The University of Maryland expressed strong interest in collaborating with universities and technical institutions in Punjab
 in areas like agriculture, agricultural processing, agricultural biotechnology, education, capacity building and training and other
 areas of science and technology.
62.       The Committee is satisfied to note the work done for enhancing cooperation and exchanges in field of Science
 &Technology through these Missions. The Committee has been regularly receiving journals on Science &Technology published
 by Indian Missions in Germany, Japan & Russia.  However, it reiterates that the journal brought out by Indian Mission in U.S.A
 be made available to the Committee.
            The Committee is of the opinion that more S & T missions should be opened specially in South Asian & South East Asian
 region for scientific cooperation and exchange of know-how.
SEISMOLOGY
63.       This programme aims to improve the detection and location capabilities of earthquakes occurring anywhere in the country
 upto magnitude 3;         to improve upon the national capacity and capability building to provide better earthquake related
 services; to save lives and property by reducing the damaging potential of future earthquakes through S&T applications.
64.       Since an allocation of Rs.10.00 crores has been made for Seismology programme for 2002-2003 the Department was
 asked as to whether it has prepared any blue print for the utilisation of the amount, the Committee was informed about the
 proposal to strengthen the seismological network in the Himalayas and its contiguous region (Indo-Gangetic-Brahamputra plains)

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 with state-of-the-art robust earthquake hazards and ascertaining the seismogenic sources. It also envisages deployment of strong
 motion accelerographs and dense network of GPS.The project was to be implemented in a consortium mode by involving the
 relevant Government agencies, research and academic institutions, social scientists and NGOs and State Governments.  An apex
 Steering Committee chaired by the Secretary, DST and assisted by Project Implementation Committee would be set up to oversee
 the implementation of the Mission Mode Project.
65.       The Committee has been given to understand  that exact prediction of earthquakes has not been possible so far. 
 Nevertheless, the Committee feels that  attempts should be made to use all technological advances available to unravel  the
 mysteries which the Nature has so far not permitted the mankind to penetrate into.  Perhaps the day might not be far when the
 Mother earth might relent and impart some insight to human beings about its fury expressed through earth quakes.  The
 Committee therefore feels that efforts should continue in that direction.
TECHNOLOGY FOR BAMBOO PRODUCT
66.       The Committee has been given to understand that Technology for Bamboo Product is   a programme at the national level
 meant to impart a significant boost to the usage of bamboo, promote specialized products for commercialization and generate
 good employment opportunities. New tools and techniques would be introduced to enhance the manner in which the bamboo
 resources are used in the country leading to greater and sensitive use of new materials.
67.       When asked  whether a critical assessment has been made about bamboo, its growth & the employment potential it holds
 for rural areas/North East Region, the Committee has  been informed that the allocation for National Mission on Bamboo
 Applications (NMBA) reflects the growing realization that bamboo can be an important vehicle to support & catalyse economic
 activity along with employment & income generation, in particular in rural areas and in regions with substantial resources of
 bamboo such as North East India, the Andaman & Nicobar islands, the Western Ghats, Uttaranchal, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand and
 Orissa.  Technology developments in recent years in many parts of the world have positioned  bamboo as an excellent wood
 substitute for building & construction and resource & support agencies.   The Committee has  been informed that all these
 assessments have highlighted the significant potential of the sector through the promotion of new value-added applications,
 technologies and markets.  Also, while developing and promoting environment friendly, value-added bamboo based product,
 practices, process technology & processing machinery under several sub-projects, the Mission would aim to empower people at
 the grass-root level encompassing farmers, artisans and other stakeholders for better employment generation with improved
 remunerative opportunities.
68.       The Committee is happy to note the Mission in Bamboo products.  However, it would like the states like Madhya Pradesh
 and  Maharastra, where sizable quantity of Bamboo is produced, have not been included in the Mission.   Besides,  the Quality of
 Bamboo needs to be improved by improving cultivation techniques.  The Committee has been given to understand that Chinese
 Bamboo is of superior quality, the Committee therefore recommends that areas like N.E. Region, which have weather conditions
 similar to those in the countries abroad must be chosen for cultivation of better variety of bamboo.
The Committee feels that the wood should be replaced by use of Bamboo for construction purposes particularly in quake prone
 areas or for making agricultural tools and for furniture.
69.       The Committee would like to add that more such mission modes could be considered for products like Jute & Coir, which
 have suffered due to cheaper substitutes available in the market and have a great potential to provide gainful employment to the
 masses.
70.       After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Science & Technology and assessing the progress of
 various programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs.1014.25
 crores, as sought by the Department of Science & Technology for the year 2002-03, under Demand No.  70 , may be approved.
 RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS AT  GLANCE
 
1.         The Committee would like that  the Department should make  an effort to reduce the non-plan expenditure by way of
 generating the Internal Extra Budgetary Resources (IEBR) through imparting training programmes and transfer of technology to
 the industry etc. so that Department would not depend solely on budgetary allocation.
 (Para 8)
2.         The Committee notes with satisfaction the  increased allocation for SERC. The Committee feels that there should be a
 periodic review of the Programmes in order to avoid wasteful expenditure.
(Para 13)
3.         The Committee observes that very few talented students are  motivated to come forward to take-up R&D as career.   It is
 necessary that efforts should, therefore, be made not only to increase the number of schemes/projects, the schemes should also be
 innovative and students should be provided with the state of art laboratory facilities and expert care should be provided to
 encourage them to test their ideas.  In case there is dearth of ideas, suggestion could be invited from all & sundry and a list could
 be drawn up to keep it handy for those who need it.
(Para 15)
4.         The Committee feels that in order to avoid chances of research being stolen/copied etc. care should be taken by the
 Department in initiating steps for registering of the patents at the earliest in order to escape from conflicts over them. Besides,
 Know-how of instruments developed should be transferred to industries for commercial production. 
(Para 17)
5.         The Committee feels that the large-scale food and drug adulteration can be prevented only if sufficient number of food and
 drug testing laboratories are available  in all major cities. Besides that training of staff involved in testing and calibration

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 processes about the new standards is necessary for better results.
(Para 22)
6.         The Committee is of the view that Patent Facilitating Cell should be reorganised into a vibrant nodal and referral agency
 for developing countries in Asia and Africa which could provide consultancy services for industry, universities, R&D institutions,
 government, NGOs and individuals, databases, video and multi-media products, undertake and support research and futuristic
 studies on IPR related topics. Besides, efforts should be made to develop Patent Facilitating centres at state levels in State S&T
 Councils, Universities, colleges; industry association for easy access to IPR related information at the local level.
 (Para 25)
7.         The Committee observes that given the recent scare of anthrax and reappearance of plague in some parts of India efforts
 must be renewed to counteract these diseases.  With its traditional knowledge the country can perform pioneering role in tackling
 these diseases.
(Para 30)
8.         The Committee is constrained to note the snails pace in the development of herbal medicines when they have the potential
 to cure dread disease like AIDS & Cancer besides the disease like diabetes, Hypertension etc.  Not only the herbal medicines,
 there is need to open big hospitals based on the Indian System of medicines.  The Committee is given to understand that the
 Indian System of medicine notably ayurveda did miraculous healing to the victims of chernobyl disaster.  This lead the Russians
 to take more interest ink this system of medicine so much so that they evinced interest in the learning of the system.  Likewise the
 United States America is reported to have set up a very big hospital in one of its states based on the Indian System of medicine. 
 If it really be so, it is indeed unfortunate we have not used our system of medicine in such a big way to set up hospitals of that
 scale.  The Committee feel it is time Government thinks over the matter irrespective of the fact whether Department of Science &
 Technology is individually concerned in the matter.
(Para 31)
9.         The Committee is of the view that effective technology transfer process to industry may also help in challenging the
 technologies coming from abroad.  Besides, the technology transferred to the industry is to be cost effective and also retain
 certain safeguards to prevent industry from exploiting the research.
(Para 34)
10.       The Committee notes with satisfaction the programme undertaken for the benefit of weaker sections of the society.  The
 Committee desires that the benefits of these programmes should reach the large population living in rural areas and smaller towns
 who might be unaware of these programmes .
            The Committee feels that effective coordination should be established with other Departments who are involved in similar
 activities to prevent overlapping of schemes.
(Para 37)
11.       The Committee would like the Department to consider starting more such programmes which should lead to development,
 self employment and income generation of women and other weaker sections of the society.  The Committee recommends that
 special incentives should be given to marketing  the products manufactured  women cooperatives.
(Para 41)
12.       The Committee is of the view that the young generation should be encouraged to take up the study of science through
 easy-to-do practicals and other innovative ways, incentives, ‘earn while you learn’ schemes etc. to help build scientific temper.
(Para 45)
13.       The Committee is also of the view that use of HAM radio should be popularized in regions/areas prone to natural disasters
 and this can be done if in schools training of HAM radio’s taken up as an extra curricular activity.
(Para 46)
14.       The Committee observes that even though the country has  made  technological advances there are frequent cases of
 landslides.  In order to prevent this, it is necessary to have a complete hazard zonation map clearly  demarcating landslide prone
 areas similar to the  one for earth quake prone areas.       Besides GIS data received from GRAM ++ should be utilized for the
 agricultural development
(Para 48)
15.       The Committee hopes that joint research projects in areas of Mutual interests in new emerging areas like genomics, nano
 technology and implementation technology would help both the countries to forge bonds of friendship between the two
 countries. 
(Para 52)
16.       The Committee feels that the thrust of weather forecasting should be on its accuracy.  The Committee observes that
 Department should consider enhancing the spatial resolution, range and accuracy of forecasts and advisories by constantly
 improving forecast models with use of available satellite data and techniques.
(Para 54)
17.       The Committee appreciates the work being done by the Department for rebuilding and Rehabilitation of Quake victims in
 Gujarat.  However it feels that in view of the massive destruction that took place there as a result of  the quake Department should
 involve certain financial agencies like Housing Urban Development Corporation (HUDCO)/ National Housing Bank (NHB) etc.
 for providing low interest loans for rebuilding so that these missions are a success. Besides, effective coordination and
 management of relief measures was very necessary.
Besides, these products must be popularized   for use in building and other similar activities in other quake prone areas in India to
 prevent loss of life and property.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
(Para 56)
18.       The Committee feels it is time that Survey of India  thought of diversifying its activities.  Apart from preparing and
 bringing out political & physical maps of the country, it should endeavour to bring out maps of tourist interest of National
 Highways, towns and cities to meet the local needs.
(Para 58)
19.       The Committee expresses its concern over delay in commissioning of Doppler Radars which are needed for accurate
 weather forecasting.  Besides, In India occurrence of cyclones is a regular feature every year, the Commissioning of Digital
 Cyclone Warning Dissemination System (DCWDS), should be given a priority. The Committee would appreciate if these could
 be installed before the beginning of Monsoon Season.
(Para 60)
20.       The Committee is satisfied to note the work done for enhancing cooperation and exchanges in field of Science
 &Technology through these Missions. The Committee has been regularly receiving journals on Science &Technology published
 by Indian Missions  in Germany, Japan & Russia.  However, it reiterates that the journal brought out by Indian Mission in U.S.A
 be made available to the Committee.
The Committee is of the opinion that more S & T missions should be opened specially in South Asian & South East Asian region
 for scientific cooperation and  exchange of know-how.
(Para 62)
21.       The Committee has been given to understand  that exact prediction of earthquakes has not been possible so far. 
 Nevertheless, the Committee feels that  attempts should be made to use all technological advances available to unravel  the
 mysteries which the Nature has so far not permitted the mankind to penetrate into.  Perhaps the day might not be far when the
 Mother earth might relent and impart some insight to human beings about its fury expressed through earth quakes.  The
 Committee therefore feels that efforts should continue in that direction.
(Para 65)
 22.      The Committee is happy to note the Mission in Bamboo products.  However, it would like the states like Madhya Pradesh
 and  Maharastra, where sizable quantity of Bamboo is produced, have not been included in the Mission.   Besides,  the Quality of
 Bamboo needs to be improved by improving cultivation techniques.  The Committee has been given to understand that Chinese
 Bamboo is of superior quality, the Committee therefore recommends that areas like N.E. Region, which have weather conditions
 similar to those in the countries abroad must be chosen for cultivation of better variety of bamboo.
The Committee feels that the wood should be replaced by use of Bamboo for construction purposes particularly in quake prone
 areas or for making agricultural tools and for furniture.
(Para 68)
23.       The Committee would like to add that more such mission modes could be considered for products like Jute & Coir, which
 have suffered due to cheaper substitutes available in the market and have a great potential to provide gainful employment to the
 masses.
(Para 69)
 ANNEXURE
 Annexure-I
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
Budgetary Outlays for 2002-03
Plan & Non-Plan
            (Rs. in crores)
 Plan Non-Plan Total
 Proposed Proposed Proposed
A.     Research & Development Support 210.00 3.50 213.50
B.     Autonomous Scientific Research
 Institutions
200.00 39.00 239.00
C.     International Cooperation 30.00 5.50 35.50
D.     Technology Development Board 0.00 58.00 58.00
E.     Societal Programmes 31.00 0.00 31.00
F.     Scientific Surveys    
F.I.   Survey of India (SOI) 15.00 152.33 167.33
F.II.  National Atlas & Thematic Mapping    
         Organisation (NATMO) 1.00 7.25 8.25
G.     India Meteorological Department (IMD) 55.00 109.82 164.82
H.     National Centre for Medium Range
 Weather
   
        Forecasting 10.00 4.20 14.20
I.     Secretariat 0.00 19.65 19.65
J.     Exhibitions 0.00 0.00 0.00
K.   Technology Development Programme 23.00 0.00 23.00
L.    State Science & Technology Programme 10.00 0.00 10.00

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
M.   Seismology 10.00 0.00 10.00
N.   Technology for Bamboo Products 20.00 0.00 20.00
                               TOTAL 615.00 399.25 1014.25
 
* Excludes plan allocation of Rs.10.00 crores transferred to the Budget of the Ministry of Urban Development.
M I N U T E S
VI
SIXTH  MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 10th April, 2002 in room No. 139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe,
 New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Smt. S. Gokula Indira
Shri C. Apok Jamir
Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
Smt. Savita Sharda
Shri B.P. Singhal
 
LOK SABHA
 
Smt. Bhavana D. Chikhalia
Dr. Charan Das Mahant
Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
Shri Rupchand Murmu
Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                            
Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                       
Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
Shri Prahlad Patel                    
Prof. R.R. Pramanik                            
Shri Naresh Puglia                               
Shri Ram Prasad Singh
Shri V. Vetriselvan       
Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K.Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
 
Prof. V.S. Ramamurthy, Secretary
Shri S.B. Krishnan, Principal Adviser
Dr. S.K. Gupta, Secretary, TDB
Shri Arun Sharma, JS & FA
Dr. A.K. Chakraborty, Scientist ‘G’
Dr. Y.P. Kumar, Scientist ‘G’
Dr. Laxman Prasad, Scientist ‘G’
Shri Anuj Sinha, Scientist ‘G’

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
Shri V. Rao Aiyagari, Scientist ‘G’
Dr. P.K.B. Menon, Scientist ‘G’
Dr. G.D. Gupta, Scientist ‘G’
Shri S.V. Singh, Scientist ‘G’
Dr. R. Saha, Scientist ‘G’
Dr. B.D. Acharya, Scientist ‘G’
Dr. Ishraq Ahmed, Scientist ‘G’
Dr. V.B. Kamble, Scientist ‘G’
Col. Siva Kumar, Director, NGDI
Dr. R.R. Kelkar, DG, IMD
Shri P. Nag, Surveyor General (Surveyor General)
Dr. B. Harigopal, Scientist ‘G’
Shri K. Kulkarni, Scientist ‘G’
 
2.         At the outset the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the Department of Science & Technology
 and requested the Secretary to make a brief presentation on Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Department.  The Secretary
 made visual presentation of the activities and achievements of the Department and briefly explained the budgetary allocation on
 different heads as also the functioning of the Department. The Members then sought clarifications on points relating to the
 Demands for Grants.  The Secretary replied to the questions and assured the Committee that he would send written comments on
 the points on which information was not readily available and for want of time.          
                        The witnesses then withdrew.
3.                     *                                                               *                                                          *.
                        A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
4.                     The Committee then adjourned at 5.40 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 11.04.2002.
______________________________________________________________________________
***      Relates to other matters.
 
IX
NINETH  MEETING
 
The Committee met at 10.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 2
nd May, 2002 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
 
Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Smt. S. Gokula Indira
Shri C. Apok Jamir
Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
Smt. Savita Sharda
Shri B.P. Singhal
Shri M. V. Rajashekaran
Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharmah
 
LOK SABHA
           
Smt. Bhavana Devrajbhai Chikhalia                  
Adv. Suresh Ramrao Jadhav                            
12.       Dr. Charan Das Mahant
13.       Shri Kailash Meghwal
14.       Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
15.       Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                            
16.       Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                       
17.       Shri Ajit Kumar Panja  
Shri Prahlad Patel
Prof. R.R. Pramanik
Shri Naresh Puglia
Prof. I.G. Sanadi
 
SECRETARIAT

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/102ndreport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:41]
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
2.                     The Committee took up for consideration the draft *** & 102
nd Reports of the Committee on the Demands for
 Grants (2002-03) of *** and the Department of Science & Technology.  The Committee considered and adopted each of the
 reports.
______________________________________________________________________________
*Relates to other matters.
3.         The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri B.P. Singhal and           Smt. Savita Sharda to present the
 Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Prof. R.R. Pramanik and in his absence Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry to lay the Reports on
 the table of the Lok Sabha.
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 10.50 A.M.
 
------- 
# Nominated w.e.f. 4th January, 2002. 
& Nominated w.e.f. 24th April, 2002. 
J Nominated w.e.f. 24th April, 2002.
*Shri Cho S. Ramswamy ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.15th February, 2002 on his resignation  from the membership
   of the Committee.
f  Dr. Raja Ramanna ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.18th February, 2002 on his resignation from  the membership of 
   the  Committee.
b
  Shri Peter Alphonse & Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray  ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of his term  in the Rajya Sabha  
   w.e.f.  2nd  April, 2002.
¥ Smt. Chandresh Kumari and Shri Lachhman Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of his term in the Rajya
   Sabha w.e.f. 9th  April, 2002.
%  Nominated  w.e.f. 26th April , 2002.