Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
251
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 18th December, 2013)
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Forty-fourth Report of the
Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of 
Scientific and Industrial Research

41
Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY FIRST REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Forty-fourth Report of the
Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of
Scientific and Industrial Research
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  18 th December, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  18 th December, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2013/Agrahayana, 1935 (Saka)

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE .................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—21
5. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS .................................................................................................. 23—26
6. I NDEX OF R EPORTS ................................................................................................................. 27—40

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
3. Shri M. Rama Jois
4. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
5. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi
8. Shrimati Maya Singh
9. Shri Alok Tiwari
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
12. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
13. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
14. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase
15. Dr. Ajay Kumar
16. Shri O.S. Manian
17. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
18. Shri Basori Singh Masram
19. Shri Vincent H. Pala
20. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
21. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
22. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
23. Shri M.B. Rajesh
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
25. Shri Yashvir Singh
26. Shrimati Supriya Sule
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
30. Shri Ramakant Yadav
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Fifty-first Report on the Action Taken by the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Forty-fourth Report
of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8
th May, 2013.
3. There were twenty nine recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Forty-fourth
Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were
received from the Department on 7
th August, 2013.
4. In the meeting held on 17 th December, 2013, the Committee considered the draft Action
Taken Report and adopted the same.
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
December, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests

(iv)
ACRONYMS
A2K : Access Knowledge for Creation of Innovative Capacity and Dissemination
BIRD : Building Industrial Research and Development
CDC : Consultancy Development Centre
CEL : Central Electronics Limited
CSIR : Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
CSR : Corporate Social Responsibility
CTPL : CSIR T ech Private Limited
DSIR : Department of Scientific and Industrial Research
NCAD : National Civil Aircraft Development
NMITLI : New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative
NRDC : National Research Development Corporation
P ACE : Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research and Technology Development
PIA : Project Innovation Awards
WIPO : World Intellectual Property Organization

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and forty fourth
Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research, presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 8
th May, 2013. There were
twenty nine recommendations in the Two Hundred and forty fourth Report of the Committee.
Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Department
on 7
th August, 2013. The Committee, on examination of Action Taken Notes, however is not
satisfied with Action Taken by the Ministry in respect of ten recommendations and would like the
Ministry to take further action in respect of such recommendations as indicated in the Report.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee
on the Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research are set out in the
subsequent paragraphs:–
Recommendation (Para 7.4)
Results Framework Document (RFD)
The Committee notes decline in project performance of the Department on RFD score in
two successive years viz. 2011-12 and 2012-13. The Committee, however, takes note of the fact
that lower performance of CSIR partly resulted from non approval of the Twelfth Five Year Plan
schemes of DSIR. The Committee hopes that the Department would make all out effort to improve
its RFD score in 2013-14 by more stricter monitoring of its programmes and by taking pro-active
measures to get required cooperation from the concerned external agencies.
Action taken by the Government
Twelfth Five Year Plan schemes have been approved and implementation of the schemes for
achieving the targets within the stipulated time frame has begun. This is expected to result in
improvement of RFD score during 2013-14.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that Department would closely monitor
implementation of the schemes so as to achieve the targets within the stipulated time-
frame.
Recommendation (Para 8.6.1)
Achievements of CSIR
Value Generation through Intellectual Property
CSIR has filed 258 patents abroad and 163 patents in India. It is maintaining a portfolio
of 3250 patents abroad and 2350 patents in India. The Committee was informed that the rate of
commercialization of CSIR patents is above 9%, which is much higher than global average of
3-4% and the Committee is appreciative of it.

2
Action taken by the Government
Department notes the appreciation of the Committee with gratitude.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 8.6.2)
While the Committee would not like to indulge in out rightly contesting the claims of the
most significant achievements narrated above by the Department, it would not tend to agree with/
accept them at their face value either. The Committee has its own reasons and reservations to
differ. The Committee is of the view that the 82
nd global ranking of CSIR is not at all in
consonance with the newly acquired economic and political clout of the country in the international
community or its international stature in the fields of Space, Nuclear Technology, Information
Technology, Biotechnologies etc. The fact that CSIR is the only organization in top 100 global
organizations should not be a matter of solace for it as it is the only organization in the country
which has been working for over last 70 years with a mandate to develop state of the art globally
competitive technologies of high commercial potential. The global ranking of CSIR is reflective of
its standing vis-à-vis other global organizations in the field and is an indicator of its overall
performance. Modern India with its 127 crore people, cannot pride itself with 82nd global ranking
of its premier organization like CSIR. Even worse is the Asian ranking where it stands at
17
th position. It further goes altogether athwart the national aspiration of emerging as a global
superpower, as also the aspiration of positioning India among the top five global scientific powers
by 2020 enunciated in the Science, Technology and Innovation Policy, 2013. The Committee is of
the view that in order to fulfill aspirations of modern India, CSIR should aim to become amongst
at least first 10 global organization in its field and it should strive hard to achieve that ranking
within next 5 years, for that alone would give it position of pride in the hearts of millions of our
young men and women.
Action taken by the Government
Department agreed with the Committee’s view that CSIR should aim to become amongst
at least top 10 global organizations. CSIR’s vision, as enunciated in vision document CSIR@80 is
“Pursue science which strives for global impact, technology that enables innovation-driven industry
and nurtures trans-disciplinary leadership thereby catalyzing inclusive economic development for the
people of India”.
Comments
The Committee feels that Vision Document CSIR@80 should be backed up by a road
map to reach the stated goal. The Committee therefore reiterates its observation and
desires that the Department should prepare the action points that would facilitate achieving
the target.
Recommendation (Para 8.6.3)
As regards the credit for research papers having been published in high impact factor
journals like Lancet, Nature, Science, etc.; the Committee has come across some conflicting and
contradictory facts which do not corroborate the tall claims of the Department. The Committee has
been informed that a sample check of top 14 research papers of the CSIR has revealed that these
research papers are not related to any scientific research or technological development done at

3
CSIR laboratories. Further, Science, Technology and Innovation Policy 2013 envisages that by 2020
the global share of Indian publications must double, and the number of papers in top 1% journals
must quadruple from the current level and the citation impact of Indian publication must improve
and match at least the world average. The Committee, therefore, also feels that the research papers
of the Department also needs to be proportionately increased so as to achieve the above envisaged
vision by the year 2020.
Action taken by the Government
CSIR regularly publishes research papers, articles, review papers, views on policy matter
related to Science and Technology comments/observations on publications by other researchers
across the world. Department would like to bring to the kind notice of the Committee that
responsibility of any R&D organization which is conscious to rendering benefits of S&T to the
Society by and large does not limit itself to the publication of its research and development work
only. It is duty of all such organizations to project their opinion, views etc. to the world forum.
In Scientific Community Journals like Nature, Lancet, Chemical Review Science etc. have very
wide reach and are being read by large populations of S&T Community world-wide. Publishing
even a small letter in these journals is not an easy task. Unless one has in-depth understanding of
the subject, his/her comments/observations cannot be accepted for publication by these coveted
journals. Through its efforts CSIR feels privileged by putting India into the elite group of Nations
which have capability to offer its observations on research articles published in above-mentioned
high impact factor and world renowned journals.
CSIR is continuously increasing its number of research publications; this year it has crossed
the figure of 5000. As per the Committee’s directives CSIR will make all out efforts to increase
its research publications proportionately.
Comments
The Committee is aware of the responsibility of any R&D organization, as stated in
the reply of the Department but Committee is of the view that the real strength of a R&D
organization lies in the substantive research and development work done in the organization
of which research papers on substantive research and development published in high impact
factor journals by the organization is a good measure. CSIR global ranking, its Asian
ranking and prestigious international awards won by its scientists etc. are also good
measures to assess the strength of CSIR. The Committee is anguished that the Department
instead of taking observations of the Committee seriously and in right spirit is trying to
glorify its work. The Committee while, by no means, wishes to be little the work done at
CSIR, but at the same time is of the view that the Department needs to reorient itself and
gear up to achieve the goals laid in Science, Technology and Innovation Policy, 2013.
Recommendation (Para 8.6.4)
The Committee also notes that the Fellowships/Awards won by CSIR scientists are national.
The Committee had in its 227
th Report emphasized on the need to make efforts to win international
apart from national awards as well. The Committee, as such is not very much amused by the
aforesaid achievements of CSIR, more so, because it has the largest pool of scientists in the country
and it is but natural that the number of scientists getting award/fellowships would be higher.
Action taken by the Government
CSIR scientists are globally recognized. They are receiving awards, are member of editorial
board of prestigious journals, are elected members of various International bodies and are invited

4
at the international forums for deliberations and delivering lectures. A list of some significant
international awards won by CSIR scientists was provided to the Committee as Annexure-I of
Action Taken Note by the Department on recommendations contained in 237th Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology and Environment
and Forests. An updated list of International Award is enclosed for ready reference to the
Committee at Annexure-I.
Comments
The Committee would have been happy if the Department would have given year-wise
figures of prestigious international awards that are open to scientists of all nationalities won
by the scientists working in CSIR and worked out the ratio of scientists of CSIR getting
such prestigious international awards to the total strength of scientists in CSIR. An attempt
to camouflage the real picture by clubbing CSIR scientists on editorial boards of any
international journals, fellowship and awards restricted to only Indian Scientist, though also
important and praiseworthy, shows that Department instead of gearing itself to achieve the
national aspirations of positioning India among the top five global scientific power by 2020,
is more than content with the present ranking of CSIR. The Committee is not satisfied with
the reply of the Department and reiterates its recommendation.
Recommendation (Para 8.6.6)
The above chart reveals that while in 2008-09, CSIR had filed a total of 587 patents-183
in India and 404 abroad, the number of patents granted was 1536-703 in India and 833 abroad.
In the year 2009-10, the total number of patents filed nosedived to 340 and the number of patents
granted to 464. Ever since then, CSIR never reached the figure of 2008-09 in terms of the number
of total patents filed and the total number of patents granted. In the year 2011-12 only, the number
of patents filed in India went up to 197 as against 183 in 2008-09, but the number of patents
granted in India was abysmal 99. However, the Committee understands that CSIR is now trying
to bring in more focus on creating technological niches and filing those patents which are of
strategic nature.
Action taken by the Government
As regard the grant of patents is concerned control lies with the Patents Offices handling
the prosecution of the patents applications both in India and abroad. During the 2008-09, grant of
703 Indian Patents to CSIR was owing to the clearance of the backlog by the Indian Patent office
through a special drive. The grant of foreign patents to CSIR during 2008-09 was 373 and not
833. This may kindly be noted.
Comments
The reply of the Department is silent as to why the number of patents filed has
declined and has never reached the figure achieved in 2008-09. The Committee is not happy
with the reply of the Department and reiterates its recommendation.
Recommendation (Para 8.6.7)
Reasons/justifications for sharp fall apart, one thing is obvious that the reverse trend has
set in and it’s a matter of serious concern. The Committee feels that this trend needs not only be
contained but also reversed and the Department should undertake all necessary measures in this
regard including strengthening of the intellectual Property and Technology Management initiative.

5
Action taken by the Government
During last 5-6 years, the CSIR patent filing has focused on strategic and commercially
important inventions. In the recent years, there is slight increase in both Indian and foreign filing.
However, continual efforts would be made by CSIR to review the filing rates and ensure that there
is consistent increase in patent filing both nationally and Internationally.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that efforts made by CSIR would help
improve number of patents filed by CSIR Scientists.
Recommendation (Para 9.1)
Creating and Nurturing S&T Human Resource
CSIR has informed that it has been systematically creating and nurturing highly qualified
S&T manpower in the country. It is presently supporting 8876 Research fellows, 172 Emeritus
Scientists, 173 Senior Research Associates and 1092 research schemes in various universities.
The Committee appreciates CSIR’s efforts for creating a pool of talent in trans-disciplinary
areas.
Action taken by the Government
The Department notes the appreciations of the Committee with gratitude.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 10.2)
CSIR technologies for National Capacity Building
The Committee appreciates development of Granito tiles and e-health centre initiative, which
the Committee hopes will help in bringing affordable health services to the doorsteps of people. The
Committee also notes breakthrough achieved in production of high quality Bio-jet fuel from Jatropha
curcus oil and test run of vehicle on the marine microalgae biodiesel product from a marine
microalgae strain cultivated in a solar pond and hopes that these breakthroughs would turnout
commercially viable and would contribute towards achieving energy security by the country. The
Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Department should strive towards making these
breakthroughs commercially viable.
Action taken by the Government
Department notes the appreciation of the Committee with sense of obligation. Further,
Department will make all out efforts to make Bio-Jet fuel from Jatropha curcus oil and marine
microalgae bio-diesel from a marine microalgae strain cultivated in a solar pond commercially
viable.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

6
Recommendation (Para 11.4)
Traditional Knowledge Digital Library
In order to prevent misappropriation of traditional medicinal knowledge of India at
International Patent Offices, the TKDL initiative of the Department is a welcome step. The
Committee notes that CSIR through TKDL has been able to prevent grant of patents in 137 cases
of misappropriation of India’s traditional medicinal knowledge at International Patent Offices like-
USPTO, EPO, CIPO etc. and that though they have identified 5000 patent applications at
International Patent Offices which concern Indian Systems of Medicine and TKDL, evidences have
been filed at pre-grant stage under relevant provisions at these Patent Offices in more than 1073
cases till June, 2012. The Committee, however, expresses its concern that out of 5000 identified
cases, the Department has, till June, 2012, filed evidences only in 1073 cases. The Committee feels
that undue delay is not desirable in such sensitive cases and Department should ensure that
evidences etc. are filed in all the cases expeditiously. The Department must take pro-active steps
not only in zealously preserving and protecting our precious traditional medicinal knowledge but
also make best use of it in providing affordable health care to our people.
Action taken by the Government
CSIR concluded Traditional Knowledge Digital Library (TKDL) Access Agreements with
various International Patent Offices as given below:
(i) European Patent Office;
(ii) German Patent Office;
(iii) United State Patent and Trademark Office;
(iv) United Kingdom Patent and Trademark Office;
(v) Canadian IP Office;
(vi) IP Australia; and
(vii) Japan Patent Office.
CSIR, since then has identified the possible cases of misappropriation at various patent
offices as per the details given below and has filed Pre-grant Opposition (Third Party Observations-
TPOs) along with prior-art evidences from TKDL, under the respective provisions of Patent Law
of International Patent Offices in 1092 cases and the already realized success in total 148 cases
through withdrawal/cancellation of patent applications/claims.
Synod. N ame of Name of cases of No. of cases in Outcome
International misappropriation which TKDL Realized
Patent Offices identified since the Evidences (TPOs)
date at TKDL submitted
Access Agreement
12 3 4 5
1. European Patent Office 449 418 97
2. United State Patent and 274 267 15
Trademark Office

7
12 3 4 5
3. IP Australia 55 51 04
4. Canadian IP Office 150 147 27
5. United Kingdom Patent and 27 27 03
Trademark Office
6. Others 187 182 02
TOTAL: 1142 1092 148
As regards the figure of 5000 patents granted at various International Patent Offices, data
relates to the study carried out by CSIR in the year 2000 and in respect of ‘Granted Patents’ only.
TKDL approach is on submission of prior-art evidences before grant of patent rather within
the time limit specified under the provisions of International Patent Legislation after the publication
of patent applications.
Issues related to invalidation of granted patents are being dealt through Intergovernmental
Committee by World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) for which the nodal department is
Department of Industrial Policy and Promotion and through TRIPs for which the nodal Department
is Department of Commerce.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 13.10)
Some useful Technologies: Highwall Mining, Terafill and NEERI-ZAR
The Committee feels that potential of the above mentioned technologies developed by CSIR
need to be fully exploited to derive maximum benefits from them. The CSIR must convince
Ministries of Coal and Mines etc. on the utility of the Highwall Mining and for its adoption on a
large scale. Similarly, it should collaborate with the Ministries of Rural Development, Urban
Development and the other related Ministries and State Governments for large scale adoption of
water purification filters and technologies. CSIR has informed that its water purification
technologies have been successfully tested in flood affected areas. A number of states in the East
and North East region particularly Bihar and Assam and Southern States like Karnat aka and Tamil
Nadu are hit almost every year by floods causing tremendous scarcity of drinking water and the
technology developed by CSIR could be gainfully utilized in providing drinking water in such flood
hit states. The Committee recommends that CSIR should demonstrate utility of its technology to
such flood prone states so that country could reap full benefit of technologies developed by CSIR.
The Committee, further, recommends that CSIR must also find solutions to problems faced by
people like drying of ponds and their revival in the state of Jharkhand so that benefit of research
of CSIR is also available in solving the problems faced by people.
Action taken by the Government
CIMFR, Directorate General of Mines Safety, Ministry of Labour and the Ministry of Coal
to implement the Highwall Mining Technology in other opencast mines in the country where due
to the existence of surface dwellings there has been limitations for expansion of the currently

8
running opencast mines and also due to very high thickness of overburden rock leading to
uneconomical practice.
The Directorate General of Mines Safety being a regulatory agency, has organized two days
Technical Workshop on 1 st and 2 nd August, 2013 on High wall Mining for providing a common
platform to various stake holders for experience sharing, knowledge enhancement, etc., on key
issue like Micro-level Planning for the technology, Subsidence Management, Machine Maintenance
etc. CSIR-CIMFR would take a lead role in the said workshop.
CSIR-CIMFR and DGMS is working together to explore possible sites for future Highwall
Mining in Indian coalfields.
CSIR-CIMFR capability for design of Highwall in Indian coalfields has been published and
discussed in various forums, including International Journals, International conferences, national
journals, conferences etc.
A performance analysis study has been undertaken by CSIR-CIMFR for the ongoing and
completed Highwall extractions of SCCL Mines: the results of the performance analysis have been
found encouraging.
At the same time advanced research on geotechnical issues specific to Indian conditions are
underway to make it sustainable for future projects.
Terafil
CSIR is in consultation with functionaries of various State Governments for transfer of
technology of Terafil. CSIR-IMMT has transferred the technology for manufacture of Terafil water
filtration disc to the Government functionaries of the following States:
● State Council of S&T, Government of Meghalaya (Year: 2008)
● Chief Engineer PRED, Government of Karnataka (Year: 2009)
● PHE Department, Government of J&K (Year: 2009)
● Water Supply and Drainage Board, Chennai, Government of Tamil Nadu (Year: 2011)
● Secretary Rural Development Department, Government of Himachal Pradesh (Year: 2011)
● Pr. Secretary, PHED, Bhopal, Government of Madhya Pradesh (Year: 2011)
● Water Resources Department, Thiruvananthapuram, Government of Kerala (Year: 2011)
In this context CSIR-IMMT has already transferred the Terafil disc manufacturing
technology to 73 MSMEs/Entrepreneurs/Government Departments/SHGs/NGOs in following
22 States of India and provided adequate training to the licensees:
Sl. No. State No. of Licensees
12 3
1. Odisha 08
2. Bihar 02
3. Kerala 02
4. Andhra Pradesh 07

9
12 3
5. Karnataka 25
6. Tamil Nadu 06
7. Meghalaya 01
8. Tripura 01
9. Madhya Pradesh 05
10. Uttar Pradesh 04
11. Chhattisgarh 02
12. Delhi 03
13. Jharkhand 04
14. Gujarat 05
15. Maharashtra 02
16. West Bengal 03
17. Jammu and Kashmir 03
18. Assam 06
19. Punjab 01
20. Himachal Pradesh 01
21. Rajasthan 01
22. Andaman and Nicobar 01
An equal number of designs for community size water filtration plants using Terafil discs
have been transferred to various beneficiaries.
CSIR-IMMT has overseen the supply of low cost Household Terafil Filters utilizing Terafil
discs and food grade plastic containers to Governments of Odisha and Sikkim.
CSIR-IMMT and CIPET have collaborated to identify, adopt, train and empower
manufacturers in five states for capacity building and dissemination of the technology/filters for
sustainable supply of clean drinking water in the rural sector. These entrepreneurs are:
● M/s Modern Pottery, Bhubaneswar, Odisha
● M/s Custom Parts Online, Sivaganga, Tamil Nadu
● M/s Farmland Rainwater Harvesting Systems, Bengaluru, Karnataka
● M/s Sree Sai Water Treatment Pvt. Ltd, Bengaluru, Karnataka
● M/s Gangotri Water India, Surat, Gujarat
● M/s Akshaya Industries, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh
CIPET centers at Odisha, Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Uttar Pradesh have created facilities for
producing plastic containers and components of water filters.

10
CSIR-IMMT has provided training to various interested parties including Government
officials, entrepreneurs and representatives of SHGs. At present, scientists of the Rural Technology
Department are equipped to provide training on manufacture of Terafil discs and installation designs
of various community size filters of capacity of 500–1,00,000 lit. day.
As per a communication of Ministry of Drinking Water and sanitation, New Delhi, Terafil
technology has been adopted by many States under JALMANI and NRDWP programmes.
As a CSIR-800 initiative the technology is being licensed to beneficiaries without any license
fee (Under CSIR’s societal outreach programme.)
Information about the Terafil technology has been covered by various national news
agencies (both print and electronic media). Over 8,000 web results can be obtained through Google
search of ‘Terafil’ today.
CSIR-IMMT will further facilitate transfer of technology to the MSMEs in the flood
affected states and other states without any license fee. Provision of training and demonstration of
the technology has been made by IMMT for MSMEs and large industries.
CSIR is trying to take a feasibility study whether the issue of drying ponds and its revival
in the state of Jharkhand can be addressed through the expertise available in CSIR System.
‘NEERI-ZAR’, developed by CSIR-NEERI is the water treatment system suitable for potable
water supply during natural/manmade disasters particularly under flood affected situations with a
wide range of floodwater quality. ‘NEERI-ZAR’ is also suitable for the remote and rural area where
on-line treatment system is not available. NEERI-ZAR is most useful for the small villages, with
lake, tank, ponds, open well, and river as a water source. The main feature of the NEERI-ZAR
is that it works without electricity or any kind of conventional energy. It also does not require any
technical support for its operation and it is a NO MAINTENANCE unit.
A unit, with two 100 L vessels, can serve about 20-30 persons, when operated for 10 hours
a day, on the basis of 6-10 liters per capita/day water requirement for drinking and cooking
purposes.
NEERI-ZAR brings down the turbidity of filtered water to less than 3 NTU from 100-300
NTU of raw water in the range. The operation of the unit includes disinfections by chemical agent.
A typical unit comprises two plastic containers placed at elevation difference to manage
gravity flow. Top container is filled with raw water and oxidizing chemical solution is added in raw
water container. Water flows by gravity into the second plastic container with a fixture and sand
filter and treated water from the tap is collected in third container. Disinfectant solution is added
to this treated water container, once treated water starts accumulating in the container. The
container is allowed to fill up to the capacity. Safe potable water is ready for use after half an
hour. The filter needs periodical cleaning. The typical capacity of the unit is 20-30 l/hour of treated
water.
The unit was tested in NEERI for the treatment of raw water spiked with turbidity, bacterial
and zooplankton. The results indicate that the unit produces treated water with turbidity in the
range 1.1 to 2.8 NTU from the raw water having turbidity in the range 14 – 300 NTU. Total
coliform and E.Coli counts in the raw water were in the range 6800 – 78300 CFU/100 ml and 100–
7900 CFU/100 ml respectively, which is usual range for surface water sources or flood waters.
The respective counts in the filtered water were 80 – 7900 CFU/100 ml and ND – 150 CFU/100
ml indicating 90 – 99% reduction in bacterial load after disinfection total coliforms and E.Coli
counts were nil in the treated water samples. Zooplankton species like Cyclops, Nauplius, Daphnia,
Branchionus are also removed during filtration.
R

11
CSIR-NEERI has supplied 100 units in the flood affected remote areas of Barmer District
in October 2006 to convert the turbid and contaminated rainwater into potable water. The system
was also installed in Aila Cyclone affected area of Sundarban district (West Bengal) in 2009 to treat
pond water as the ground water sources were contaminated with saline water. About 400 units
were installed by CSIR-NEERI in various villages.
NEERI-ZAR had received two prestigious awards namely Nina Saxena Excellence in
Technology Award in 2008 instituted by IIT Kharagpur and International Project Innovation Awards
(PIA) – Development instituted by International Water Association (IWA) in 2011.
CSIR is in consultation with functionaries of various State Governments for transfer of
technology of Terafil.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, however, desires that Department
should obtain feedback from the State Governments/Organizations/Units to whom it has
transferred its Highwall Mining, Terafill and NEERI ZAR technologies to know as to what
extent these technologies have been found useful by them and to what extent they are
satisfied with the adoption of such technologies. The Committee may also be appraised of
the consolidated results of feedback so obtained.
Recommendation (Para 15.2)
Plan Outlay during Eleventh Five Year Plan vis-a-vis Plan Outlay in Twelfth Five Year Plan
A chart showing Plan outlay, allocation made and actual expenditure incurred during
Eleventh Five Year Plan is given below:–
(R in crores )
Outlay Allocation Expenditure
9000.00 6959.00 6940.51
(99.73%)
(R in crores )
Year Budget Revised Expenditure Percentage
Estimate Estimate Utilization
2007-08 1070.00 1060.00 1054.98 99.53
2008-09 1200.00 1 190.00 1180.40 99.19
2009-10 1350.00 1279.00 1278.87 99.99
2010-11 1600.00 1600.00 1596.26 99.77
2011-12 1930.00 1830.00 1830.00 100.00
T
OTAL: 7150.00 6959.00 6940.51 99.73
From the above chart it is clear that an amount of R9000.00 crores was earmarked for
the Department for the Eleventh Five Year Plan. But the BE allocation in the annual plans made
to the Department was restricted to R7150.00 crores, thus showing a reduction of
R1850.00 crores. The total budgetary allocation further came down to R6959.00 crores, if

12
allocation made for the five years i.e. 2007-08 to 2011-12 at the RE stage is taken into account
The Committee notes that the Gross Plan budgetary allocation during the Eleventh Five Year Plan
has been reduced by R2041.00 crores. The Committee finds that trend of utilization of allocated
resources has been fairly better. While during the year 2007-2008 as against the BE of R1070.00
crores, the actual expenditure incurred by the Department amounted to R1054.98 crores. The
Committee also does not find any significant variation between the BE and RE allocation of the
Department during that year as the RE allocation came to R1060.00 crores as against the BE
allocation of R1070.00 crores. Similar is the case in almost all other financial years. In
2008-2009, while the BE allocation was R1200.00 crores the RE allocation was
R1190.00 crores. While in the year 2011-12, the BE and RE allocation remained the same i.e.
R1600.00 crores. If we take a look at the percentage utilization of RE allocation it exceeds 99%
in all the financial years of Eleventh Five Year Plan. And in the year 2011-12, it registered as
high as 100%. The Committee feels that the reduction in approved outlay of the Department
which had been consistently performing so well as far as financial achievements were concerned
was totally unjustified.
Action taken by the Government
Department agrees with the Committee’s observations on optimal utilization of funds
released to the Department.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 16.1)
Twelfth Five Year Plan Allocation
During the Twelfth Five Year Plan, outlay projected by the Department was R47003.00
crores i.e. which consisted of R8803.00 crores for DSIR schemes and R38200.00 crores for
CSIR schemes. However, the outlay approved amounts to R17896.00 crores – R496.00 crores
for DSIR schemes and R17400.00 crores for CSIR scheme. Although prima facie  it appears that
there has been drastic cut in the projected demand of the Department amounting almost to
R29107.00 crores, the Committee finds that the Department has got an approved outlay for the
Twelfth Five Year Plan which is almost double the allocation of the Eleventh Five Year Plan, thus
showing almost 100% increase which cannot be considered less by any standards.
Action taken by the Government
Department agrees with the Committee’s observations that the approved allocation of the
Department for Twelfth Five Year Plan is almost double from Eleventh Five Year Plan allocations.
Department is, in fact, planned many new schemes/projects including CSIR-800, Open Innovation
scheme NCAD etc. to pursue during the Twelfth FYP. However, due to the reduced allocation these
can not be launched with full strength.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

13
Recommendation (Para 17.2)
Projected/Approved Outlay and Utilization during 2012-13
The Committee finds that the Department monitors and reviews its ongoing programmes
with the help of technical advisory committees, technical committees and project review
committees. In addition, CSIR monitors progress of its projects at various levels - at Laboratory
level by respective research councils; by the task force at project level; by cluster directors at the
cluster level; external monitoring committees review progress at Headquarters level and DG, CSIR
reviews the overall progress of the projects further from Headquarters. However, the Committee
notes that despite various monitoring mechanism put in place by the Department, it has failed to
make full utilization of allocated resources in the year 2012-13.
Action taken by the Government
Department conceptualized some new schemes during the current plan, it is taking some
time to get approval of the Competent Authority. This has led to reduced utilization of the
allocation.
Further Department would like to apprise the Committee that CSIR deployed R471.00 crore
of internal resources to carry out its R&D activities in view of excessive budgetary cut at R.E.
stage. However, the Department will make every effort to utilize its allocations fully in future.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply but would like to observe that the Department should
seek funds only to the extent it can utilize during the financial year as unspent funds are
unnecessary burden on the Central Government.
Recommendation (Para 18.2)
Financial Allocation for 2013-14
The charts reveals that the Department has once again projected an unrealistic demand
under the Plan head of R3096.02 crores against which the outlay approved is R2013.00 crores, the
same as BE plan allocation in 2012-13. However, if both plan and non-plan allocation is taken into
account, the total approved outlay is R3571.00 crores consisting of non-plan allocation of
R1558.00 crores. This year total allocation is, however, higher by R87.00 crore as compared to
the last year allocation of R3484.00 crores. As mentioned above, while the plan allocation has kept
at the same level as the last year, the non-plan allocation has been increased from R1471.00 to
R1558.00 crores.
The Committee feels that though the utilization of funds of the Department is impressive,
the Committee recommends that the Department should make endeavour to improve it further.
Action taken by the Government
Department will make all out efforts to improve its funds utilization at optimal level.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

14
Recommendation (Para 19.4.4)
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR)
(i) Promoting Innovation in Individuals, Start-ups and MSMEs;
(ii) Patent Acquisition and Collaborative Research and Technology
Development” (PACE) Scheme;
(ii) Building Industrial Research and Development (BIRD) scheme;
(iii) Access Knowledge for Creation of Innovative Capacity and Dissemination (A2K)
The Committee notes the Planning Commission has allocated R85 crores as against the
projected demand of R94.02 crores for the aforesaid four schemes and hopes that Department
would prudently utilize the resources to meet various targets under the schemes.
Action taken by the Government
The Department is working towards meeting various targets set under the four schemes,
viz. PRISM, PACE, BIRD and A2K+ within the outlay of R85 crores, allocated by the Planning
Commission.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 20.2.7)
Autonomous Institutions/Public Sector Enterprises
Consultancy Development Centre (CDC)
The Committee is of the view that ‘consultancy services’ has a huge potential for growth
and in the future it could be one of the leading professions and recognizes the critical role of CDC
in exploitation of this potential. Development of computerized database of consultants and
consultancy firms and collaboration with institutes like BITS is welcome step but more needs to
be done to build capacity in the field of consultancy capabilities in the country. The Committee,
accordingly, recommends that the CDC must formulate a potent action plan to develop and promote
consultancy capabilities in the country so that consultancy emerges as a viable career option in the
country.
Action taken by the Government
A potent action plan to develop and promote consultancy capabilities in the country is being
formulated by CDC in consultation with DSIR. The CDC will take up implementation of the action
plan after approval in its Governing Council Meeting in November/December, 2013.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

15
Recommendation (Para 20.3.9)
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR)
The Committee welcomes setting up of Innovation Complexes which will have world class
facilities and help catalyze innovation eco system of the region. The Committee notes that, for the
present, such complexes are being built in Chennai, Kolkata and Mumbai and hopes these
complexes would be equitably built in all parts of the country so that the benefit of these
complexes reach all region of the country. The Committee also hopes that with the setting up of
CSIR special centres in North Eastern States, Lakshadweep and Andaman and Nicobar Islands,
scientific solutions would be successfully found to be peculiar problems of these regions and this
would catalyze faster growth and development of these regions.
Action taken by the Government
Department has planned to set-up Innovation Complexes at eight different locations across
the country. At first instance Innovation Complexes are being set up at Chennai, Kolkata and
Mumbai. Setting up of Innovation Complex at Vishakapatnam is just in preliminary stage. Setting
up such complexes at other places will be taken up depending upon the availability of resources.
Comments
The Committee expresses its serious concern over undue delay in setting up
Innovation Complex at Vishakhapatnam. From the reply given by the Department it appears
that even the procedural formalities for the Complex have not yet been completed. The
Committee is of the view that the delay will further escalate the cost of land,
infrastructural facilities, etc. required for setting up an Innovation Complex. The
Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation for setting up of an Innovation
Complex at Vishakhapatnam without any further delay to catalyze innovation environment
of the region. The Committee also desires that Department should vigorously pursue with
concerned authorities for allocation of resources needed for setting up Innovation
Complexes in other parts of country so as to boost innovation environment in the country.
Recommendation (Para 20.4.3)
CSIR Tech Private Limited (CTPL)
The Committee is surprised to know that though CTPL was established on May 2, 2011,
the relationship between CTPL and CSIR has not yet been finalized and CTPL has not
commercialized any technologies so far. The Committee is of the view that the purpose for which
the CTPL was created gets defeated if it fails to nurture and support its mentor. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that relationship between CSIR and CTPL may be worked out without any
further loss of time so that innovative capacity of CSIR for newer models, products and services
is enhanced i.e. purpose for setting CTPL starts materializing.
Action taken by the Government
The Department notes the observation of the Committee. CSIR is committed to reap the
benefit of CSIR Tech. Pvt. Ltd. by way of commercializing its products through it. CSIR Tech.
Pvt. Ltd. has already technology tie-ups with some CSIR laboratories which includes: CSIR-
CECRI, CSIR-IMMT, CSIR-NAL, CSIR-NCL, AND CSIR-NEERI.

16
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to know the extent to which CTPL has
succeeded in commercialization of products of CSIR Laboratories with whom CTPL has
already a tie up.
Recommendation (Para 20.5.8)
National S&T Human Resource Development
The Committee is pleased to note that the Department has agreed to widen the ambit of
250 handholding scholarships to include not only dyslexic students but also students suffering from
other serious physical disabilities as recommended by the Committee in its 227th Report. The
Committee, feels, consistent with the enlargement of the ambit of the handholding scholarship to
include students suffering from serious physical disabilities, the scheme of scholarships should be
renamed as “CSIR hand holding Scholarship for differently abled students”.
Action taken by the Government
The Department notes the appreciation of the Committee with gratitude. As per the
suggestion of the Committee, the Department is in the process of renaming the programme “CSIR
hand holding scholarship for dyslexic students to pursue higher education in science” to “CSIR
hand holding scholarship for differently abled students”.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like Department to inform it when the
process of renaming the above programme is complete.
Recommendation (Para 20.5.9)
The Committee hopes Planning Commission would, while allocating funds at RE 2013-14
stage, would make adequate allocation of funds for the programme which will go a long way in
exploiting the talent in science students with different abilities as also helping them to pursue higher
studies in science with dignity.
Action taken by the Government
The Department will raise the issue with the Planning Commission during the discussion at
R.E. stage.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 20.6.4)
Interaction between Industry and CSIR
The Committee notes with concern that India is lagging far behind other countries of the
world in respect of R&D contribution made by the Private sector. In comparison to developed
countries of the world, India’s R&D funding from non-government sector is abysmally low. Even
in comparison to our neighboring country China, we lag far behind. The percentage contribution

17
of private sector and public sector to R&D contribution in India and China is nearly in reverse
order. In China private sector contribution is nearly 70% of R&D expenditure while in India it is
Government which makes 75 to 80% contribution. The Committee feels that in order to enhance
funding in R&D, the private R&D contribution needs to be augmented substantially. The Committee
in its 227 th report had recommended that private sector contribution to R&D needs to be enhanced
to 50% from 25% during the Twelfth Plan period by offering incentives, forming partnership etc.
The Department in their Action Taken Replies had assured the Committee that every effort would
be made to bring industries on board. Even the Government has in their Twelfth Five Year Plan
Approach Paper admitted that private sector contribution is not adequate to develop strong R&D.
The Committee feels that somewhere we have failed in our efforts to woo private sector and
nothing commendable has been achieved in this direction even in the second year of the plan
period. The Committee, therefore, feels that mere assurance given by the Department to make
every effort to bring industries on board, will not help unless it draws a concrete time bound action
plan to ensure that private sector contribution to R&D gets enhanced to 50% from existing 25%
by the end of Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Action taken by the Government
CSIR is a part of S&T system of India. It is a collective responsibility of the S&T
fraternity of India to pursue industries to increase its share on R&D activities. Government is
taking all the possible steps to increase industries participation.
To achieve this Government has set up a goal to raise the Gross Expenditure in R&D upto
2% of GDP by 2016-17 with equal investment by Government and Private Sector. As a follow up
to the recommendations of the Sub-Committee on PM’s Council on Trade and Industry PPP for
R&D and clean energy, a Joint Committee of Industry and Government for stimulating investment
of private sector into R&D was constituted by Ministry of Science and Technology for co-
development of a White Paper for addressing the needs for stimulation of the private sector
investment into R&D in India. The Committee is co-Chaired by Secretary, DST and Vice Chairman,
Tata Steel Ltd. and members are Secretaries of DSIR, DBT and Ministry of Earth Sciences and
representative from industries including Jubilant Life Sciences Ltd., Forbes Marshall Pvt. Ltd. and
Infosys Ltd. Hon’ble Minister of Science and Technology and Earth Sciences Shri Jaipal Reddy has
released a White Paper on ‘Stimulation of Investment of Private Sector in R&D into India on
12th July, 2013’, prepared by the Joint Committee of Industry and Government.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply but would like the Department to make earnest
efforts to contribute its share in what it calls the collective responsibility of the S&T
fraternity of India to achieve the goal of raising Gross Expenditure in R&D upto 2% of
GDP by 2016-17.
Recommendation (Para 20.7.8)
New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative (NMITLI)
The Committee appreciates that New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative
(NMITLI) started by the Department in the Eleventh Plan and recommends that programme should
be pursued with great vigour in the Twelfth Plan so that a large number of research projects are
undertaken under PPP mode and private investment in R&D which, at present is around 20 to 25%,
increase substantially.

18
Action taken by the Government
Department feels encouraged by the appreciation of the Committee. CSIR is vigorously
pursuing the NMITLI Scheme during Twelfth Five Year Plan. Two cycles of advertisement for
seeking proposals from industry have already been made. Proposals are at various stages of
scrutiny and projectization.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 20.8.3)
CSIR 800
The Committee lauds the objective with which CSIR 800 scheme has been launched. The
fact that more budgetary allocation has been made for the scheme than those demanded by the
Department shows the importance that Government attaches to this scheme. The Committee hopes
that the Department shall endeavour to achieve the objective of the scheme of augmenting the
income and quality of lives of one million rural citizens across the country during the Twelfth Five
Year Plan. The Committee also recommends that the Department should formulate more such
schemes to augment the income of poor and quality of their lives.
Action taken by the Government
The Department notes, with gratitude, the appreciation of the objectives of CSIR800
scheme. CSIR is making all out efforts to achieve the objectives of the scheme commensurate to
the investments made. This is a new scheme being operationalized during the current plan. Apart
from CSIR various other agencies are involved in the schemes which are crucial to its success.
Department is confident about the success of the scheme, however, success to its full extent will
depend upon other implementing agencies also. Department would like to submit before the
Committee that depending upon the level of success of the present scheme, formulation of more
such schemes will be taken up.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 20.9.5)
CSIR Scheme for Open Innovation
The Committee appreciates the novel objective of its Open Source Drug Discovery Plan i.e.
to make healthcare affordable to the common man. The Committee notes that the programme was
initiated in Eleventh Five Year Plan with TB as target disease and is being extended to Twelfth Five
Year Plan to cover Malaria and Leishmaniasis (Kala-Azar) and hopes that programme would lead
to affordable treatment of these diseases for common man. The Committee recommends that the
Department should provide high priority to such socially useful programmes so that objectives of
these programmes are achieved as early as possible.

19
Action taken by the Government
Department notes the appreciation of the Committee with gratitude. As per the directives of
the Committee Department is giving top priority to the Scheme which is in the advanced stage of
approval as a new scheme to be operationalized during the current plan.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation (Para 20.10.6)
National Civil Aircraft Development Programme (NCAD)
The Committee is perturbed to observe that very little progress has been made with regard
to this important programme. In order to develop capabilities for development of aircrafts with
large passenger capacities, the Committee is of the view that the Department should complete this
programme at the earliest so that new programme of development of more sophisticated aircrafts
of even higher passenger capacities could be taken and India acquires capabilities to compete with
established countries like USA and France in this field. The Committee accordingly recommends
that the Department should seriously work for successful completion of the programme at the
earliest.
Action taken by the Government
The Department is unable to initiate the National Civil Aircraft Development as the nodal
agency for implementation of the programme is yet to be identified.
Comments
The Committee is anguished with the reply given by the Department and observes
that NCAD, once considered a project of prime importance for the Department appears to
have been shelved now. Even the nodal agency for implementation of the programme has
not yet been identified. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its recommendation for
successful completion of the programme at the earliest.
Recommendation (Para 20.11.3)
Programmes for North-Eastern States and Women centric initiatives
The Committee notes skill development training programme organized by NRDC for the
people of North Eastern States and for women’s empowerment and is particularly happy on setting
up of post harvest technology centres. The Committee recommends that in order to assess the
potency and utility of these training programmes, the Department should develop a mechanism to
find out as to what extent these training programmes have actually resulted in trained persons
becoming gainfully employed or becoming entrepreneurs because that alone will demonstrate the
usefulness of these programmes.
Action taken by the Government
NRDC shall engage an independent agency to obtain the feedback regarding the
effectiveness of skill development training programme organized by it for the people of North
Eastern states.

20
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like the Department to inform it of the
results of feedback obtained.
Recommendation (Para 20.12.4)
Public Sector Enterprises
National Research Development Corporation (NRDC)
The Committee notes with concern the poor performance of NRDC. The Committee feels
that the purpose for which an organization is created gets defeated if it fails to deliver. The
mandate of NRDC is to commercialize the technologies developed by the research laboratories and
institutes of CSIR and other public funded research institutes, universities including autonomous
research institutions. The poor record of NRDC in obtaining patents for technologies and technical
knowhow assigned to it, coupled with losses incurred by it, speaks volumes of its malfunctioning
and lack of professionalism. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
introspect the causes of failure of NRDC and its poor performance and work out a strategy to
ensure that NRDC is in a position to fulfill the purpose for which it was established.
Action taken by the Government
During the Eleventh plan period, NRDC earned a premia and royalty of R32 crores from
191 technologies licensed by it and secured 117 patents for inventors working in Universities and
other R&D Institutes. It incurred losses since many R&D organizations, including CSIR embarked
on technology transfer and commercialization on their own and as a result, technology assignment
to NRDC declined. Mushrooming of technology transfer organizations in the private sector offered
competition to NRDC, resulting in reduced share of business. NRDC also faced leadership crisis
and its manpower depleted with no fresh recruitment for several years, resulting in lack of vision
and forward planning. Future strategies to revive NRDC include: induction of necessary
professional manpower; acting as an implementing arm for government schemes, including DSIR
schemes; taping the Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) activities of public and private sector
companies and offering consultancy services for the same; strengthening its royalty collection
mechanism; and scouting for technology assignment from educational institutes.
Comments
The Committee observes that the Department has failed to take action in time to
address issues which led to NRDC incurring losses and not able to fulfill the purpose for
which it was established and hopes that strategies now adopted to revive NRDC would yield
the desired results.
Recommendation (Para 20.13.6)
Central Electronics Limited (CEL)
The Committee notes with concern losses being incurred by CEL in the years 2010-11 and
2011-12 and recommends that Department should take necessary measures to restore its financial
viability. The Committee further express its anguish that due to financial crunch the crucial
programme of upgradation of the capacity of solar photo voltaic module from 10 MW to 80 MW
is held up and funds made available are not even sufficient to upgrade the production facility to

21
25 MW in this financial year and unless sufficient funds are made available even upgradation of
the production facility to 25 MW would be possible only in 2014-15.The Committee recommends
that fund crunch should not hold up upgradation of facilities for production of photo voltaic module
and sufficient funds be allocated at RE stage for the purpose.
Action taken by the Government
CEL has estimated an outlay of R15 crore to enhance the capacity of Solar Photovoltaics
production to 25 MW and has stated that the funds should be made available in one installment
since all the necessary equipment will be installed and commissioned concurrently. The proposal
has been submitted to DSIR for approval and based on approval, additional budget allocation shall
be sought at the RE stage.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that Department would ensure that fund
crunch does not come in the way of enhancing the capacity of Solar Photovoltaic module to
25 MW.

MINUTES

24

25
VI
SIXTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 17 th December, 2013 in Committee Room
No. ‘67’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
3. Shri M. Rama Jois
4. Shri Alok Tiwari
5. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
6. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
LOK SABHA
7. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
8. Dr. Ajay Kumar
9. Shri O.S. Manian
10. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
11. Shri Basori Singh Masram
12. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
13. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
14. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
15. Shri Pradeep Tamta
16. Shri Joseph Toppo
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Committee Officer
The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee and invited
suggestions/amendments to the draft 246
th to 252 nd Reports of the Committee on the Action Taken
by Government on the recommendations/observations contained in the 239 th to 245 th Reports on
Demands for Grants (2013-14), pertaining to the Ministries/Departments of Atomic Energy, Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, Space, Earth Sciences, Scientific and Industrial
Research and Biotechnology respectively.
25

26
*** Relate to other matters.
2. The Committee, after brief discussion, adopted 246 th to 252 nd draft Action Taken Reports
without any amendment.
3. The Committee decided to present/lay on the table of both the Houses of the Parliament its
246th to 252 nd Reports on 18 th December, 2013. The Committee authorised its Chairman and, in his
absence, Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra to present the Report in Rajya Sabha and Shri Pradeep Tamta
and, in his absence, Shri Dayanidhi Maran to lay the copy of the reports on the table of Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
The Committee, then, adjourned at 5.10 
P.M.

27
27
INDEX OF REPORTS PRESENTED BY DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY , ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
Report No. Subject of the Report
12
1. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1993-94.
2. ‘National Environment Tribunal Bill, 1992’.
3. Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1992-93.
4. Annual Report of the Department of Electronics for the year 1992-93.
5. Annual Report of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1992-93.
6. Annual Report of the Department of Science and Technology for the year 1992-93.
7. Annual Report of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1992-93.
8. Demands for Grants the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1994-95.
9. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95.
10. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1994-95.
11. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1994-95.
12. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 1994-95.
13. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1994-95.
14. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1994-95.
15. Annual Report of the Department of Space for the year 1993-94.
16. Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1993-94.
17. Annual Report of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1993-94.
18. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 1995-96.
19. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1995-96.
20. Annual Report of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1993-94.
21. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1995-96.
22. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1995-96.
23. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1995-96.
24. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1995-96.
25. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1995-96.

28
12
26. Annual Report of the Department of Science and Technology for the year 1993-94.
27. Annual Report of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1993-94.
28. Annual Report of the Department of Electronics for the year 1993-94.
29. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 1995.
30. Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95.
31. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 1996-97.
32. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1996-97.
33. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1996-97.
34. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1996-97.
35. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1996-97.
36. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1996-97.
37. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1996-97.
38. Demonstration of Herbal Fuel by Shri P. Ramar at IIP, Dehradun.
39. Action Taken by Ministry of Environment and forests on the recommendations
contained in the 9
th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants of Ministry
of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95.
40. ‘Mid-term appraisal’ of programmes and functioning of the Department of
Biotechnology with special emphasis on the role of Biotechnology in Agriculture and
allied areas.
41. ‘Mid-term appraisal’ of programmes and functioning of the Department of Science
and Technology.
42. ‘Mid-term appraisal’ of programmes and functioning of the Department of Space.
43. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the Thirty-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(1996-97) of the Department of Biotechnology.
44. Action Taken by the Department of Electronics on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty-second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1996-97)
of the Department of Electronics.
45. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1996-97)
of the Department of Ocean Development.
46. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 1997-98.
47. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1997-98.

29
12
48. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1997-98.
49. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1997-98.
50. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1997-98.
51. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1997-98.
52. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1997-98.
53. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1998-99.
54. Demands for Grants of the Department of Bio-technology for the year 1998-99.
55. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 1998-99.
56. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1998-99.
57. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1998-99.
58. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1998-99.
59. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1998-99.
60. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the Fifty-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(1998-99) of the Department of Biotechnology.
61. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-sixth Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants (1998-99) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
62. Action Taken by the Department of Electronics on the recommendations contained
in the Fifty-eighth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
the Department of Electronics.
63. Aspects related to Food Preservation and Safety Measures.
64. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 1999-2000.
65. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the
year 1999-2000.
66. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1999-2000.
67. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1999-2000.
68. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1999-2000.
69. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1999-2000.
70. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the
year 1999-2000.

30
12
71. Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Bill, 1999.
72. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 2000-01.
73. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2000-01.
74. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2000-01.
75. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Information Technology for the year 2000-01.
76. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2000-01.
77. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2000-01.
78. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2000-01.
79. ‘The Information Technology Bill, 1999’.
80. Preservation of Gir Forests and Protection of Wild Life.
81. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-second Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Science
and Technology.
82. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-third Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research.
83. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-fourth Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of
Biotechnology.
84. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-seventh Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Space.
85. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-sixth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Ocean
Development.
86. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2001-02.
87. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2001-02.
88. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2001-02.
89. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2001-02.
90. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2001-02.
91. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2001-02.
92. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninety-first Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Space.

31
12
93. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-seventh Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of
Biotechnology.
94. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-sixth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research.
95. ‘The Biological Diversity Bill, 2000’.
96. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-ninth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Science and
Technology.
97. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-eighth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Ocean
Development.
98. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninetieth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Environment
and Forests.
99. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2002-03.
100. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2002-03.
101. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2002-03.
102. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 2002-03.
103. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2002-03.
104. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Envir onment and Forests for the year 2002-03.
105. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 2000.
106. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-second Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Department of Science and Technology.
107. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-first Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2002-03) of the Department of Ocean Development.
108. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the
Hundredth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the
Department of Space.
109. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the Ninety-ninth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2002-03) of the Department of Biotechnology.

32
12
110. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-third Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
111. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
112. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2003-04.
113. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2003-04.
114. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2003-04.
115. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2003-04.
116. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2003-04.
117. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 2003-04.
118. Conservation and Environmental-Management Plan for Dal-Nagin Lake.
119. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-fifteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Ocean Development.
120. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-thirteenth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology on Demands
for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
121. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in One Hundred-twelfth Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on Demands for Grants
(2003-04) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
122. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-sixteenth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Biotechnology.
123. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the
One Hundred-fourteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Space.
124. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-seventeenth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department
of Science and Technology.

33
12
125. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 2004-05.
126. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2004-05.
127. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2004-05.
128. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2004-05.
129. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2004-05.
130. Demands for Grants of the Department of Atomic Energy for the year 2004-05.
131. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Envir onment and Forests for the year 2004-05.
132. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-eighteenth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the conservation and Environmental Management Plan for Dal-Nagin
Lake, Srinagar.
133. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Twenty-fifth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department
of Science and Technology.
134. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the
One Hundred Twenty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Space.
135. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Twenty-seventh Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Biotechnology.
136. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Twenty-sixth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department
of Scientific and Industrial Research.
137. Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Thirtieth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
138. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Twenty-eighth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Ocean
Development.

34
12
139. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Thirty-first Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests.
140. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Science and Technology.
141. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Biotechnology.
142. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
143. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Ocean Development.
144. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Space.
145. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
146. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
147. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Forty-third Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Ocean Development.
148. Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Forty-fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Atomic Energy.
149. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-fortieth Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Science and Technology.
150. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in
the One Hundred Forty-forth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of Department of Space.
151. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty-second Report of the
Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research.
152. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the One-Hundred Forty-first Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Biotechnology.
153. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in  the One Hundred Forty-sixth Report of the Committee on the Demands
for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
154. The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2005.
155. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Science and Technology.
156. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.

35
12
157. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Biotechnology.
158. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Ocean Development.
159. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
160. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
161. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Space.
162. Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research Programme including Herbal Medicines.
163. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Sixtieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
164. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Ocean Development (renamed as Ministry
of Earth Sciences).
165. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Space.
166. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
167. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Biotechnology.
168. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Science and Technology.
169. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
170. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Science and Technology.
171. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
172. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Biotechnology.

36
12
173. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
174. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
175. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Space.
176. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
177. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research Programme including Herbal
Medicines.
178. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Science and
Technology.
179. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Biotechnology.
180. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
181. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
182. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Space.
183. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
184. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology. Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
185. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of’ Science and Technology
(Ministry of Science and Technology).
186. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (Ministry of Science and Technology).
187. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.

37
12
188. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
189. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Space.
190. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
Science and Technology).
191. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
192. Functioning of Central Pollution Control Board.
193. Global Warming and its Impact on India.
194. The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008.
195. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Science and Technology.
196. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Ninetieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Biotechnology.
197. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
198. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Ninety-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
199. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Space.
200. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology. Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
201. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
202. Coastal Management Programmes.
203. The National Green Tribunal Bill, 2009.
204. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.

38
12
205. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
Science and Technology).
206. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Space.
207. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
208. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (Ministry of Science and Technology).
209. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department Science and Technology
(Ministry of Science and Technology).
210. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
211. “The Protection and Utilisation of Public Funded Intellectual Property Bill, 2008”.
212. “The Civil Liability For Nuclear Damage Bill, 2010”.
213. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
214. Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Biotechnology.
215. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Sixth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Space.
216. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
217. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Eighth Report of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
218. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Science and Technology.
219. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Tenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.

39
12
220. The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Bill, 2010.
221. The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011.
222. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
223. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Science and Technology
(Ministry of Science and Technology).
224. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
225. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Space.
226. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
227. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (Ministry of Science and Technology).
228. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
Science and Technology).
229. Report on “The Regional Centre for Biotechnology Bill, 2011”.
230. S teps Taken by various Sectors of the Indian Economy to Control Pollution.
231. The Indian Forest (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
232. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
233. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Science and Technology.
234. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
235. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Space.
236. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
237. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.

40
12
238. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Biotechnology.
239. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
240. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Science and Technology.
241. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
242. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Space.
243. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
244. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
245. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Biotechnology.
246. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Thirty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
247. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fortieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Science and Technology.
248. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
249. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Space.
250. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
251. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
252. A ction Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Biotechnology.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.