Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
253
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th December, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11th December, 2014)
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY THIRD REPORT
“The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013”

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED FIFTY THIRD REPORT
“The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013”
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  11th December, 2014)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  11th December, 2014)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2014/Agrahayana, 1936 (Saka)

Website: http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(iv)
2. P REFACE ............................................................................................................................... (v)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ (vi )
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE ................................................................................................ 1—2
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................ 3—1 06
6. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS ................................................................................................ 107—121
7. L IST OF R EPORTS P RESENTED  E ARLIER ............................................................................... 122—135

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2013-14)
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
3. Shri M. Rama Jois
4. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
5. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
6. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
7. Shri T.M. Selvaganapathi
8. Shrimati Maya Singh
9. Shri Alok Tiwari
10. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
12. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
13. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
14. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase
15. Dr. Ajay Kumar
16. Shri O.S. Manian
17. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
18. Shri Basori Singh Masram
19. Shri Vincent H. Pala
20. Shri Natubhai Gomanbhai Patel
21. Shrimati Kamla Devi Patle
22. Shri Ramashanker Rajbhar
23. Shri M.B. Rajesh
24. Shri Tathagata Satpathy
25. Shri Yashvir Singh
26. Shrimati Supriya Sule
27. Shri Pradeep Tamta
28. Shri Joseph Toppo
29. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
30. Shri Ramakant Yadav
31. Prof. (Dr.) Ranjan Prasad Yadav

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Committee Officer

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2014-15)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C.P . Narayanan
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri Bhupinder Singh
9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Beig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
22. Shri Nana Patole
23. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
24. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
25. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
27. Shri Nagendra Singh
28. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
#31. Vacant
(iii)
# Shri Ram Kripal Yadav ceased to be a member of the Committee consequent upon his induction in the Union Council
of Ministers w.e.f.  9 th November, 2014.

SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
(iv)

(v)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorized by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred and Fifty Third Report on “The Wild Life
(Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013”.
2. In its meetings held on 3
rd December, 2013, 24 th February and 30 th October, 2014, the
Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
and on 4
th March, 2014, the Committee heard the views of Chairman and Members of Expert
Committee constituted by the Standing Committee of the National Board for Wildlife on the
provisions of the Bill.
3. In the meeting held on 10
th December, 2014, the Committee considered the draft report and
adopted the same.
ASHWANI KUMAR
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
10th December , 2014 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

(vi)
ACRONYMS
CITES : Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora
WLPA Bill : W ild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013

1
REPORT
The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 provides the legal framework for the protection of
various species of wild animals, management of their habitat and also for the regulation and control
of trade in the products derived from various parts of wild animals. The Act has been amended
earlier in 1982, 1986, 1991, 1993, 2003 and 2006.
2. The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013 (Annexure-I) (hereinafter referred to as
the Bill) was introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the 5
th August, 2013 and referred* to the Department
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on
the 7
th August, 2013 for examination and report.
3. The Bill, inter alia , proposes to insert new definitions in view of the amendments proposed
in the Act; provide for prohibition on use of animal traps except under certain circumstances;
provide for grant of permit for scientific research; make provisions relating to CITES so as to
control illegal international trade in wild life; increase the punishment for offences under the Act;
make provision considering certain activities, such as, grazing or movement of livestock, bona fide
use of drinking and household water by local communities, etc., as non prohibitive; provide for
protection of hunting rights of the Scheduled Tribes in the Union Territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands; insert a new Schedule VII to the Act so as to include the Appendices listing out
flora and fauna for purposes of regulation of international trade under CITES and make certain
consequential and other amendments to the Act.
4. Considering the significance of the Bill, the Committee issued a Press Release in National
Dailies and other regional newspapers on 31
st August, 2013, inviting Memoranda from experts/
individuals/organisations interested in the subject matter of the Bill. The Committee received 7617
Memoranda in response to the Press Release. On scrutiny, most the Memoranda were found to be
repetitive and identical in nature and only 14 Memoranda contained issues of substantive nature
which were forwarded to the Ministry for their response/comments. The Comments of the Ministry
were received on 20
th November, 2013.
5. The Committee held preliminary discussion on the Bill in its meeting held on
26th September, 2013 and heard the views of the Secretary and other senior officers of the Ministry
of Environment and Forests at its meeting held on 3 rd December, 2013. The Committee then heard
the views of the Chairman and Members of the Expert Committee on provisions of the Bill along
with the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests at its meeting held on
4
th March, 2014.
6. Meanwhile, the term of the Chairman of the Committee expired on 9 th April, 2014 and later
on the Committee stood dissolved w.e.f. 18th May, 2014 consequent upon the dissolution of Lok
Sabha. The newly constituted Committee at its meeting held on 30 th October, 2014 heard the
Secretary and other officers of the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change on the
Bill. During the meeting, the Secretary informed the Committee that:–
“The Government has, while reviewing the status and the contents of the present Bill, which
was introduced in the Parliament, taken a view that the Bill should be withdrawn and the
provisions of the Act as well as the proposed amendments need to be reviewed, along with
several other issues which pertain to wildlife protection, which also originate from various
international conventions to which India is a party. Some of the issues which have become
* Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II dated the 7 th August, 2013.

2
important and which the Government would like to address while bringing a comprehensive
amendment include the inclusion of plant species in the schedules of the Act so that they
can also be adequately protected, protection of wildlife other than Scheduled species,
mandate of wildlife authorities in areas which are beyond the protected areas, to introduce
some of the enabling provisions for the implementation of CITES, and empowering the
officials of the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau. So, these are some of the important features.
The Members would also be aware that Government has appointed a High-level Committee
under the Chairmanship of ex-Cabinet Secretary, Mr. T.S.R. Subramanian, which also has
legal experts and experts in different fields of environment. This Committee has been
specifically tasked with making recommendations on reforms which are required in various
Acts which govern the functioning of the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate
Change. The Wildlife Protection Act is one of them. The Committee has had a number of
sittings, including consultation with various State Governments and expert bodies, and they
are likely to submit their report within a month or so. So, we would like to also benefit
from the recommendations which emerge from that Committee”.
7. Thereafter, the Ministry vide its communication dated 19
th November, 2014 further informed
that subsequent to the introduction of the Bill, the Ministry is of the view that several more issues
like inclusion of plant species in schedules for adequate protection, protection of wildlife other than
scheduled species, mandate of wildlife authorities in areas beyond protected Areas, enabling
provisions for CITES implementation, etc. are required to be covered in the Wild Life (Protection)
Act, 1972. It was, therefore, felt that the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013 be
withdrawn for preparation of a comprehensive amendment proposal.
8. Subsequently, vide letter dated 3
rd December, 2014 the Ministry of Environment, Forests
and Climate Change further intimated that steps had been taken to obtain approval of Hon’ble Prime
Minister for withdrawal of the Bill as per Rule 9.13 of the Manual of Parliamentary Procedures and
action for seeking post facto approval of the Cabinet was also in progress. The Ministry has also
forwarded a statement on the withdrawal of the proposed Wild Life (Protection) Amendment
Bill, 2013. The statement is at Annexure-II. The notice of Motion dated 4
th December, 2014 given
by the Minister of Environment, Forests and Climate Change for withdrawal of the Bill is at
Annexure-III.
9. In view of the decision of the Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
to withdraw the Bill to undertake a comprehensive review of the present Act, the
Committee feels that no useful purpose will be served by examining the provisions of the
existing Bill. The Committee, therefore, decided not to pursue the Bill any further and
recommends that the Government may revisit all aspects of The Wild Life (Protection)
Act, 1972 in a holistic manner and come out with a comprehensive Bill.

3
ANNEXURE

5
ANNEXURE-I
TO BE INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
27 April, 2012
Bill No. XXXI of 2013
THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION) AMENDMENT BILL, 2013
A
BILL
further to amend the the Wild Life (Protection) Act,  1972.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the Wild Life (Protection)
Amendment Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. In the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred
to as the principal Act), in section 2,—
(a) after clause ( 2), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(2A) “animal trap” means any device designed to
restrain or capture an animal and includes a leg hold
trap device which usually works by means of jaws
which close tightly upon one or more of the animal’s
limbs, thereby preventing withdrawal of the limb or
limbs from the trap;’;
(b) after clause ( 14), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(14A) ‘‘Gram Sabha’’ means the Gram Sabha as
defined in clause ( b) of article 243 of the Constitution;’;
Short title and
commencement.
Amendment of
section 2.
53 of 1972. 5
10

6
(c) in clause ( 15), after the words “wild animal”, the
words “or specified plant” shall be inserted;
(d) in clause ( 16), in sub-clause ( b), after the word
“trapping”, the word “electrocuting” shall be inserted;
(e) after clause ( 22), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(22A ) “Panchayat” means the Panchayat as
defined in clause ( d) of article 243 of the Constitution;’;
(f) for clause ( 24), the following clause shall be
substituted, namely:—
‘(24) “person” shall include any firm or company
or any authority or association or body of individuals
whether incorporated or not;’;
(g) after clause ( 26), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
‘(26A) “Schedule” means a Schedule annexed to
this Act;
(26B) “Scheduled Areas” means the Scheduled
Areas referred to in sub-paragraph ( 1) of paragraph 6
of Part C of the Fifth Schedule to the Constitution;
(26C) “scientific research” means an activity
carried out only for the purpose of research on any
animal or plant specified in Schedules I to VII (except
Schedule V) or discovered in the wild or its habitats;’;
(h) in clause ( 31), in sub-clause ( b), after the word
“nests”, the words “live nests” shall be inserted;
(i) in clause ( 35), after the word “firearms”, the words
“chainsaw firearms, catapult” shall be inserted;
(j) in clause ( 36), for the words “and found wild in
nature”, the words “or found wild in nature” shall be substituted;
(k) in clause ( 39), for the words “a circus”, the words
“conservation and breeding centres” shall be substituted.
3. In section 5B of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 3), for
the words “functions assigned to it”, the words “functions assigned
to it under the Act on such terms and conditions as may be
prescribed” shall be substituted.
4. After section 9 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“9A. ( 1) No person shall manufacture, sell, purchase,
keep, transport or use any animal trap except with prior
permission in writing of the Chief Wild Life Warden given for
educational and scientific purposes.
Amendment
of section 5B.
Insertion of
new section
9A.
Prohibition on
animal traps.

7
(2) Every person, having on the date of commencement
of the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Act, 2013, the
possession of any animal trap, shall within sixty days from
such commencement, declare to the Chief Wild Life Warden,
the number of animal traps and their description in his
possession and the place or places where such traps have
been stored.
(3) The Chief Wild Life Warden may, if he is satisfied
that a person shall use an animal trap in his possession only
for educational or scientific purposes, issue to such person,
a written permission to possess such trap subject to such
conditions as may be specified in such permission.
(4) All animal traps, declared under sub-section ( 2) and
in respect of which permission has not been granted in
writing by the Chief Wild Life Warden under sub-section ( 3),
shall become the property of the State Government.
(5) In the prosecution for any offence under this
section, it shall be presumed that a person in possession of
animal trap is in unlawful possession of such trap, unless the
contrary is proved by the accused:
Provided that in certain exceptional circumstances, to
be determined by the Chief Wild Life Warden, use of animal
traps, except leg hold traps may be permitted by the Chief
Wild Life Warden for safeguarding the agricultural crops and
property of farmers.”.
5. After section 12 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be inserted, namely:—
“12A. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
Act, the Chief Wild Life Warden, shall on an application, grant
a permit, by an order in writing to any person, to conduct
scientific research.
(2) Without prejudice to any law for the time being in
force, the Chief Wild Life Warden shall ensure that all permits
for scientific research have been processed and granted
subject to such conditions and in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) The Central Government may prescribe the
following, namely:—
(a) the areas for conduct of scientific research;
(b) the person who shall be eligible for the grant
of permits;
(c) the time frame in which proposals for
scientific research shall be disposed of, which shall in
no case exceed one hundred twenty days;
Insertion of
new section
12A.
Grant of
permit for
scientific
research.

8
(d) the conditions subject to which permits for
scientific research may be granted.”.
6. In section 18 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the State Government shall declare its
intention to constitute any area which falls under the
Scheduled Areas as a sanctuary in consultation with the Gram
Sabha concerned.”.
7. In section 22 of the principal Act, for the words “the
records of the State Government and the evidence of any person
acquainted with the same”, the words “the records of the State
Government and of the Gram Sabha and the Panchayat and the
evidence of any person acquainted with the same” shall be
substituted.
8. In section 28 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1), in
clause ( b), after the word “photography”, the words “and
documentary film-making without making any change in the habitat
or causing any adverse impact to the habitat or wild life” shall be
inserted.
9. In section 29 of the principal Act, for the Explanation, the
following Explanation shall be substituted, namely:—
“Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,
grazing or movement of livestock permitted under clause ( d)
of section 33, or hunting of wild animals under a permit
granted under section 11 or hunting without violating the
conditions of permit granted under section 12, or the exercise
of any rights permitted to continue under clause ( c) of sub-
section ( 2) of section 24, or the bona fide use of drinking
and household water by local communities, shall not be
deemed to be an act prohibited under this section.”.
10. In section 32 of the principal Act, for the words “other
substances”, the words “other substances or equipment” shall be
substituted.
11. In section 33 of the principal Act,—
(i) in the opening portion, after the words “manage and
maintain all Sanctuaries”, the words “in accordance with such
management plans prepared by it as per the guidelines issued
by the Central Government and in case the Sanctuary also
falls under the Scheduled Areas, in consultation with the
Gram Sabha concerned,” shall be inserted;
(ii) in the proviso to clause ( a), for the words “tourist
lodges”, the words “tourist or Government lodges” shall be
substituted.
Amendment
of section 32.
Amendment
of section 22.
Amendment
of section 28.
Amendment
of section 18.
Amendment
of section 29.
Amendment
of section 33.

9
12. In section 35 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), after the proviso, the following
proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided further that the State Government shall
declare its intention to constitute any area which falls
under the Scheduled Areas as a National Park in
consultation with the Gram Sabha concerned.”;
(ii) after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“( 2A ) The notification referred to in sub-
section ( 1) shall, wherever available, include relevant details of
forests (including forest compartment number) and revenue
records pertaining to the area proposed to be declared as a
National Park.”;
(iii) in sub-section ( 8), for the words and figures
“sections 27 and 28”, the words, figures and letter “sections
18A, 27 and 28,” shall be substituted.
13. In section 36D of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2),—
(i) for the words “five representatives”, the words “not
less than three representatives” shall be substituted;
(ii) after sub-section ( 2), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(2A) Where a community reserve is declared on
private land under sub-section ( 1) of section 36C, the
Community Reserve management committee shall consist of
the owner of the land along with a representative of the State
Forests or Wild Life Department under whose jurisdiction the
Community Reserve is located and also the representative of
the Panchayat concerned or the tribal community, as the case
may be.”.
14. In section 38 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), the
following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
“Provided that the State Government shall declare any
area which falls under the Scheduled Areas to be a National
Park in consultation with the Gram Sabha concerned.”.
15. In section 38C of the principal Act, after clause ( a), the
following clause shall be inserted, namely:—
“(aa) supervise the overall functioning of the zoo and
authorise the concerned Chief Wild Life Warden to supervise
the zoo;”.
Amendment
of section 35.
Amendment of
section 36D.
Amendment of
section 38.
Amendment of
section 38C.

10
16. Section 38J of the principal Act shall be renumbered as
sub-section ( 1) the roof, and after sub-section ( 1) as so
renumbered, the following sub-section shall be inserted, namely:—
“(2) The Central Zoo Authority shall issue guidelines for the
purposes of this section.”.
17. In section 38L of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 2), for
clauses ( l) and ( m), the following clauses shall be substituted,
namely:—
“( l) Chairperson, National Commission for the
Scheduled Tribes or an officer authorised by him;
(m) Chairperson, National Commission for the
Scheduled Castes or an officer authorised by him;”.
18. In section 38-O of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1),
in clause ( a), after the words “of this Act”, the words “and make
grants to it for such Plan” shall be inserted.
19. After section 38X of the principal Act, the following
section shall be inserted, namely:—
“38XA. The provisions contained in this Chapter shall
be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions
relating to the Sanctuaries and National Parks (whether
included and declared, or are in the process of being so
declared) included in a tiger reserve under this Act.”.
20. In Chapter IVC of the principal Act, in the heading, for
the words “TIGER AND OTHER ENDANGERED SPECIES”, the
words “WILD LIFE” shall be substituted.
21. For section 38Y of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“38Y . The Central Government may, for the purpose of
this Act, by order published in the Official Gazette, constitute
a Wild Life Crime Control Bureau consisting of—
(a) the Director of Wild Life Preservation—
Director ex officio ;
(b) the Inspector-General of Police—Additional
Director;
(c) the Deputy Inspector-General of Police—Joint
Director;
(d) the Deputy Inspector-General of Forests—
Joint Director;
Amendment of
Chapter IVC.
Amendment
of section 38L.
Amendment
of section
38-O.
Amendment
of section 38J.
Provisions of
this Chapter
shall be in
addition to
provisions
relating to
Sanctuaries
and National
Parks.
Substitution of
new section for
section 38Y .
Insertion of
new section
38XA.
Constitution
of Wild Life
Crime Control
Bureau.

11
(e) the Additional Commissioner (Customs and
Central Excise)—Joint Director; and
(f) such other officers as may be appointed from
amongst the officers referred to in sections 3 and 4 of
this Act.”.
22. In section 39 of the principal Act,—
(i) in sub-section ( 1), in clause ( a), after the words
“bred in captivity or hunted”, the words, figures and letter “or
specified plant picked, uprooted, kept, damaged or destroyed,
dealt with or sold under section 17A” shall be inserted;
(ii) after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(4) Where any such Government property is a
live animal, the State Government shall ensure that it is
housed and cared for by a recognised zoo or rescue
centre when it cannot be released to its natural
habitat.”.
23. After Chapter V A of the principal Act, the following
Chapter shall be inserted, namely:—
‘CHAPTER VB
R
EGULATIN OF I NTERNATIONAL T RADE IN E NDANGERED  S PECIES  OF
WILD F AUNA AND F LORA AS PER C ONVENTION  ON I NTERNATIONAL
TRADE IN E NDANGERED  S PECIES  OF W ILD F AUNA AND F LORA
49D. In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise
requires,—
(a) “artificially propagated” means plants which
have been grown under controlled conditions from plant
materials grown under similar conditions;
(b) “bred in captivity” means produced from
parents in captivity;
(c) “Convention” means the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora signed at Washington, D.C., in the
United States of America on the 3rd of March, 1973,
and amended at Bonn on the 22nd of June, 1979, its
appendices, decisions, resolutions and notifications
made thereunder and its amendments, to the extent
binding on India;
(d) “exotic species” means species of animals and
plants not found in wild in India and not listed in the
Appendices to the Convention but notified as such by
the Management Authority under sub-section ( 3) of
section 49F for the reasons mentioned in clause ( b) of
section 49E;
Amendment
of section 39.
Insertion of
new Chapter
VB.
Definitions
for the
purposes of
this Chapter.

12
(e) “export” means export from India to any
other country of animal, animal article, meat, trophy,
specimen, exotic species or of any of them;
(f) “import” means import into India from any
other country of animal, animal article, meat, trophy,
specimen, exotic species or of any of them;
(g) “Management Authority” means the
Management Authority designated under section 49F;
(h) “plant” means any member, alive or dead, of
the plants listed in Schedule VII including seeds, roots
and other parts thereof;
(i) “readily recognisable part or derivative”
includes any specimen which appears from an
accompanying document, the packaging or a mark or
label, or from any other circumstances, to be a part or
derivative of an animal or plant of species listed in
Schedule VII;
(j) “re-export” means export of any specimen
that has previously been imported;
(k) “Scientific Authority” means a Scientific
Authority designated under section 49H;
(l) “scheduled specimen” means any specimen of
species listed in Appendices I, II and III of the
Convention and incorporated as such in Schedule VII;
(m) “specimen” means—
(i) any animal or plant, whether alive or
dead;
(ii) in the case of an animal,—
(A) for species included in
Appendices I and II, any readily recognisable
part or derivative thereof;
(B) for species included in
Appendix III, any readily recognisable part
or derivative thereof specified in
Appendix III of Schedule VII in relation to
the species; and
(iii) in the case of a plant,—
(A) for species included in
Appendix I, any readily recognisable part or
derivative thereof;

13
(B) for species included in
Appendices II and III, any readily recognisable
part or derivative thereof specified in
Appendices II and III of Schedule VII in
relation to the species;
(n) “trade” means export, re-export, import and
introduction from the sea.
49E. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to,—
(a) specimens of animal and plant species listed in
Schedule VII; and
(b) exotic species of animals and plants specimens not
covered by Schedule VII which require regulation,—
(i) to protect the indigenous gene pool of the wild
life found in India; or
(ii) such species as it may be invasive in nature
and may pose a threat to the wild life or ecosystems of
India; or
(iii) as such species are, in the opinion of the
Scientific Authority, critically endangered in the habitats
in which they occur naturally.
49F . (1) The Central Government may, by notification,
designate an officer not below the rank of an Additional Director
General of Forests as the Management Authority for discharging the
functions and exercising the powers under this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the Customs Act, 1962 or rules made
or notifications issued thereunder or any law for the time being in
force, the Management Authority shall be responsible for issuance of
permits and certificates regulating the import, export and reexport of
any scheduled specimen, submission of reports and other functions
as required under this Chapter.
(3) The Management Authority shall, by notification, and on
the advice of the Scientific Authority, notify the exotic species of
animals and plants not covered by the Convention.
(4) The Management Authority shall prepare and submit
annual and biennial reports to the Central Government.
(5) The Central Government may appoint such officers
and employees as may be necessary to assist the Management
Authority in discharging its functions or exercising its powers
under this Chapter, on such terms and conditions of service
including salaries and allowances as may be prescribed.
Provisions of
this Chapter to
apply to
animal and
plant species
listed in
Schedule VII
and exotic
species.
Designation of
Management
Authority and
other officers.
52 of 1962.

14
(6) The Management Authority may, with the prior approval
of the Central Government, delegate its functions or powers [except
the power to notify exotic species under subsection ( 3)], to such
officers not below the rank of Assistant Inspector General of
Forests, as it may consider necessary for the purposes of this
Chapter.
49G . The Management Authority shall, while discharging its
functions or exercising its powers under the provisions of this
Chapter, be guided by the following principles, namely:—
(i) the export or re-export or import of a specimen
under Schedule VII is in accordance with the provisions of
this Chapter;
(ii) specimens for export or import are not obtained in
contravention of any laws, for the time being in force relating
to protection of fauna and flora;
(iii) export or re-export of any living specimen is so
arranged and shipped as to minimise the risk of injury,
damage to health or cruel treatment;
(iv) the import of any specimen listed in Appendix I of
Schedule VII is not used for primarily commercial purposes;
(v) the re-export of living specimen of species listed in
Appendix I or Appendix II of Schedule VII shall require the
prior grant and submission of a re-export certificate issued as
per the provisions of the Convention;
(vi) the proposed recipient of a living specimen is
suitably equipped to house and take care of it;
(vii) the import of any specimen of a species included
in Appendix I or Appendix II of Schedule VII shall require the
submission of either an export permit or a re-export
certificate under this Act in addition to the requirement of
export permit or re-export certificate under any other law for
the time being in force;
(viii) the introduction from the sea of any specimen of
a species included in Appendix I or Appendix II of
Schedule VII shall require the grant of a certificate from the
Management Authority of the country of introduction issued
under the provision of the Convention;
(ix) the export of any specimen of a species included
in Appendix III of Schedule VII from any country which has
included that species in Appendix III shall require grant and
submission of an export permit which shall only be granted
when conditions ( ii) and ( iii) have been fulfilled;
General
principles to
be followed by
Management
Authority.

15
(x) the import of any specimen of a species included in
Appendix III of Schedule VII shall require,—
(a) the submission of certificate of origin; and
(b) where the import is from a country which
has included that species in Appendix III, an export
permit; or
(c) in the case of re-export, a certificate granted
by the Management Authority of the country of re-
export that the specimen was processed in that country
or is being re-exported, may be accepted by the
country of import as evidence that the provisions of the
Convention have been complied with in respect of the
specimen concerned.
Explanation .—In clause ( viii ), the expression
“introduction from the sea” means transportation into
India of specimens of any species which were taken
from the marine environment not under the jurisdiction
of India.
49H. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification,
designate one or more institutes established by it and engaged in
research in wild life, as the Scientific Authority for the purposes of
this Chapter.
(2) The designated Scientific Authority shall advise the
Management Authority in such matters as may be referred to it by
the Management Authority.
(3) Whenever the Scientific Authority is of the opinion that
the export of specimens of any such species be limited in order to
maintain that species throughout its range at a level consistent with
its role in the ecosystems in which it occurs and well above the
level at which that species might become eligible for inclusion in
Appendix I of Schedule VII, it shall advise the Management
Authority to take such appropriate measures to limit the grant of
export permits for specimens of that species as the Scientific
Authority may deem necessary for said purpose.
(4) The Scientific Authority, while advising the Management
Authority shall be guided by the following principles, namely:—
(a) that such export or import referred to in section
49G shall not be detrimental to the survival of that species;
and
(b) proposed recipient of a living specimen is suitably
equipped to house and take care for it.
(5) The Scientific Authority shall monitor the export permits
granted by the Management Authority for specimens of species
included in Appendix II of Schedule VII.
Designation
of Scientific
Authorities.

16
(6) It shall be the duty of the Scientific Authority to identify
and inform the Management Authority of exotic species of animals
and plants which are not covered by Schedule VII and require
regulation thereof—
(i) to protect the indigenous gene pool of the wild life
found in India; or
(ii) to avoid threat to the wild life or ecosystems of
India as such species are invasive in nature; or
(iii) to protect such species as they, in the opinion of
the Scientific Authority, are critically endangered in the
habitats in which they occur naturally.
49-I. The Management Authority and the Scientific Authority,
shall, while performing their duties and exercising powers by or
under this Chapter, be subject to such general or special directions,
as the Central Government may, from time to time, give in writing.
49J. ( 1) The Central Government may, by notification,
constitute a co-ordination committee, for the purpose of ensuring
co-ordination between the Management Authority and Scientific
Authority, State Chief Wild Life Wardens and other enforcement
authorities or agencies dealing with trade in wild life.
(2) The co-ordination committee referred to in sub-section ( 1)
shall meet at such time and place and shall observe such rules of
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings,
including the quorum at its meetings, as may be prescribed.
49K. ( 1) No person shall enter into any trade in scheduled
specimens included in Appendix I of Schedule VII:
Provided that the scheduled specimens included in Appendix I
of Schedule VII bred in captivity for commercial purposes, (except
those which cannot be released in the wild), or of a plant species
included in the said Appendix I and artificially propagated for
commercial purposes shall be deemed to be scheduled specimen
included in Appendix II of Schedule VII.
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 1), no
person shall enter into any trade in any scheduled specimen except
in accordance with the certificate granted by the Management
Authority or the officer authorised by it in such manner as may be
prescribed.
(3) Every person trading in any scheduled specimen shall
report the details of the scheduled specimen and the transaction to
the Management Authority or the officer authorised by it in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(4) Every person, desirous of trading in a scheduled
specimen, shall present it for clearance to the Management Authority
or the officer authorised by it or a customs officer only at the ports
of exit and entry specified thereof.
Power of
Central
Government
to issue
directions.
Constitution
of
co-ordination
committee.
International
trade in
scheduled
specimens and
restriction in
respect
thereof.

17
49L. ( 1) Every person possessing an exotic species or
scheduled specimen shall report the details of such specimen or
specimens to the Management Authority or the officer authorised by
it within such period and in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The Management Authority or the officer authorised by it
may, on being satisfied that any exotic species or scheduled
specimen was in possession of a person being the owner prior to
the date of coming into force of the Wild Life (Protection)
Amendment Act, 2013 and the rules made thereunder, or was
obtained, in conformity with the Convention, register the details of
such scheduled specimen or exotic species and issue a registration
certificate in the prescribed manner allowing the owner to retain
such specimen.
(3) Any person who transfers possession, by any means
whatsoever, of any scheduled specimen or exotic species shall
report the details of such transfer to the Management Authority or
the officer authorised by it in such form and within such period and
in such manner as may be prescribed.
(4) The Management Authority or the officer authorised by it
shall register all transfers of scheduled specimens or exotic species
and issue the transferee with a registration certificate in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(5) Any person in possession of any live scheduled specimen
or exotic species which bears any offspring shall report the birth of
such offspring to the Management Authority or the officer
authorised by it in such form and within such period and in such
manner as may be prescribed.
(6) The Management Authority or the officer authorised by it
shall on receipt of the report under sub-section ( 5) register any
offspring born to any scheduled specimen or exotic species and
issue the owner with a registration certificate in such manner as
may be prescribed.
(7) No person shall possess, transfer or breed any scheduled
specimen or exotic species except in conformity with this section
and such rules as may be prescribed.
(8) The owner of an exotic species or scheduled specimen
shall take all necessary precautions to ensure that it does not
contaminate the indigenous gene pool of the wild life found in the
country in any manner.
49M. ( 1) Every person who is engaged in the breeding in
captivity or artificially propagating any scheduled specimen listed in
Appendix I of Schedule VII shall make, within a period of ninety
days of the commencement of the Wild Life (Protection)
Amendment Act, 2013, an application for registration to the
Conservator of Forest (Wild Life).
Possession,
breeding and
domestic
trade of
exotic species
or scheduled
specimens.
Registration
of persons
engaged in
breeding or
artificially
propagating
Scheduled
specimen.

18
(2) The form of application to be made to the Conservator of
Forest (Wild Life) under sub-section ( 1), the particulars to be
contained in such application form, the manner in which such
application shall be made, the fee payable on such application, the
form of certificate of registration, the procedure to be followed in
granting or cancelling the certificate of registration shall be such as
may be prescribed.
49N. ( 1) On receipt of application under sub-section ( 1) of
section 49M, the Conservator of Forest (Wild Life) shall, if—
(a) the application is in the prescribed form; and
(b) satisfied that the provisions of the Act and rules
made thereunder have been duly complied with, record an
entry of the statement in a register and register the applicant
and grant him a certificate of registration.
(2) If the Conservator of Forest (Wild Life) is not satisfied
that the provisions of the Act and rules made thereunder are
complied with or if a false particular is furnished, he may refuse or
cancel the registration, as the case may be:
Provided that an opportunity of being heard shall be given to
the applicant before the registration is refused or as the case may
be, the registration is cancelled.
(3) The certificate of registration under sub-section ( 1) shall
be issued for a period of two years and may be renewed after two
years on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
(4) Any person aggrieved by the refusal of the Conservator of
Forest (Wild Life) or cancellation of registration under sub-
section ( 2) may prefer an appeal to the Chief Wild Life Warden.
49-O. No person shall alter, deface, erase or remove a mark
of identification affixed upon the exotic species or scheduled
specimen or its package.
49P. ( 1) Every exotic species or scheduled specimen, in
respect of which any offence against this Act or rules made
thereunder has been committed, shall become the property of the
Central Government.
(2) The provisions of section 39 shall, so far as may be,
apply in relation to the exotic species or scheduled specimen as they
apply in relation to wild animals and animals articles referred to in
sub-section ( 1) of that section.
(3) Where specimen referred to in sub-section ( 2) is a live
animal, the State Government shall ensure that it is housed and
cared for by a recognised zoo or rescue centre in case it cannot be
released to its natural habitat.’.
Registration
and issue of
certificate of
registration.
Prohibition
of erasing
of a mark
of identifi-
cation.
Exotic species
of scheduled
specimen
to be
Government
property.

19
24. In section 50 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1),—
(i) after the words “any Forest Officer”, the
words “or any officer authorised by the Management
Authority” shall be inserted;
(ii) after the words “a sub-inspector”, the words
“or any customs officer not below the rank of an
inspector or any officer of the coast guard not below
the rank of an Assistant Commandant” shall be inserted;
(b) after sub-section ( 9), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(10) During any inquiry or trial of an offence
under this Act, where it appears to the Judge or
Magistrate that there is prima facie case that any
property including vehicles and vessels, seized under
clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) was involved in any way
in the commission of an offence under this Act, the
Judge or Magistrate shall not order for the return of
such property to its rightful owner until the conclusion
of the trial of the offence notwithstanding anything
contained in section 451 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973.”.
25. After section 50 of the principal Act, the following
sections shall be inserted, namely:—
“50A. The Director of Wild Life Crime Control Bureau
constituted under section 38Y or any other officer authorised
by him in this behalf, may, notwithstanding anything
contained in this Act, undertake control of delivery of any
consignment to—
(a) any destination in India, in such manner as
may be prescribed;
(b) a foreign country, in consultation with the
competent authority of such foreign country to which
a consignment is destined, in such manner as may be
prescribed.
50B. ( 1) An officer-in-charge of a police station as and
when so requested in writing by an officer mentioned in sub-
section ( 1) of section 50, shall take charge of and keep in
safe custody, pending the order of the Magistrate, all articles
seized and delivered under this Act.
(2) The officer-in-charge may allow any officer to
accompany such articles to the police station or who may be
deputed, to affix his seal to such articles or to take samples
of and from them and all samples so taken shall also be
sealed with a seal of the officer-in-charge of the police station.
Amendment of
section 50.
2 of 1974.
Insertion of
new sections
50A and 50B.
Police to
take charge
of article
seized and
delivered.
Power to
undertake
delivery.

20
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, or any other law for the
time being in force, the Central Government may, by rules,
specify the manner of dealing with the articles forwarded to
the police officer under sub-section ( 1).”.
26. For sections 51 and 51A of the principal Act, the
following sections shall be substituted, namely:—
“51. ( 1) Any person who contravenes any provision of
this Act or any rule or order made thereunder, or terms and
conditions of any licence or permit granted under this Act,
shall be guilty of an offence against this Act, and shall, on
conviction, be liable to be punished in the manner specified
under sub-sections ( 2) to ( 7).
(2) Where the offence relates to any animal specified in
Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II or the meat of such
animal or animal article, trophy, or uncured trophy derived
from such animal, such offence shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five
years but which may extend to seven years and also with fine
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may
extend to twenty-five lakh rupees:
Provided that in the case of a second or subsequent
offence, of the nature mentioned in this sub-section, the term
of imprisonment shall not be less than seven years and also
with fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but
which may extend to fifty lakh rupees.
(3) Where the offence relates to the sale or purchase or
transfer or offer for sale or trade of any animal specified in
Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II or the meat of such
animal or animal article, trophy, or uncured trophy derived
from such animal or any violation of Chapter V A, shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than seven years and also with fine which shall not be
less than fifteen lakh rupees:
Provided that in the case of a second or subsequent
offence, of the nature mentioned in this sub-section, the term
of imprisonment shall not be less than seven years and also
with fine which shall not be less than thirty lakh rupees.
(4) Where the offence relates to the sale or purchase or
transfer or offer for sale or trade of any animal specified in
Part I of Schedule II, Schedule III and Schedule IV , or the
meat of such animal or animal article, trophy, or uncured
trophy derived from such animal, such offence shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
three years or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees
or with both:
2 of 1974.
Substitution
of new
sections for
section 51
and 51A.
Penalties.

21
Provided that in case of a second or subsequent
offence of the nature mentioned in this sub-section, the term
of imprisonment which may extend to five years or with fine
which may extend to three lakh rupees or with both.
(5) Where the offence relates to hunting in a Sanctuary
or a National Park or altering the boundaries of a Sanctuary
or a National Park, such offence shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five
years but which may extend to seven years and also with fine
which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may
extend to twenty-five lakh rupees:
Provided that in the case of a second or subsequent
offence of the nature mentioned in this sub-section, the term
of imprisonment shall not be less than seven years and also
with fine which shall not be less than thirty lakh rupees.
(6) Where the offence relates to hunting in a tiger
reserve or altering the boundaries of a tiger reserve, such
offence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years and also with fine
which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which may
extend to thirty lakh rupees:
Provided that in the case of a second or subsequent
offence of the nature mentioned in this sub-section, the term
of imprisonment shall not be less than seven years and also
with fine which shall not be less than fifty lakh rupees.
(7) Where the offence relates to contravention of the
provisions of section 38J, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or
with a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or with
both:
Provided that in the case of a second or subsequent
offence of the nature mentioned in this sub-section, the term
of imprisonment may extend to one year or with fine which
may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.
51A. ( 1) Where the offence relates to contravention of
any other provision of this Act or any rule or order made
thereunder, or the breach of any of the terms and conditions
of any licence or permit granted under this Act, such offence
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to three years and also with fine which may extend to
twenty-five thousand rupees:
Provided that in the case of a second or subsequent
offence of the nature mentioned in this sub-section, the term
of imprisonment shall not be less than three years but which
may extend to five years and also with fine which shall not
be less than fifty thousand rupees.
Other
offences.

22
(2) When any person is convicted of an offence against this
Act, the court trying the offence may order that any captive animal,
wild animal, animal article, trophy, uncured trophy, meat, ivory
imported into India or an article made from such ivory, any
specified plant, or part or derivative thereof in respect of which the
offence has been committed, and any trap, tool, vehicle, vessel or
weapon, used in the commission of the said offence be forfeited to
the State Government and that any licence or permit, held by such
person under the provisions of this Act, be cancelled.
(3) Such cancellation of licence or permit or such forfeiture
shall be in addition to any punishment that may be awarded for such
offence.
(4) Where any person is convicted of an offence against this
Act, the court may direct that the licence, if any, granted to such
person under the Arms Act, 1959, for possession of any arm with
which an offence against this Act has been committed, shall be
cancelled and that such person shall not be eligible for a licence
under the Arms Act, 1959 for a period of five years from the date
of conviction.
(5) Nothing contained in section 360 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 or in the Probation of Offenders
Act, 1958 shall apply to a person convicted of an offence with
respect to hunting in a Sanctuary or a National Park or of an
offence against any provision of Chapter V A unless such person is
under eighteen years of age.
51B. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973,—
(a) every offence punishable with a term of
imprisonment for three years or more under this Act shall be
cognizable offence;
(b) no person accused of an offence under sub-
sections ( 1), ( 2), ( 3), ( 5) and ( 6) of section 51 shall be
released on bail or on his own bond unless the Public
Prosecutor has been given the opportunity to oppose the
application for such release.”.
27. In section 55 of the principal Act,—
(a) after clause ( ac), the following clause shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(ad) the Management Authority or any officer,
including an officer of the Wild Life Crime Control
Bureau, authorised in this behalf by the Central
Government; or”;
(b) the following proviso shall be inserted, namely:—
Certain
conditions to
apply while
granting bail.
54 of 1959.
2 of 1974.
20 of 1958.
2 of 1974.
Amendment
of section 55.

23
“Provided that a court may also take cognizance
of any offence under this Act without the accused
being committed to trial, upon perusal of a police report
under section 173 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, of the facts constituting an offence
under this Act.”.
28. In section 61 of the principal Act,—
(a) in sub-section ( 1), after the words “one Schedule to
another”, the words “except Schedule VII” shall be inserted;
(b) after sub-section ( 1), the following sub-section shall
be inserted, namely:—
“(2) The Central Government may, in consultation
with concerned State Governments by notification, add
or omit or amend the entries in any of the Schedules to
respond to area or site specific requirements of each
State.”;
(c) after sub-section ( 3), the following sub-sections
shall be inserted, namely:—
“( 4) The Central Government may, by
notification, and in consultation with the Management
Authority and the Scientific Authority, amend, vary or
modify Schedule VII.
(5) Nothing contained in this Chapter and
Schedule VII, shall affect anything contained in other
provisions of the Act and the Schedules I to VI (both
inclusive).
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
Act, where a particular species is listed under
Schedules I, II, III, IV , V , or VI and Schedule VII, the
provisions of this Act relevant to Schedules I to VI
shall apply to such species.
(7) Every notification issued under this section
shall be laid, as soon as may be it is issued, before
each House of Parliament.”.
29. In section 63 of the principal Act, in sub-section ( 1),—
(a) after clause ( ai), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
“(aii) the rules, standards or procedures and any
other matter pertaining to Scientific Research;
(aiii) any matter relating to animal traps;
(aiv) terms and conditions of the committee, sub-
committees or study groups under sub-section ( 3) of
section 5B;
2 of 1974.
Amendment
of section 61.
Amendment
of section 63.

24
(av) terms and conditions of the Committees
under section 8A;”;
(b) after clause ( j), the following clauses shall be
inserted, namely:—
“( ji ) the terms and conditions of service
including salaries and allowances of the officers and
employees of the Management Authority under sub-
section ( 5) of section 49F;
(jii) the rules of procedure for transaction of
business at meetings of the co-ordination committee
including quorum under sub-section ( 2) of section 49J;
(jiii ) the manner of granting permits for
possessing or trading in scheduled specimens under
sub-section ( 2) of section 49K; and the manner of
furnishing reports of such specimens to the
Management Authority under sub-section ( 3) of section
49K;
(jiv) The period within which and the manner in
which the details of exotic species or scheduled
specimen to be reported under sub-section ( 1) of
section 49L;
(jv) The period within which and the manner in
which the details of transfer of exotic species or
scheduled specimen under sub-section ( 3) of section
49L;
(jvi) The manner of registration certificate under
sub-section ( 4) of section 49L;
(jvii) The form, period and the manner in which
the birth of offspring of exotic species or scheduled
specimen to be reputed under sub-section ( 5) of section
49L;
(jviii ) The manner in which a registration
certificate to be issued to the owner under sub-
section ( 6) of section 49M;
(jix) the rules to regulate possession, transfer or
breeding under subsection (7) of section 49L;
(jx) the form, particulars, manner, fee payable on
the application and the form of certificate of
registration and the procedure in granting or cancelling
the certificate of registration under sub-section ( 2) of
section 49M;
(jxi) the fee payable under sub-section ( 3) of
section 49N;

25
(jxii) the manner of delivery of any consignment
to any destination in India and to a foreign country
under section 50A;”;
(c) after clause ( l), the following clause shall be inserted,
namely:—
“(m) any other matter which has to be, or may be,
prescribed.”.
30. For section 65 of the principal Act, the following section
shall be substituted, namely:—
“65. Nothing in this Act shall affect the hunting rights
of the Scheduled Tribes of the Andaman Islands and the
Nicobar Islands in the Union Territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands, as notified by the Andaman and Nicobar
Administration from time to time.”.
31. After Schedule VI of the principal Act, the following
Schedule shall be inserted, namely:—
Substitution
of new
section for
section 65.
Rights of
Scheduled
Tribes in
Andaman and
Nicobar
Islands to be
protected.
Insertion of
new Schedule
VII.

26
26
“SCHEDULE VII
(See section 49E)
APPENDIX-I
FAUNA (ANIMALS)
PHYLUM CHORDATA
CLASS MAMMALIA
(MAMMALS)
ARTIODACTYLA
Antilocapridae: Pronghorn
1. Antilocapra americana
Bovidae: Antelopes, cattle, duikers, gazelles, goats, sheep etc.
2. Addax nasomaculatus
3. Bos gaurus
4. Bos mutus
5. Bos sauveli
6. Bubalus depressicornis
7. Bubalus mindorensis
8. Bubalus quarlesi
9. Capra falconeri
10. Capricornis milneedwardsii
11. Capricornis rubidus
12. Capricornis sumatraensis
13. Capricornis thar
14. Cephalophus jentinki
15. Gazella cuvieri
16. Gazella leptoceros
17. Hippotragus niger variani
18. Naemorhedus baileyi
19. Naemorhedus caudatus
20. Naemorhedus goral
21. Naemorhedus griseus

27
22. Nanger dama
23. Oryx dammah
24. Oryx leucoryx
25. Ovis ammon hodgsonii
26. Ovis ammon nigrimontana
27. Ovis orientalis ophion
28. Ovis vignei vignei
29. Pantholops hodgsonii
30. Pseudoryx nghetinhensis
31. Rupicapra pyrenaica ornate
Camelidae: Guanaco, vicuna
32. Vicugna vicugna
Cervidae: Deer, guemals, muntjacs, pudus
33. Axis calamianensis
34. Axis kuhlii
35. Axis porcinus annamiticus
36. Blastocerus dichotomus
37. Cervus elaphus hanglu
38. Dama dama mesopotamica
39. Hippocamelus spp.
40. Muntiacus crinifrons
41. Muntiacus vuquangensis
42. Ozotoceros bezoarticus
43. Padu puda
44. Rucervus duvaucelii
45. Rucervus eldii
Moschidae: Musk deer
46. Moschus spp. (Only the populations of Afghanistan, Bhutan,
India, Myanmar, Nepal and Pakistan; all other populations are
included in Appendix II)
Suidae: Babirusa, pygmy hog
47. Babyrousa babyrussa
48. Babyrousa bolabatuensis Babyrousa celebensis

28
49. Babyrousa togeanensis
50. Sus salvanius
Tayassuidae: Peccaries
51. Catagonus wagneri
CARNIVORA
Ailuridae: Red panda
52. Ailurus fulgens
Canidae: Bush dog, foxes, wolves
53. Canis lupus (Only the populations of Bhutan, India, Nepal and
Pakistan; all other populations are included in Appendix II.
Excludes the domesticated form and the dingo which are
referenced as Canis lupus familiaris and Canis lupus dingo)
54. Speothos venaticus
Felidae: Cats
55. Acinanyx jubatus
56. Caracal caracal (Only the population of Asia; all other
populations are included in Appendix II)
57. Catopuma temminckii
58. Felis nigripes
59. Leopardus geoffroyi
60. Leopardus jacobitus
61. Leopardus pardalis
62. Leopardus tigrinus
63. Leopardus wiedii
64. Lynx pardinus
65. Neofelis nebulosa
66. Panthera leo persica
67. Panthera onca
68. Panthera pardus
69. Panthera tigris
70. Pardofelis marmorata
71. Prionailurus bengalensis bengalensis (Only the populations of
the Bangladesh, India and Thailand; all other populations are
included in Appendix II)
72. Prionailurus planiceps

29
73. Prionailurus rubiginosus (Only the population of India; all other
populations are included in Appendix II)
74. Puma concolor coryi
75. Puma concolor costaricensis
76. Puma concolor couguar
77. Puma yagouaroundi (Only the populations of Central and North
America; all other populations are included in Appendix II)
78. Uncia uncia
Lutrinae: Otters
79. Aonyx capensis microdon (Only the population of Cameroon
and Nigeria; all other populations are included in Appendix II)
80. Enhydra lutris nereis
81. Lontra felina
82. Lontra longicaudis
83. Lontra provocax
84. Lutra lutra
85. Lutra nippon
86. Pteronura brasiliensis
Mustelinae: Grisons, honey badger, martens, tayra, weasels
87. Mustela nigripes
Otariidae: Fur seals, sealions
88. Arctocephalus townsendi
Phocidae: Seals
89. Manochus spp.
Ursidae: Bears, giant panda
90. Ailuropoda melanoleuca
91. Helarctos malayanus
92. Melursus ursinus
93. Tremarctos ornatus
94. Ursus arctos (Only the populations of Bhutan, China, Mexico
and Mongolia; all other populations are included in Appendix II)
95. Ursus arctos isabellinus
96. Ursus thibetanus

30
Viverridae: Binturong, civets, linsangs, otter-civet, palm civets
97. Prionodon pardicolor
CETACEA: Dolphins, porpoises, whales
Balaenidae: Bowhead whale, right whales
98. Balaena mysticetus
99. Eubalaena spp.
Balaenopteridae: Humpback whale, rorquals
100. Balaenoptera acutorostrata (Except the population of West
Greenland, which is included in Appendix II)
101. Balaenoptera bonaerensis
102. Balaenoptera borealis
103. Balaenoptera edeni
104. Bala enoptera musculus
105. Balaenoptera omurai
106. Balaenoptera physalus
107. Megaptera novaeangliae
Delphinidae: Dolphins
108. Orcaella brevirostris
109. Orcaella heinsohni
110. Sotalia spp.
111. Sousa spp.
Eschrichtiidae: Grey whale
112. Eschrichtius robustus
Iniidae: River dolphins
113. Lipotes vexillifer
Neobalaenidae: Pygmy right whale
114. Caperea marginata
Phocoenidae: Porpoises
115. Neophocaena Phocaenoides
116. Phocoena sinus
Physeteridae: Sperm whales
117. Physeter macrocephalus

31
Platanistidae: River dolphins
118. Platanista spp.
119. Ziphiidae: Beaked whales, bottle-nosed whales
120. Berardius spp.
121. Hyperoodon spp.
CHIROPTERA
Pteropodidae: Fruit bats, flying foxes
122. Acerodon jubatus
123. Pteropus insularis
124. Pteropus loochoensis
125. Pteropus mariannus
126. Pteropus molossinus
127. Pteropus pelewensis
128. Pteropus pilosus
129. Pteropus samoensis
130. Pteropus tonganus
131. Pteropus ualanus
132. Pteropus yapensis
CINGULATA
Dasypodidae: Armadillos
133. Priodontes maximus
DASYUROMORPHIA
Dasyuridae: Dunnarts
134. Sminthopsis longicaudata
135. Sminthopsis psammophila
Thylacinidae: Tasmanian wolf, thylacine
136. Thylacinus cynocephalus
(possibly extinct)
DIPROTODONTIA
Macropodidae: Kangaroos, wallabies
137. Lagorchestes hirsutus
138. Lagostrophus fasciatus
139. Onychogalea fraenata

32
140. Onychogalea lunata
141. Phalangeridae Cuscuses
Potoroidae: Rat-kangaroos
142. Bettongia spp.
143. Caloprymnus campestris
(possibly extinct)
Vombatidae: Northern hairy-nosed wombat
144. Lasiorhinus krefftii
LAGOMORPHA
Leporidae: Hispid hare, volcano rabbit
145. Caprolagus hispidus
146. Romerolagus diazi
PERAMELEMORPHIA
Chaeropodidae: Pig-footed bandicoots
147. Chaeropus ecaudatus
(possibly extinct)
Peramelidae: Bandicoots, echymiperas
148. Perameles bougainville
Thylacomyidae: Bilbies
149. Macrotis lagotis
150. Macrotis leucura
PERISSODACTYLA
Equidae: Horses, wild asses, zebras
151. Equus africanus
152. Equus grevyi
153. Equus hemionous hemionus
154. Equus hemionus khur
155. Equus przewalskii
156. Equus zebra zebra
Rhinocerotidae: Rhinoceroses
157. Rhinocerotidae spp. (Except the subspecies included in
Appendix II)
Tapiridae: Tapirs
158. T apiridae spp. (Except the species included in Appendix II)

33
PRIMATES: Apes, monkeys
Atelidae: Howler and prehensile-tailed monkeys
159. Alouatta coibensis
160. Alouatta palliata
161. Alouatta pigra
162. Ateles geoffroyi frontatus
163. Ateles geoffroyi panamensis
164. Brachyteles arachnoides
165. Brachyteles hyposanthus
166. Oreonax flavicauda
167. Cebidae New World monkeys
168. Callimico goeldii
169. Callithrix aurita
170. Callithrix flaviceps
171. Leontopithecus spp.
172. Saguinus bicolor
173. Saguinus geoffroyi
174. Sauginus leucopus
175. Saguinus martinsi
176. Saguinus Oedipus
177. Saimiri oerstedii
Cercopithecidae: Old World monkeys
178. Cercocebus galritus
179. Cer copithecus diana
180. Cercopithecus roloway
181. Macaca silenus
182. Mandrillus leucophaeus
183. Mandrillus sphinx
184. Nasalis larvatus
185. Piliocolobus kirkii
186. Piliocolobus rufomitratus
187. Presbytis potenziani
188. Pygathrix spp.

34
189. Rhinopit hecus spp.
190. Semnopithecus ajax
191. Semnopithecus dussumieri
192. Semnopithecus entellus
193. Semnopithecus hector
194. Semnopithecus hypoleucos
195. Semnopithecus priam
196. Semnopithecus schistaceus
197. Simias concolor
198. Trachypithecus geei
199. Trachypithecus pileatus
200. Trachypithecus shortridgei
Cheirogaleidae: Dwarf lemurs
201. Cheirogaleidae spp.
Daubentoniidae: Aye-aye
202. Daubentoni madagascariensis
Hominidae: Chimpanzees, gorilla, orang-utan
203. Gorilla beringei
204. Gorilla gorilla
205. Pan spp.
206. Pongo abelii
207. Pongo pygmaeus
208. Hylobatidae Gibbons
209. Hylobatidae spp.
Indriidae: Avahi, indris, sifakas, woolly lemurs
210. Indriidae spp.
Lemuridae: Large lemurs
211. Lemuridae spp.
Lepilemuridae: Sportive lemurs
212. Lepilemuridae spp.
Lorisidae: Lorises
213. Nycticebus spp.

35
Pithecidae: Sakis and Uakaris
214. Cacajao spp.
215. Chiropotes albinasus
PROBOSCIDEA
Elephantidae: Elephants
216. Elephas maximus
217. Laxodonta africana (Except the populations of Botswana,
Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe, which are included in
Appendix-II)
RODENTIA
Chinehillidae: Chinehillas
218. Chinchilla spp. (Specimens of the domesticated form are not
subject to the provisions of the Convention)
Muridae: Mice, rats
219. Leporillus conditor
220. Pseudomys fieldi praeconis
221. Xeromys myoides
222. Zyzomys pedunculatus
Sciuridae: Ground squirrels, tree squirrels
223. Cynomys mexicanus
SIRENIA
Dugongidae: Dugong
224. Dugong dugon
Trichechidae: Manatees
225. Trichechus inunguis
226. Trichechus manatus
CLASS A VES
(BIRDS)
ANSERIFORMES
Anatidae: Ducks, geese, swans, etc.
227. Anas aucklandica
228. Anas chlorotis
229. Anas laysanensis
230. Anas nesiotis
231. Asarcornis scutulata

36
232. Branta canadensis leucopareia
233. Branta sandvicensis
234. Rhodonessa caryophyllacea
(possibly extinct)
APODIFORMES
Trochilidae: Hummingbirds
235. Glaucis dohrnii
CHARADRIIFORMES
Laridae: Gull
236. Larus relictus
Scolopacidae: Curlews, greenshanks
237. Numenius borealis
238. Numenius tenuirostris
239. Tringa guttifer
CICONIIFORMES
Ciconiidae: Storks
240. Ciconia boyciana
241. Jabiru mycteria
242. Mycteria cinerea
Threskiornithidae: Ibises, spoonbills
243. Geronticus eremita
244. Nipponia nippon
COLUMBIFORMES
Columbidae: Doves, pigeons
245. Caloenas nicobarica
246. Ducula mindorensis
CORACIIFORMES
Bucerotida: Hornbills
247. Aceros nipalensis
248. Buceros bicornis
249. Rhinoplax vigil
250. Rhyticeros subruficollis
FALCONIFORMES: Eagles, falcons, hawks, vultures
Accipitridae: Hawks, eagles
251. Aquila Adalberti

37
252. Aquila heliaca
253. Chondrohierax uncinatus wilsonii
254. Haliaeetus albicilla
255. Harpia harpyja
256. Pithecophaga jefferyi
Cathartidae: New World vultures
257. Gymnogyps californianus
258. V ultur gryphus
Falconidae: Falcons
259. Falco araeus
260. Falco jugger
261. Fa lco newtoni
262. Falco pelegrinoides
263. Falco peregrinus
264. Falco punctatus
265. Falco rusticolus
GALLIFORMES
Cracidae: Chachalacas, currassows, guans
266. Crax blumenbachii
267. Mitu mitu
268. Oreophasis derbianus
269. Penelope albipennis
270. Pipile jacutinga
271. Pipile pipile
Megapodiidae: Megapodes, scrubfowl
272. Macrocephalon maleo
Phasianida: Grouse, guineafowl, partridges, pheasants, tragopans
273. Catreus wallichii
274. Colinus virginiamus ridgwayi
275. Crossoptilon crossoptilon
276. Cr ossoptilon mantchuricum
277. Lophophorus impejanus
278. Lophophorus lhuysii

38
279. Lophophorus sclateri
280. Lophura edwardsi
281. Lophura imperialis
282. Lophura swinhoii
283. Polyplectron napoleonis
284. Rheinardia ocellata
285. Syrmaticus ellioti
286. Syrmaticus humiae
287. Syrmaticus mikado
288. T etraogallus caspius
289. T etraogallus tibetanus
290. Tragopan blythii
291. Tragopan caboti
292. Tragopan melanocephalus
293. T ympanuchus cupido attwateri
GRUIFORMES
Gruidae: Cranes
294. Grus americana
295. Grus canadensis nesiotes
296. Grus canadensis pulla
297. Grus japonensis
298. Grus leucogeranus
299. Grus monacha
300. Grus nigricollis
301. Grus vipio
Otididae: Bustards
302. Ardeotis nigriceps
303. Chlamydotis macqueenii
304. Chlamydotis undulata
305. Houbaropsis bengalensis
Rallidae: Rail
306. Gallirallus sylvestris

39
Rhynochetidae: Kagu
307. Rhynochetos jubatus
PASSERIFORMES
Atrichornithidae: Scrub-bird
308. Atrichornis clamosus
Cotingidae: Cotingas
309. Cotinga maculata
310. Xipholena atropurpurea
Fringillidae: Finches
311. Carduelis cucullata
Hirundinidae: Martin
312. Pseudochelidon sirintarae
Icteridae: Blackbird
313. Xanthopsar flavus
Meliphagidae: Honeyeater
314. Lichenostomus melanops cassidix
Muscicapidae: Old World flycatchers
315. Dasyornis broadbenti litoralis
(possibly extinct)
316. Dasyornis longirostris
317. Picathartes gymnocephalus
318. Picathartes areas
Pittidae: Pittas
319. Pitta gurneyi
320. Pitta kochi
Strunidae: Mynahs (Starlings)
321. Leucopsar rothschildi
Zosteropidae: White-eye
322. Zosterops albogularis
PELECANIFORMES
Fregatidae: Frigatebird
323. Fregata andreswsi
Pelecanidae: Pelican
324. Pelecanus crispus

40
Sulidae: Booby
325. Papasula abbotti
PICIFORMES
Picidae: Woodpeckers
326. Campephilus imperialis
327. Dryocopus javensis richardsi
PODICIPEDIFORMES
Podicipedida: Grebe
328. Podilymbus gigas
PROCELLARIIFORMES
Diomedeidae: Albatross
329. Phoebastria albatrus
PSITTACIFORMES
Cacatuidae: Cockatoos
330. Cacatua goffiniana
331. Cacatua haematuropygia
332. Cacatua moluccensis
333. Cacatua sulphurea
334. Probosciger aterrimus
Lorridae: Lories, lorikeets
335. Eos histrio
336. V ini ultramarina
Psittacidae: Amazons, macaws, parakeets, parrots
337. Amazona arausiaca
338. Amazona auropalliata
339. Amazona barbadensis
340. Amazona brasiliensis
341. Amazona finschi
342. Amazona guildingii
343. Amazona imperialis
344. Amazona leucocephala
345. Amazona oratrix
346. Amazona pretrei
347. Amazona rhodocorytha

41
348. Amazona tucumana
349. Amazona versicolor
350. Amazona vinacea
351. Ama zona viridigenalis
352. Amazona vittata
353. Anodorhynchus spp.
354. Ara ambiguus
355. Ara glaucogularis
356. Ara macao
357. Ara militaris
358. Ara rubrogenys
359. Cyanopsitta spixii
360. Cyanoramphus cookii
361. Cyanoramphus forbesi
362. Cyanoramphus novaezelandiae
363. Cyanoramphus saisseti
364. Cyclopsitta diophthalma coxeni
365. Eunymphicus cornutus
366. Guarouba guarouba
367. Neophema chrysogaster
368. Ognorhynchus icterotis
369. Pezop orus occidentalis
(possibly extinct)
370. Pezoporus wallicus
371. Pionopsitta pileata
372. Primolius couloni
373. Primolius maracana
374. Psephotus chrysopterygius
375. Psephotus dissimilis
376. Psephotus pulcherrimus
(possibly extinct)
377. Psittacula echo
378. Pyrrhura cru entata

42
379. Rhynchopsitta spp.
380. Strigops habroptilus
RHEIFORMES
Rheidae: Rheas
381. Pterocnemia pennata (Except Pterocnemia pennata pennata
which is included in Appendix II)
SPHENISCIFORMES
Spheniscidae: Penguins
382. Spheniscus humboldti
STRIGIFORMES: Owls
383. Heteroglaux blewitti
384. Mimizuku gurneyi
385. Ninox natalis
386. Ninox novaeseelandiae undulata
Tytonidae: Barn owls
387. T yto soumagnei
STRUTHIONIFORMES
Struthionidae: Ostrich
388. Struthio camelus
TINAMIFORMES
Tinamidae: Tinamous
389. Tinamus solitarius
TROGONIFORMES
Trogonidae: Quetzals
390. Pharomachrus mocinno
CLASS REPTILIA
(REPTILES)
CROCODYLIA: Alligators, caimans, crocodiles
391. CROCODYLIA spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
Alligatoridae: Alligators, caimans
392. Alligator sinensis
393. Caiman crocodilus apaporiensis
394. Caiman latirostris (Except the population of Argentina, which is
included in Appendix II)
395. Melanosuchus niger

43
Crocodylidae: Crocodiles
396. Crocodylus acutus
397. Crocodylus cataphractus
398. Crocodylus intermedius
399. Crocodylus mindorensis
400. Crocodylus moreletii
401. Crocodylus niloticus niloticus
402. Crocodylus palustris
403. Crocodylus porosus
404. Crocodylus rhombifer
405. Crocodylus siamensis
406. Os teolaemus tetraspis
407. T omistoma schlegelii
408. Gavialidae: Gavial
Gavialis gangeticus
RHYNCHOCEPHALIA
Sphenodontidae: Tuatara
409. Sphenodon spp.
SAURIA
Chamaeleonidae: Chameleons
410. Brookesia perarmata
Helodermatidae: Beaded lizard, gila monster
411. Heloderma horridum charlesbogerti
Iguanidae: Iguanas
412. Brachylophus spp.
413. Cyclura spp.
414. Sauromalus varius
Lacertidae: Lizards
415. Gallotia simonyi
Varanidae: Monitor lizards
416. V aranus bengalensis
417. V aranus flavescens
418. V aranus griseus

44
419. V aranus komodoensis
420. V aranus nebulosus
SERPENTES : Snakes
Boidae : Boas
421. Acrantophis spp.
422. Boa constrictor occidentalis
423. Epicrates inornatus
424. Epicrates monensis
425. Epicrates subflavus
426. Sanzinia madagascariensis
Bolyeriidae : Round Island boas
427. Bolyeria multocarinata
428. Casarea dussumieri
Loxocemidae : Mexican dwarf boa
429. Python molurus molurus
Tropidophiidae : Wood boas
430. V ipera ursinii
TESTUDINES
Chelidae : Austro-American side-necked turtles
431. Pseudemydura umbrina
Cheloniidae : Marine turtles
432. Cheloniidae spp.
Emydidae : Box turtles, freshwater turtles
433. Glyptemys muhlenbergii
434. T errapene Coahuila
Geoemydidae : Box turtles, freshwater turtles
435. Batagur affinis
436. Batagur baska
437. Geoclemys hamiltonii
438. Melanochelys tricarinata
439. Morenia ocellata
440. Pangshura tecta
Testudinidae : Tortoises
441. Astrochelys radiata

45
442. Astrochelys yniphora
443. Chelonoidis nigra
444. Gopherus flavomarginatus
445. Psammobates geometricus
446. Pyxis arachnoides
447. Pyxis planicauda
448. T estudo kleinmanni
Trionychidae : Softshell turtles, terrapins
449. Apalone spinifera atra
450. Aspideretes gangeticus
451. Aspideretes hurum
452. Aspideretes nigricans
CLASS AMPHIBIA
(AMPHIBIANS)
ANURA
Bufonidae : Toads
453. Altiphrynoides spp.
454. Atelopus zeteki
455. Bugo periglenes
456. Bufo superciliaris
457. Nectophrynoides spp.
458. Nimbaphrynoides spp.
459. Spinophrynoides spp.
Microhylidae : Red rain frog, tomato frog
460. Dyscophus antongilii
Cryptobranchidae : Giant salamanders
461. Andrains spp.
Salamandridae : Newts and salamanders
462. Neurergus kaiseri
CLASS ELASMOBRANCHII
(SHARKS)
RAJIFORMES
Pristidae : Sawfishes
463. Pristidae spp. (Except the species included in Appendix II)

46
ACIPENSERIFORMES : Paddlefishes, sturgeons
Acipenseridae : Sturgeons
464. Acipenser brevirostrum
465. Acipenser sturio
CYPRINIFORMES
Catostomidae : Cui-ui
466. Chasmistes cujus
Cyprinidae : Blind carps, plaeesok
467. Probarbus jullieni
OSTEOGLOSSIFORMES
Osteoglossidae : Arapaima, bonytongue
468. Scleropages formosus
PERCIFORMES
Sciaenidae : Totoaba
469. T otoaba macdonaldi
SILURIFORMES
Pangasiidae : Pangasid catfish
470. Pangasianodon gigas
CLASS SARCOPTERYGII
(LUNGFISHES)
COELACANTHIFORMES
Latimeriidae : Coelacanths
471. Latimeria spp
PHYLUM ARTHROPODA
LEPIDOPTERA
Papilionidae : Birdwing butterflies, swallowtail butterflies
472. Ornithoptera alexandrae
473. Papilio chikae
474. Papilio homerus
475. Papilio hospiton
PHYLUM MOLLUSCA
CLASS BIV ALVIA
(CLAMS AND MUSSELS)
UNIONOIDA
Unionidae : Freshwater mussles, pearly mussels
476. Conradilla caelata

47
477. Dromus dromas
478. Epioblasma curtisi
479. Epioblasma florentina
480. Epioblasma sampsonii
481. Epioblasma sulcata perobliqua
482. Epioblasma torulosa gubernaculum
483. Epioblasma torulosa torulosa
484. Epioblasma turgidula
485. Epioblasma walkeri
486. Fusconaia cuneolus
487. Fusconaia edgariana
488. Lampsilis higginsii
489. Lampsilis orbiculata orbiculata
490. Lampsilis satur
491. Lampsilis virescens
492. Plethobasus cicatricosus
493. Plethobasus cooperianus
494. Pleurobema plenum
495. Potamilus capax
496. Quadrula intermedia
497. Quadrula sparsa
498. T oxolasma cylindrella
499. Unio nickliniana
500. Unio tampicoensis tecomatensis
501. V illosa trabalis
STYLOMMATOPHORA
Achatinellidae: Agate snails, oahu tree snails
502. Achatinella spp
FLORA (PLANTS)
AGA V ACEAE: Agaves
503. Agave parviflora
APOCYNACEAE: Elephant trunks, hoodias
504. Pachypodium ambongense

48
505. Pachypodium baronii
506. Pachpodium decaryi
507. ARAUCARIACEAE: Monkey-puzzle tree
508. Araucaria araucana
CACTACEAE: Cacti
509. Ariocarpus spp.
510. Astrophytum asterias
511. Aztekium ritteri
512. Coryphantha werdermannii
513. Discocactus spp.
514. Echinocereus ferreirianus ssp. lindsayi
515. Echinocereus schmollii
516. Escobaria minima
517. Escobaria sneedii
518. Mammillaria pectinifera
519. Mammillaria solisioides
520. Melocactus conoideos
521. Melocactus deinacanthus
522. Melocactus glaucescens
523. Melocactus paucispinus
524. Obregonia denegrii
525. Pachycereus militaris
526. Pediocactus bradyi
527. Pediocactus knowltonii
528. Pediocactus paradinei
529. Pediocactus peeblesianus
530. Pediocactus sileri
531. Pelecyphora spp.
532. Sclerocactus brevihamatus ssp. tobuschii
533. Sclerocactus erectocentrus
534. Sclerocactus glaucus
535. Sclerocactus mariposensis
536. Sclerocactus mesae-verdae

49
537. Sclerocactus nyensis
538. Sclerocactus papyracanthus
539. Sclerocactus pubispinus
540. Sclerocatus wrightiae
541. Strombocactus spp.
542. Turbinicarpus spp.
543. Uebelmannia spp.
COMPOSITE: (Asteraceae) Kuth
544. Saussurea costus
CUPRESSACEAE: Alerce, cypresses
545. Fitzroya cupressoides
546. Pilgerodendron uviferum
CYCADACEAE: Cycads
547. Cycas beddomei
EUPHORBIACEAE: Spurges
548. Euphorbia ambovombensis
549. Euphorbia capsaintemariensis
550. Euphorbia cremersil (Includes the forma viridifolia and the var.
rakotozafyi)
551. Euphorbia cylindrifolia (Includes the ssp. tuberifera)
552. Euphyorbia decaryi (Includes the vars. ampanihyensis, robinsonii
and spirosticha)
553. Euphorbia francoisii
554. Euphorbia moratti (Includes the vars. antsigiensis, bemarahensis
and multiflora)
555. Euporbia parvicyathophora
556. Euphorbia quartziticola
557. Euphorbia tulearensis
FOUQUIERIACEAE: Ocotillos
558. Fouquieria fasiculata
559. Fouquieria purpusii
LEGUMINOSAE (Fabaceae): Afrormosia, cristobal, rosewood,
sandalwood
560. Dalbergia nigra

50
LILIACEAE: Aloes
561. Aloe albida
562. Aloe albiflora
563. Aloe alfredii
564. Aloe bakeri
565. Aloe bellatuala
566. Aloe calcairphila
567. Aloe compressa (Includes the vars. paucituberculata,
rugousquamosa and schistophila)
568. Aloe delphinensis
569. Aloe descoingsii
570. Aloe fragilis
571. Aloe haworthioides (Includes the var. aurantiaca)
572. Aloe helenae
573. Aloe laeta (Includes the var. maniaensis)
574. Aloe parallelifolia
575. Aloe parvula
576. Aloe pillansii
577. Aloe polyphylla
578. Aloe rauhii
579. Aloe suzannae
580. Aloe versicolor
581. Aloe vossii
NEPENTHACEAE: Pitcher-plants (Old World)
582. Nepenthes khasiana
583. Nepenthes rajah
ORCHIDACEAE: Orchids
584. Aerangis ellisii
585. Dendrobium cruentum
586. Laelia jongheana
587. Laelia lobata
588. Paphipedilum spp.
589. Peristeria elata

51
590. Phargmipedium spp.
591. Renanthera imschootiana
PALMAE (Arecaceae): Palms
592. Chrysalidocarpus decipiens
PINACEAE: Firs and pines
593. Abies guatemalensis
PODOCARPACEAE: Podocarps
594. Podocarpus parlatorei
RUBIACEAE: Ayugue
595. Balmea Stormiae
SARRACENIACEAE: Pitcher-plants (New World)
596. Sarracenia oreophila
597. Sarracenia rubra
598. ssp. alabamensis
599. Sarracenia rubra ssp. jonesii
STANGERIACEAE: Stangerias
600. Stangeria eriopus
ZAMIACEAE: Cycads
601. Ceratozamia spp.
602. Chigua spp.
603. Encephalartos spp.
604. Microcycas Calacoma

52
52
APPENDIX-II
FAUNA (ANIMALS)
PHYLUMCHORDATA
CLASS MAMMALIA
(MAMMALS)
ARTIODACTYLA
Bovidae: Antelopes, cattle, duikers, gazellers, goats, sheep, etc.
1. Ammotragus lervia
2. Biscon bison athabascae
3. Budorcas taxicolor
4. Cephalophus brookei
5. Cephalophus dorsalis
6. Cephalophus ogilbyi
7. Cephalophus silvicultor
8. Cephalophus zebra
9. Damaliscus pygargus pygargus
10. Kobus leche
11. Ovis ammon (Except the subsepecies included in Appendix I)
12. Ovis canadensis
13. Ovis vignei (Except the subspecies included in Appendix I)
14. Philantomba monticola
15. Saiga borealis
16. Saiga tatarica
Camelidae: Guanaco, vicuna
17. Lama guanicoe
18. Vicugna vicugna
Cervidae Deer: guemals, muntjacs, pudus
19. Cervus elaphus bactrianus
20. Pudu mephistophile
Hippopotamidae: Hippopotamuses
21. Hexaprotodon liberiensis

53
22. Hippopotamus amphibious
Moschidae: Musk deer
23. Moschus spp. (Except which are included in Appendix I)
Tayassuidae: Peccaries
24. Tayassuidae spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
CARNIVORA
Canidae: Bush dog, foxes, wolves
25. Canis lupus (Except which are included in Appendix I.)
26. Cerdocyon thous
27. Chrysocyon brachyurus
28. Cuon alpinus
29. Lycalopex fulvipes
30. Lycalopex fulvipes
31. Lycalopex griseus
32. Lycalopex gymnocercus
33. Vulpes cana
34. Vulpes zerda
Eupleridae: Fossa, Falanouc, Malagasy civet
35. Cryptoprocta ferox
36. Eupleres goudotii
37. Fossa Fossana
Felidae: Cats
38. Felidae spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I.)
Mephitidae: Hog-nosed skunk
39. Conepatus humboldtii
Lutrinae: Otters
40. Lutrinae spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
Otariiae: Fur seals, sealions
41. Arctocephalus spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
Phocidae: Seals
42. Mirounga leonine
Ursidae: Bears, giant panda
43. Ursidae spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)

54
Viverridae: Binturong, civets, linsangs, otter-civet, palm civets
44. Cynogale bennettii
45. Hemigalus derbyanus
46. Prionodon linsang
CETACEA: Dolphins, porpoises, whales
47. Cetacea spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I.)
Pteropodidae: Fruit bats, flying foxes
48. Acerodon spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
49. Pteropus spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
CINGULATA
Dasypodidae: Armadillos
50. Chaetophractus nationi
DIPROTODONTIA
Macropodidae: Kangaroos, wallabies
51. Dendrolagus inustus
52. Dendrolagus ursinus
Phalangeridae: Cuscuses
53. Phalanger intercastellanus
54. Phalanger mimicus
55. Phalanger orientalis
56. Spilocuscus kraemeri
57. Spilocuscus maculatus
58. Spilocuscus papuensis
MONOTREMATA
Tachyglossidae: Echidnas, spiny anteaters
59. Zaglossus spp.
PERISSODACTYLA
Equidae: Horses, wild asses, zebras
60. Equus hemionus (Except the subsepecies included in Appendix I)
61. Equus kiang
62. Equus zebra hartmannae
Rhinocerotidae: Rhinoceroses
63. Ceratotherium simum simum

55
Tapiridae: Tapirs
64. Tapirus terrestris
PHOLIDOTA
Manidae: Pangolins
65. Manis spp.
PILOSA
Bradypodidae: Three-toed sloth
66. Bradypus variegates
Myrmecophagidae: American anteaters
67. Myrmecophaga tridactyla
PRIMATES: Apes, monkeys
68. Primate spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
PROBOSCIDEA
Elephantidae: Elephants
69. Loxodonta africana
RODENTIA
Sciuridae: Ground squirrels, tree squirrels
70. Ratufa spp.
SCANDENTIA: Tree shrews
71. Scandentia spp.
SIRENIA
Trichechidae: Manatees
72. Trichechus senegalensis
CLASS A VES
(BIRDS)
ANSERIFORMES
Anatidae: Ducks, geese, swans, etc.
73. Anas bernieri
74. Anas Formosa
75. Branta ruficollis
76. Coscoroba coscoroba
77. Cygnus melancoryphus
78. Dendrocygna arborea
79. Oxyura leucocephala
80. Sarkidiornis melanotos

56
APODIFORMES
Trochilidae: Hummingbirds
81. Trochilidae spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
CICONIFORMES
Balaenicipitidae: Shoebill, whale-headed stork
82. Balaeniceps rex
Ciconiidae: Storks
83. Ciconia nigra
Phoenicopteridae: Flamingos
84. Phoenicopteridae spp.
Threskiornithidae: Ibises, spoonbills
85. Eudocimus ruber
86. Geronticus calvus
87. Platalea leucorodia
COLUMBIFORMES
Columbidae: Doves, pigeons
88. Gallicolumba luzonica
89. Goura spp.
CORACIIFORMES
Bucerotidae: Hornbills
90. Aceros spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
91. Anorrhinus spp.
92. Anthracoceros spp.
93. Berenicornis spp.
94. Buceros spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
95. Penelopides spp.
96. Rhyticeros spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
CUCULIFORMES
Musophagidae: Turacos
97. Tauraco spp.
FALCONIFORMES Eagles, falcons, hawks, vultures
98. Falconiformes spp. (Except the species included in Appendices I
and III and the species of the family Cathartidae)
GALLIFORMES
Phasianidae: Grouse, guineafowl, partridges, pheasants, tragopans
99. Argusianus argus

57
100. Gallus sonneratii
101. Ithaginis cruentus
102. Pavo muticus
103. Polyplectron bicalcaratum
104. Polyplectron germaini
105. Polyplectron malacense
106. Polyplectron schleiermacheri
GRUIFORMES
Gruidae: Cranes
107. Gruidae spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
Otididae: Bustards
108. Otididae spp.
Cotingidae: Cotingas
109. Rupicola spp.
Emberizidae: Cardinals, tanagers
110. Gubernatrix cristata
111. Paroaria capitata
112. Paroaria coronata
113. Tangara fastuosa
Estrildidae: Mannikins, waxbills
114. Amandava formosa
115. Lonchura oryzivora
116. Poephila cincta cincta
Fringillidae: Finches
117. Carduelis yarrellii
Muscicapidae: Old World flycatchers
118. Cyornis ruckii
119. Garrulax canorus
120. Garrulax taewanus
121. Leiothrix argentauris
122. Leiothrix lutea
123. Liocichla omeiensis
Paradisaeidae: Birds of paradise
124. Paradisaeidae spp.

58
Pittidae: Pittas
125. Pitta guajana
126. Pitta nympha
Pycnonotidae: Bulbul
127. Pycnonotus zeylanicus
Sturnidae: (Mynahs (Starlings)
128. Gracula religiosa
Ramphastidae: Toucans
129. Pteroglossus aracari
130. Pteroglossus viridis
131. Ramphastos sulfuratus
132. Ramphastos toco
133. Ramphastos tucanus
134. Ramphastos vitellinus
PSITTACHIFORMES
135. Psittaciformes spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I and
Agapornis roseicollis, Melopsittacus undulatus, Nymphicus
hollandicus and Psittacula krameri, which are not included in the
Appendices)
RHEIFORMES
Rheidae: Rheas
136. Pterocnemia pennata pennata
137. Rhea Americana
SPHENISCIFORMES
Spheniscidae: Penguins
138. Spheniscus demersus
STRIGIFORMES Owls
139. S tragiformes spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
CLASS REPTILIA
(REPTILES)
CROCODYLIA Alligators, caimans, crocodiles
140. C rocodilia spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
SAURIA
Agamidae: Agamas, mastigures
141. Uromastyx spp.

59
Chamaeleonidae: Chameleons
142. Bradypodion spp.
143. Brookesia spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
144. Calumma spp.
145. Chamaeleo spp.
146. Furcifer spp.
Cordylidae: Spiny-tailed lizards
147. Cordylus spp.
Gekkonidae: Geckos
148. Cyrtodactylus serpensinsula
149. Phelsuma spp.
150. Uroplatus spp.
Helodermatidae: Beaded lizard, gila monster
151. Heloderma spp. (Except the subspecies included in Appendix I)
Iguanidae: Iguanas
152. Amblyrhynchus cristatus
153. Conolophus spp.
154. Ctenosaura bakeri
155. Ctenosaura oedirhina
156. Ctenosaura melanosterna
157. Ctenosaura palearis
158. Iguana spp.
159. Phrynosoma blainvillii
160. Phrynosoma cerroense
161. Phrynosoma coronatum
162. Phrynosoma wigginsi
Lacertidae: Lizards
163. Podarcis lilfordi
164. Podarcis pityusensis
Scincidae Skinks
165. Corucia zebrata
Teiidae: Caiman lizards, tegu lizards
166. Crocodilurus amazonicus

60
167. Dracaena spp.
168. Tupinambis spp.
Varanidae: Monitor lizards
169. V aranus spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
Xenosauridae: Chinese crocodile lizard
170. Shinisaurus crocodilurus
SERPENTES: Snakes
Boidae: Boas
171. Boidae spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
Bolyeriidae: Round Island boas
172. Bolyeriidae spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
Colubridae: Typical snakes, water snakes, whipsnakes
173. Clelia clelia
174. Cyclagras gigas
175. Elachistodon westermanni
176. Ptyas mucosus
Elapidae : Cobras, coral snakes
177. Hoplocephalus bungaroides
178. Naja atra
179. Naja Kaouthia
180. Naja mandalayensis
181. Naja naja
182. Naja oxiana
183. Naja philippinensis
184. Naja sagittifera
185. Naja samarensis
186. Naja siamensis
187. Naja sputatrix
188. Naja sumatrana
189. Ophiophagus hannah
Loxocemidae: Mexican dwarf boa
190. Loxocemidae spp.
Pythonidae: Pythons
191. Pythonidae spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)

61
Tropidophiidae: Wood boas
192. Tropidophiidae spp.
Viperidae: Vipers
193. V ipera wagneri
TESTUDINES
Carettochelyidae: Pig-nosed turtles
194. Carettochelys insculpta
Chelidae: Austro-American side-necked turtles
195. Chelodina maccordi
Dermatemydidae: Central American river turtle
196. Dermatemys mawii
Emydidae: Box turtles, freshwater turtles
197. Glyptemys insculpta
198. T errapene spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
Geoemydidae: Box turtles, freshwater turtles
199. Batagur spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
200. Cuora spp.
201. Heosemys annandalii
202. Heosemys depressa
203. Heosemys grandis
204. Heosemys spinosa
205. Leucocephalon yuwonoi
206. Malayemys macrocephala
207. Malayemys subtrijuga
208. Mauremys annamensis
209. Mauremys mutica
210. Notochelys platynota
211. Orlitia borneensis
212. Pangshura spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
213. Siebenrockiella crassicollis
214. Siebenrockiella leytensis
Platysternidae: Big-headed turtle
215. Platysternon megacephalum

62
Podocnemididae: Afro-American side-necked turtles
216. Erymnochelys madagascariensis
217. Pe ltocephalus dumerilianus
218. Podocnemis spp.
Testudinidae: Tortoises
219. T estudinidae spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
Trionychidae: Softshell turtles, terrapins
220. Amyda cartilaginea
221. Chitra spp.
222. Lissemys punctata
223. Lissemys scutata
224. Pelochelys spp.
CLASS AMPHIBIA
(AMPHIBIANS)
ANURA
Dendrobatidae: Poison frogs
225. Allobates femoralis
226. Allobates zaparo
227. Cryptophyllobates azureiventris
228. Dendrobates spp.
229. Epipedobates spp.
230. Phyllobates spp.
Hylidae: Tree frogs
231. Agalychnis spp.
232. Mantellidae Mantellas
233. Mantella spp.
Microhylidae: Red rain frog, tomato frog
234. Scaphiophryne gottlebei
Ranidae: Frogs
235. Euphlyctis hexadactylus
236. Hoplobatrachus tigerinus
Rheobatrachidae: Gastric-brooding frogs
237. Rheobatrachus spp.
CAUDATA
Ambystomatidae: Axolotls
238. Ambystoma dumerilii

63
239. Ambystoma mexicanum
CLASS ELASMOBRANCHII
(SHARKS)
LAMNIFORMS
Cetorhinidae: Basking shark
240. Cetorhinus maximus
Lamnidae: Great white shark
241. Carcharodon carcharias
ORECTOLOBIFORMES
Rhincodontidae: Whale shark
242. Rhincodon typus
RAJIFORMES
Pristidae: Sawfishes
243. Pristis microdon
CLASS ACTINOPTERYGII
(FISHES)
ACIPENSERIFORMES Paddlefishes, sturgeons
244. Acipenseriformes spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
ANGUILLIFORMES
Anguillidae: Freshwater eels
245. Anguilla anguilla
Cyprinidae: Blind carps, plaeesok
246. Caecobarbus geertsi
OSTEOGLOSSIFORMES
Osteoglossidae: Arapaime, bonytongue
247. Arapaima gigas
PERCIFORMES
Labridae: Wrasses
248. Cheilinus undulates
CLASS SARCOPTERYGII
(LUNGFISHES)
CERATODONTIFORMES
Ceratodontidae: Australian lungfish
249. Neoceratodus forsteri

64
PHYLUM ARTHROPODA
CLASS ARACHNIDA
(SCORPIONS AND SPIDERS)
ARANEAE
Theraphosidae: Red-kneed tarantulas, tarantulas
250. Aphonopelma albiceps
251. Aphonopelma pallidum
252. Brachypelma spp.
SCORPIONES
Scorpionidae: Scorpions
253. Pandinus dictator
254. Pandinus gambiensis
255. Pandinus imperator
CLASS INSECTA
(INSECTS)
COLEOPTERA
Scarabaeidae: Scarab beetles
256. Dynastes satanas
Papilionidae: Birdwing butterflies, swallowtail butterflies
257. Atrophaneura jophon
258. Atrophaneura pandiyana
259. Bhutanitis spp.
260. Ornithoptera spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
261. Parnassius apollo
262. T einopalpus spp.
263. Trogonoptera spp.
264. Troides spp.
PHYLUM ANNELIDA
CLASS HIRUDINOIDEA
(LEECHES)
ARHYNCHOBDELLIDA
Hirudinida: Medicinal leeches
265. Hirudo medicinalis
266. Hirudo verbena

65
PHYLUM MOLLUSCA
CLASS BIV ALVIA
(CLAMS AND MULLELS)
MYTILOIDA
Mytilidae: Marine mussels
267. Lithophaga lithophaga
UNIONOIDA
Unionidae: Freshwater mussels, pearly mussels
268. Cyprogenia aberti
269. Epioblasma torulosa rangina
270. Pleurobema clava
VENEROIDA
Tridacnidae: Giant clams
271. Tridacnidae spp.
CLASS GASTROPODA
(SNAILS AND CONCHES)
MESOGASTROPODA
Strombidae: Queen conch
272. Strombus gigas
STYLOMMATOPHORA
Camaenidae: Green tree snail
273. Papustyla pulcherrima
PHYLUM CNIDARIA
CLASS ANTHOZOA
(CORALS AND SEA ANEMONES)
ANTIPATHARIA: Black corals
274. Antipatheria spp.
HELIOPORACEA
Helioporidae: Black corals
275. Helioporidae spp. (Includes only species Heliopora coerulea.
Fossils are not subject to the provisions of the Convention)
SCLERACTINIA: Stony corals
276. Scleractinia spp. (Fossils are not subject to the provisions of the
Convention)
STOLONIFERA
Tubiporidae: Organ-Pipe corals
277. Tubiporidae spp. (Fossils are not subject to the provisions of the
Convention)

66
CLASS HYDROZOA
(SEA FERNS, FIRE CORALS AND STINGING MEDUSAE)
MILLEPORINA
Milleporidae: Fire corals
278. Milleporidae spp. (Fossils are not subject to the provisions of the
Convention)
STYLASTERINA
Stylasteridae Lace corals
279. Stylasteridae spp. (Fossils are not suject to the provisions of the
Convention)
FLORA (PLANTS)
AGA V ACEAF: Agaves
280. Agave victoriae-reginae
281. Nolina interrata
AMARYLLIDACEAE: Snowdrops, sternbergias
282. Galanthus spp.
283. Sternbergias spp.
ANACADIACEAE: Cashews
284. Operculicarya hyphaenoides
285. Operculicarya pachypus
APOCYNACEAE: Elephant trunks, hoodias
286. Hoodia spp.
287. Pachypodium spp. (Except the species included in Apendix I )
288. Rauvolfia serpentine
ARALIACEAE: Ginseng
289. Panax ginseng
290. Panax quinque folius
BERBERIDACEAE: May-apple
291. Podophyllum hexandrum
BROMELIACEAE: Air plants, bromelias
292. Tillandsia harrisii
293. Tillandsia kammii
294. Tillandsia kautskyi
295. Tillandsia mauryana
296. Tillandsia sprengeliana

67
297. Ti llandsia sucrei
298. Tillandsia xerographica
CACTACEAE: Cacti
299. Cactaceae spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I and
except Pereskia spp. Pereskiopsis spp. and Quiabentia spp.)
CARYOCARACEAE: Ajo
300. Caryocar costaricense
CRASSULACEAE: Dudleyas
301. Dudleya stolonifera
302. Dudleya traskiae
CUCURBITACEAE: Melons, gourds, cucurbits
303. Zygosicyos pubescens
304. Zygosicyos tripartitus
CYATHEACEAE: Tree-ferns
305. Cyathea spp.
CYCADACEAE: Cycads
306. Cycadaceae spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
DICKSONIACEAE: Tree-ferns
307. Cibotium barometz
308. Dicksonia spp.
DIDIEREACEAE: Alluaudias, didiereas
309. Didiereaceae spp.
DIOSCOREACEAE: Elephant’s foot, kniss
310. Dioscorea deltoidea
DROSERACEAE: Venus’ flytrap
311. Dionaea muscipula
EUPHORBIACEAE: Spurges
312. Euphorbia spp.
FOUQUIERIACEAE: Ocotillos
313. Fouquieria columnaris
JUGLANDACEAE: Gavilan
314. Oreomunnea pterocarpa
LAURACEAE: Laurels
315. Aniba rosaeodora

68
LEGUMINOSAE (Fabaceae): Afrormosia, cristobal, rosewood,
sandalwood
316. Caesalpinia echinata
317. Pericopsis elata
318. Platymiscium pleiostachyum
319. Pterocarpus santalinus
LILIACEAE: Aloes
320. Aloe spp.
MELIACEAE: Mahoganies, Spanish cedar
321. Swietenia humilis
322. Swietenia macrophylla
323. Swietenia mahagoni
NEPENTHACEAE: Pitcher-plants (Old World)
324. Nepenthes spp.
ORCHIDACEAE: Orchids
325. Orchidaceae spp.
OROBANCHACEAE: Broomrape
326. Cistanche deserticola
PALMAE (Arecaceae): Palms
327. Beccariophoenix madagascariensis
328. Lemurophoenix halleuxii
329. Marojejya darianii
330. Neodypsis decaryi
331. Ravenea lauveli
332. Ravenea rivularis
333. Satranala decussilvae
334. V oanioala gerardii
PASSIFLORACEAE: Passion-flowers
335. Adenia olaboensis
PORTULACACEAE: Lewisias, portulacas, purslanes
336. Anacampseros spp.
337. A vonia spp.
338. Lewisia serrata

69
PRIMULACEAE: Cyclamens
339. Cycl amen spp.
RANUNCULACEAE: Golden seals, yellow adonis, yellow root
340. Adonis vernalis
341. Hydrastis Canadensis
ROSACEAE: African cherry, stinkwood
342. Prunus Africana
RUBIACEAE: Ayugue
343. Sarracenia spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)
SCROPHULARIACEAE: Kutki
344. Picrorhiza kurrooa (Excludes Picrorhiza scrophulariiflora)
STANGERIACEAE: Stangerias
345. Bowenia spp.
TAXACEAE: Himalayan yew
346. T axus chinesis and infraspecific taxa of this species
347. T axus cuspidata and infraspecific taxa of this species
348. T axus fuana and infraspecific taxa of this species
349. T axus sumatrana and infraspecific taxa of this species
350. T axus wallichiana
THYMELAEACEAE (Aquilariaceae): Agarwood, ramin
351. Aquilaria spp.
352. Gonystylus spp.
353. Gyrinops spp.
V ALERIANACEAE: Himalayan spikenard
354. Nardostachys grandiflora
VITACEAE: Grapes
355. Cyphostemma elephantopus
356. Cyphostemma montagnacii
WELWITSCHIACEAE: Welwitschia
357. W elwitschia mirabilis
ZAMIACEAE: Cycads
358. ZAMIACEAE spp. (Except the species included in Appendix I)

70
ZINGIBERACEAE: Giner lily
359. Hedychium philippinense
ZYGOPHYLLACEAE: Lignum-vitae
360. Bulnesia sarmientoi
361. Guaiacum spp.

71
71
APPENDIX-III
FAUNA (ANIMALS)
PHYLUM CHORDATA
CLASS MAMMALIA
(MAMMALS)
ARTIODACTYLA
Bovidae: Antelopes, cattle, duikers, gazelles, goats, sheep, etc.
1. Antilope cervicapra
2. Bubalus arnee (Excludes the domesticated form, which is
referenced as Bubalus bubalis)
3. Gazella dorcas
4. Tetracerus quadricornis
Cervidae: Deer, guemals, muntjacs, pudus
5. Cervus elaphus barbarus
6. Mazama temama cerasina
7. Odocoileus virginianus mayensis
CARNIVORA
Canidae: Bush dog, foxes, wolves
8. Canis aureus
9. Vulpes bengalensis
10. Vulpes vulpes griffithi
11. Vulpes vulpes montana
12. Vulpes vulpes pusilla
Herpestidae: Mongooses
13. Herpestes edwardsi
14. Herpestes fuscus
15. Herpestes javanicus
16. Auropunctatus
17. Herpestes smithii
18. Herpestes urva
19. Herpestes vitticollis

72
Hyaenidae: Aardwolf
20. Proteles cristata
Mustelinae: Grisons, honey badger, martens, tayra, weasels
21. Eira barbara
22. Galictis vittata
23. Martes flavigula
24. Martes foina intermedia
25. Martes gwatkinsii
26. Mellivora capensis
27. Mustela altaica
28. Mustela erminea ferghanae
29. Mustela kathiah
30. Mustela sibirica
Odobenidae: Walrus
31. Odobenus rosmarus
Procyonidae: Coatis, kinkajou, olingos
32. Bassaricyon gabbii
33. Bassariscus sumichrasti
34. Nasua narica
35. Nasua nasua solitaria
36. Potos flavus
Viverridae: Binturong, civets, linsangs, otter-civet, palm civets
37. Arctictis binturong
38. Civettictis civetta
39. Paguma larvata
40. Paradoxurus hermaphroditus
41. Paradoxurus jerdoni
42. Viverra civettina
43. Viverra zibetha
44. Viverricula indica
CHIROPTERA
Phyllostomidae: Broad-nosed bat
45. Platyrrhinus lineatus

73
CINGULATA
Dasypodidae: Armadillos
46. Cabassous centralis
47. Cabassous tatouay
PILOSA
Megalonychidae: Two-toed sloth
48. Choloepus hoffmanni
Myrmecophagidae: American anteaters
49. Tamandua mexicana
RODENTIA
Cuniculidae: Paca
50. Cuniculus paca
Dasyproctidae: Agouti
51. Dasyprocta punctata
Erethizontidae: New World porcupines
52. Sphiggurus mexicanus
53. Sphiggurus spinosus
Sciuridae: Ground squirrels, tree squirrels
54. Marmota caudata
55. Marmota himalayana
56. Sciurus deppei
CLASS A VES
(BIRDS)
ANSERIFORMES
Anatidae: Ducks, geese, swans, etc.
57. Cairina moschata
58. Dendrocygna autumnalis
59. Dendrocygna bicolor
CHARADRIIFORMES
Burhinidae: Thick-knee
60. Burhinus bistriatus
COLUMBIFORMES
Columbidae: Doves, pigeons
61. Nesoenas mayeri

74
CUCULIFORMES
Cathartidae: New World vultures
62. Sarcoramphus papa
GALLIFORMES
Cracidae: Chachalacas, currassows, guans
63. Crax alberti
64. Crax daubentoni
65. Crax globulosa
66. Crax rubra
67. Ortalis vetula
68. Pauxi pauxi
69. Penelope purpurascens
70. Penelopina nigra
Phasianidae: Grouse, guineafowl, partridges, pheasants, tragopans
71. Meleagris ocellata
72. Tragopan satyra
PASSERIFORMES
Cotingidae: Cotingas
73. Cephalopterus ornatus
74. Cephalopterus penduliger
Muscicapidae: Old World flycatchers
75. Acrocephalus rodericanus
76. Terpsiphone bourbonnensis
PICIFORMES
Capitonidae: Barbet
77. Semnornis ramphastinus
Ramphastidae: Toucans
78. Baillonius bailloni
79. Pteroglossus castanotis
80. Ramphastos dicolorus
81. Selenidera maculirostris

75
CLASS REPTILIA
(REPTILES)
SAURIA
Gekkonidae: Geckos
82. Hoplodactylus spp.
83. Naultinus spp.
SERPENTES: Snakes
Colubridae Typical snakes, water snakes, whip snakes
84. Atretium schistosum
85. Cerberus rynchops
86. Xenochrophis piscator
Elapidae: Cobras, coral snakes
87. Micrurus diastema
88. Micrurus nigrocinctus
Viperidae: Vipers
89. Crotalus durissus
90. Daboia russelii
TESTUDINES
Chelydridae: Snapping turtles
91. Macrochelys temminckii
Emydidae: Box turtles, freshwater turtles
92. Graptemys spp.
Geoemydidae: Box turtles, freshwater turtles
93. Geoemyda spengleri
94. Mauremys iversoni
95. Mauremys megalocephala
96. Mauremys nigricans
97. Mauremys pritchardi
98. Mauremys reevesii
99. Mauremys sinensis
100. Ocadia glyphistoma
101. Ocadia philippeni
102. Sacalia bealei
103. Sacalia pseudocellata

76
104. Sacalia quadriocellata
Trionychidae: Softshell turtles, terrapins
105. Palea steindachneri
106. Pelodiscus axenaria
107. Pelodiscus maackii
108. Pelodiscus parviformis
109. Rafetus swinhoei
PHYLUM ECHINODERMATA
CLASS HOLOTHUROIDEA
(SEA CUCUMBERS)
ASPIDOCHIROTIDA
Stichopodidae Sea cucumbers
110. Isostichopus fuscus
CLASS INSECTA
(INSECTS)
COLEOPTERA
Lucanidae: Cape stag beetles
111. Colophon supp.
LEPIDOPTERA
Nymphalidae: Brush-footed butterflies
112. Agrias amydon boliviensis
113. Morpho godartii lachaumei
114. Prepona praeneste buckleyana
PHYLUM CNIDARIA
CLASS ANTHOZOA
(CORALS AND SEA ANEMONES)
GORGONACEAE
Coralliidae
115. Corallium elatius
116. Corallium japonicum
117. Corallium konjoi
118. Corallium secundum
FLORA (PLANTS)
GNETACEAE: Gnetums
119. Gnetum montanum

77
LEGUMINOSAE (Fabaceae): Afrormosia, cristobal, rosewood, sandalwood
120. Dalbergia retusa
121. Dalbergia stevensonii
122. Dipteryx panamensis
MAGNOLIACEAE: Magnolia
123. Magnolia liliifera var obovata
MELIACEAE Mahoganies, Spanish cedar
124. Cedrela fissilis
125. Cedrela lilloi
126. Cedrela odorata
PALMAE (Arecaceae): Palms
127. Lodoicea maldivica
PAPA VERACEAE: Poppy
128. Meconopsis regia
PINACEAE: Firs and pines
129. Abies guatemalensis
130. Pinus koraiensis
PODOCARPACEAE: Podocarps
131. Podocarpus neriifolius
TROCHODENDRACEAE: (Tetracentraceae) Tetracentron
132. T etracentron sinense

78
78
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 provides for the
protection and conservation of wild animals, birds and plants. The
said Act, provides inter-alia , for the management of their habitats
and regulation and control of trade or commerce thereof.
2. Taking into consideration the increase in wild life crime,
the Central Government had constituted a Tiger Task Force. The
Tiger Task Force, in its report, had recommended for amending the
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 so as to increase the punishments
for violating provisions of the Act. Consequent upon the
recommendations the Task Force, a Committee was constituted for
examining the recommendations made by the Tiger Task Force
relating to amendments in the Act and the provisions for
enforcement of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) in the country, and
suggesting other necessary amendments. India is a party to the said
Convention and it is obligatory for the country to bring in necessary
legislative changes to facilitate implementation of CITES.
3. The Committee, inter alia , recommended to insert a new
Chapter VB, in the Act consistent with the provisions of the CITES.
The terms, phrases and definitions etc. in the Chapter would have
the same meaning as given in the CITES.
4. The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013, inter-alia ,
proposes to—
(a) insert new definitions in view of the amendments
proposed in the Act;
(b) provide for prohibition on use of animal traps
except under certain circumstances;
(c) provide for grant of permit for scientific research;
(d) make provisions relating to CITES so as to control
illegal international trade in wild life;
(e) increase the punishment for offences under the Act;
(f) make provision considering certain activities as non
prohibitive under section 29 of the Act, such as, grazing or
movement of livestock, bona fide use of drinking and
household water by local communities, etc.;
(g) provide for protection of hunting rights of the
Scheduled Tribes in the Union territory of Andaman and
Nicobar Islands;

79
(h) insert a new Schedule VII to the Act so as to
include the Appendices listing out flora and fauna for
purposes of regulation of international trade under CITES;
(i) make certain consequential and other amendments to
the Act.
5. The notes on clauses explain in detail various provisions
contained in the Bill.
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
    N EW D ELHI; JAYANTHI NA TARAJAN
The 31st January, 2013.

80
80
Notes on clauses
Clause 2.—This clause seeks to amend section 2 of the Wild
Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (hereinafter referred to as the principal
Act) which relates to definitions.
Clause 3.—This clause seeks to amend sub-section ( 3) of
section 5B of the Act which relates to standing committee of the
National Board for Wildlife.
It is proposed to provide that rules may be made prescribing
the terms and conditions of committees, sub-committees or study
groups to be constituted, by the National Board in discharge of
functions assigned to it.
Clause 4.—This clause seeks to insert new section 9A which
relates to prohibition on animal traps.
It provides that no person shall manufacture, sell, purchase,
keep, transport or use any animal trap except with prior permission
given in writing by the Chief Wild Life Warden for educational and
scientific purposes.
It further provides that every person, who possesses any
animal trap on the date of commencement of the proposed
legislation, shall within sixty days from such commencement, shall
make declarations to that effect.
It also provides that the Chief Wild Life Warden may
purposes, then person to possess such trap subject to conditions.
It also provides that all declared animal traps, of which
permission has not been granted shall become the property of the
State Government. In the prosecution for any offence under the
proposed section, it shall be presumed that a person in possession
of animal trap is in unlawful possession of such trap.
Clause 5.—This clause seeks to insert a new section 12A
which relates to grant of permit for scientific research.
It provides that notwithstanding anything contained in the
Act, the Chief Wild life Warden, shall grant a permit to any person
to conduct scientific research subject to such conditions and in
such.
It further provides for the Central Government to prescribe in
respect of certain matters.
Clause 6.—This clause seeks to amend section 18 of the Act
relating to declaration of Sanctuary.

81
It provides that the State Government shall declare its
intention to constitute any area which falls under the Scheduled
Areas as a sanctuary in consultation with the Gram Sabha
concerned.
Clause 7.—This clause seeks to amend section 22 of the
principal Act which relates to inquiry by the Collector.
It provides that the Collector claims and rights shall ascertain
the same from the records of the State Government and of the
Gram Sabha and the evidence of any person acquainted with such
rights.
Clause 8.— This clause seeks to amend section 28 of the
principal Act which relates to grant of permit.
It proposes to grant permit for documentary film-making also
without making any change in habitat or causing any adverse impact
to it or wildlife.
Clause 9.—This clause seeks to substitute the existing
Explanation to section 29 of the principal Act which relates to
destruction, etc., in sanctuary prohibited without a permit.
It proposes to include the reference of section 11, 12 and
clause (c) of sub-section ( 2) of section 24 for the purposes
enhancing the scope of the Explanation .
Clause 10.—This clause seeks to amend section 32 of the
principal Act which relates to ban on use of injurious substances.
It proposes to include other substances or equipment with a
view to ban carrying of injurious equipments inside the sanctuary.
Clause 11.—This clause seeks to amend section 33 of the
principal Act which relates to control of sanctuaries.
It proposes that the Chief Wild Life Warden shall control,
manage and maintain all sanctuaries in accordance with the
management plan prepared as per guidelines issued by the Central
Government and also to include Government lodges within the
purview of clause ( a) thereof.
Clause 12.—This clause seeks to amend section 35 of the
principal Act which relates to declaration of National Parks.
It proposes to insert a new proviso to sub-section ( 1) of the
aforesaid section to provide that the State Government shall declare
its intention to constitute any area which falls under the Scheduled
Areas as a National Park in consultation with the Gram Sabha concerned.
It further proposes to insert a new sub-section ( 2A) to
provide that the notification under sub-section ( 1) shall include
relevant details of forests (including forest compartment number)
and revenue records pertaining to the area proposed to be declared
as a National Park.

82
Clause 13.—This clause seeks to amend section 36D of the
principal Act which relates to Community Reserve Management
Committee.
It proposes to reduce the representatives from five to three to
be nominated by the village panchayats, etc.
It further proposes to insert a new sub-section ( 2A) which
provides that where a community reserve is declared on private land
under sub-section ( 1) of section 36C, the Community Reserve
Management Committee shall consist of the owner of the land along
with a representative of the State Forests or Wild life Department
under whose jurisdiction the Community Reserve is located.
Clause 14.—This clause seeks to amend section 38 of the
principal Act which relates to power of the Central Government to
declare areas as sanctuaries or National Parks.
It proposes to insert a new proviso to sub-section ( 2) of the
aforesaid section to provide that the State Government shall declare
its intention to constitute any area which falls under the Scheduled
Areas as a National Park in consultation with the Gram Sabha
concerned.
Clause 15.—This clause seeks to amend section 38C of the
principal Act which relates to functions of the Central Zoo
Authority.
It proposes to insert a new clause ( aa) which enables the
Authority to supervise the overall functioning of the zoos and
authorise the concerned Chief Wild Life Warden to supervise the
zoo.
Clause 16.—This clause seeks to amend section 38J of the
principal Act which relates to prohibition of teasing, etc., in a zoo.
It proposes to confer power upon the Central Zoo Authority
to issue guidelines in this regard.
Clause 17.—This clause seeks to amend section 38L of the
principal Act which relates to constitution of National Tiger
Conservation Authority.
It proposes to substitute clauses ( 1) and ( m) of sub-
section ( 2) include officers of the National Commission of
Scheduled Tribes and National Commission for the Scheduled Castes
of officers authorised by them.
Clause 18.—This clause seeks to amend section 38-O of the
principal Act which relates to powers and functions of Tiger
Conservation Authority.
It proposes to enable the Authority to make grants to the
State Government for implementation of tiger conservation plans.
Clause 19.—This clause seeks to insert a new section 38XA
which provides that the provisions contained in Chapter IVB shall be

83
in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions relating to the
Sanctuaries and National Parks (whether included and declared, or
are in the process of being so declared) included in a tiger reserve
under the principal Act.
Clause 20.—This clause seeks to amend the heading of
Chapter IVC of the principal Act with respect to the nomination of
the Wild Life Crime Control Bureau.
Clause 21.—This clause seeks to substitute section 38Y of
the principal Act which relates to constitution of Wild Life Crime
Control Bureau and also to the change of name of the Wild Life
Crime Control Bureau.
Clause 22.—This clause seeks to amend section 39 of the
principal Act relating to wild animals, etc., to be Government
property.
It proposes to amend sub-section ( 1) of the aforesaid section
so as to include specified plant picked, uprooted, kept, damaged or
destroyed, dealt with or sold under section 17A within the scope of
the said sub-section ( 1).
It further proposes to insert a new sub-section ( 4) to provide
that where Government property is alive animal and it cannot be
released to its natural habitat, the State Government shall ensure that
it is housed and cared for by a recognised zoo or rescue centre.
Clause 23.—This clause seeks to insert new Chapter VB in
the principal Act for Regulation of International Trade in Endangered
Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.
The proposed new section 49D seeks to inter alia , define the
words and expression for the purposes of the proposed new
Chapter.
The proposed new section 49E provides for application of the
provisions of the proposed Chapter to animal and plant species listed
in Schedule VII and exotic species.
The proposed new section 49F makes provision of
Management Authority and other officers.
It further provides that the Central Government may designate
an officer not below the rank of Additional Director General of
Forests as the Management Authority for discharging functions and
exercising powers under the proposed legislation.
It also provides that the Management Authority shall be
responsible for issuance of permits and certificates regulating the
import, export and re-export of any scheduled specimen, submission
of reports and other functions as required under the proposed
Chapter and he shall, on the advice of the Scientific Authority,
notify the exotic species of animals and plants not covered by the
Convention and prepare and submit annual and biennial reports to
the Central Government.

84
It also provides that the Central Government may appoint
officers and employees to assist the Management Authority in
discharging his functions or exercising powers.
It also enables the Management Authority to delegate the
functions or powers [except the power to notify exotic species
under sub-section ( 3)], to the officers not below the rank of
Assistant Inspector General of Forests.
The proposed new section 49G provides for powers of
Management Authority.
It provides that the Management Authority shall, while
discharging the functions or exercising powers ensure certain
matters specified therein.
The proposed new section 49H provides for Scientific
Authorities. It provides that the Central Government may designate
one or more institutes established by it and engaged in research in
wildlife, as the Scientific Authority for the purposes of the proposed
Chapter.
It further provides that the designated Scientific Authority
shall advise the Management Authority in such matters as may be
referred to it by the Management Authority.
It also provides that the Scientific Authority, while advising
the Management Authority shall be guided by the principles specified
therein and the Scientific Authority shall monitor the export permits
granted by the Management Authority for specimens of species
included in Appendix II to Schedule VII.
It also provides that it shall be the duty of the Scientific
Authority to identify and inform the Management Authority of exotic
species of animals and plants which are not covered by Schedule
VII and require regulation thereof (i) to protect the indigenous gene
pool of the wildlife found in India; (ii) to avoid threat to the wildlife
or ecosystems of India as such species are invasive in nature; (iii)
to protect such species as they, in the opinion of the Scientific
Authority, are critically endangered in the habitats in which they
occur naturally.
The proposed new section 49-I provides that the Management
Authority and the Scientific Authority, while performing their duties
and exercising powers, shall be subject to such general or special
directions, as the Central Government may, from time to time, give
in writing.
The proposed new section 49J provides for constitution of a
co-ordination committee for the purpose of ensuring co-ordination
between the Management Authority and Scientific Authority, State
Chief Wildlife Wardens and other enforcement authorities or
agencies dealing with trade in wild life.

85
The proposed new section 49K provides that no person shall
enter into any international trade in scheduled specimens included in
Appendix I to Schedule VII.
It further provides that no person shall enter into any trade in
any scheduled specimen except in accordance with the certificate
granted by the Management Authority or the officer authorised by
him in such manner as may be prescribed.
It also provides that every person trading in any scheduled
specimen shall report the details of the scheduled specimen and the
transaction to the Management Authority or the officer authorised by
him in such manner as may be prescribed.
It also provides that every person, desirous of trading in a
scheduled specimen, shall present it for clearance to the
Management Authority or the officer authorised by him or a
customs officer only at the ports of exit and entry specified thereof.
The proposed new section 49L provides that every person
possessing an exotic species or scheduled specimen shall report the
details of such specimen or specimens to the Management Authority
or the officer authorised by him within such period and in such
manner as may be prescribed.
It further provides that the Management Authority or the
officer authorised by him may, on being satisfied that any exotic
species or scheduled specimen was in possession of a person being
the owner prior to the date of coming into force of the proposed
legislation and the rules made thereunder, or was obtained, in
conformity with the Convention, register the details of such
scheduled specimen or exotic species and issue a registration
certificate in the prescribed manner allowing the owner to retain
such specimen.
It also provides that any person who transfers possession of
any scheduled specimen or exotic species shall report the details of
such transfer to the Management Authority or the officer authorised
by it in such form and within such period and in such manner as
may be prescribed and the Management Authority or the officer
authorised by him shall register all transfers of scheduled specimens
or exotic species and issue the transferee with a registration
certificate in such manner as may be prescribed.
It also provides that any person in possession of any live
scheduled specimen or exotic species which bears any offspring
shall report the birth of such offspring to the Management Authority
or the officer authorised by him in such form and within such
period and in such manner as may be prescribed.
It also provides that the Management Authority or the officer
authorised by it shall on receipt of the report, register any offspring
born to any scheduled specimen or exotic species and issue the
owner with a registration certificate in such manner as may be
prescribed.

86
It also provides that no person shall possess, transfer or
breed any scheduled specimen or exotic species except in
conformity with this section and the rules made thereunder; and the
owner of an exotic species or scheduled specimen shall take all
necessary precautions to ensure that it does not contaminate the
indigenous gene pool of the wildlife found in the country in any
manner.
The proposed new section 49M provides for registration of
persons engaged in breeding or artificially propagating specimen of
Schedule VII. It provides that every person who is engaged in the
breeding in captivity or artificially propagating any scheduled
specimen listed in Appendix I of Schedule VII shall make an
application for registration to the Conservator of Forest (Wildlife)
within a period of ninety days of the commencement of the
proposed legislation.
It further provides that the form of application to be made to
the Conservator of Forest (Wildlife) under sub-section ( 1), the
particulars to be contained in such application form, the manner in
which such application shall be made, the fee payable thereon, the
form of certificate of registration, the procedure to be followed in
granting or cancelling the certificate of registration shall be such as
may be prescribed.
The proposed new section 49N provides for registration and
issue of certificate of registration.
It further provides that if the Conservator of Forest (Wildlife)
is not satisfied that the provisions of the Act and rules made
thereunder are complied with or if a false particular is furnished, he
may refuse or cancel the registration as the case may be.
It also provides that the certificate of registration shall be
issued for a period of two years and may be renewed after two
years on payment of such fee as may be prescribed.
It also provides that any person aggrieved by the refusal of
the Conservator of Forest (Wildlife) or cancellation of registration
may prefer an appeal to the Chief Wildlife Warden.
The proposed new section 49O provides for prohibition of
erasing of a mark of identification. It provides that no person shall
alter, deface, erase or remove a mark of identification affixed upon
the exotic species or scheduled specimen or its package.
The proposed new section 49P provides that exotic species of
scheduled specimen to be Government property.
It further provides that the provisions of section 39 shall, so
far as may be, apply in relation to the exotic species or scheduled
specimen as they apply in relation to wild animals and animals
articles referred to in sub-section ( 1) of that section.

87
It also provides that where specimen referred to in sub-
section ( 2) is a live animal, the State Government shall ensure that
it is housed and cared for by a recognised zoo or rescue centre in
case it cannot be released to its natural habitat.
Clause 24.—This clause seeks to amend section 50 of the
principal Act which relate to power of entry, search, arrest and
detention. It seeks to confer power of entry, search, arrest and
detention on any officer authorised by the Management Authority or
any customs officer not below the rank of an inspector or any
officer of the coast guard not below the rank of an Assistant
Commandant.
It further seeks to insert a new sub-section ( 10) which
provides that during any inquiry or trial of an offence under the Act,
where it appears to the Judge or Magistrate that there is prima facie
case that any property including vehicles and vessels, seized under
clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) was involved in any way in the
commission of an offence under the Act, the Judge or Magistrate
shall not order for the return of such property to its rightful owner
until the conclusion of the trial of the offence notwithstanding
anything contained in section 451 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.
Clause 25.—This clause seeks to insert new section 50A and
50B.
The proposed new section 50A provides for power to
undertake delivery. It provides that the Director Wildlife Crime
Control Bureau or any other officer authorised by him, may,
undertake control of delivery of any consignment to—(a) any
destination in India, (b) a foreign country, in consultation with the
competent authority of such foreign country to which a
consignment is destined, in such manner as may be prescribed.
The proposed new section 50B provides that the police to
take charge of articles seized and delivered. It provides that an
officer-in-charge of a police station as and when so requested in
writing by an officer mentioned in sub-section ( 1) of section 50,
shall take charge of and keep in safe custody, pending the order of
the Magistrate, all articles seized under the Act.
It further provides that the officer-in-charge may allow any
officer to accompany such articles to the police station or who may
be deputed, to affix his seal to such articles or to take samples of
and from them and all samples so taken shall also be sealed with a
seal of the officer-in-charge of the police station.
It also provides that without prejudice to the provisions
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or any other law
for the time being in force, the Central Government may, by rules,
specify the manner of dealing with the articles forwarded to the
police officer under sub-section ( 1).

88
Clause 26.—This clause seeks to substitute sections 51 and
51A of the principal Act relating to penalties and certain conditions
to apply while granting bail. It provides that any person who
contravenes any provision of the Act or any rule or order made
thereunder, or terms and conditions of any licence or permit granted
under the Act, shall be guilty of an offence and shall, on conviction,
be liable to be punished in the manner specified under sub-
sections ( 2) to ( 7).
It further provides that where the offence relates to any
animal specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II or the meat
of such animal or animal article, trophy, or uncured trophy derived
from such animal, such offence shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but
may extend to seven years and also with fine which shall not be
less than one lakh rupees but may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees
and in the case of a second or subsequent offence, of the nature
mentioned in this sub-section, the term of imprisonment shall not be
less than seven years and also with fine which shall not be less than
five lakh rupees but may extend to fifty lakh rupees.
It also provides that where the offence relates to the sale or
purchase or transfer or offer for sale or trade of any animal
specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II or the meat of
such animal or animal article, trophy, or uncured trophy derived
from such animal or any violation of Chapter V A, shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven
years and also with fine which shall not be less than fifteen lakh
rupees and in the case of a second or subsequent offence, of the
nature mentioned in this sub-section, the term of imprisonment shall
not be less than seven years and also with fine which shall not be
less than thirty lakh rupees.
It also provides that where the offence relates to the sale or
purchase or transfer or offer for sale or trade of any animal
specified in Part I of Schedule II, Schedule III and Schedule IV , or
the meat of such animal or animal article, trophy, or uncured trophy
derived from such animal, such offence shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both and in case
of a second or subsequent offence of the nature mentioned in this
sub-section, the term of imprisonment which may extend to five
years or with fine which may extend to three lakh rupees or with
both.
It also provides that where the offence relates to hunting in
a sanctuary or a National Park or altering the boundaries of a
sanctuary or a National Park, such offence shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than five years but
may extend to seven years and also with fine which shall not be
less than five lakh rupees but may extend to twenty-five lakh rupees
and in the case of a second or subsequent offence of the nature

89
mentioned in this sub-section, the term of imprisonment shall not be
less than seven years and also with fine which shall not be less than
thirty lakh rupees.
It also provides that where the offence relates to hunting in
a tiger reserve or altering the boundaries of a tiger reserve, such
offence shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
shall not be less than seven years and also with fine which shall not
be less than five lakh rupees but may extend to thirty lakh rupees
and in the case of a second or subsequent offence of the nature
mentioned in this sub-section, the term of imprisonment shall not be
less than seven years and also with fine which shall not be less than
fifty lakh rupees.
It also provides that where the offence relates to
contravention of the provisions of section 38J, such offence shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months or with a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees or
with both and in the case of a second or subsequent offence of the
nature mentioned in this sub-section, the term of imprisonment may
extend to one year or with fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees or with both.
The proposed new section 51A provides for other offences. It
provides that where the offence relates to contravention of any
other provision of the Act or any rule or order made thereunder, or
the breach of any of the terms and conditions of any licence or
permit granted under this Act, such offence shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also
with fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees and in
the case of a second or subsequent offence of the nature mentioned
in this subsection, the term of imprisonment shall not be less than
three years but may extend to five years and also with fine which
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees.
It further provides that when any person is convicted of an
offence against this Act, the court trying the offence may order that
any captive animal, wild animal, animal article, trophy, uncured
trophy, meat, ivory imported into India or an article made from such
ivory, any specified plant, or part or derivative thereof in respect of
which the offence has been committed, and any trap, tool, vehicle,
vessel or weapon, used in the commission of the said offence be
forfeited to the State Government and that any licence or permit,
held by such person under this Act, be cancelled and such
cancellation of licence or permit or forfeiture shall be in addition to
any punishment that may be awarded for such offence.
It also provides that where any person is convicted of an
offence under the Act, the court may direct that the licence, if any,
granted to such person under the Arms Act, 1959, for possession
of any arm with which an offence under the Act has been
committed, shall be cancelled and that such person shall not be
eligible for a licence under the Arms Act, 1959 for a period of five
years from the date of conviction.

90
It also provides that nothing contained in section 360 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 or in the Probation of Offenders
Act, 1958 shall apply to a person convicted of an offence with
respect to hunting in a sanctuary or a National Park or of an
offence against any provision of Chapter V A unless such person is
under eighteen years of age.
The proposed new section 51B provides for certain conditions
to apply while granting bail. It provides that every offence
punishable with a term of imprisonment for three years or more
under the Act shall be cognizable offence and no person accused of
an offence under sub-sections ( 1), ( 2), ( 3), ( 5) and ( 6) of section
51 shall be released on bail or on his own bond unless the Public
Prosecutor has been given the opportunity to oppose the application
for such release.
Clause 27.—This clause seeks to amend section 55 of the
principal Act which relates to cognizance of offence.
It proposes to insert a new clause ( ad) so as to include the
Management Authority or any officer, including an officer of the
Wildlife Crime Control Bureau, authorised in this behalf by the
Central Government within the scope of the aforesaid section for
the purpose of making complaint of any offence under the Act.
It further proposes to insert a proviso to provide that a court
may also take cognizance of any offence under this Act without the
accused being committed to trial, upon perusal of a police report
under section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 of the
facts constituting an offence under the Act.
Clause 28.—This clause seeks to amend section 61 of the
principal Act which relates to power to alter entries in schedule.
It proposes to amend sub-section ( 1) so as to exclude
Schedule VII from the purview of the said sub-section.
It further proposes to insert a new sub-section to confer
power upon the Central Government to add or omit or amend the
entries in any of the Schedules to respond to area or site specific
requirements of each State in consultation with concerned State
Government.
It also provides that the Central Government may amend, vary
or modify Schedule VII in consultation with the Management
Authority and the Scientific Authority.
It also provides that nothing contained in this Chapter and
Schedule VII, shall affect anything contained in other provisions of
the Act and the Schedules I to VI (both inclusive).
It also provides that every notification issued under this
section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, before
each House of Parliament.

91
Clause 29.—This clause seeks to amend section 63 of the
principal Act which relates to power of Central Government to make
rules.
It proposes to include the matters under the proposed
legislation in respect of which the Central Government may make
rules.
Clause 30.—This clause seeks to substitute section 65 of the
principal Act which relates to right of Scheduled Tribes to be
protected.
It provides that nothing in the Act shall affect the right of any
Scheduled Tribes of the Andaman Islands and the Nicobar Islands
in the Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands as notified
by the Andaman and Nicobar Administration.
Clause 31.—This clause seeks to insert a new Schedule VII
to include the species as listed in the Appendices of Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.

92
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to insert a new Chapter VB in the
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 so as to provide for the provisions
under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
of Wild Fauna and Flora. The proposed new section 49F provides
that the Central Government may designate an officer not below the
rank of Additional Director General of Forests as the Management
Authority for discharging functions and exercising powers under the
Act. Sub-section ( 5) thereof provides that the Central Government
may appoint such officers and employees as may be necessary to
assist the Management Authority in discharging its functions or
exercising the powers under the proposed new Chapter, on such
terms and conditions of service including salaries and allowances as
may be prescribed. The salaries and allowances of the officers and
employees to be appointed shall be met from the sanctioned budget
of the Central Government under the plan scheme “Strengthening of
Wild Life Division Consultancies for Special Tasks”.
2. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, is not likely
to involve any other expenditure of recurring or non-recurring
nature from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
92

93
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (1) of clause 110 of the Bill provides that the State
Government shall make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.
It also provides that the Central Government may frame model
rules, which shall apply to the State mutatis mutandis  until the rules
in that matter are made by the State Government.
Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to amend section 63 of the Wild
Life (Protection) Act, 1972 which confers power upon the Central
Government to make rules. The matters on which rules may be
made, inter alia , relate to— (a) the rules, standards or procedures
and any other matter pertaining to Scientific Research; (b) any
matter relating to animal traps; (c) terms and conditions of the
committee, sub-committees or study groups under sub-section (3)
of section 5B; (d) terms and conditions of the committees under
section 8A; (e) the terms and conditions of service including salaries
and allowances of the officers and employees of the Management
Authority under sub-section (5) of section 49F; (f) the rules of
procedure for transaction of business at meetings of the co-
ordination committee including quorum under sub-section (2) of
section 49J; (g) the manner of granting permits for possessing or
trading in scheduled specimens under sub-section (2) of section
49K; and the manner of furnishing reports of such specimens to the
Management Authority under sub-section (3) of section 49K; (h) the
rules to regulate breeding in captivity or artificially propagating
specimens listed in Appendix I of Schedule VII; (i) any matter
referred to in section 49L; (j) any other matter relating to Scheduled
specimens or exotic species; (k) rules on any matter not specifically
specified.
2. The rules made by the Central Government under
section 63 of the Act, shall have to be laid, as soon as they are
made, before each House of Parliament.
3. The matters in respect of which rules may be made are
matters of procedure or administrative detail and it is not practicable
to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative
power is, therefore, of a normal character.
93

94
94
ANNEXURE
EXTRACTS  FROM THE W ILD L IFE (P ROTECTION ) A CT, 1972
(53 OF 1972)
* *** *
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
* *** *
(15) “habitat” includes land, water or vegetation which is the
natural home of any wild animal;
(16) “hunting” with its grammatical variations and cognate
expressions, includes,—
* *** *
(b) capturing, coursing, snaring, trapping, driving or
baiting any wild or captive animal and every attempt to do so;
* *** *
(24) “person” includes a firm;
* *** *
(31)“trophy”means the whole or any part of any captive
animal or wild animal, other than vermin, which has been kept or
preserved by any means, weather artificial or natural, and includes-
(b) antler, bone, carapace, shell, horn rhinoceros horn,
hair, feather, nail, tooth, tusk, musk, eggs, nests and honeycomb;
* *** *
(35) “weapon” includes ammunition, bows and arrows,
explosives, firearms, hooks, knives, nets, poison, snares and traps
and any instrument or apparatus capable of anaesthetizing, decoying,
destroying, injuring or killing an animal;
(36) “wild animal” means any animal specified in Schedules I
to IV and found wild in nature;
* *** *
    ( 39) “zoo” means an establishment, whether stationary or
mobile, where captive animals are kept for exhibition to the public
and includes a circus and rescue centres but does not include an
establishment of a licensed dealer in captive animals.
* *** *
Definitions.

95
5B. (1) * * * * *
(3) The National Board may constitute committees, sub-
committees or study groups, as may be necessary, from time to
time in proper discharge of the functions assigned to it.
* *** *
22. The Collector shall, after service of the prescribed notice upon
the claimant, expeditiously inquire into—
(a) the claim preferred before him under clause (b) of
section 21, and
(b) the existence of any right mentioned in section 19 and not
claimed under clause ( b) of section 21, so far as the same may be
ascertainable from the records of the State Government and the
evidence of any person acquainted with the same.
* *** *
28. ( 1) The Chief Wild Life Warden may, on application, grant
to any person a permit to enter or reside in a sanctuary for all or
any of the following purposes, namely:—
* *** *
(a) photography;
* *** *
29. No person shall destroy, exploit or remove any wild life
including forest produce from a sanctuary or destroy or damage or
divert the habitat of any wild animal by any act whatsoever or
divert, stop or enhance the flow of water into or outside the
sanctuary, except under and in accordance with a permit granted by
the Chief Wild Life Warden, and no such permit shall be granted
unless the State Government being satisfied in consultation with the
Board that such removal of wild life from the sanctuary or the
change in the flow of water into or outside the sanctuary is
necessary for the improvement and better management of wild life
therein, authorises the issue of such permit:
Provided that where the forest produce is removed from a
sanctuary the same may be used for meeting the personal bona fide
needs of the people living in and around the sanctuary and shall not
be used for any commercial purpose.
Explanation —For the purposes of this section, grazing or
movement of livestock permitted under clause ( d) of section 33
shall not be deemed to be an act prohibited under this section.
* *** *
32. No person shall use, in a sanctuary, chemicals, explosives
or any other substances which may cause injury to, or endanger,
any wild life in such sanctuary.
Standing
Committee of
the National
Board.
Inquiry by
Collector.
Destruction,
etc., in a
sanctuary
prohibited
without a
permit.
Grant of
permit.
Ban on use of
injurious
substances.

96
33. The Chief Wild Life Warden shall be the authority who
shall control, manage and maintain all sanctuaries and for that
purpose, within the limits of any sanctuary,—
(a) may construct such roads, bridges, buildings,
fences or barrier gates, and carry out such other works as he
may consider necessary for the purposes of such sanctuary:
Provided that no construction of commercial tourist lodges,
hotels, zoos and safari parks shall be undertaken inside a sanctuary
except with the prior approval of the National Board.
* *** *
National Parks
35. (1) Whenever it appears to the State Government that an
area, whether within a sanctuary or not, is, by reason of its
ecological, faunal, floral, geomorphological or zoological association
or importance, needed to be constituted as a National Park for the
purpose of protecting, propagating or developing wild life therein or
its environment, it may, by notification, declare its intention to
constitute such area as a National Park:
Provided that where any part of the territorial waters is
proposed to be included in such National Park, the provisions of
section 26A shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to the
declaration of a National Park as they apply in relation to the
declaration of a sanctuary.
(2) The notification referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall define
the limits of the area which is intended to be declared as a National
Park.
* *** *
(8) The provisions of sections 27 and 28, sections 30 to 32
(both inclusive), and clauses ( a), ( b) and ( c) of section 33,
section 33A and section 34 shall, as far as may be apply in relation
to a National Park as they apply in relation to a sanctuary.
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, in case of an
area, where within a sancutary or not, where the rights have been
extinguished and the land has become vested in the State
Government under any Act or otherwise such area may be notified
by it, by a notification, as a National Park and the proceedings
under sections 19 to 26 (both inclusive) and the provisions of sub-
sections ( 3) and ( 4) of this section shall not apply.
* *** *
36D. (1) * * * * *
(2) The Committee shall consist of five representatives
nominated by the Village Panchayat or where such Panchayat does
not exist by the members of the Gram Sabha and one representative
Control of
sanctuaries.
Declaration
of National
Parks.
Community
Reserve
Management
Committee.

97
of the State Forests or Wild Life Department under whose
jurisdiction the community reserve is located.
* *** *
38L. (1) * * * * *
(2) The Tiger Conservation Authority shall consist of the
following members, namely:—
* *** *
(l) Chairperson, National Commission for the Scheduled
Tribes;
(m) Chairperson, National Commission for the
Scheduled Castes;
* *** *
38-O. (1) The Tiger Conservation Authority shall have the
following powers and perform the following functions, namely:—
(a) to approve the Tiger Conservation Plan prepared by
the State Government under sub-section ( 3) of section 38V of
this Act;
* *** *
CHAPTER IVC
TIGER AND O THER E NDANGERED  S PECIES  C RIME C ONTROL B UREAU
38Y. The Central Government may, for the purposes of this
Act, by order published in the Official Gazette, constitute a Tiger
and Other Endangered Species Crime Control Bureau to be known
as the Wildlife Crime Control Bureau consisting of—
(a) the Director of Wildlife Preservation—Director ex
officio ;
(b) the Inspector-General of Police—Additional
Director;
(c) the Deputy Inspector-General of Police—Joint
Director;
(d) the Deputy Inspector-General of Forests—Joint
Director;
(e) the Additional Commissioner (Customs and Central
Excise)—Joint Director; and
(f) such other officers as may be appointed from
amongst the officers covered under sections 3 and 4 of this
Act.
* *** *
Constitution of
National Tiger
Conservation
Authority.
Powers and
Functions of
Tiger
Conservation
Authority.
Constitution
of Tiger and
other
Endangered
Species Crime
Control
Bureau.

98
CHAPTER V
Trade or Commercer Wild Animals, Animal Articles and Trophies
39. (1) Every—
(a) wild animal, other than vermin, which is hunted
under section 11 or sub-section ( 1) of section 29 or sub-
section ( 6) of section 35 or kept or bred in captivity or
hunted in contravention of any provision of this Act or any
rule or order made thereunder or found dead, or killed by
mistake; and
* *** *
CHAPTER VI
P
REVENTION  AND D ETECTON OF OFFENCES
50. (1) Nothwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, the Director or any other officer
authorised by him in this behalf or the Chief Wild Life Warden or
the authorised officer or any forest officer or any police officer not
below the rank of a sub-inspector, may, if he has reasonable
grounds for believing that any person has committed an offence
against this Act,—
(a) require any such person to produce for inspection
any captive animal, wild animal, animal article, meat, trophy,
uncured trophy, specified plant or part or derivative thereof in
his control, custody or possession, or any licence, permit or
other document granted to him or required to be kept by him
under the provisions of this Act;
(b) stop any vehicle or vessel in order to conduct
search or inquiry or enter upon and search any premises,
land, vehicle or vessel, in the occupation of such person, and
open and search any baggage or other things in his
possession;
(c) seize any captive animal, wild animal, animal article,
meat, trophy or uncured trophy, or any specified plant or part
or derivative thereof, in respect of which an offence against
this Act appears to have been committed, in the possession of
any person together with any trap, tool, vehicle, vessel or
weapon used for committing any such offence and, unless he
is satisfied that such person will appear and answer any
charge which may be preferred against him, arrest him
without warrant, and detain him:
Provided that where a fisherman, residing within ten
kilometres of a sanctuary or National Park, inadvertently enters on
a boat, not used for commercial fishing, in the territorial waters in
that sanctuary or National Park, a fishing tackle or net on such boat
shall not be seized.
* *** *
Wild animals,
etc., to be
government
property.
Power of
entry, search
arrest and
detention.

99
51. (1) Any person who contravenes any provision of this Act
except Chapter V A and section 38J or any rule or order made
thereunder or who commits a breach of any of the conditions of
any licence or permit granted under this Act, shall be guilty of an
offence against this Act, and shall, on conviction, be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or
with fine which may extend to twenty-five thousand rupees or with
both:
Provided that where the offence committed is in relation to
any animal specified in Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II or meat
of any such animal or animal article, trophy or uncured trophy
derived from such animal or where the offence relates to hunting in
a sanctuary or a National Park or altering the boundaries of a
sanctuary or a National Park, such offence shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but
may extend to seven years and also with fine which shall not be
less than ten thousand rupees:
Provided further that in the case of a second or subsequent
offence of the nature mentioned in this sub-section, the term of
imprisonment shall not be less than three years but may extend to
seven years and also with fine which shall not be less than twenty-
five thousand rupees.
(1A) Any person who contravenes any provisions of Chapter
V A, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall
not be less than three years but which may extend to seven years
and also with fine which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees.
(1B ) Any person who contravenes the provisions of
section 38J shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to two
thousand rupees, or with both:
Provided that in the case of a second or subsequent offence,
the term of imprisonment may extend to one year or the fine which
may extend to five thousand rupees.
(1C) Any person, who commits an offence in relation to the
core area of a tiger reserve or where the offence relate to hunting
in the tiger reserve or altering the boundaries of the tiger reserve,
such offence shall be punishable on first conviction with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but
may extend to seven years, and also with fine which shall not be
less than fifty thousand rupees but may extend to two lakh rupees;
and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction with
imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years and also with
fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but may extend
to fifty lakh rupees.
(1D) Whoever, abets any offence punishable under sub-
section ( 1C) shall, if the act abetted is committed in consequence
of the abetment, be punishable with the punishment provided for
that offence.
Penalties.

100
(2) When any person is convicted of an offence against this
Act, the Court trying the offence may order that any captive animal,
wild animal, animal article, trophy, uncured trophy, meat, ivory
imported into India or an article made from such ivory, any
specified plant, or part or derivative thereof in respect of which the
offence has been committed, and any trap, tool, vehicle, vessel or
weapon, used in the commission of the said offence be forfeited to
the State Government and that any licence or permit, held by such
person under the provisions of this Act, be cancelled.
(3) Such cancellation of licence or permit or such forfeiture
shall be in addition to any other punishment that may be awarded
for such offence.
(4) Where any person is convicted of an offence against this
Act, the court may direct that the licence, if any, granted to such
person under the Arms Act, 1959, for possession of any arm with
which an offence against this Act has been committed, shall be
cancelled and that such person shall not be eligible for a licence
under the Arms Act, 1959, for a period of five years from the date
of conviction.
(5) Nothing contained in section 360 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 or in the Probation of Offenders
Act, 1958 shall apply to a person convicted of an offence with
respect to hunting in a sanctuary or a National Park or of an
offence against any provision of Chapter V A unless such person is
under eighteen years of age.
51A. When any person accused of, the commission of any
offence relating to Schedule I or Part II of Schedule II or offences
relating to hunting inside the boundaries of National Park or wild life
sanctuary or altering the boundaries of such parks and sanctuaries,
is arrested under the provisions of the Act, then notwithstanding
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 no such
person who had been previously convicted of an offence under this
Act shall, be released on bail unless—
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity
of opposing the release on bail; and
(b) where the Public Procecutor opposes the
application, the Court is satisfied that there are reasonable
grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and
that he is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
55. No Court shall take cognizance of any offence against
this Act on the complaint of any person other than—
(a) the Director of Wild Life Preservation or any other
officer authorised in this behalf by the Central Government;
or
54 of 1959.
2 of 1974.
20 of 1958.
Certain
conditions to
apply while
granting bail.
Cognizance of
offences.
2 of 1974.

101
(aa) the Member-Secretary, Central Zoo Authority in
matters relating to violation of the provisions of Chapter IV A;
or
(ab) Member-Secretary, Tiger Conservation Authority;
or
(ac) Director of the concerned tiger reserve; or
(b) the Chief Wild Life Warden, or any other officer
authorised in this behalf by the State Government subject to
such conditions as may be specified by that Government; or
(bb) the officer-in-charge of the zoo in respect of
violation of provisions of section 38J; or
(c) any person who has given notice of not less than
sixty days, in the manner prescribed, of the alleged offence
and of his intention to make a complaint to the Central
Government or the State Government or the officer authorised
as aforesaid.
* *** *
61. (1) The Central Government may, if it is of opinion that
it is expedient so to do, by notification, add or delete any entry to
or from any Schedule or transfer any entry from one Part of a
Schedule to another Part of the same Schedule or from one
Schedule to another.
* *** *
65. Nothing in this Act shall affect the hunting rights
conferred on the Scheduled Tribes of the Nicobar Islands in the
Union territory of Andaman and Nicobar Islands by notification of
the Andaman and Nicobar Administration, No. 40/67/F, No. G 635,
V ol. III, dated the 28th April, 1967, published at pages 1 to 5 of the
extraordinary issue of the Andaman and Nicobar Gazette, dated the
28th April, 1967.
* *** *
Power to alter
entries in
Schedules.
Rights of
Scheduled
Tribes to be
protected.

102
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
further to amend the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972.
[Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan, Minister of State (Independent Charge)
in the Ministry of Environment and Forests ]

ANNEXURE-II
Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change Statement on
Withdrawal of the proposed Wild Life Protection Amendment Bill, 2013
The Wild Life (Protection) Act was enacted in 1972 and it has undergone amendments in
1982, 1986, 1991, 1993, 2003 and 2006. One more amendment has been introduced in Rajya Sabha
and is with the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests for scrutiny. A few sittings have taken place and report is awaited.
The present Act primarily provides a framework for wild life protection in the country for
the States. The Act places primary responsibility of protection on the Wild Life Authorities of the
state and places most of the powers for protection and conservation with the States, including
framing of rules for most of the provisions. The provisions are primarily grouped into following
categories:
1. Institutions - Wildlife Preservation Officer, National and State Boards for Wildlife,
National Tiger Conservation Authority (NTCA), Central Zoo Authority (CZA), Wildlife
Crime Control Bureau (WCCB).
2. Hunting of Wild Animals - General principles of wildlife protection, protection of some
specified plants (Species)
3. Wildlife Areas – Protected Areas (PAs) and processes for their declaration and
management (Habitats)
4. Trade or commerce in wild animals and their articles (Use of biodiversity)
5. Prevention, detection of offences including punishments, procedures and related
matters (enabling mechanisms)
Since the time this law was enacted, scope of wild life protection has undergone a sea change
and now covers biodiversity in whole - ranging from species to ecosystem complexes in landscapes.
Wild life protection action has become much more challenging due to the approach of earmarking of
Protected Areas for preservation of life forms, species specific conservation over the earlier habitat
based approach, and now landscape based conservation strategies with human existence included as
the new norms. In such circumstances, the scope of Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 (WLPA),
which is the only law facilitating conservation action for biodiversity, needs to be widened much
beyond the existing one. Following points are specifically needed to be addressed in the review.
(i) Definitions of wildlife including wild animals alone is not sufficient. Species of other
life forms which do not come under the category of wild animals need to be covered
under the law for which suitable changes are required.
(ii) Hunting is prohibited as a policy and therefore, so is provided in the law. The definition
of hunting covering any activity focussed on animals makes management cumbersome
due to legal restrictions. For example, cultural practices like payers to wild animals on
religious occasions, photography of wild animals or capturing for radio-collaring or
rescue etc. comes within the definition of hunting. Thus the term hunting needs to be
qualified for intention of hurting the wildlife as different from bona fide actions.
103

104
(iii) Provisions for exceptional permission for hunting (like photography, capture
for research, translocation etc.) are much restrictive in the law itself. As a result in
case of overpopulation in certain cases, management by population control is not
possible.
(iv) The matters related to research and conservation action, including regulation is
possible largely for the scheduled animals only. Animals and plants, which are not part
of schedule, are out of purview of regulation due to which legal issues sometimes
cause difficulty in enforcement. For example, black kites are not part of Schedules.
Therefore any action related to such species cannot be regulated under the act unless
the action occurs within a national park or wildlife sanctuary.
(v) The provisions related to removal of forest produce from a sanctuary, indicating its
use only for personal bona fide needs of the people living in and around the PA and
not for commercial purpose, restrict the appropriation of any produce, which may be
required to be removed from a PA for conservation purpose. For example, removal of
large quantity of flowered bamboo from a PA after gregarious flowering becomes
necessary due to fire hazard and it cannot be consumed by the local people.
(vi) There is no provision related to trade or any activity related to exotic species. Thus
exotic birds are imported/smuggled into the country and due to absence of a law for
their trade; indigenous species are dealt under garb of exotics.
(vii) In the provisions for declaration of possession/ownership of various scheduled
species, provisions are confusing. Thus, while transfer of ownership of scheduled I
animals by inheritance is possible, ownership of offspring of the captive animals is not
defined. Trade of peacock feathers is exempted from regulations but being a product
of a schedule I animal, requirement of declaration of possession ownership is not
exempted, while at the same time, sunset provision for declaration forbids possession
without ownership certificate.
(viii) Large number of trophies are imported by many Indian citizens after hunting in several
countries with legally obtained game licenses. Any curb on this to curb tendency of
glorifying hunting and keeping wildlife trophies is sometimes challenged in courts of
law. A policy for restricting the number has been put in place which is to be factored
in within the Act.
(ix) The laws for declaration of various Protected Areas (PAs) do not provide complete
processes for alteration/denotification of such areas, which causes doubt over the
processes and therefore, renders the States hesitant to notify more areas as PAs.
(x) In the proposed amendment, a full chapter detailing all the provisions of CITES has
been provided with a Schedule VII containing all the three appendices of CITES. As
provisions of CITES keep changing due to frequent reviews of conservation status of
the species covered, corresponding changes cannot be undertaken so frequently in the
schedules in WLPA. In such circumstances, modification of schedules of the Act itself
can become difficult than enforcing it.
(xi) In some of the judgements of Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, need of a law
similar to Endangered Species Act of USA has also been expressed. WLPA in spirit
conforms to the needs of habitats and species and provides for protection of species
based on their threat status. But the limitations mentioned above indicate need of a
fresh look at the Act and a complete review thereof.

105
Therefore, it is proposed to withdraw the proposed Wild Life (Protection) Amendment
Bill 2013, in order to undertake a comprehensive review of the present Act, after conducting a
policy dialogue on the needs of law for ensuring conservation of life forms, plants and animals with
the ecosystems and habitats, within and beyond Protected Areas, and also comparing it with the
corresponding laws of other countries.

106
106
çdk”k tkoMsdj
Prakash Javadekar
jkT; ea=h ¼Lora= çHkkj½
i;kZoj.k] ou ,oa tyok;q ifjorZu
Hkkjr ljdkj
MINISTER OF STATE (INDEPENDENT CHARGE)
ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Dated: 4th December, 2014
To
The Secretary General
Rajya Sabha
New Delhi
Sub: Motion for withdrawal of a Bill in the House in which it has been introduced.
Sir,
I give notice of my intention to move for leave to withdraw the Wild Life (Protection)
Amendment Bill, 2013 during the Winter Session (233rd Session) of the Rajya Sabha and also to
withdraw the Bill.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(Prakash Javadekar)
Copy to:
1. Minister of Parliamentary Affairs
2. Minister of Law and Justice (Legislative Department)
Indira Paryavaran Bhawan, Jor Bagh Road, New Delhi-110003
Tel.: 011-24695136, 24695132, Fax : 011-24695329
F.No. 4-21/2014-WL(Pt)
ANNEXURE-III

107
MINUTES

108

109
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 3 rd December, 2013 in Committee Room
No. ‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Maya Singh
LOK SABHA
3. Shri Vincent H. Pala
4. Shri M.B. Rajesh
5. Shri K. Jayaprakash Hegde
6. Shri O.S. Manian
7. Shri Dayanidhi Maran
8. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar
9. Shri Pradeep Tamta
10. Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. V . Rajagopalan, Secretary
2. Shri K. Jude Sekar, Special Secretary and DGF
3. Shri S.S. Garbyal, Assistant Director General of Forests (Wildlife)
4. Shri Rajesh Gopal, Assistant Director General of Forests (National Tiger Conservation
Authority)
5. Dr. S.K. Khanduri, Inspector-General of Forests (Forest Conservation)
109

110
*** Relates to other matters.
***
***
***
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, Secretaries, Ministry
of Environment and Forests, *** Special Secretary and Director-General (Forests), Ministry of
Environment and Forests, *** and other senior officers of the Ministries/Department present in the
meeting. He informed the Members that the meeting had been convened to hear the views of the
Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests on “the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment
Bill, 2013” ***. Members of the Committee may also offer their views on those Bills. He further
stated that after hearing the Secretaries of Ministry of Environment and Forests ***.
3. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests initiated his presentation and
thanked the Committee for having been given an opportunity to present the views of the Ministry
on “The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013”. He stated that The Wild Life (Protection)
Act, 1972, provided the legal framework for the protection of various species of wild animals,
management of their habitat and also for the regulation and control of trade in the products derived
from various parts of wild animals. The Act had been amended earlier in 1991, 2003 and 2006.
The Bill had been introduced to make punishments for various wild life crimes more stringent and
to facilitate implementation of Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Fauna and Flora (CITES), of which, India was a member.
4. Thereafter, he delineated other salient features of the Bill viz. bill proposed to define “animal
hold traps”, “wildlife research”, provisions relating for facilitating and regulating research in
Protected Areas, powers given to Chief Wildlife Warden in that regard and constitution of an Expert
Committee by the Standing Committee of National Board of Wild Life.
5. On the query raised by the Chairman on hunting rights granted to tribal communities in the
Nicobar Islands, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests stated that earlier the right
was granted only to a certain notified community in Nicobar Islands and the same had now been
extended to notified communities in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
6. Thereafter, Members pointed out that wild animals were adversely affecting agriculture and
human life and sought clarifications from the Special Secretary and Director General (Forests) on
the measures taken to ensure timely compensation for loss of life and property due to attacks by
wild animals. Members also desired to know whether the Ministry was formulating any long term
policy in coordination with people and State Governments for protection of human lives and
property due to man-animal conflict. Special Secretary and Director General (Forests) replied that
apart from giving timely compensation for loss of life and property they were in the process of
initiating an awareness programme in collaboration with some States to prevent such incidents.
Throwing further light in the matter, ADG , National Tiger Conservation Authority (NICA), stated
that the main reason behind rise in cases of man-animal conflict could be attributed to rise in
population of tigers over and above the carrying capacity. To tackle with the problem, tigers were
being shifted from high density to low density tiger reserves and their monitoring was being done
through radio telemetry. Members also drew the attention of the Committee towards incidents of
man animal conflict in Karnataka, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh. On the observation
of the Committee that compensation amount of Rs. 2 lakh was too meagre, Special Secretary and
Director General Forests agreed that the amount offered was meager and pointed out that
some states like Maharashtra had suo motto increased compensation amount from Rs. 2 lakh to
Rs. 5 lakh.

111
7. When a question was raised regarding fear among the Jain Community that the Bill prohibits
the use of naturally shed Peacock tail feathers and directly interferes in their religious practices,
the Additional Director General (Forests) replied that naturally shed peacock feathers had already
been exempted under ‘The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972’ and the exemption would continue.
8. One Member raised the issue of illegal domestic farming of exotic birds such as Emu and
Ostrich in Tamil Nadu and emphasized upon the need for a legislation for the purpose. The
Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests informed that as per existing Act, all the wildlife
species were not mentioned in the schedule and hence, were not covered under the Act. He
accepted that a regulation was needed in, that regard and that aspect was probably not covered
under current amendment of the Wild Life Act, 1972.
9. Responding to a query with regard to shifting animals with radio telemetry monitoring, ADG
(Forests), NTCA explained that there was no proposal to shift animals to parks or sanctuaries
which happened to be core areas of tiger reserve. Throwing further light on the issue, Special
Secretary and DG (Forests) stated that as the number of elephants was very high in States like
Karnataka, it was impossible to translocate all animals from one area to other. He further stated
that the Ministry had kept provision for providing assistance to States for elephant proof barriers.
Another member enquired about problems being faced by State Governments in construction of
roads in rural areas due to delay in getting forestry clearances. He added that roads are constructed
in phases but the Ministry of Environment and Forests insisted on seeking clearance for the entire
project in one go which caused considerable delay. Responding to the query ADG , (Forests) said
that they would look into the matter and expedite the cases wherever pending.
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. * * *
16. * * *
17. * * *
18. * * *
19. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
20. The meeting adjourned at 1.34 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

112
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the 24 th February, 2014 in Main Committee
Room No. Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Rama Jois
3. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
4. Shri Rama Chandra Khuntia
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Marotrao Sainuji Kowase
6. Shri O.S. Manian
7. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar
8. Shri Joseph Toppo
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Shri S.S. Garbyal, Special Secretary and Director (Forests)
2. Dr. S.K. Khanduri, IGF
3. Dr. Rashid Hasan, Advisor
***
***
***
***
***
112
*** Relates to other matters.

113
2. At the out set, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, Special Secretary
and Director General (Forests) Ministry of Environment and Forest and other senior officials
present in the meeting of the committe.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. Chairman enquired from the Ministry of Environment and Forests about the ‘Wild Life
Protection (Amendment) Bill, 2013’. The Special Secretary and Director-General (Forests) informed
the Committee that some members of the Expert Committee constituted by the Ministry to look into
the proposed amendments were out of the country and hence could not appear before the
Committee on that day. The Committee then decided to call the Members of the said Expert
Committee in its next meeting on the 4
th March, 2014 to hear their views on the Bill.
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. * * *
16. * * *
17. * * *
18. * * *
19. * * *
20. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
21. The meeting adjourned at 1.10 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

114
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 4 th March, 2014 in Main Committee
Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Vijay Jawaharlal Darda
3. Shri Rabinarayan Mohapatra
4. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
LOK SABHA
5. Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
6. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
7. Shri M.B. Rajesh
8. Shri O.S. Manian
9. Shri Basori Singh Masram
10. Shri Ramashankar Rajbhar
SECRETARIAT
Dr. D.B. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Deputy Director
Shri Deepak Kalra, Assistant Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Representatives of Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Shri S.S. Garbyal, Special Secretary and Director General (Forests)
2. Shri Sushil Kumar, Additional Secretary and Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board
3. Shri Ajay Tyagi, Joint Secretary
4. Dr. Rashid Hasan, Advisor
***
114
*** Relate to other matters.

115
Experts on ‘The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013
1. Dr. M.K. Ranjitsinh, Chairman, Expert Committee
2. Ms. Prerna Singh Bindra, Member, Expert Committee
3. Dr. M.D. Madhusudan, Member, Expert Committee
2. At the outset, Chairman wlcomed the Members of the Committee, Secretaries, *** Public
*** Director-General (Forests), Ministry of Environment and Forests; *** experts on the Wild Life
(Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013 present in the meeting. Thereafter, he informed that the meeting
had been convened to hear the views of the aforesaid Ministries/Department *** on the steps taken
by them to mitigate pollution in their respective sectors and the also to hear the views of experts
on the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013.
3. * * *
4. He, thereafter, asked the Chairman of the Expert Committee, Dr. M.K. Ranjitsinh to apprise
the Committee of objections and concerns, if any, and the scope for improvement on the various
provisions of “The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013”. The Chairman, Expert Committee
thanked the Chairman for giving him an opportunity to present his views before the Committee.
He stated that as decided by the Supreme Court amendments proposed in the Wild Life (Protection)
Act by the ministry should have first been scrutinised by the National Board for Wild Life being
the technical authority. However, the same was not done. When it was brought to the notice of
the Ministry, the Ministry appointed a Committee of Experts to look into the amendments.
5. The Chairman of the Expert Committee stated that the amendments proposed in the Bill
subverted the very purpose of the Wild Life (Protection) Act in many regards. Clause 9A gave
power to the Chief Wildlife Warden for allowing setting up of traps for safeguarding crop and
property of farmers but it is likely to be misused for protecting animals like tigers, including
schedule I animals, etc. trappes may be laid. He then raised concern on Clause 29 and 38 (a) of
the Bill. He drew attention towards a glaring mistake in drafting the Bill where the words ‘State
Government’ were used instead of ‘Central Government’ for management of national parks and
sanctuaries.
6. He further stated that as per proposed bill, any particular animal in a particular notified area
could be de-notified which would pose serious threat to the lives of the animals. On the issue of
extension of hunting rights to tribals of Andaman and Nicobar Islands, he stated that doing so
would not only pose a threat to the bio-diversity of the islands but also open Pandora’s box as
similar demands would be raised by tribal communities from other States.
7. He, thereafter, suggested changes in the Clauses relating Convention on Trade in Endangered
Species (CITES) and stated that changes should have been more comprehensive and scientific
authorities like Zoological Society of India and Wild Life Institute of India should have been
consulted beforehand. He, also, commented on Section 49 (P), Section 50, 51, 51 A, 60 B and
61 of the Bill.
8. Chairman, asked other Expert Committee members to give their views on the Bill presenting
her views, Ms. Prema Singh Bindra said that amendments proposed in the Bill particularly Sections
61, 51 A, 9(A) were unwieldy and diluted. It was further added that since the Wild Life
(Protection) Act, 1972 was the only Act that protected the critically endangered wildlife, the
Ministry should not amend the Act in a hurry.
*** Relates to other matters.

116
9. Another Expert Committee Member namely Dr. M.D. Madhusudan agreeing with
Dr. Ranjitsinh highlighted that under the existing Act there was no thrust on research
activities, whereas all conservation activities were based on research work only. He also added that
now-a-days tribes of Nicobar were using guns, etc. and not traditional gears for hunting.
Therefore, if at all, tribals were to be allowed to hunt, they should be allowed to do so by
traditional methods only and that too in limited areas.
10. While reacting to the comments of Expert Committee Members, the Special Secretary and
Director General (Forests) stated that suggestions made by the experts were very insignificant and
needs to be considered very seriously. The Chairman of the Committee then directed the Ministry
of Environment and Forests to furnish detailed comments of the Ministry to the Committee on the
points raised by the Expert Committee Members. Other Members of the Committee also raised
concern on some of the provisions of the Bill.
11. * * *
12. * * *
13. * * *
14. * * *
15. * * *
16. * * *
17. * * *
18. * * *
19. * * *
20. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
21. The Committee adjourned 1.39 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

117
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 N OON on Thursday, the 30 th October, 2014 in Main Committee,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
3. Shri C.P. Narayanan
4. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
5. Shri Bhupinder Singh
6. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
8. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
9. Kumari Sushmita Dev
10. Shri Laxman Giluwa
11. Dr. K. Gopal
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
14. Shri Nana Patole
15. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
16. Shri Nagendra Singh
17. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
18. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
19. Shri Ram Kripal Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
WITNESSES
***
117
*** Relates to other matter.

118
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. Representatives of Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change
1. Shri Ashok Lavasa, Secretary
2. Shri H.K. Pande, Additional Secretary
3. Dr. Rajesh Gopal, ADG (NTCA)
4. Dr. S.K. Khanduri, IGF (WL)
5. Shri R.K. Srivastava, IGF (PE)
10. The Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forests and
Climate Change and other senior officers present in the meeting of the Committee. The
Committee then took up presentation by the Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forests
and Climate Change. The Chairman, thereafter, informed the Members that he had been
informed by the Secretary, Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change that the
Government had decided to withdraw the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013 in
order to undertake a comprehensive review of the present Act. He stated that no useful
purpose would be served in discussing the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013
since Government had decided to withdraw the Bill. He asked the Secretary to state the
reasons as to why it was considered necessary to withdraw the Bill and the details of
amendments that were proposed to be brought in the new Bill.
11. The Secretary stated that several additional issues like inclusion of plant species in
schedules for adequate protection, protection of wildlife other than scheduled species,
mandate of wildlife authorities in areas beyond protected Areas, enabling provisions for
CITES implementation, etc. were required to be covered in the Wild Life (Protection) Act,
1972. It was therefore, felt that the Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013 be
withdrawn for preparation of a comprehensive amendment proposal. He also informed the
Committee about constitution of a High Level Committee under the Chairmanship of ex-
Cabinet Secretary, Shri T.S.R. Subramanian, specifically tasked with making
recommendations on reforms which were required in various Acts, including the Wild Life
Protection Act, 1972.
12. In response to a query as to whether the decision for the withdrawal of the Bill
was taken at the level of Cabinet or the Minister, the Secretary clarified that the
decision had been taken at the level of the Minister and had been submitted to the Prime
Minister’s Office for its approval. The Chairman asked the Secretary to intimate the
status of the Bill to the Committee in writing.
*** Relate to other matters.

119
13. Thereafter, the Chairman expressed the hope that in the process of harmonizing domestic
laws with International treaties, there should be no dilution of the principles of environmental
protection.
14. The Secretary assured the Committee that the intention of the Ministry was only to
rationalize the things and not to dilute anything pertaining to environmental or wildlife protection.
15. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
16. The meeting then adjourned at 1.48 
P.M.

120
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 10 h December, 2014 in Room No. 63,
Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C.P. Narayanan
3. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
4. Shri Bhupinder Singh
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
7. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
8. Kumari Sushmita Dev
9. Shri Ninong Ering
10. Shri Laxman Giluwa
11. Dr. K. Gopal
12. Shri Nana Patole
13. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
14. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
15. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
16. Shri Nagendra Singh
17. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
18. Shri Vikram Usendi
19. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, The Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. He
informed that Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change had, vide its notice of Motion
dated 4
th December, 2014, expressed its intention to withdraw the Wild Life Protection
(Amendment) Bill, 2013, which was pending with the Committee.
120

121
3. Thereafter, the Chairman apprised the Committee of the recommendations of the Committee
in the draft Report on the Bill for Committee’s approval. The Committee adopted the draft Two
Hundred Fifty-third report without any amendment.
4. The Committee, thereafter, decided to present/lay the Report on the table of both the Houses
of Parliament on 11
th December, 2014. The Committee authorised the Chairman and, in his absence,
Shri Bhupendra Singh, to present the report in Rajya Sabha and Kumari Sushmita Dev and, in her
absence, Shri Nagendra Singh, to lay the report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 3.40 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

122
122
INDEX OF REPORTS PRESENTED BY DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARTLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
TECHNOLOGY , ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
Report No. Subject of the Report
12
1. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1993-94.
2. ‘National Environment Tribunal Bill, 1992’.
3. Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1992-93.
4. Annual Report of the Department of Electronics for the year 1992-93.
5. Annual Report of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1992-93.
6. Annual Report of the Department of Science and Technology for the year 1992-93.
7. Annual Report of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1992-93.
8. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1994-95.
9. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95.
10. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1994-95.
11. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1994-95.
12. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 1994-95.
13. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1994-95.
14. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1994-95.
15. Annual Report of the Department of Space for the year 1993-94.
16. Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1993-94.
17. Annual Report of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1993-94.
18. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 1995-96.
19. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1995-96.
20. Annual Report of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1993-94.
21. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1995-96.
22. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1995-96.
23. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1995-96.
24. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1995-96.
25. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1995-96.

123
12
26. Annual Report of the Department of Science and Technology for the year 1993-94.
27. Annual Report of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1993-94.
28. Annual Report of the Department of Electronics for the year 1993-94.
29. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 1995.
30. Annual Report of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95.
31. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 1996-97.
32. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1996-97.
33. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1996-97.
34. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1996-97.
35. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1996-97.
36. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1996-97.
37. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1996-97.
38. Demonstration of Herbal Fuel by Shri P . Ramar at IIP, Dehradun.
39. Action Taken by Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the 9
th Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants of Ministry
of Environment and Forests for the year 1994-95.
40. ‘Mid-term appraisal’ of programmes and functioning of the Department of
Biotechnology with special emphasis on the role of Biotechnology in Agriculture and
allied areas.
41. ‘Mid-term appraisal’ of programmes and functioning of the Department of Science
and Technology.
42. ‘Mid-term appraisal’ of programmes and functioning of the Department of Space.
43. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the Thirty-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(1996-97) of the Department of Biotechnology.
44. Action Taken by the Department of Electronics on the recommendations contained
in the Thirty-second Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1996-97)
of the Department of Electronics.
45. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the Thirty-fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1996-97)
of the Department of Ocean Development.
46. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology of the
year 1997-98.
47. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1997-98.

124
12
48. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1997-98.
49. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1997-98.
50. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1997-98.
51. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1997-98.
52. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1997-98.
53. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 1998-99.
54. Demands for Grants of the Department of Bio-technology for the year 1998-99.
55. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 1998-99.
56. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1998-99.
57. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 1998-99.
58. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1998-99.
59. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1998-99.
60. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the Fifty-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(1998-99) of the Department of Biotechnology.
61. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the Fifty-sixth Report of the Committee on Demands
for Grants (1998-99) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
62. Action Taken by the Department of Electronics on the recommendations contained
in the Fifty-eighth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (1998-99) of
the Department of Electronics.
63. Aspects related to Food Preservation and Safety Measures.
64. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 1999-2000.
65. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the
year 1999-2000.
66. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1999-2000.
67. Demands for Grants of the Department of Electronics for the year 1999-2000.
68. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 1999-2000.
69. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 1999-2000.
70. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the
year 1999-2000.

125
12
71. Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Bill, 1999.
72. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 2000-01.
73. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2000-01.
74. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2000-01.
75. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Information Technology for the year 2000-01.
76. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2000-01.
77. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2000-01.
78. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2000-01.
79. ‘The Information Technology Bill, 1999’.
80. Preservation of Gir Forests and Protection of Wild Life.
81. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-second Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Science
and Technology.
82. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-third Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research.
83. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-fourth Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of
Biotechnology.
84. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-seventh Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Space.
85. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-sixth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2000-01) of the Department of Ocean
Development.
86. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2001-02.
87. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2001-02.
88. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2001-02.
89. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the year
2001-02.
90. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2001-02.
91. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2001-02.
92. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninety-first Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Space.

126
12
93. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-seventh Report of
the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of
Biotechnology.
94. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-sixth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Scientific
and Industrial Research.
95. ‘The Biological Diversity Bill, 2000’.
96. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-ninth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Science and
Technology.
97. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Eighty-eighth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department of Ocean
Development.
98. Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Ninetieth Report of the
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Ministry of Environment
and Forests.
99. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2002-03.
100. Dem ands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2002-03.
101. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2002-03.
102. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 2002-03.
103. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2002-03.
104. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2002-03.
105. The Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Cess (Amendment) Bill, 2000.
106. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-second Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Department of Science and Technology.
107. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-first Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2002-03) of the Department of Ocean Development.
108. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the
Hundredth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the
Department of Space.
109. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the Ninety-ninth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2002-03) of the Department of Biotechnology.

127
12
110. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-third Report of the Committee on
Demands for Grants (2002-03) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
111. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2002-03) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
112. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2003-04.
113. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2003-04.
114. Demands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2003-04.
115. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2003-04.
116. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2003-04.
117. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 2003-04.
118. Conservation and Environmental-Management Plan for Dal-Nagin Lake.
119. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-fifteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Ocean Development.
120. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-thirteenth Report of the Department-
related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology on Demands
for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
121. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in One Hundred-twelfth Report of the Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on Demands for Grants
(2003-04) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
122. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-sixteenth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Biotechnology.
123. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the
One Hundred-fourteenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2003-04) of the Department of Space.
124. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-seventeenth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2003-04) of the Department
of Science and Technology.

128
12
125. Demands for Grants of the Department of Science and Technology for the
year 2004-05.
126. Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research for the
year 2004-05.
127. Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2004-05.
128. Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2004-05.
129. Dem ands for Grants of the Department of Space for the year 2004-05.
130. Demands for Grants of the Department of Atomic Energy for the year 2004-05.
131. Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and Forests for the year 2004-05.
132. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred-eighteenth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the conservation and Environmental Management Plan for Dal-Nagin
Lake, Srinagar.
133. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Twenty-fifth report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department
of Science and Technology.
134. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in the
One Hundred Twenty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Space.
135. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Twenty-seventh Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Biotechnology.
136. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Twenty-sixth Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department
of Scientific and Industrial Research.
137. Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Thirtieth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
138. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Twenty-eighth Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Department of Ocean
Development.

129
12
139. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Thirty-first Report of the Department-related
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2004-05) of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests.
140. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Science and Technology.
141. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Biotechnology.
142. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
143. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Ocean Development.
144. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Space.
145. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
146. Demands for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
147. Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Forty-third Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Ocean Development.
148. Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations
contained in the One Hundred Forty-fifth Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Atomic Energy.
149. Action Taken by the Department of Science and Technology on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred-fortieth Report of the Committee
on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Science and Technology.
150. Action Taken by the Department of Space on the recommendations contained in
the One Hundred Forty-forth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2005-06) of Department of Space.
151. Action Taken by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research on the
recommendations contained in the One Hundred Forty-second Report of the
Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-06) of Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research.
152. Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations
contained in the One-Hundred Forty-first Report of the Committee on Demands for
Grants (2005-06) of Department of Biotechnology.
153. Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations
contained in  the One Hundred Forty-sixth Report of the Committee on the Demands
for Grants (2005-06) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
154. The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2005.
155. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Science and Technology.
156. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.

130
12
157. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Biotechnology.
158. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Ocean Development.
159. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
160. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
161. Demands for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Space.
162. Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research Progra mme including Herbal Medicines.
163. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Sixtieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
164. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Ocean Development (renamed as Ministry
of Earth Sciences).
165. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Space.
166. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
167. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Biotechnology.
168. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Science and Technology.
169. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Fifty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2006-07) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
170. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Science and Technology.
171. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research.
172. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Biotechnology.

131
12
173. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
174. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
175. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Space.
176. Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
177. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Sixty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Drugs and Pharmaceuticals Research Programme including Herbal
Medicines.
178. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on the Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Science and
Technology.
179. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Biotechnology.
180. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
181. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
182. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Space.
183. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
184. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred Seventy-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
185. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Science and T echnology
(Ministry of Science and Technology).
186. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (Ministry of Science and Technology).
187. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.

132
12
188. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
189. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Space.
190. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
Science and Technology).
191. Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
192. Functioning of Central Pollution Control Board.
193. Global Warming and its Impact on India.
194. The Compensatory Afforestation Fund Bill, 2008.
195. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology. Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Science and Technology.
196. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Ninetieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of’ the Department of Biotechnology.
197. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
198. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Ninety-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
199. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Department of Space.
200. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
201. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One
Hundred and Eighty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
202. Coastal Management Programmes.
203. The National Green Tribunal Bill, 2009.
204. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.

133
12
205. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
Science and Technology).
206. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Space.
207. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
208. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (Ministry of Science and Technology).
209. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Department Science and Technology
(Ministry of Science and Technology).
210. Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
211. “The Protection and Utilisation of Public Funded Intellectual Property Bill. 2008”.
212. “The Civil Liability For Nuclear Damage Bill, 2010”.
213. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
214. Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Biotechnology.
215. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Space.
216. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2010-11) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
217. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
218. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Science and Technology.
219. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Tenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Ministry or Environment and Forests.

134
12
220. The Academy of Scientific and Innovative Research Bill, 2010.
221. The Nuclear Safety Regulatory Authority Bill, 2011.
222. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
223. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Science and T echnology
(Ministry of Science and Technology).
224. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
225. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Space.
226. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
227. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial
Research (Ministry of Science and Technology).
228. Demands for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of
Science and Technology).
229. Report on “The Regional Centre for Biotechnology Bill, 2011”.
230. S teps Taken by various Sectors of the Indian Economy to Control Pollution.
231. The I ndian Forest (Amendment) Bill, 2012.
232. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
233. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Science and Technology.
234. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
235. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Space.
236. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
237. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Twenty-seventh Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2012-13) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.

135
12
238. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants
(2010-11) of the Department of Biotechnology.
239. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
240. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Science and Technology.
241. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
242. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Space.
243. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
244. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
245. Demands for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Biotechnology.
246. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Thirty-ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
247. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Fortieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Science and Technology.
248. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-first Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
249. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Space.
250. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-third Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
251. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research.
252. Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the Two
Hundred Forty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands
for Grants (2013-14) of the Department of Biotechnology.
253. The Wild Life (Protection) Amendment Bill, 2013.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.