file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/85th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
Parliament of India
 Rajya Sabha
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
 ON
 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
85th REPORT
 ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS
 CONTAINED IN THE SEVENTY-SIXTHREPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON THE
 DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2000-2001) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
 
 (presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th  April, 2001)
 (laid in the Lok Sabha on 18th April, 2001)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 April, 2001/Visakha, 1923  (Saka) 
 
C O N T E N T S                              
 
1.     COMPOSITION OF  THE COMMITTEE
2.     INTRODUCTION
3.     REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.     MINUTES OF THE MEETING                                                                                                      
       
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDINGCOMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR  2001)
----------
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah           — Chairman
 RAJYA SABHA
2.      Shri Debabrata Biswas
3.   Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan aliasesDilip Kumar
4.       Shri K. C. Kondaiah
5.       Smt. Chandresh Kumari
6.       Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra
7.       Dr. D. Masthan
8.       Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
9.       Prof.(Smt.) Bharati Ray
10.   Smt. Savita Sharda
11.   Shri Birabhadra Singh                          
12. Shri Lachhman Singh                           
13. Shri B.P. Singhal                                              
14. Shri Prakanta Warisa                           

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/85th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
15. Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
  
      LOK  SABHA
 
16. Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura
17. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                   
18. Shri Vishwendra Singh Chauhan           
19. Smt. Bhavana Chikhaliya                     
20. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza                 
21. Shri Laxman Giluwa                             
22. Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
  23.Shri Bali Ram Kashyap
 24.Shri Hassan Khan
25. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
26. Shri S. Murugesan                               
27. Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
28. Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                            
29. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
30. Shri B.K. Parthasarathi            
31. Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
32. Dr. Ashok Patel 
33. Shri Prahlad Patel                                
34. Prof. R.R. Pramanik                            
35. Shri Naresh Puglia                               
36. Shri Ramsagar Rawat                          
37. Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
38. Prof. I.G. Sanadi                                             
39. Shri Lakshman Seth                             
40. Shri Ram Prasad Singh            
41. Shri V.S. Sivakumar    
  42.Shri Vaiko
  43.Shri V. Vetriselvan                               
44. Dr. (Smt.) Rajeswaramma Vukkala
45. Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
      Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
      Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
      Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
      Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
      Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
  
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
 Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Eighty-fifth Report on the Action
 Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations contained in the Seventy-sixth Report of the Committee on
 Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the Department of Ocean Development.
 
            The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development  on the recommendations
 contained in the Seventy-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
 Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the Department of Ocean Development  which was presented to
 the Rajya Sabha on 24th April, 2000.
 
            There are fourteen recommendations contained in the Seventy-sixth Report of the Committee.  Action Taken Notes on the
 recommendations of the Committee, were received from the Department on 20th  December, 2000.

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/85th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 
            In the meeting held on 9th April, 2001, the Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report and adopted the same.
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                                                                                            C. RAMACHANDRAIAH,
April 9, 2001                                                                                                                             Chairman,
                         Committee on Science & Technology,
                  Environment & Forests.          
 R E P O R T
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Ocean Development on the recommendations
 contained in the Seventy-sixth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
 Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the Department of Ocean Development which was presented to the
 Rajya Sabha on 24th April, 2000.  There are fourteen recommendations contained in the Seventy-sixth Report of the Committee.
 Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Department on 20th December, 2000.
      On scrutiny of the Action Taken Report as received from the Department of Ocean Development, the Committee has observed that
 the Department of Ocean Development has initiated the action for implementation of all fourteen recommendations contained in the
 Seventy-sixth Report of the Committee.
       The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the action taken by the
 Department of Ocean Development are given in the succeeding paragraphs: -
Budgetary Allocations for 2000-01
Recommendation 
       The Committee recommends that in order to ensure continuity of the Programmes an additional allocation may be allotted
 to the Department at the time of R.E. stage so that rescheduled programmes can be completed in the current year itself.
(Para  11)
Action Taken by the Department
Noted. The observations are being conveyed to the Ministry of  Finance and Planning Commission.
Comments
The Committee  is constrained to note the lackadaisical attitude of the Department in communicating its recommendation to the
 appropriate quarters.  It was in fact in Department’s own interest to expeditiously follow up the recommendation.  But it appears from
 the communication dated the 20 th December, 2000 of the Department that recommendations were still in the process of being
 communicated when RE stage was over and government was in the process of initiating its thinking process for the next budget.
Polar Sciences – Antarctic Expedition
Recommendation
       The Committee observes that this heralds another scientific feat in the realms of polar science at the end of this millennium
 and demonstrates the capabilities and interest of the country to pursue a well-focused scientific campaign from a pristine
 scientific platform provided by Antarctica.
       The Committee recommends that the National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR) Goa, should be
 designated as the nodal  agency of the Department in planning, coordinating and executing the XX Indian Scientific
 Expedition to Antarctica for continuation  of  the  scientific/research programmes   initiated  during the  XIX expedition.  
 
 
The Committee  hopes that the scientific and logistics co-operation gained with the launching of the XIX Expedition from Cape
 Town would lead to the initiation of state-of-the-art research programmes in Polar Sciences and should be carried forward in
 initiating and executing specific and specialized programmes in the scientific disciplines of Polar Remote Sensing, Southern
 Ocean Oceanography & Paleoclimatology, and Antarctic Global Change.
(Para 18 &18.1)
Action Taken by the Department
The Department is grateful for the kind observations. The NCAOR is the Nodal Agency  for planning, coordinating and executing

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/85th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 the XX  Indian Antarctic Expedition.  NCAOR is committed to excellence in the polar Sciences.
Comments
      The Committee notes the reply.
Marine Living Resources
Recommendation
       The Committee observes that under Marine Living Resources programme the department would continue its research
 towards studies to establish techniques for estimation of fish, zooplankton and Deep Scattering Layer (DSL) of the biomass;
 large marine ecosystem studies of the Arabian Sea; assessment of mesopelagic  resources of the high seas and studies on the
 benthic productivity/biodiversity and the fish biodiversity of the continental slope area.
(Para 25)
Action Taken by the Department
      The Department of Ocean Development has formulated Marine Living Resources programme in consultation with Ministry of
 Agriculture and will cover subjects mentioned in the observations of the Committee without duplicating the efforts of other
 Departments like Department of Animal Husbandry and  Dairying or Biotechnology.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Drugs from Sea
Recommendation
      The Committee notes with satisfaction that under the programme the Department has done a commendable work.  The
 Committee trusts that the Department would continue the exploratory work relating to collection, identification and bio-
evaluation of the marine flora and fauna from the Indian coastal waters besides completing regulatory pharmacology and
 toxicology of the anti-diabetic and anti-diarrhoeal drug in the year ahead.  This would go a long way in strengthening  the
 commercialization of Indian drugs and their quality comparable to world standards.  The Department should also strive for
 Patenting of anti-cholesterol molecule and achieve the Patenting of Process for anti-HIV drug by Indian Institute of Chemical
 Technology (IICT), Hyderabad. 
(Para 27)
 
Action Taken  by the Department
The Department of Ocean Development (DOD) is grateful to the Committee for their encouraging comments.  Exploratory work
 relating to collection, identification and bioevaluation of marine flora and fauna from Indian coasts is progressing  with Central Drug
 Research Institute, Lucknow as the nodal institution for the DOD project.
    The regulatory Pharmacology work on the identified Antidiabetic and Antidiarrhoeal preparations are complete.  Both the
 preparations are safe and do not show any undesirable effects on cardiovascular and central nervous system at the effective doses. 
 Three months-repeat dose treatment (toxicity) studies on both the preparations in rat are over.  Drug treatment have been well
 tolerated by animals.  Detailed histopathological examinations of organs and tissues are presently under progress.  The mandatory 3
 months repeat dose study in monkey by oral route on these two preparations will be undertaken when permission from the Committee
 for Prevention of Cruelty to Small and Experimental Animals (CPCSEA) is available.
    On anti-cholesterol molecule, an Indian Patent has already been taken (Patent 1371/Cal/97-A SI. No.181673) by the Principal
 Investigator of Calcutta University.
Comments
      The Committee appreciates the effort being made by the Department in  augmenting its efforts in  collection, identification and
 bioevaluation of marine flora and fauna from Indian coasts towards 
Antidiabetic and Antidiarrhoeal preparations. What is
 important in this process is the Department should concentrate its efforts towards  the transfer of technology for
 commercialization to the pharmaceutical  companies at the earliest. At the same time it should be available to the common
 people at  a  moderate price.  Delay caused in finalisation and marketing of such formulations could render the progress and
 efforts made so for, in fructuous, as private sector is always quick in such matters with a view to earn profits.
Marine Non-Living Resources-Polymetallic Nodule Programme
Recommendation
The Committee recommends that the Department should continue its efforts for development of technology for mining
 development of an integrated mining complex module of 25,000 tonnes/yr. capacity for 6000 m. depth in joint collaborative
 efforts so that the cost of Deep Seabed Mining system is reduced significantly.  The Department should also continue its efforts

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/85th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 towards commissioning of the design, development and testing of unmanned submersible capable of working up to 6000 m
 through collaborative programme.
(Para 33)
Action Taken by the Department
      A shallow bed mining system developed jointly by National Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai and Institute of
 Konstruction (IKS), University of Siegen, Germany was tested off Tuticorin at 410 mts. The system has further been tested
 for its continuous operation, maneuverability etc at a shallower depth. Design of an integrated mining system for operation at
 6000 mts. is underway under this joint Programme with IKS.
     
      Under the collaborative programme between NIOT and Experimental Design Bureau of Oceanological Engineering (EDBOE),
 Russian Academy of Science, project for the design, development and test of an unmanned submersible for operation up to 6000 mts.
 water depth  at a cost of Rs. 18.20 crore is  proposed.
Comments
      
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Department in developing shallow bed mining system developed jointly by
 National Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai and Institute of Konstruction (IKS), University of Siegen, Germany but
 efforts must be intensified not only to achieve continuous operation, maneuverability etc at a shallower depth of an integrated
 mining system for operation at 6000 mts. for extraction of Poly-Metallic Nodules at that level but also periodical evaluation
 of the project with regard to its economics in the fast changing world.
Recommendation
      The Committee notes with satisfaction the R&D activities of the Department for optimization of extraction efficiencies of
 metal values (Cu., Ni.,Co,.Mn.) at NML(J), RRL(B) and HZL(U) and hopes that the data generated in the demonstration plant
 and associated R&D work in other laboratories for selective scale up studies would be analysed with an ultimate objective of
 designing a commercial plant.
(Para 33.1)
Action Taken by the Department
      In the development endeavor for the extraction of metals from nodules, R&D work towards optimization of extraction efficiency
 continues at Regional Research Laboratory (RRL), Bhubaneshwar, Hindustan Zinc Ltd, Udaipur and National Metallurgy Laboratory,
 Jamshedpur. A Turnkey contract for the setting up a continuous demonstration plant of 500 kg/day capacity has been awarded and the
 plant is scheduled to be commissioned in May, 2001 at HZL, Udaipur for  validation of the Process Package evolved by  RRL,
 Bhubaneshwar & BARC, Trombay.  The Process Parameters to be generated in the Proposed Pilot Plant would be an input for techno-
economic study.
Comments
      The Committee expresses its satisfaction on the efforts made towards R&D work for optimization of extraction  of  Metals. The
 Department should monitor effectively the progress of proposed plant to be commissioned in May, 2001 at Hindustan Zinc Ltd,
 Udaipur for   validation of the Process Package evolved by  RRL, Bhubaneswar & BARC, Trombay to avoid any cost over-run of the
 project.
Marine Environmental and Coastal Zone, Coastal Ocean Monitoring& Prediction Systems (COMAPS)
Recommendation
The Committee doubts the claim of the department particularly in respect of pollution of sea water at Bombay where one
 sees for about 25 minutes of journey on helicopter the water being totally polluted and recommends that Geographical
 Information System based information  system  for monitoring  pollution  in  the coastal  waters need to be carried  out
 
 
with a concerted effort  and a sense of urgency and the data to draw inference on the levels of pollutants in different parts of
 the coastal ocean should be processed and the knowledge so generated should be disseminated to the State Pollution Control
 Boards whenever the pollution levels reach alarming levels for remedial action.  The State Pollution Control Boards should
 also prepare Action Plan for mitigation of coastal pollution. 
(Para 35)
Action Taken by the Department
      The results obtained from the COMAPS programme in the section 0-25 km of Mumbai indicated that the sea beyond 5 km is clean
 compared to the pollution levels observed near the coast.  The suggestion made by the Committee for developing a GIS based

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/85th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 Information System is being followed up and the Information System is under development  through NIO, Goa. 
      Data collected is being disseminated to the State Pollution Control Boards indicating the trend of pollution from year to year, as
 suggested by the Committee. Such efforts will be intensified through the above said GIS based Information System. 
The Ministry of   Environment   and Forests are being apprised of the  need   for State   Pollution Control Boards to prepare Action
 Plans  for  mitigation of coastal pollution.
Comments
      The Committee observes that there is a need for greater co-ordination between the Department of Ocean Development  and 
 respective State Pollution Control Boards for a continued monitoring of marine-pollution levels and the data generated through
 Geographical Information Systems (GIS) must be utilised to the fullest extent to achieve desired results.
Coastal  Research Vessels
Recommendation
      The Committee observes that the cruises involved by Coastal Research Vessel (CRV)  Sagar Purvi & Sagar Paschimi
 should be carried on frequent basis to monitor Pollution and they should be carried out with the participation of the scientists
 of Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi and National Institute of Oceanography and other related
 institutions.  The cruises should also observe critically the habitats including flora and fauna specially sea turtles in
 Lakshdweep Islands.
(Para 38)
Action Taken by the Department
      The suggestion made by the Committee to use CRV Sagar Purvi and Sagar Paschimi to monitor the pollution with the
 environmental institutions like NIO, CECRI is  being implemented.  A separate cruise programme for Lakshadweep Islands is also
 planned in the year 2000-01 for monitoring the critical habitats like coral reefs, sea turtles etc. in the Lakshadweep Islands like
 Kadamat.
 
Comments
      The Committee notes the reply and is of the view that the Department  should frequently monitor the Pollution levels and
 should try to cover maximum number of the islands spread over Indian coastline in near future.
Development of GIS System for Critical Habitats
Recommendation
      The Committee recommends that under the programme Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM), the
 Department should complete development of Environmental Impact Assessment guidelines for  waste  disposal,  marine 
 transportation and tourism  sector.  The  task towards determination of Waste Assimilation Capacity should also be carried
 out through development of Geographical Information System.
(Para 42)
Action Taken by the Department
      Under the project on Development of EIA Guidelines for coastal activities, guidelines for activities like ports and harbours, waste
 disposal and tourism are being taken up.  The guidelines for ports and harbours  have been completed  and at present the guidelines for
 waste disposal  and tourism are being developed.  Further, the results of the   Waste Assimilation Capacity project  indicating  the
 various  quantum of wastes to be  disposed and the likely area of disposal by  Industries and  municipalities  will also be developed
 using GIS.
Comments
      The Committee expresses satisfaction that the guidelines for ports and harbours  have been completed  and  the guidelines for
 waste disposal  and tourism are being developed.  The Committee appreciates the progress made so far and would like the work to be
 completed as expeditiously as possible.
Ocean Observations and Information Service (OOIS)
Recommendation
      While the Committee notes with satisfaction that the programme under the Ocean Observation Information Service have
 been successful, it observes that the indigenisation of Data buoy technology and Operation and maintenance of 12 data buoy
 system by National Data Buoy Programme (NDBP) is yet to be achieved.  The Committee further observes that the up-
gradation of existing tide gauge network both in terms of software and sensors redeployment of existing current meter and
 deployment of new current meter array along the equator would take place during this financial year. Similarly, the
 Committee would appreciate if under the programme Ocean Dynamics and Modeling (INDOMOD), validation of Coupled

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/85th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 Atmospheric Ocean Model (CAOM) to provide forcing parameter for ocean general circulation model and sensitivity test for
 CAOM for prediction of storm surges associated with tropical cyclone along the Indian coast would be conducted and
 validated.  The experiments to determine the sensitivity for development of hybrid coupled model for prediction of Indian
 monsoon regions have also to be achieved.
(Para 51)
 
Action Taken by the Department
      In the period from August 97-Feb.99, all the 12 data buoys as envisaged were developed.  Some of the buoys were frequently
 damaged or vandalized. However, during the last three years operation period of NDBP, the maintenance of data buoys have been
 regularly carried out by the engineers and technicians of NIOT. Proposal for indigenisation of data buoy production and management
 within India to meet the future requirements is being formulated for necessary approval of Government. 
      During the 9
th Plan period DOD formulated a programme on Indian Ocean Modelling (INDOMOD)with the objective to develop
 ocean state forecast  of the Indian Seas.  IISC, Bangalore, IIT, Delhi, CMMACS, Bangalore, IITM, Pune, NIO, Goa and Cochin
 University are undertaking programmes  to develop the numerical model and necessary infrastructure to achieve goal.  During the last
 3-4 years significant progress has been made in the improvements to the prediction of storm surge, development of model for real time
 forecast of Oceanic conditions and prediction of spatial distribution of SST, current and biological productivity etc.
Comments
      While the Committee appreciates the Department’s efforts for undertaking programmes aimed at developing Ocean  Observation
 Information Service for different States. The Committee is of the view that the data collected must be timely disseminated so that the
 same can be utilised to predict cyclones and prevent loss of  life and property.
Coastal Community Programmes
Recommendation
      The Committee recommends that the Department should develop the shore to vessel communication system and commission the
 system in A&N and Lakshdweep Islands which would be helpful for fishermen going for fishing in high seas.  The technology should
 be handed over to the State Governments for continuous operation and maintenance.
(Para 53)
Action Taken by the Department
      The Department has assigned the task of completion and commissioning of the Shore to Fishing Vessel Communication System in
 Pondicherry, Saligao in Goa and Andaman and Nicobar Islands, to NIOT.  SAMEER, a unit of Department of Electronics which was
 involved in identification of sites and the field testing of the Shore to Fishing Vessel Communication System, is being involved in
 testing the commissioned units in West Bengal and Orissa.  Imparting training to the Fisheries Department staff and installation of the
 tower and the system in three sites, one each in Pondicherry, Goa and Andaman and Nicobar Islands.  Since there is lack of response
 from Lakshadweep Administration on installation of the System and also due to the logistics problems involved in transportation of
 the base station equipment, tower, etc., Lakshadweep site has been deleted from the purview of the programme.  It may also be noted
 that Fishermen of Lakshadweep Island go to sea mainly for tuna fishing using pole and line as the prime fishing method and they are
 less vulnerable as compared to the  fishermen in the East Coast who always face the risk of high velocity winds, cyclones, etc.
The technology will be handed over to the State/UT Governments concerned for continuous operation and maintenance as soon as
 the systems become operational .
Comments
      The Committee notes the position.
Island Development
Recommendation
      The Committee shares the perception that the genetic and biotic equilibrium should be maintained in the Indian
 environment.  However, it is of the view that the Department should carry out further research on formulation of appropriate
 feeds for maximum growth of lobsters and also develop the larval rearing technology in Indian spiny lobster.  At the same
 time the Department should also implement projects on development of technology for sustainable shrimp farming, lobster
 and seaweed culture and polyculture of marine organisms at Andaman & Nicobar Centre for Ocean Science & Technology.
(Para No. 60)
Action Taken by the Department
      “Ocean Science and Technology for Islands” focuses on developing sustainable technologies for breeding, rearing, sea ranching
 and fattening/culture of marine organisms such as lobsters, crabs, and other fin and shell fish of commercial importance.  The
 enhancement of marine living resources programme under this project, to begin with, is focusing on developing the larval rearing

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/85th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 technology in Indian spiny lobster as well as fattening them under controlled conditions.  One set of experiment on fattening of
 lobsters has already been completed by June, 2000 which has helped in standardizing the technology for fattening of lobsters under
 controlled conditions using locally available natural feed.  During the current financial year it is proposed to carry out research on
 formulation of appropriate supplementary feeds for maximizing the growth of lobsters.  The experiments of larval rearing of Indian
 spiny lobsters have also been initiated from March, 2000. The various physico-chemical and biological parameters, which are
 conducive for the success of larval rearing, are being studied and experimented upon so as to evolve appropriate technology for
 rearing of larvae up to juvenile stage. .
      As a step towards disseminating the technology of fattening of lobsters to the Island Community, fattening of lobsters in cages and
 ponds is proposed to be taken up at Port Blair in Andamans this financial year. In addition, fattening of mud crab is also proposed to
 be taken up simultaneously at Port Blair and to demonstrate it to the Island Community making use of the technology already
 developed elsewhere, outside the country.
Comments
      The Committee appreciates the efforts made through Ocean Science and Technology for Islands which focuses on developing
 sustainable technologies for  breeding, rearing, sea ranching and fattening/culture of marine organisms such as lobsters, crabs, and
 other fin and shell fish of commercial importance. However, the Committee is of the view that this technology must be made available
 to other fishing communities living around long Indian coastline and facilities must be provided  to help fishing communities to sell
 their catchments.
Delineation of Outer Limits of Continental Shelf
Recommendation
      The Committee observes that with the ratification of the UN Convention on Law of the Sea, a new international order has
 been established for the oceans and India being represented in almost all the important bodies on oceans will stand to benefit
 enormously by provisions of the convention, only if we can adopt an integrated approach for scientific planning, formulation,
 implementation and overall management of the programmes with a comprehensive organisational and institutional back up.
(Para No. 63)
Action Taken by the Department
      Noted.
Comments
      The Committee notes the reply.
 
M I N U T E
 
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Monday the 9 th April, 2001 in Room No.139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New
 Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah —Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.   Shri Birabhadra Singh
3.   Shri K. C. Kondaiah
4.   Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra
5.   Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
6.   Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray
7.   Smt. Savita Sharda
8.   Shri B.P. Singhal
9.   Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
 
      LOK  SABHA
 
10.  Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/85th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
11.  Shri Baliram Kashyap
12.  Dr. Charan Das Mahant
13.  Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
14.  Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
15.  Shri Suresh Pasi
16.  Dr. Ashok Patel
17.  Shri Vaiko
18.  Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
      SECRETARIAT
     
      Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
        Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
        Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
      Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
           
2.   The Committee took up consideration of 85 th, 86th & 87th Draft Reports.  The Committee considered each of these reports.  After
 minor connections of oral nature, the Committee adopted these reports.
 
3.   The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri B. P. Singhal to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri
 E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan and in his absence Dr. Ashok Patel to lay the Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha on April 18, 2001.
 
 
4.   *                                              *                                  *
 
5.   *                                              *                                  *
 
6.   The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 P.M. to meet again on 10th April, 2001.
 
 
 
 
_________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters