PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1998-99) 
SIXTY-THIRD REPORT 
ON 
ASPECTS RELATED TO FOOD PRESERVATION AND SAFETY 
MEASURES 
. 
(PRESENTED ON 24TH FEBRUARY, 1999) 
(LAID ON 24TH FEBRUARY, 1999) 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
FEBRUARY , 1999/PHALGUNA, 1920 (SAKA) 

CONTENTS 
PAGES 
1. CoMPOSITION OF THE CoMMITTEE (i)-(ii) 
2. CoMPOSITION OF THE Sus-COMMITTEE (iii) 
3. lNTROOUcnON (v) 
4. REPORT OF THE CoMMITTEE 1-8 
5. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE Sus-CoMMITfEE 9-13 
6. MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE CoMMITTEE 15-19 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS 
(1998-99) 
Shri S. R. Bommai - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Rahasbihari Barik 
4. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
*5. Smt. Saroj Dubey 
* *6. Shri Oscar Fernandes 
@7. Shri Ram Chandra Khuntia 
8. Dr. D. Masthan 
9. Dr. · Y. Radhakrishna Murty 
10. Shri Lachhman Singh 
@@11. Shri Raj Mohinder Singh 
12. Shri W. Angou .Singh 
$13. Shri B. P. Singhal 
14. Shri Prakanta Warisa 
$$15. Vacant 
LOK SAIJHA 
16. ~.ri l:Ma Na&h Bhapt ,.·~ :!'' 
17. Shri ~a~jib Biswal 
18. Shri Owin1ara Surenan .. : .~ . 
19. Smt, Bhavana Chikhaliya 
20. Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix D'Souza 
21. Shri M. C. Dhamotharan 
22. Shri George Eden 
23. Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya 
24. Shri K. Krishnamoorthy 
25. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
x *26. Prof. Ajit Kumar Mehta 
~; . 
'Nominated w.e.f. 27th. July, 1998 vice Shri Khan Ghufran Zahidi ceased to be a Member of the Committee 
w.e.f. 4th July, 1998 on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha . 
.. Nominated w.e.f. 17th July, 1998. 
@Nominated w.e.f 17th July, 1998 vice Shri Pranab Mukherjee ceased to be a Member of the Committe e 
w.e.f 29th June, 1998. 
@@Nominated w.e.f. 11th August, 1998. vice Shri G .Swami nathan ceased to be a Member of the 
Committee w.e.f 29th June, 1998 on expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha. 
$Nominated w.e.f 15th September, 1998 vice Shri Ram Ratan Ram who was nominated w.e.f. 12th Jun e, 
1998 and ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 4th July, .1998 on expiry of his term in Rajya 
Sabha. 
$$Shri N. Abdul Khader ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 29th June , 1998 on expiry of his 
term in Rajya Sabha. 
x'Nominated w.e.f. 12th January, 1999 vic~ Shri Madhavrao Scindia ceased to be a Memb er of the 
Committee w.e.f. 16th December, 1998. 
(i) 

27. Shri J anardan Prasad Misra 
28. Shri Rupchand Munnu 
29 Captain Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 
30. Shri Prakash Vishwanath Paranjpe 
31. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik 
32. Shri S. Vijaya Rama Raju 
33. Shri lnderjit Singh Rao 
34. Smt. Vijaya Raje Scindia 
%35. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
36. Shri Virendra Singh 
37. Prof. Saifuddin Soz 
38. Shri Devji Bhai J. Tan del 
39. Shri Prasad Baburao Tanpure 
40. Dr. C. P. Thakur 
41. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
42. Shri Suresh Warpudkar 
43. Shri Mukul Wasnik 
%*44. Vacant 
%$45. Vacant 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri H. K. Chanana , Director 
Shri D. P. Ahuja, Under Secretary 
Shri Rosh an La I, Committee Officer 
% Nominated w.e.f. 26th June, 1998. 
% • Shri Ayanur Manjunath ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f 11th June, 1998. 
%$ Shri B. M. Menasinakai ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f lOth June. 1998. 

COMPOSITION OF TilE SUB-COMMITIEE (OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITIEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS) TO LOOK INTO THE VARIOUS ASPECTS OF FOOD 
TECHNOLOGY & REL~TED ASPECTS 
Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik - Convenor 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Rahasbihari Barik 
3. Shri Ram Chandra Khuntia 
4. Dr. D. Masthan 
5. Shri 's. P. Singhal 
6. Shri Prakanta Warisa 
LOK SABHA 
7 .. Shri Ran jib Biswal 
8. Shri Chengara Surendran ... 
9. Dr. (Mrs.) Beatt:ix D'Souza 
10. Shri George Edett 
11.. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
12. Shri Rupchand 'MuQDU 
13. Shri ·s. Yijaya :J!ama Raju 
14. Shri lnderjit Singh Rao 
~- Smt. Vijay~ Raje Scindia 
16. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
~ 
17. Shri Virendra Singb 
18. Shri Mukul Wasnik 

INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & 
Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the report on its behalf, 
present this Report, on aspects related to Food Preservation and safety aspects. 
2. Keeping in view the vast potential for expansion of Food Processing Industries a Sub­
Committee under the Convenorship of Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik, Member of Lok 
Sabha, was appointed to examine the aspects related to Food Technology and related 
aspects. 
3. The Committee places on record its appreciation of highly commendable work done 
by the Sub-Committee comprising of Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik- Convenor, Dr.D . 
Masthan, Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix D'Souza, Dr. Charan Das Mahant , Smt. Vijaya Raje Scindia, 
S/Shri Rahasbihari Barik, Ram Chandra Khuntia, B.P. Singhal, Prakanta Warisa, Ranjib 
Biswal, Olengara Surendran, George Eden, Rupchand Murmu, S. Vijaya Rama Raju, 
Inderjit Singh Rao , Maheshwar Singh, Virendra Singh & Mukul Wasnik. 
4. The Sub-Committee, (of the Parliamentary Stauding Committee on Science & 
Technology, Environment & Forests) on Food Technology and related aspects made an in­
depth examination of various aspects related to Food Technology und Preservation. The 
Sub-Committee visited Industrial Toxicology Research Institute (Lucknow) on 22nd and 23rd 
October, 1998 to examine the safety aspects related to food. The Sub-Committee also visited 
Central Agricultural Research Institute (CARl), Port Blair and Indian Institute of Chemical 
Biology (IICB), Calcutta from 23rd November to 27th November, 1998. 
5. The Sub-Committee had the benefit of notes and other documents supplied by the 
Department of $cientific and Industrial Research and other constituent bodies like CFTRI 
and ITRC . 
6. In the meetings of the Committee held on 24th September, 1998 and Sub-Committee 
held on 9th November, 1998, the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of 
Scientific & Industrial Research, and Directors CFTRI and ITRC gave an overview of the 
major R & .D efforts being pursued and achievements made in regard to Food Technology & 
related aspects. 
7. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Officers and representatives of the 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and CFTRI and ITRC for their co­
operation and answering the queries raised by Members on the food technology and related 
aspects. 
8. The Sub-Committee considered and adopted the Report of the Sub-Committee on 
the 22nd December., 1998. 
9. The Committee in _its meeting held on 22nd December , 1998 considered and adopted 
the Report of the Sub-Committee. 
NEW DELHI; 
December 22, 1998 
S.R. BOMMAI, 
Chairman, 
Committee on Science & Technology, 
Environment & Forests 

REPORT 
Throughout the three or four million years that man has been on earth, his principal 
concern has been quest for food. He has often sought more food, and always, for food more 
to his liking. Man has had a series of sources of food, each affording some advantages over 
the preceding source. Throughout the past ten thousand or so years agriculture has been a 
reasonably satisfactory source of food for most people. 
2. From the beginning of man on the earth human population has tended to increase 
upto the limit of food supply. Crisis have arisen, but there has usually been time in which a 
transition to a new, larger, and more favourable food supply has been effected. 
3. In India, one-third of the food consumed by the people goes to the body and two­
thirds go to the doctors. This is because the value addition to food-production is a mere 7% 
in India, compared to as much as 23% in China and 45% in Philipines. Food with food 
value is food and food without food value is not food at all. People in our country have yet 
to develop scientific food habits based on food values and not on the taste of tongue. Habit 
is to be decided first and then the taste will follow because taste is developed by habits. 
People have adopted old traditional food habits. Indian diet consists almost extensively of 
cereals, and 'what we lose from them on account of refinement is not made good from other 
sources as it happens to be in more developed countries. The poor people of this country, 
who form the vast majority, suffer to a far greater extent than the wealthy minority, who can 
afford a richer, more varied diet, on account of the both qualitative and quantitative losses 
in case of cereals. 
4. Food, thus remains one of the most complex economic, political and moral problem 
Qf our times. In India, the future of hundreds of millions poor, hungry, malnourished people 
depend largely on.our willingness and ability to take up challenge of providing them with an 
adequate supply of good and cheap food. 
5. Thus, in us lies the responsibility to build capability to increase and improve food 
supplies, raise knowledge of human nutrition and simultaneously contribute to the reduction 
of poverty, malnourishment and other related diseases. To meet the challenge of providing 
people with adequate good quality food at all the times and abo e~t cheap rates we have to 
rely on food processing. Apart from the fact that our people gl'l the right food, we must 
create awareness among them what is the right food and what is the right manner of 
preparing and partaking it. 
6. Recently, changes i!l food consumption patterns have hcen occurring world-wide, 
including India. In urban India, protein consumption has increased by a quarter between 
1970 and 1990 on the basis of total expenditure on food, while cereal consumption has 
dropped more than a third of all expenditure to just a quarter. The shift is to da iry products 
and meat. The change in food habits in rural India has been more dramatic. Cereals which 
accounted for more than half of all food expenditure in 1970 in rural India, dropped to a 
little over third in 1990. Protein consumption, however , increased by more than half, in 
addition to more than a third increase in case of fruits and vegetables. 
7. Food processing is primarily done to improve and safeguard the agricultural 
productivity; reducing wastage of perishable food items like fruits and vegetables and for 
improving food availability for domestic markets and for exports and finally to ensure an 
adequate food supply during non-agriculturall~ productive periods . 
8. Today, the Indian food processing industry ranks fifth in its contribution to value 

addition but tops in terms of employment; employing about 20 per cent of the country's 
industrial labour force. Though food industries account for annually 5.2% of the total 
industrial investment, yet contribute around 18% to the ODP. The food processing 
industries in India are broadly classified into three categories, l'iz. primary sector, infQrmal 
and cottage scale sector and large scale sector. The primary sector predominantly comprises 
of about 90,000 rice hullers, 26,000 flour chakkies, 1,20,000 dhall mills, 2,20,000 oil ghanis, 
besides myriads of homescale dehydration and processing units in rural as well as semi urban 
areas. ln the informal sector, there are around 54,000 bakeries, over 5,000 paste goods units, 
15,000 traditional food units, 2,000 poha making units and 5,000 fruit vegetable and spice 
processing units. The organised sector accounts for over 800 large flour mills, 450 modern 
rice mills, 400 fish processing units, 5,000 fruit and vegetable processing units, 130 meat 
processing units, 650 sweetened and aerated water (soft drinks) units, 100 milk products 
units, 650 sugar mills and 800 solvent extraction (oil) units. 
9. The challenges before food processing sector in India are to extend the period during 
which food remains wholesome i.e. shelf life by preservation techniques which inhibit 
microbiological or biochemical changes and thus allow time for distribution and home 
storage; to increase the variety in diet through enhanced range of attractive (and safe) 
flavours, colours, aromas and textures in foods (to enhance the eating, sensory and 
organolleptic quality); to change the form of the food to allow further processing (e.g. the 
milling of grains to flour); to improve the nutritional quality of food and to ensure the food 
safety at manufacture and at consumption levels. However, the major basic problems faced 
by the Indian food processing industry are; Seasonal availability of raw materials; fluctuating 
and high raw material cost; uncontrolled material quality (for inputs); general consumer 
indifference to quality and hence poor returns on investment on quality; meager 
infrastructure for refrigeration storage and refrigerated transport. High cost of waste 
treatment without any monetary return. 
10. DSIR, through its various institutions, is working to pursue these challenges before 
the food processing industry. It has created a sound technological base to assist the food 
processing industries, mostly in the cottage, small and medium scale sectors, through 
appropriate technology and services in food preservation, studying and analysing food 
toxicity and safety and certification. Besides, it generates appropriate techniques, 
technologies and equipment for processing food produce suited to our socio-cultural needs. 
The Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI) of DSIR is solely devoted to 
R&D in Food and Food Processing, besides the Regional Research Laboratories at Jammu 
and Thiruvananthapuram and the Institute of Himalayan Bioresource Technology (IHBT), 
Palampur have some R&D pertaining to food processing, whilst the Industrial 
Toxilogicology Research Centre (ITRC) at Lucknow undertakes R&D pertaining to food 
safety especially adulterants and their toxicity. These CSIR laboratories over the years have 
developed around 350 knowhow comprising about 300 processes and 50 designs, most of 
which are suited to the resource endowments of the informal sector even in rural areas. 
11. Another vitally inter-linked and integral part of the food problem is the related 
safety aspects. Use of various food additives added for technological purposes has become 
inevitable with the growth of food processing industry. Moreover, some <ldulterants are 
deliberately added for earning undue profits. The recent incident of outbreak of dropsy 
disease due to consumption of adulterated mustard oil is cause for concern. ITRC does a 
regular monitoring of food stuffs to check the nature of food adulterants/contaminants. It 
has devised lot of simple techniques for checking the adulteration in common household 
food stuffs. These techniques are simple and practicable. 

ROLE OF CFTRI 
12. The major R & D programmes of the Central Food Technological Research 
Institute (CFTRI) are related to development of food products and processes for optimal 
utilization of the country's agricultural produce, technology packages for vulnerable and 
ready-to-eat foods, low cost nutritive foods for vulnerable population, processes for value 
added products from plantation produce, protocols for post-harvest handling and 
transportation of fruits and vegetables for export and inland shipments, methods of 
packaging of food, packaging of food materials and processed food products for extended 
shelf life, techniques for crop and grain protection, technologies for eliminating or reducing 
post-harvest losses of perishables and durables, and modernisation of the primary food 
processing, industry through development of energy-efficient, machinery and equipment. 
Besides, basic research is also carried out on food additives, preservatives, micronutrients, 
food toxicity and safety, food microbiology and bioactive substances . 
13. The Committee is of the view that our villagers and cultivators are still ignorant of 
the useful technologies developed for increasing the yield, and knowledge ab~ut the proper 
usage of .pesticides, fertilizers etc. and recommends that knowhow developed by the 
departments in these fields should be made available to the persons working at the grassroot 
through the State Govt~·nments, and there must he a mechanism for feedback on the 
application of the technology. The correct slogan should be .. From Lab to the Land and From 
Land to the Lab". 
14. The Committee recommends that food processing and vnluc addition should be done 
in a way as not to harm the natural and traditional tastes of food items. Hence, the 
department should aim at good quality, hygienic and nutritious food with the original 
motherly touch. 
CFTRI has done pioneering work as regard various food products which can be 
summarised as follows:-
FRUITS & VEGETABALES 
15. India though is a producer of wide variety of fruit both tropical and temperat e yet 
its share in the world trade of processed fruits and vegetables is still less than one per cent. 
The annual production is about 30 million tonnes of fruit and 70 million tonnes for 
vegetables, however over 30% of the produce is wasted due to lack of proper processing and 
infrastructural facilities. Even the industries working in this sector are not working to their 
installed capacity. Other. major hurdle in this sector is that the processing industry is highly 
decentralised as a large number of units except for a few large corporate players including 
multinationals are in the informal sector. Many new items have been added to hitherto 
exported fruits and vegetables items and thus the scope of vcrti\·al expansion of the industry 
to more value adde~ and sophisticated products has been considerably increased. 
16. CFTRI has done pioneering R&D work in this sector in the field of curt ailment of 
lihortages, improvement of quality and extension of storage life of various fruits and 
vegetables. The contribution of the CFTRI to aspects of food preservation and safety can be 
summarised as follows; 
(a) Modified Atmosphere Storage: 
17. CFTRI has developed an standardised modified atmosphere storage methods to 
extend the storage life of selected fruits and vegetables both under ambient as well as low 
temperature conditions. The technique helps in extending the shelf-life as the modified 

atmosphere inside the system produce more carbon dioxide and consequently suppresses 
normaly occurring respiration in open environment. This technique is very advantageous as 
it is very simple, inexpensive and provides a number of benefits such as maintenance of 
freshness and quality, extension of storage life by 3-5 folds and is suitable for operation at 
home, cottage, small scale and large scale industrial levels, besides it also does not require 
much infrastructural facility. The technique is being scaled up at CFfRI for commercial 
application. This has been successfully used for bananas and mangoes. The techniques are 
also expected to be equally successful with several other tropical fruits of India. 
(b) Anti-Fungal Paste: 
18. CFfRI has developed anti-fungal paste for treating cut portions of banana bunches. 
The paste prevents fungal infection during storage and transportation. It has made possible 
to sh'ip bananas to distant countries, involving extended period of transportation. 
(c) Wax Emulsion Treatment: 
19. CFfRI has developed formulations of wax emulsion which form microscopic coating 
on the surface to extend the storage life of fruits and vegetables by 100% thus reducing 
physiological losses in weight, shrivelling, rate of respiration an1.l impart glossiness and eye 
appeal to the fruits thereby improving the marketability. There is no undesirable odour or 
flavour and no hazard to health. 
(d) Technologies for Fresh Fruit Exports: 
20. Using a combination of the above technique CFfRI has successfully devised specific 
technology packages for export of alphonso and banganapalli varieties of mango and 
cavendish variety of banana, by ship reefer containers. The package of technologies include 
pre-harvest treatments to control spoilages; harvesting procedures; desapping; treatments to 
control post-harvest spoilages; pre-cooling' suitable CFB boxes; modified atmosphere 
packaging; low temperature storage in containers and ripening protocols. The techniques are 
being deployed for export of alphonso and banganapalli mangoes. 
21. The Committee expresses its concern over the fact that India has its share as low as 
less than one· per cent in the world market of processed fruits and vegetables and recommends 
that vigorous efforts be made to achieve higher share in the global market. The Committee 
also recommends that techniqiles developed for preservation of fruits and vegetables should be 
commercialised for application. 
22. During tl)e visit to Central Research Institute of Chemical Biology in Calcutta on 
27th November, 1998 the Sub-Committee was informed by the Scientists of the Institute 
about the toxicity in the vegetables grown on the Calcutta Corporation garbage in Dhapa 
and Mathpukur near Calcutta. Most of the people of Calcutta ronsumc these vegetables 
throughout the year. The Scientists were asked to consider the feasibility of conducting a 
research on toxic effect of the vegetables grown on garbage and ascertain whether these 
vegetables are. fit for human consumption. Likewise they were asked to find out whether the 
sewage water discharged by the Calcutta Corporation is safe for pisciculture, because fish 
cultured in this water is consumed by Calcuttans. 
23. The Committee thus recommends that Government should pursue these Research 
Projects and report the findings thereof. 
FOOD GRAINS 
24. India is the second largest producer of rice and the fourth largest producer of wheat. 

It produces nearly 200 million tonnes of food grains per year of which colossa l 20 million 
tonnes are lost due to damage and waste. 
Wheat: 
25. Around 800 flour mills involved in commercial milling operations are working in the 
organised sector. The output consists of white flour, semolina, whole meal flour and bran. 
About 80-85% of the output is directly consumed by the household sector and 15-18% is 
consumed by the confectionery products. A mini wheat mill comprising a system which 
cleans and grinds the grains, in addition to sieving of atta has been deve loped by CITRI. 
The mini wheat mill developed by CITRI uses indigenously available low cost machinery 
like destoner (developed by CFTRI) aspirator, huller, metallic chakki and sifter. Its capacity 
is 100 kg/hr. and investment required is about Rs. 6 lakh wjth grinding cost of Rs. 0.50/kg. 
wheat grain is adaptable in rural as well as urban areas. A variety of pesticidal formulations 
and application packages right from the storage at farmers end to bulk storage in 
warehouses, to bagged grains to household storage have also been developed. 
Rice: 
26. In rice milling modern rice mills are steadily replacing traditional milling in hullers/ 
shellers. The hullers developed by CFTRI for .rice milling and used in rural areas are not 
effective for milling of rice, as the yield of rice b very poor (60-04%.) and broken content is 
very high (25-40%). The byproducts, viz. bran and husk get powdered and are obtained as a 
pulverized mix which has almost no economic value. Cl~TRI has developed a series of 
system to enhance their efficiency. CFTRI has also been propogating the use of improved 
hullers and modernisation of rice milling industry under the uctivities of The Regional 
Extension Service Centre established by the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, 
Government of India for the last ten years. CITRI has published several booklets and has 
conducted a number of workshops, seminars, demonstrations, in the rice producing States 
and other parts of the country. 
COARSE GRAINS 
27. The coarse grains like Bajra, jowar, maize etc. account for 20% of the total food 
grain products. Their poor acceptance is due to the presence of outer husk or bran which 
makes them coarse in feature. CFTRI has developed techniques to improve the acceptability 
and enhance the value of coarse grains. The technique of removing both the bran and germ 
of maize greatly increases the shelf life of helished maize grits which becomes acceptable for 
preparing conventional foods. 
DHAL MILLING 
28. CFTRI has concentrated its effort on improvement of the traditional Dhal Mill to 
enhance product yield and quality and for making process more economical. The improved 
machinery developed are Hand operator range Dehusker , Dhal Mill and versatile Dhal Mill. 
29. The Committee observes that over the years we h:tvc failt. .. t un the food front precisely 
because we have focussed our attention, almost exclusively to lht! ctuantitative aspects and not 
to improve quality of our food. The Sub-Committee recommcmls that vigorous efforts be 
takE'n for value addition in the food to fight the problem of malnutrition. 
30. The Committee recommends that the techniques developed by CFTRI for value 
addition in food grains should be popularised by taking help of vnrlous source~ of media viz. 
local newspapers, All India Radio and Doordarsban so that benefits of these technologies 
could percolate to the rural masses. The Sub-Committee also ·feels .that 

something urgently needs to be done to reduce losses of food grains due to damage and waste. 
The Sub-Committee recommends that unwarranted refinement of food grains, which result in 
loss of quality protein, fats, minerals and vitamins should be checked. 
MILK AND MILK J.>RODUCTS 
31. "India is perhaps the largest milk producing country in the world with the current 
annual production of over 70 million tonnes . The consumption of liquid milk is around 46% 
and the remaining 54% is utilized for conversion to milk products CITRI pioneered the use 
of buffalo milk, to make baby food powder leading to the establishment of vast baby food 
industry. CITRI is working with NDDB for manufacture of baby food and at present 
working on technology for low-cost protein foods." 
MEAT AND POULTRY 
32. India has the world's largest cattle population but consumption of meat is quite low. 
There is good demand for ready to cat and semi-processed meat products in the domestic 
market as well as for export. To improve and enhance the production of value-added 
products based on meat, it is necessary to employ modern technologies, appropriate 
machinery and modern packaging systems. Most of the CFI'RI proccssess are worked out at 
laboratory/bench scale and their scale-up can lead to modern tcl·hnologies. 
33. The Committee expresses its concern over the low contribution of our country in meat 
export although it has world's largest animal population and recommends that all out efforts 
be made to improve meat exports and for producing value added products based on meat. 
The Sub-Committee also recommends that to meet international standards proper hygenic 
measures and economically viable packaging materials be developed. 
PLANTATION PRODUCE 
34. CITRI has also worked on cardamom, spice and oleoresins, white pepper, 
Dehydrated green pepper and chemical free spices. 
ACmEVEMENTS OF CFTRI 
35. Over the years, CITRI has transferred many major technologies to industry. The 
notable among the technologies transferred are (i) flavour concentrates and soft drink 
manufacturing technology for cola beverages, lemon and orange drinks; (ii) total technology 
for dehulling and extraction of superior quality oil from sesame, mustard and sunflower; (iii) 
improved designs for grain milling machinery for increased yields of milled products; rice, 
maize, wheat and pulses; (iv) total technology for manufacture of Spirulina platensis, the 
fresh water glue green alga, which has emerged world-over as a much sought after health 
food; (v) infant food from buffalo milk; (vi) total technology for manufacture of pickles in 
large scale; and (vii) viable small-scale technologies for produrtion of oyster mushroom, 
culture preparation, spawn production, mushroom growing and dehydration. 
ROLE OF INDUSTRIAL TOXICOLOGY RESEARCH CENTRE (ITRC) 
Safety of Food Materials: 
36. The fast growth of food processing industry has led to the increased use of various 
food additives added for technological purposes. The safety of chemical additives appearing 
in food stuffs has been a matter of continued concern both for consumers and regulatory 
authorities. The common adulterants causing concern are the ones deliberately added for the 
purpose of disguising inferior commodities and/or earning undue profits. The other group of 

non-intentional contaminants however, creep up during field production or processing, 
packaging and storage. Industrial Toxicology Research Centre (ITRC) does a regular 
monitoring of foodstuffs to find out the extent and nature of food adulterants, and conducts 
detailed safety evaluation studies to assess the health risk implications. 
Adulteration with Non-permitted Colours: 
37. Because of comparatively low cost and easy availability, a number of non-permitted 
toxic colours are frequently used in food products and thus constitute a hazard to health. 
ITRC has been engaged in both monitoring and safety evaluation of various permitted and 
non-permitted colours. 
Adulterants in edible oils: 
38. Edible oils have been a commodity that has attracted maximum scope and variety of 
adulterants. Argemone oils is used as an adulterant in mustard due to its low cost and 
complete mixibility with mustard oil. Consumption of argemone contaminated mustard oil, 
even at low levels for a short duration, is known to cause injurious health effects. The 
disease is commonly referred to as epidemic Dropsy. lTRC hus developed a fluorescene 
based prototype kit to rapidly (approximately in 30 minutes) st.:rccn Argemone oil in 
mustard oil with a sensitivity of 0.01 %. 
39. Besides ITRC has succesfully developed technologies for detection of Butter Yellow, 
Tricresly Phosphate Adulteration, Levels of Nickel. 
40. Edible oils have attracted maximum scope and variety of adulteran ts. The recent 
incident of outbreak of drop sy disease due to consumption of adulterated mustard oil clearly 
proves this. The Sub-Committee recommends that concrete steps be taken by the Council for 
generating public awareness in regard to the methods developed for detecting the level of 
adulterat ion. A mechanism should be evolved for regular interactions with the DSIR and State 
Governments for effective implementation of the required technologies and for proper 
awareness of the concerned people. 
Pesticide Residues: 
41. The use of pesticides is an important contributing factor to the agricultural 
revolution resulting in an increased quantity of food grain. Some pesticides persist even after 
they have served their purpo se. Monitorin g of pesticide residues at national level has been 
proposed with ITRC as a Nodal Laboratory. The laboratory coordinates the pesticide 
residue analysis at national level. 
42. The Committee recommends that the dependence of ugrkulfure on chemical fertilizers 
and pesticides be reduced by developing biofertilizers and biupt!sticidcs as serious health 
hazards are caused due to percolating of chemical pesticides and ht!avy metals into the food 
chain. The Committee recommends that awareness among ~he fnrmers and cultivators be 
created for the proper, scientific and right use of pesticides. 
MYCOTOXIN REFERENCE CENTRE 
43. In India, food raw materials and processed food products are highly susceptible to 
mycotoxin formation, necessitating toxin inactivating steps in food processing . This also 
needs highly reliable and sensitive methods of toxin estimation in food. CFTRI has been 
working on its own on aflatoxin in foods since its inception and is recognised throughout the 
world as a pioneer. CFTRI is actively engaged at present in the R&D efforts on 

biotechnological aproach for analysis and reduction of anatoxin in food materials. A 
combined project on food safety which also involves setting up of the Mycotoxin Reference 
Centre has been recently submitted to the Ministry of Food Processing Industries, New 
Delhi. 
44. The Committee recommends that setting up of the proposed Mycotoxin Reference 
Centre be expedited. 
FOOD IRRADIATION CENTRE 
45. Food irradiation help to decontaminate food from bacteria, parasites and insects. 
The process of irradiation involves exposing food material to ionizing radiations i.e. X-rays 
or gamma rays, It's a cold process and has advantage of treating the produce even in the 
final packaged form, thus packaged and forzen foods can also bl' taeateu without any change 
in the form of nutritional value. The irradiation centres pre!.ently operating at Mumbai and 
Delhi are mainly utilised for pharmaceutical prodm:ts and nwdil:al devices. Thus DSIR 
proposes to set up a model food irradi<.tion centre at CFI'Rl. Tht: ~entre would be primarily 
involved in development of expertise, products, technologies anu evaluation of irradiated 
food focussing on fruits, vegetables, spices, herbs, meat, fish and poultry products. 
46. The Committee recommends that the technique of low dose irradiation technology for 
preservation of various food items if found useful and cost effective be upscaled for 
commerical purposes. 
47. To edt adequately is one of the fundamental needs of every living being. The history 
of man has been the history of the fight for food, and the greater part of his activity has 
been aimed to achieve this objective. The fight was a difficult one and hunger, 
undernutrition and misery were always his usual companions. It is only during the last 
epochs and due to enormous amount of knowledge accumulated by man, that the availability 
of food has increased. Contemporary science and technology is being increasingly applied to 
meet the world's current and future needs. The scope of these developments imply an urgent 
need for safety and nutritional quality of new products. 
48. In the emerging scertario, we should hope for enough food and correct food to 
enable every child that is born to realize his full potential, the maximum physical, mental 
and emotional development of which he is capable. The Germans anJ Japanese are pioneer 
on this issue. After the first world war Japanese increased thl'ir national average height by 
two inches by changing their food habits. The Germans have devdoped their food habits on 
food values and not on taste. 
49. Food Processing Industry has vast potential for growth. Food Preservation and 
related safety aspects shall continue to be a major concern in lnuia, for which there are no 
easy solutions or short cuts. The returns from this sector could be maximised by the 
continued support and inputs from science and technology and thereby ensuring food quality 
and safety to people. 

MINUTES OF SUB-COMMITTEE 

n 
SECOND MEETING 
The Sub-Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 9th November, 1998 in 
Committee Room "A" , Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik-Convenor 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Rahasbihari Barik 
3. Shri Ram Chandra Khuntia 
4. Dr. D. Masthan 
5. Shri B.P. Singhal 
LOK SABRA 
6. Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix D' Souza 
7. Shri Inderjit Singh Rao 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Director 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary 
Shri Roshan Lal, Committee Officer 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL 
RESEARCH 
Dr. R. A. Mashelkar, Secretary 
REPRESENTATIVES OF . THE COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL 
RESEARCH 
1. Shri S.D. Garg, Head (STMD) 
2. Dr. Sudeep Kumar, Scientist 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE CENTRAL FOOD TECHNOLOGICAL RESEARCH 
INSTITUTE, MYSORE 
Dr. V. Prakash, Direct;)r 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDUSTRIAL TOXICOLOt;Y RESEARCH CENTRE, 
LUCKNOW 
Dr. P.K. Seth, Director 
2. The Secretary, Department of Scientific & Industrial Research, gave an audio-visual 
as well as oral presentation on the Feod Technologies und related aspects including food 
preservation and safety. The Members then sought clarifications on various food 
preservation techniques, identification of toxic substances in food items and related subjects. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 4.15 P.M. 

IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Sub-Committee met at 9.30 A.M. on Friday, the 18th December, 1998 in Room 
No. 67, First Floor, Parliament House , New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik-Convenor 
SECRETARIAT 
' Shri H. K. Chan ana, Director 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary 
Shri Roshan Lal, Committee Officer 
The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 10.00 A.M. without trunsacting uny business, due 
to lack of quorum, to meet again at 10.15 A.M. on Tuesday. the 22nd December, 1998. 

v 
FIFfH MEETING 
The Sub-Committee met at 10.15 A.M. on Tuesday, the 22nd December, 1998 in Room 
No. 67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik-Convenor 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Rahasbihari Barik 
3. Shri Ram Chandra Khuntia 
LOK SABHA 
4. Shri Ranjib Biswal 
5. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
6. Shri Mukul Wasnik 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri H.K. Chanana, Director 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary 
Shri Roshan Lal, Committee Officer 
2. The Sub-Committee took up for consideration its draft Report on Food Technology 
& related aspects and adopted the same with minor amendments. The Sub-Committee 
authorised the Convenor to incorporate a point regarding research project on vegetables 
growns on garbage in Calcutta. · 
3. The Sub-Committee decided to place the Report before the main Committee for 
consideration and adoption. 
4. The Sub-Committee then adjourned at 10.30 A.M. 

MINUTES OF THE COMMITTEE 

XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M . on Thursday, the 24th September,·1998 in Room 
No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri Saifuddin Soz - in the Chair 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Debabrata Biswas 
3. Shri Oscar Fernandes 
4. Shri Ram Chandra Khuntia 
5. Dr. Y. Radhakrishna Murty 
6. Shri Lachhman Singh 
7. Slui Raj Mohinder Singh 
8. Shri W. Angou Singh 
9. Shri B.P. Singhal 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Indra Nath Bhagat 
11. Shri Chengara Surendran 
12. Dr. (Mrs.) Beatrix D' Souza 
13. Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya 
14. Shri K. Krishnamoorthy 
15. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
16. Shri Rupchand Murmu 
17. Captain Jai Narayan Prasad Nishad 
18. Shri Virendra Singh 
19. Shri Prasad Baburao Tanpure 
20. Dr. C.P. Thakur 
21. Shri Suresh Warpudkar 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri D.P. Ahuja, Under Secretary 
Shri Roshan La!, Committee Officer 

Kt.;I'KESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND 
INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH 
1. Dr. R. A. Mashelkar, Secretary 
2. Dr. A. Lahiri, Adviser 
3. Shri K.V. Srinivasan, Adviser 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE COUNCIL OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL 
RESEARCH 
1. Shri Ajay Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Dr. H.R. Bhojwani, Head (RPBD) 
3. Shri S.D. Garg, Head (STMD) 
4. Shri A.K. Verma, Scientist 
5. Dr. Sudeep Kumar, Scientist 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE CENTRAL FOOD TECHNOLOGICAL RESEARCH 
INSTITUTE, MYSORE 
. •. -. ~-:. . ,.. . ...,. .• ' •, · ~'r ~ A 
Dr. V. Prakash, Director 
... 
REPRESENTATIVES Of' THE INDUSTRIAL TOXICOLOGY RESEARCH 
CENTRE, LUCKNOW 
1. Dr. P.K. Seth, Director 
2. Dr. S.K. Khanna, Scientist 
3. Dr. Mukul Das, Scientist 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE NATIONAL RESEARCH DEVELOPMENT 
CORPORATION 
Shri N.K. Sharma, Managing Director 
2. The Secretary, Department of Scientific & Industrial Research, gave an audio-visual 
:entation on the Food Technologies and related aspects like food preservation and safety 
:cts. The Members then sought clarifications as regard various food preservation 
niques, identification of toxic substances in food items and related subjects. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 12.55 P.M. 
··a. · ..... ~ 

XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 22ml December, 1998 in Room 
No. 63, Parliament House , New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
Shri S. R. Bommai--Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
3. Shri Rahasbihari Barik 
4. Shri Oscar Fernandes 
5. Shri Ram Chandra Khuntia 
6. Shri Lachhman Singh 
7. Shri W. Angou Singh 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Ranjib Biswal 
9. Shrimati Bhavana Chikhaliya 
10. Shri M. C. Dhamotharan 
11. Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
12. Shri K. Krishnamoorthy 
13. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Prmnanik 
14. Shri Maheshwar Singh 
15. Shri Prasad Baburao Tanpure 
16. Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
17. Shri Mukul Wasnik 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri H. K. Chanana, Director 
Shri D. P. Ahuja, Und er Secretary 
Shri Roshan La!, Committee Officer 
2. • * • 
3. The Committee then took up consideration of the draft 63rd Report as submitted by 
the Sub-Committee on Food Technology & Related aspects and adopted the same. 
4. The Committee dectded to hold its next sitting in Delhi at 4.00 P.M. on 25th January, 
1999. 
•••Relates to other matters. 