file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
NINETY-EIGHTH REPORT
 ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS /
 OBSERVATIONS  CONTAINED IN THE
NINETIETH    REPORT   OF   THE   DEPARTMENT - RELATED
                 PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
 AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2001-2002)
OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT
& FORESTS
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 22ND MARCH, 2002)
(LAID IN THE LOK SABHA ON 22ND MARCH, 2002)
 RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH 2002/CHAITRA, 1924(SAKA)
 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Website: http://parliamentofindia.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
   
1.      COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
 2.         INTRODUCTION                                           
3.      REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE       
4.      MINUTES OF THE MEETING   
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2002)
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah — Chairman
           
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri S. Peter Alphonse
   #  3.   Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
4. Smt. S. Gokula Indira
5. Shri C. Apok Jamir
6. Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
7. Smt. Chandresh Kumari
8. Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
9. Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray           
10. Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
11. Smt. Savita Sharda

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
12. Shri Lachhman Singh
13. Shri B.P. Singhal
*14. Vacant
    f 15. Vacant
 
LOK  SABHA
 
16. Smt. Margaret Alva
17. Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                    
18. Smt. Bhavna Devrajbhai Chikhalia                     
19. Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
20. Adv. Suresh Ramrao Jadhav                             
21. Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
22. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
23. Dr. Charan Das Mahant
24. Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
25. Shri Kailash Meghwal
26. Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
27. Shri Rupchand Murmu
28. Shri S. Murugesan                                
29. Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                              
30. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik            
31. Shri B.K. Parthasarathi 
32. Shri Ajit Kumar Panja   
33. Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
34. Dr. Ashok Patel   
35. Shri Prahlad Patel                                 
36. Prof. R.R. Pramanik                             
37. Shri Naresh Puglia                                
38. Shri Ganta Srinivasa Rao          
39. Prof. I.G. Sanadi                                                                                  
40. Shri Ram Prasad Singh 
41. Shri Vishvendra Singh   
42. Shri V. Vetriselvan
43. Shri Balram Singh Yadav
44. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
    % 45.  Vacant
 
SECRETARIAT
 
      Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
      Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
      Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
      Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
 Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Ninety-eighth Report on the
 Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the recommendations contained in the Ninetieth Report of the
 Committee on Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the Ministry of Environment & Forests.
 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
2.         The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the
 recommendations contained in the Ninetieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
 Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the Ministry of Environment & Forests which
 was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th April, 2001.
 
3.         There are twenty recommendations contained in the Ninetieth Report of the Committee.  Action Taken Notes on the
 recommendations of the Committee were received from the Ministry on15th October, 2001.
 
4.         In the meeting held on 20
th March, 2002, the Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report and adopted
 the same.
 
 
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                                 C. RAMACHANDRAIAH,
March 20, 2002                                                                                                                            Chairman,
                                 Committee on Science & Technology,
                                     Environment & Forests.        
R E P O R T
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the
 recommendations contained in the Ninetieth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the Ministry of Environment
 & Forests which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24 th  April, 2001 and laid in the Lok Sabha on the 24 th April,
 2001.  There are 20 recommendations contained in the Ninetieth Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the
 recommendations of the Committee were received from the Department on 15th October, 2001.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the action taken by the
 Ministry of Environment & Forests are set out in the succeeding paragraphs: -
MAJOR SCHEMES OF THE MINISTRY
Recommendation 
The Committee observes that there is need for radical transformation in the attitude of officials concerned with
 inspection of the level of pollution generated by industrial units. The attitude should be objective, need based and be
 guided by the need to control the pollution in the interest of present generation as well as posterity.
The Ministry should also prepare an Action Plan for already identified 24 critically polluted areas of the country for
 improvement of Environment.
(Para 8.2)
Action Taken by the Department
The observations of the Committee have been noted and would be conveyed to Central Pollution Control Board/State
 Pollution Control Boards for its implementation.
The Central Pollution Control Board in consultation with the State Pollution Control Boards has prepared Action
 Plan for the 24 critically polluted areas which is under implementation.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
VEHICULAR POLLUTION CONTROL MEASURES
Recommendation
The Committee observes that the national emission standards introduced by the Government are nothing more than
 the minimum requirement. In the interest of a clean environment there is perhaps a need for more rigid standards. At the

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
 same time there is a need to consider whether any particular type of fuel or gas, say CNG alone will result in a clean and
 green environment. Whether it is safe to use it? A decision has to be taken, keeping in view the infrastructure available
 and without causing hardships to commuters and throwing the entire economy out of gear.
The Committee is aware that the Ministry of Environment & Forests enjoys statutory powers under the Air
 Act, 1981 and the Environment (Protection) Act to enforce more stringent regime of standards with a view to 
 control  pollution.  The Ministry  should  have stepped in  the  current controversy with regard to use of CNG in
 public transport and help bring a harmonious solution to the problem with a view to control the pollution
 without causing hardships to any section of the society.
(Para 9.1 and 9.2 )
Action Taken by the Department
An inter-ministerial Task Force on Auto Fuels Specifications and Vehicular Emission Standards constituted under
 the Chairmanship of Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board submitted its report in March, 2001 to the Ministry of
 Petroleum and Natural Gas. The report includes the following recommendations: -
" From the environmental angle and for reduction in vehicular emissions, an ideal option would have been to achieve
 Euro-IV standards from the year 2005 which will bring us at par with the European Union norms. However, in view of
 the fact that the Euro-IV specifications and technologies are yet to be firmed up, and that taking a jump from Bharat
 Stage I norms akin to Euro I norms to Euro III norms in the entire country may not be implement able, the suggested
 option will be to achieve Bharat Stage II norms throughout the country by 2005 and to strive for achieving Euro-III
 equivalent (Bharat Stage III) norms from the year 2005 in mega cities (NCT/NCR, Greater Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai,
 Bangalore, Hyderabad & Ahmedabad)."
As regards to use of CNG as a transport fuel with special reference to public transport in the NCR, the Hon'ble
 Supreme Court has given directions vide its order dated 28
th  July, 1998 which include the following:
Expansion of CNG outlets from 9 to 80 by 31.03.2000.
Replacement of all pre 1990 autos and taxis with new vehicles using clean fuel.
Entire city bus fleet (DTC & Private) to be converted to single fuel mode on CNG by       31.03.2001.
These orders are being implemented. CNG is a clean fuel and overall CNG vehicles are safer than other vehicles.
 The risk as a result of fire or as a result of uncontrolled release of CNG is much lower than gasoline and comparable to
 that which might be expected with diesel fuel. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is dealing the matter
 relating to adoption of safety code of practice for CNG vehicles under the Central Motor Vehicle Rules. The Ministry of
 Environment and Forests is regularly coordinating with the concerned agencies including Government of NCT of Delhi,
 the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas to bring harmonious
 solution to use CNG in public transport with a view to control air pollution in Delhi.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
NATIONAL RIVER CONSERVATION PLAN INCLUDING GANGA ACTION PLAN
Recommendation
The Committee observes that for any plan or programme regarding cleansing of rivers of such a magnitude as
 Ganga, to succeed, it is necessary to have a meticulous planning. Any delay in its execution is bound to result in
 the plan going awry. More so, because the parameters regarding the  size of the  population and  the extent of
 urbanisation etc., which
 would have been taken into account at the stage of planning are subject to rapid changes
 in a country like India. Hence, timely execution is crucial for such programmes or else we would be back to
 square one.
(Para 10.2)
Action Taken by the Department
The Ministry acknowledges the need for timely execution of the programme. The following steps have been taken by
 the Ministry to speed up the progress of implementation-

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
(i)   A Standing Committee of NRCA has been constituted under the Union Minister of Environment & Forests to
 enable a more frequent review of the progress of the programme.
(ii)  The programme is reviewed at regular intervals by the Monitoring Committee chaired by Member
 (Environment), Planning Commission and the Steering Committee chaired by Secretary, Ministry of
 Environment & Forests.
(iii)The Chief Ministers of the Ganga Action Plan (GAP) States have been requested to constitute review
 Committees under them with MPs, MLAs, Mayor of local bodies to review the progress of the programme on
 regular basis.
(iv)The Nodal Secretaries of various State Departments have been asked to review the programme with their
 respective implementation agencies on a regular basis.
(v)  Site visits are regularly undertaken by the NRCD officers to review and monitor the progress of works.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and observes that the Central Ganga Authority now National
 River Conservation Authority had time and again emphasized that the project under Ganga Action Plan should
 be implemented in a time bound manner and the steps mentioned above were already in place.  But even after a
 period of 10 years, the GAP- Phase I is not fully complete and the time schedule for GAP- Phase II i.e. December
 2001 has lapsed and only 13.7 percent of the targeted sewage treatment capacity has been created.  It is a sad
 state of affairs.  The Committee would like the Ministry to take steps for speedy execution of the Plan.
Recommendation
At the same time it is necessary to see whether any alternative effective indigenous technologies can be
 advantageously used instead of draining out vast sums from national exchequer for which no audit may be possible.
(Para 10.3)
Action Taken by the Department
Keeping in view the experience gained under GAP Phase-1, emphasis is being placed by NRCD for promoting
 appropriate and low cost technologies for treatment of sewage, which also have lower O&M costs. Thus, where
 adequate land is available, technologies like waste stabilisation ponds, agro-forestry (Karnal) are being preferred. The
 State Governments have been asked to carry out the life cycle cost comparison of various technologies (which includes
 capital cost, land cost and O&M cost) before determining the most optimum technology for a particular site.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
RECEOMMENDATION OF THE COMMITTEE
The Committee has been given to understand that a team of experts from Varanasi has devised a method to rid the
 Ganga of a big chunk of its pollutant load, using the inherent energy of the flowing waters and the sun and the filtering
 properties of the riverbed.
Banaras Hindu University's (BHU) Ganga Laboratory has developed the "three gradient theory", using the
 river's sand bed, solar energy and the kinetic energy of the water that could prove a vital pollution management
 tool in cities located along the country's rivers that are struggling to contain water pollution.
The Committee understands that the system basically filters the inorganic, organic and microbiological pollutant load
 of the river - usually left untreated by sewage treatment plants (STPS) - through the sand piled up on the concave bank
 or downstream and upstream of the city.
"The polluted water first flows out of a trickling box - which is large filter comprising sand and stone layers and then
 the sand bed. If then mingles with the high velocity zone in the river for a natural course of flow again". The problem of
 pollution is acute between December and July, which is the dry season, when the river level falls below 65 meters and
 the dissolved oxygen also decreases. But this energizes the sand bed as solar radiation converts it into a hot plate to treat
 a higher quantum of inorganic and microbiological waste.
(Para 10.4 to 10.7) 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
Action Taken by the Department
Prof U. K. Choudhary of Department of Civil Engineering, BHU, Varanasi submitted a project proposal in April,
 1995 suggesting application of five theories of Science & Technology and the theory of Three Gradients for river
 pollution management without treatment plants and power supply for pollution abatement of river Ganga at Varanasi
 under Ganga Action Plan  Phase-II. According to the proposal, the sewage generated in Varanasi city is to be taken to
 the opposite side of the river Ganga by pumping and symphonic pipe arrangement and sprinkled over the sand bed
 which will act as a trickling filter and treat the sewage. The treated effluent from the sand bed will rejoin the river.
The proposal of Prof. U.K. Choudhary was referred to Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB) and U.P.
 Government in May/June, 1995 for their examination and expert advice. Both the U.P. Government and Central
 Pollution Control Board rejected the proposal of Prof. U.K. Choudhary as very expensive, impractical and technically
 not feasible due to the following reasons:
(i)   It is impractical and expensive to take the wastewater to the opposite side of the river at Varanasi by laying
 pipelines below the bed of the river, the width of which is a few kilometers particularly in the rainy season. 
(ii)  There is every possibility of chokage of pores of the sand bed due to entrainment of suspended solids present in
 the sewage. This will cause the proposed trickling filter to choke after sometime, as a result of which the sewage
 and pathogens instead of going through the filter media would go into the river as surface flow without any
 treatment, thereby, polluting it.
(iii)The RL of the proposed treatment site is 64 meters, whereas the normal flood level of river Ganga in Varanasi is
 71 meters. The proposed treatment plant site which falls in the flood plain of river Ganga would be submerged in
 flood water every year for 30-45 days in the monsoon season. Construction of sewage treatment plant the flood
 plain of the river should be avoided as a basic concept.
(iv)Since both banks of river Ganga are used for bathing by the pilgrims on festive occasions, carrying the waste
 water to the opposite bank will pollute the environment on that side. Thus, there is a risk of health hazard and
 discomfort to the pilgrims during the mass bathing days.
3.   In November 1995, NRCD informed Prof. U.K.Choudhary that his proposal was not acceptable in view of the
 comments/advice received from Central Pollution Control Board and UP Government.
4.   An R&D proposal on the same five theories of river management has also been received from Dr. U.K.Choudhary in
 the beginning of May 2001 and is under examination. However, the comments of CPCB and State Pollution Control
 Board in para 2 above shall apply to the R&D proposal also.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee observes that Ganga Action plan, launched in 1985, with the objective of bringing water
 quality of river Ganga and its tributaries to bathing levels, has not been able to achieve its objective till date.
 GAP Phase-I of the plan is not yet fully complete, even after delay of over 10 years. GAP Phase-II is also far
 behind schedule, and is due to end in December, 2001. There are reports of creation of only 13.7% of the targeted
 sewage treatment capacity so far. The assets created under the Scheme suffered serious impairment and often
 closure particularly in Bihar and Uttar Pradesh because of technical flaws in design, problems in land
 acquisition, contract mismanagement, lack of maintenance and in general because of the lackadaisical attitude of
 the States and their implementing agencies.  Technologies adopted by the National River Conservation
 Directorate (NRCD) for construction of Sewage Treatment Plants (STPS) were often questionable in as much as
 they could not adequately address the problem of reducing bacterial load in the river to the desired level. The
 NRCD has abandoned the crucial activity of monitoring the water quality on river Ganga since September, 1999,
 reportedly for want of funds, and deprived itself of a key instrument of overall performance monitoring of the
 GAP. The Ministry of Environment & Forests needs to seriously review the implementing of entire GAP and
 evolve a financing arrangements whereby the States and the agencies develop a more involved stake in
 arrangement whereby the States and the agencies develop a more involved stake in creation of assets, their
 maintenance and their functionality at all times; review and strengthen technical and administrative monitoring
 to ensure the value for money and  assets created at great public expense; and facilitate competent technological

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
 support for optimum utilization of resources.
(Para 10.10)
Action Taken by the Department
The GAP was launched in 1985 with the objective of bringing water quality of river Ganga and its tributaries to
 bathing levels. The total expenditure on the scheme till March 31, 2000 is Rs. 903.88 crore and till November 30, 2000
 is Rs. 930.79 crore. The Ganga Action Plan (GAP) referred to in the CAG report includes works under GAP -Phase I
 and II. The scheme GAP-1, which was started in 1985, has been declared closed on 31.3.2000 although 3 sub-schemes
 of sewage treatment plants are yet to be completed (2 in Bihar and 1 in West Bengal). The total expenditure on this Plan
 is Rs. 452 crore. Pollution abatement works in 25 towns in the States of UP, Bihar, and West Bengal have been taken up
 under GAP Phase 1. Under this Plan, a capacity of 835 mld has been created against the target of 873 mld. The
 estimated sewage in 25 towns in 1985 was 1340 mld. Thus, pollution load treated in terms of pollution level of 1985 is
 about 65% but in terms of present pollution level, it will amount to 35% only. Certain problems of O&M of assets
 created under GAP-1 have emerged in Bihar and to some extent in UP. The matter is being constantly pursued with the
 State Government at the highest level. It is also proposed to move the Planning Commission to consider earmarking of
 O&M Funds in the State Annual Plans. These are the major reasons for low visibility of impact of GAP-1 on the water
 quality of river Ganga. However, the water quality monitoring results indicate that wherever the Pollution abatement
 works have been commissioned and made functional, the river water quality has shown improvement for  example, in 
 1986 the  bio chemical  oxygen demand (BOD) ranged from 5.5 to 15.5 mg/lt in the stretch from Kannouj to Varanasi as
 against which, the values of BOD in this stretch ranged from 1.8 to 6.5 mg/l in 1999.
2.   As for the GAP-II, this Programme was approved in 3 phases from 1993 to 1996. GAP-II was later merged under the
 National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) in December 1996. A total capacity of about 1861 mld of sewage treatment
 alongwith allied works is to be created under GAP-II. The works of YAP under GAP-II in Haryana (12 towns), UP (8
 towns) and Delhi are in an advanced stage of completion. As against the present approved cost of Rs. 509 crore an
 expenditure of Rs. 453 crore has been incurred on the Plan so far. The targeted sewage treatment capacity of 744 mld, in
 the original 15 towns (Haryana-6, U.P.-S and Delhi) which is funded by the Japan Bank for International Cooperation
 (JBIC) through a soft loan has been commissioned and made functional. The remaining about 78 mld capacity at Agra is
 also under commissioning. The works in the remaining 6 towns of Haryana under YAP will take another 2 years to
 complete. The works on the other components of GAP-II which cover the river Ganga, Gomati and Damodar are in
 different stages of execution. The objective of the scheme can be expected to be achieved only when all the ongoing
 works under GAP-II are completed.
3.   Out of the total of 5414 mld of domestic sewage in 109 towns selected for pollution abatement along the banks of
 river Ganga and its tributaries, the GAP addressed to process only 2734 mld. The remaining quantity of 2680 mld is for
 Delhi which is being tackled with their own Plan funds. As against the target of 2734 mld under GAP the total capacity
 of sewage treatment created under Ganga Action Plan -I and II till date is 1559 mld which is 57 per cent of the target.
4.  The conventional technologies proposed earlier did not address the problems of bacterial pollution fully. In order to
 address this issue, a decision was taken in July 1999 to adopt oxidation pond based sewage treatment in all the places.
 These ponds although requiring large areas of land are capable of reducing faucal coliform suitably. The State
 Governments could not provide such areas of land in large towns, which account for a major chunk of the capital cost of
 works under the Action Plan. In view of the difficulties of land acquisition in large towns it has now been decided to use
 conventional system of sewage treatment followed by dis-infection to address the bacteriological pollution.
5.  The discontinuation of water quality monitoring was done considering the fact that under the ongoing
 GEMS/MINARS programmes of CPCB, the water quality of major river is being monitored with the help of SPCBs and
 the data generated there could be utilised. However, it was observed that the water quality monitoring of CPCBs does
 not meet the objective of GAP and the submission of data is late. The Water Quality Monitoring (WQM) under GAP
 was restarted from December 2000.
6.   A comprehensive monitoring mechanism at the Centre and in the States is in place for Ganga Action Plan. The
 programme is monitored by an Apex Committee called the National River Conservation Authority (NRCA) (earlier
 called the Central Ganga Authority) which is chaired by the Prime Minister and has the Union Minister of Environment
 and Forests and other Central Ministers of the concerned Ministries, Chief Ministers and Members of Parliament of the
 participating States as Members. So far, 10 meetings of NRCA have been held. The last meeting was held on 13. 3.
 2001. There is a Steering Committee under Secretary of the Ministry of Environment and Forests with the Chief

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
 Secretary of the participating States and officers of the concerned Central Ministries as Members. The Steering
 Committee reviews the programme on a quarterly basis. Till date a total of 45 meetings have been held. In addition a
 Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of Member Planning Commission also reviews progress on a quarterly
 basis. A total of 30 (as on 31.3.2001) meetings of the Monitoring Committee have been held so far. In addition to these
 Committees, the progress both physical and financial is regularly reviewed by the Ministry for Environment and Forests
 with the concerned officers of the State Government. The NRCD, which is implementing this programme, has regular
 interaction with participating States. The officers of NRCD regularly visit the project sites and interact with the State
 Government officials and Engineers of the implementing agencies. At the  State level, there is a nodal department and a
 nodal implementing agency earmarked for this programme. The Secretary of Nodal Department reviews the progress on
 a regular basis. Additionally, there is a Steering Committee which reviews the programme on a quarterly basis. The
 Citizens Monitoring Committees have also been constituted in most of the GAP towns to review the progress and
 provide inputs for public participation and involvement.
7.   In the 10
th  Meeting of NRCA held on 13.3.2001 under the Chairmanship of Prime Minister, a total of 11 resolutions
 were adopted as given in Annexure. With the integration and holistic approach and with direct public participation in the
 cost as proposed in these resolutions, the programme is expected to achieve the much-desired sustainability. The
 Ministry of Environment and Forests is also moving the Planning Commission for earmarking funds for O&M out of
 the State Annual Plans.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee observes that Rs.453 crore has been incurred on the Plan so far as against the present approved
 outlay of Rs.509 crore and, a capacity of only 646 mld. has been commissioned and made functional with the remaining
 90 mld. capacity yet to be created. The Ministry should consider whether the indigenous methods suggested in the
 foregoing paragraphs could be tried without putting the Ganga Action Plan (GAP) out of gear.
(Para 10.11)
Action Taken by the Department
 The capacity of sewage treatment already put in place under Yamuna Action Plan in 744 mld. The remaining
 capacity of 20 mld pertains to 6 Sewage Treatment Plants in the 6 smaller towns of Haryana where waste stabilisation
 ponds have been proposed as the method of treatment. The pond technology is one of the most appropriate treatment
 technologies for countries like India to meet the fecal coliform standards with low capital as well as operation and
 maintenance costs. These projects are under implementation and will be completed in 2 years time.
Comments
The Ministry should regularly monitor the progress in regard to the projects under implementation and the
 likely date of completion.
 
YAMUNA ACTION PLAN
Recommendation
In Delhi out of 16 proposed Sewage Treatment Plants (STPG) along the banks of the Yamuna, 8 have been
 completed while 5 were operating. The Committee is constrained to observe that despite the Supreme Court
 orders in 1995 for setting up of STPS, a number of treatment plants have not been established. The Committee
 has been given to understand that out of 22 drains discharging effluents into the Yamuna, 20 have not met the
 water quality standards. Rather the quality of the river water has deteriorated because of continuous discharge
 of domestic and industrial effluents into the river. It has been further stated that the dissolved oxygen in the river
 water was nil while the river should contain minimum 4 mg/l of dissolved oxygen. The river has 41 mg/l of
 Biological Oxygen Demand (BoD), which is much higher than the prescribed limit, of minimum 3mg/l.
(Para 11.1)
Action Taken by the Department

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
The STPs referred to in para are under implementation by the Govt. of NCT of Delhi out of their own plan funds.
 The Apex Court directed in its order dated 10.4.2001 in the case of PIL-Maili Yamuna to the Government of National
 Capital Territory of Delhi and the Government of India through the Ministry of Urban Development to file separate
 affidavits indicating the steps to be taken to ensure that the Integrated Action Plan is implemented by 31.3.2003. The
 integrated Action Plan consists of the following major activities:
(i)     Increase in sewage treatment capacity
(ii)    Sewering of regularized unauthorized colonies
(iii)   Refurbishing of the trunk sewerage system
(iv)    Removal/relocation of jhuggies from the Yamuna river banks and the drains
(v)     Construction of 15 common Effluent Treatment Plans.
The Delhi Jal Board had earlier projected that a capacity of 512 mgd will be in place by 31.03.2003. This has now
 been revised to 582 mgd by the same date.
Out of 567 regularized unauthorised colonies, sewering work will be completed in 490 such colonies by 31.03.2003.
 As for the refurbishing of trunk sewers, work in 81 kilometers out of the total 91 kms. Length will be completed by
 31.03.2003.
The number of jhuggies on the river banks and drains has been revised by the Slum and JJ Wing of the Municipal
 Corporation of Delhi from 62000 to approximately 75000. The removal/relocation of these jhuggies will be dependent
 on the availability of land and resources.
All the proposed 15 common effluent treatment plants presently under construction will be completed by December
 2002.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply & hopes that the requisite amount of cooperation & coordination among the
 different agencies will be forthcoming to implement the apex Court’s order.
Recommendation
The Committee is also of the view that the Ministry of Environment & Forests in coordination with the State
 Governments of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Delhi should plan out a strategy for augmentation of water
 resources in the upper stretches of Yamuna and for conserving water both in domestic and irrigation use.
(Para 11.2)
Action Taken by the Department
 A High Powered Committee on Maintenance of Minimum Flow in River Yamuna has been constituted by this
 Ministry under Chairmanship of Member (Environment), Planning Commission. The Chief Secretaries of the states of
 UP, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Delhi & Rajasthan are members of this Committee. The Committee has held 9
 meetings till now and recommended certain short term and long term measures such as increased sewage treatment
 capacity, timely completion of sewage treatment plants, water conservation measures, installation of upstream reservoirs
 etc. for maintaining a minimum flow of 10 cusecs in the river.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
FOREST FIRE CONTROL & MANAGEMENT
Recommendation 
The Committee notes that the present programme is to be implemented in all the States. The Committee in its 3rd,
 22nd and 30
th  Reports had dealt with this aspect and emphasized the need to raise the budgetary outlays with a view to
 acquire modem methods of fire control. The Committee is constrained to observe that things have not even marginally
 improved and the recent forest fires in the States of Uttaranchal and Uttar Pradesh have exposed the inefficiency of the
 fire fighting machinery. If this phenomenon continues, as recently witnessed in forests in Garhwal mountains, the day is

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
 not far off when the country will be totally devoid of forests. The Committee expresses its concern that the forest fires
 which ravage our vast forest wealth at a tremendous cost to the nation have hitherto not received the adequate attention
 and priority they should get and the allocations of this sector have been inadequate. While there could be constraints of
 hostility of terrain, inaccessibility to fire prone areas and other difficulties in putting them out it is necessary to provide
 adequate budgetary support to this area of work. In addition, the Committee recommends priority this sector deserves.
(Para 13)
Action Taken by the Department
The issue of forest fire prevention and control has been attracting the attention of the Government of India for the last
 few years. First of all a rough estimate of losses from forest fires was made which is around 440 crores annually. A
 national master plan has been prepared and the Plan scheme 'Modern Forest Fire Control Methods' was reviewed and
 the new components were added in the scheme. The new component includes use of traditional methods, involvement of
 villagers under the Joint Forest Management programming in fire prevention and control and devising early warning
 and fire danger rating system with the help of Forest Survey of India by use of satellite  imagery.  The annual  outlay on 
 forest  fire  was  previously  around  Rs.3  crore annually which has now been stepped up and an outlay of around Rs. 11
 crores has been fixed for the year 2001-02. Earlier the scheme was in operation in 11 states of the country but now all
 the states have been covered. The new name of the scheme is 'Forest Fire Control and Management' and is in operation
 in all the states of the country since the financial year 2000-01. Concern expressed by the Hon'ble Members has been
 taken care of the proposal for enhanced allocation during the 10
th  Five Year Plan as per the provisions of national
 master plan on forest fire will be sent to the Planning Commission.
Comments
While the Committee notes the reply, it observes that there is need to evaluate the impact of the scheme at
 regular intervals with a view to eliminate the recurring losses.
WILD LIFE PROTECTION
Recommendation
 The Committee is constrained to observe that despite the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972 and other enactments, there
 has been a spurt in death of animals in recent years, like Rhinos, tigers, elephants, peacocks etc. in one or other parts of
 the country. Besides, there have been cases of poaching and smuggling of Wild-Life specially the Tigers on the Indo-
Nepal Boarder. The Committee observes that the steps taken by the Government at State, National and international
 level are mere reiteration of what already exists in the statue book or elsewhere.
(Para 15)
Action Taken by the Department
There is no denying the fact that there has been rise in the number of seizures of wildlife products/deaths of animals
 like rhinos, tigers, elephants, peacocks over the years. This is also a fact  that  large number of cases of poaching of
 tigers have been detected in Lakhimpur Kheri and other Tarai districts of Uttar Pradesh. increase in the number of
 offences is partly also due to better detection both on account of greater sensitization of enforcement agencies as well as
 the authorization of new expert investigative agencies like the CBI and Special Task Forces of State Police Departments
 to investigate the cases of violation of Wild Life (Protection) Act.
The monetary incentive for poaching and clandestine trade in wildlife has become so lucrative that highly organised
 mafias have entered into this field. Most of the times the kingpin of the Organisation conducts the operations sitting at a
 distance and the enforcement agencies end up by arresting persons who do not have much information about the final
 destination of the products  and  the  principal  beneficiary  of  the  operation.  Lack  of  investigation skills with the
 enforcement agencies and the slow process of prosecution in the courts further compound the problem.
These issues were discussed at length in the meeting of the State Minister of Forests held at Coimbatore in January,
 200 1. The main recommendations in the Charter are :
1.  Wild animals do considerable damage to agricultural crops in areas adjoining national parks and sanctuaries,
 causing considerable concern, thereby requiring formulation of an appropriate insurance scheme for
 compensating damage to agricultural crops failing within five kilometers of national parks and sanctuaries.

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
2.  Existing provisions for payment of compensation in the causes of deaths due to wild animals were emphasized,
 with the objective of ensuring compliance by the State/Union Territories Governments.
3.  The ban on recruitment of forestry personnel shall be lifted and the vacancies filled up immediately on the lines of
 Police Department. The field formations shall be recognised into viable units and be provided with adequate
 mobility, fire arms and effective communication network.
4.   An effective mechanism for intelligence gathering and data base of habitual offenders should be developed for
 preventing wildlife crimes.
5. Adequate expertise shall be developed for prosecuting offenders and training be organised for undertaking
 investigation.
6.   Steps shall be taken immediately for designating special courts for wildlife offences.
7.  Create effective enforcement infrastructure both within protected areas and outside protected area to prevent
 poaching.
It was followed up by a comprehensive message from the Prime Minister of India, copy of which is annexed.
 However, the response of the State Governments has been totally lukewarm and many of them have shown their
 inability to take any substantial measure because of the financial stringencies.
While the Ministry will continue to pursue the State Governments for effective action keen interest especially by the
 Members of the Standing Committee and the Members of Parliament in general can go a long way towards ensuring
 effective protection of forest and wildlife.
Comments
      The Committee notes the reply.  However, it would like the Ministry to undertake periodical evaluation of the steps
 taken at regular intervals, to protect the wild life.
Recommendation
A total amount of Rs. 22.15  crores (plan and Non-plan) has been allocated as compared to Rs. 20.88 crores in
 the BE of 2000-01 which went up to Rs. 22.57 crores at RE stage. There are more than 150 National Parks and
 Sanctuaries in 25 states (including North-Eastern States) and 27 Tiger Reserve spread over in 14 states and
 covering an area  of 37,761 sq. km area in the country. Besides, there are elephant ranges. Keeping in view the
 expanse of land to be surveyed/covered, the budgetary support is a pittance. Much of this amount would be spent
 on peripheral matters and matters incidental to the preservation of wild life. The Committee has grave doubts
 whether any amount really reaches the animals, their preservation, safety, upkeep, feed etc. What is needed is a
 dedicated & committed manpower and adequate budgetary support for the purpose. The Committee therefore
 recommends that the budgetary support should be suitably augmented. At the same time it must be ensured that
 the people working for the preservation of wild life are dedicated to the cause.
(Para 16)
Action Taken by the Department
The area of activities pursued by the Ministry is quite large and most of them are of great concern to the people.
 Therefore, the allocations to wildlife can be increased to a limited extent only.
The Ministry is sensitive to the needs of increased allocation to wildlife sector and due care would be taken in this
 regard while finalising 10
th five year plan proposals.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply with concern and reiterates its recommendation with the hope that at least a beginning
 would be made for the enhanced allocation for feeding and upkeep of the animals for animals cannot be allowed to
 remain on the verge of starvation indefinitely.  As regards peripheral matters, while the state of affairs continuous to be
 indifferent and in some cases poor these matters could be allowed to wait for a while.
FOREST CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT & REGENERATION
Recommendation 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
The Committee appreciates that the development of forestry sector has now got the active involvement of
 people and this effort has to be further strengthened. There is, however, much still to be done in this area as the
 phenomenon of cutting of trees, removal of precious timber and mysterious forest fires continues unabated. The
 Problem cannot be overcome unless a consciousness is built among the people that the forests  belong to them
 and they belong to the forests and the feeling of alienation among the tribals and local population goes. The
 Committee feels that the local population (including tribals) residing in the forest areas should be actively
 associated with the management of forests and allowed to share the usufructs, without in any way compromising
 on the preservation of our national forests. If this happens, many of the ills currently afflicting our forests will
 disappear. The Ministry  should  devise  steps  to inculcate  among than a sense of belonging
 and purpose about
 the forests. The people performing outstanding work in their area should be suitably rewarded and honoured at
 the appropriate forum.
(Para 18) 
Action Taken by the Department
The Ministry is promoting Participatory Forest Management and encouraging benefit sharing of usufructs in lieu of
 protecting the forests and conserving the natural resources. The Ministry has recently issued revised guidelines to the
 state governments for implementation of Joint Forest Management programme. Besides FP Division is implementing
 the Centrally Sponsored Scheme on Association of Scheduled Tribes and Rural Poor in Regeneration of Degraded
 Forests on Usufruct Sharing Basis in which local tribal people are actively associated in protection and rehabilitation of
 degraded forests and allowed to share the usufructs.
Comments
While the Committee notes the reply, it would like an effective mechanism to be evolved  to see that the
 programme reaches the community at large. The Ministry should devise better ways and means to achieve this
 objective.
INTEGRATED AFFORESTATION AND ECO-DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
Recommendation
The Committee Observes that the investment in Afforestation Projects has been, on an average, less than one
 percent of the total plan outlay in various Plan periods. The enhanced allocation for the Integrated Afforestation
 and eco-development projects for the year 2001-2002 should be monitored on regular  intervals and the
 experience gained in regard to Afforestation programmes during the Ninth Plan should be utilised for avoiding
 multiplicity of programmes in the same area.
(Para 22)
Action Taken by the Department
For enhancing the scope of work of FDAs/JFMCs, and the overall area coverage in the Tenth Plan, the proposal of
 the NAEB mentioned above may kindly be seen. It envisages much larger allocation for the proposed umbrella scheme
 for afforestation, and elimination of multiplicity of schemes by adopting the convergent approach mentioned above.
 IAEP projects would be an important component of the umbrella scheme. For 2001-02, allocation/utilisation under the
 IAEP scheme would be carefully monitored.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee observes that it is important to increase the Forest Cover of the Country. The country was far
 behind the targets fixed in this regard about four decades ago. No doubt the costs have gone up tremendously all
 these years. Nevertheless the Committee is of the view that it is possible to increase the forest cover by keeping
 the outlay at  the  minimum possible. Land  areas  should be identified and earmarked for the purpose
 and
 Plantation could be done on these lands on mass scale, which would keep the costs minimum. Voluntary
 organisations and individuals could also be invited to plant trees in memory of their near and dear ones. At the
 same time efforts should be made to diversify the plants instead of choosing the traditional cheap varieties used
 by official horticultural agencies. This would go a long way to combat the dangers of global warming and make

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
 the environment healthy and congenial to mankind.
(Para 23)
Action Taken by the Department
 The Ministry of Environment & Forests has formulated National Forestry Action Programme (NFAP), a
 comprehensive strategic long term plan for the next twenty years to bring one third of the area of the country under
 forest/tree cover, to arrest deforestation for achieving sustainable development of forests and to maintain ecological
 balance. The Programme aims at sustainable development of 76.5 million hectares of forests covering 16 major forest
 types extending over 26 States and Union Territories. The area to be regenerated/planted is 48.23 million hectares.  The
 Ministry of Environment and Forests operates a Grants-in-Aid Scheme to Voluntary Agencies under which financial
 assistance is provided to Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs) for development of wastelands adjoining forest
 areas through afforestation and soil moisture conservation measures.
Comments
Efforts should be made to monitor the progress in implementation of the programme thorough NFAP and the
 grants-in-aid scheme.  All efforts should be directed towards achieving the goal of one-third area of the country
 under forest cover.
While the Committee notes the reply, it is not happy with the performance in the field of aforestation all these
 years, it would therefore like the progress to be regularly monitored and responsibility fixed if targets remain
 unachieved/deficiencies are noticed in the implementation of the programme.
RED OIL PALM PROJECT-ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS FOREST & PLANTATION
 DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION LIMITED
Recommendation
The Committee notes that on the basis of the Report submitted by the Central Agricultural Research institute
 (CARI), Port Blair which conducted a study on the impact of Red Palm Cultivation on the local ecology, there
 has not been any significant adverse impact on the ecology of the Island. The report has also pointed out that
 Little Andaman Island was most suitable agro-climatically for cultivation of Red Oil Palm.  The Committee
 therefore recommends that the Ministry of Environment & Forests should go ahead with the
 plantation/cultivation of Red Oil Palm for extension to 2,400 ha. Which was originally sanctioned in 1979 and
 thereafter to 5,000 ha. so that a full fledged refinery unit could be established in Andaman & Nicobar Islands and
 the Project completed. This would also provide succor to Andaman & Nicobar Islands Forest & Plantation
 Development Corporation Ltd., which at present is a venture, incurring losses.
(Para 26)
Action Taken by the Department
Government of India has sanctioned a project in 1979 for raising Red Oil P" Plantation over 2400 ha. on forest land
 in Little Andaman. The Corporation has brought an area 1593 ha. under plantation till Government of India has put a
 ban on raising Red Oil Palm Plantation in Jan, 1985 by converting natural forests into Red OR Palm plantations. The
 Government had also ordered a study on the environment impact of Red Oil Palm through Central Agriculture Research
 institute in 1987. The Committee has submitted its report in Feb. 1996.  The Corporation has submitted a proposal for
 allowing Red M Palm plantation as per the original project of 2400 ha. Raising of Red Oil Palm Plantation require a
 prior approval under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.The Ministry has requested vide letter dated 20.9.2000 to
 Managing Director, Andaman & Nicobar Forest & Plantation Development Corporation and local administration to
 submit a proposal under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 for raising plantation of Red Oil Palm on degraded forest/open
 forest patches taking into account the recommendations of the expert committee report and incorporating following
 information:
(i)
      Status of area/site in which Red Oil Palm Plantation proposed to be planted;
(ii)    Present growth of the area and distance from present Red Oil Palm factory;
(iii)   Source of seedings, strains and clones;
(iv)  Source of funding; 

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
(v)    Central Government will not favour raising of Red Oil Palm plantations on in thick natural forest, so areas which
 are degraded or where density is low may be identified for submission of proposal under Forest (Conservation
 act, 1980.
The Forest Development Corporation is making efforts to identify such forest areas and submit a comprehensive
 proposal for approval under Section 2 of Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
The recommendations of the Committee has been noted.
Comments
The committee notes the reply.
 
ANNEXURES
 
  ANNEXURE - I
RESOLUTIONS ADOPTED AT THE X MEETING OF THE NRCA HELD ON 13.3.2001
 The X meeting of the National River Conservation Authority (NRCA) was held on 13.3.2001 at 5.00 PM in the
 Parliament House Annexe under the Chairmanship of Hon'ble Prime Minister. The meeting was attended by Union
 Minister for Environment & Forests, Dy. Chairman, Planning Commission, Member Planning Commission, Members
 of Parliament, Chief Ministers of four States, Environment Ministers and senior officials of States and senior officials of
 various Ministries of Central Government. NRCA after detailed deliberation unanimously adopted following resolution:
1.   While river cleaning would need to be given a much higher priority, it is also essential that resources are not
 spread thinly. The focus, therefore, has to be on large towns, which are gross polluters.
2.   In case of works already completed assets need to be maintained and also continuously operated/utilized for
 which funds must be earmarked by the States. The State& UTs must meet the O&M costs which on an average
 is around 5% of the capital cost.
3.   A holistic and integrated approach shall be adopted by addressing not only river pollution but other components
 like internal sewage, solid waster disposal, low cost toilets etc.
4.   The cost of works shall be shared between the Central and States/local bodies, public on 70:30 basis. The public
 shall contribute not less than 10% of the cost.
5.   A detailed plan for recovery/operation maintenance cost shall become part of the project proposal in future,
6.   Because of delay in implementation, there is a cost overrun in many schemes. The Central share in the total cost
 will be limited to the ceiling amount approved by the CCEA. Balance cost, if any, is to be borne by the
 respective State Government.
7.   Approved works must be completed first and where State/UTs have not been responsive enough and such works
 have been pending for more than two years because of non-action by States, a Committee of Secretaries
 consisting of Secretary Ministry of Environment & Forests, Secretary Finance, Secretary Planning Commission
 and Chief Secretary of the concerned State shall review the necessity of such schemes.
8.   National Lake Conservation Plan shall receive the same priority as the rivers.
9.   Mobilization of resources/funds will need special attention. Plan outlays would need to be enhanced substantially
 so that gap between fund requirements and outlay is bridged.
10.  Coastal towns would get special attention because it has been observed that sewage, solid waste, biomedical
 waste and the like are dumped into sea. Prioritization of coastal towns for taking up such works may be done
 from the angle of mangroves, promotion of eco-tourism, cultural and religious importance of the place and the
 like.
11.  With a view to focus on issues relating to protection and improvement and cleaning of rivers/lakes, a massive
 programme of environment education and awareness is imperative.

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
Centre and States to launch this campaign through a programme of volunteers called NATIONAL GREEN
 VOLUNTEERS or some other name as is finally decided upon.
            ANNEXURE-II
                                                           
PRIME MINISTER
                                                                                                            New Delhi
March 29,2001
Dear Shri,
In recent years, there has been an increase in the number of killing of wild animals like tiger, panther, elephant, rhino, musk
 deer and other species.  Several cases of illegal export of wildlife products derived from various species have been detected
 from time to time.  This is a matter of great concern.
One of the major reasons for decline in standards of wildlife protection is the large number of vacancies at various
 level in the field formations of the Forest Department and need for greater commitment on part of the officials.  Certain
 states have made drastic cuts in the number of sanctioned posts in the Department and have also banned filling up of
 vacant posts.  Allocations to this sector have also been grossly inadequate.  There is also need for upgradation of the
 skills of the staff both in respect of prevention of wildlife crime and successful prosecution of the offenders.  An
 effective mechanism for intelligence gathering needs to be developed and steps for designating special courts for trying
 wildlife offences taken.  Further, effective infrastructure for communication, adequate mobility and sophisticated
 weapons have to be made available to the forest staff if we want  to protect and conserve our flora and fauna,
I hope after a review of the situation relating to your State, the issues mentioned above would receive your personal
 attention so that wildlife protection gets the priority it deserves.
With Regards,
Yours Sincerely,
                                                                                                    (A.B.Vajpayee) 
MINUTE
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 09.30 A.M. on Wednesday, the 20 th March, 2002 in Room No. 63, First Floor, Parliament
 House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
     
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.
       Smt. S. Gokula Indira
3.       Shri C. Apok Jamir
     
LOK  SABHA
 
4.       Smt. Bhavana D. Chikhalia
5.       Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D' Souza
6.       Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
7.       Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
8.       Shri S. Murugesan
       

file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/98th.htm[29-08-2018 16:20:38]
9. Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
10.   Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
11.   Shri Ajit Kumar Panja
12.   Shri Suresh Pasi
13.   Dr. Ashok Patel
14.   Shri Prahlad Patel
15.   Prof. R. R. Pramanik
16.   Shri Ram Prasad Singh
17.   Shri V. Vetriselvan
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K.Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee took up consideration of Draft ***, ***  & 98
th Reports of the Committee on the Action taken by
 ***, *** and Ministry of Environment & Forests on the recommendations/observations contained in the ***, *** and
 Ninetieth Reports respectively of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2001-2002).  The Committee considered and
 adopted each of the reports. 
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Smt. S. Gokula Indira to present the Reports to the
 Rajya Sabha and Shri Ali. Mohd. Naikand in his absence Shri.Madhusudan Devram Mistry to lay the Reports on the
 table of the Lok Sabha.
    *                                                          *                                                          *
4.         The Committee then adjourned at 09.50 A.M.
 
*** Relates to other matters.
#   Nominated w.e.f. 4th January, 2002 
*   Shri Cho S. Ramswamy ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.15th February, 2002 on his resignation  from the  membership of the
    Committee
f  Dr. Raja Ramanna ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.18th February, 2002 on his resignation from  the membership of the Committee.
 
 
%  Shri Laxman Giluwa ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 5th March, 2002 vice his nomination to the Committee on Energy
   (Lok  Sabha).