Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
REPORT NO.
286
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on st December, )1 2016
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on )1 2016st December,
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Seventy-Eighth Report
of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science & Technology, Environment
& Forests on the Demands for Grants (2016-17)
of the Department of Biotechnology


Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations
contained in the Two Hundred Seventy-Eighth Report
of the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Science & Technology, Environment
& Forests on the Demands for Grants (2016-17)
of the Department of Biotechnology
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 1st December, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2016/Agrahayana, 1938 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ............................................................................................ (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................... .. (iv)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... ....... 1-9
5. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... ..... 1 1-14

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2016-17)
 (Constituted on 1st September, 2016 )
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury    —   Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shrimati Vandana Chavan
5. Shri C.P. Narayanan
6. Shri Parimal Nathwani
7. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
8. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
9. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
10. Shri Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Baig
13. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
14. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
15. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Chirag Paswan
22. Shri Shivaji A. Patil
23. Shri Nanabhau Falgunrao Patole
24. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
25. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
26. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
27. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
28. Shri Nagendra Singh
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati M.Vasanthi
31. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M.K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairperson of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Eighty-sixth Report on the Action Taken by the
Department of Biotechnology on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Seventy-
eighth  Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2016-2017) of the Department of
Biotechnology, which was presented/laid in the both the Houses of Parliament on 9th May, 2016.
2. There were fifteen recommendations in the Two Hundred and Seventy-eighth Report of the
Committee.  Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from
the Department on 16th August, 2016.
3. In the meeting held on 29th November, 2016, the Committee considered the Report and
adopted the same.
RENUKA CHOWDHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairperson,
29 December , 2016 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Agrahayana 10, 1938  Science & Technology, Environment & Forests,
Rajya Sabha
(iii)

ACRONYMS
HRD : Human Resource Development
RBIAC : Rural Biotech Innovation and Application Centre
BIBCOL : Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Limited
(iv)

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of
Biotechnology on the recommendations contained in the Two Hundred and Seventy-eighth  Report
of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2016-17) of the Department of Biotechnology,
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 9th May, 2016. There were fifteen recommendations
in the Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee
were received from the Department on 16th August, 2016.  The Department has accepted all the
recommendations of the Committee. The Committee, on examination of Action Taken Notes,
however is not satisfied with action taken by the Department in respect of one
recommendation (Para No. 6.6) and would like the Department to take further action in
respect of said recommendation as indicated in the Report.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on
the Action Taken by the Department of Biotechnology are set out in the following paragraphs:-
FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE OF THE DEPARTMENT
Recommendation
The Committee feels that the purpose of Five Year Plans is to formulate long gestation
projects and the inadequate allocation of funds during the plan period adversely affects the
execution of projects. The Committee is disappointed to note that instead of being provided
the approved allocation, the Department of Biotechnology has been allocated only 62.70
per cent of its approved outlay during the 12th Five Year Plan. This would certainly have
an adverse bearing on the schemes / programmes of the Department in the 12th Five Year
Plan. (Para 2.2)
Action Taken by Government
Although the Department has been allocated only 62.70% of the approved outlay during the
12th  Five Year Plan, all efforts have been made to ensure that major programmes which have been
initiated do not suffer due to lack of funds. Prioritization of activities has been ensured and new
activities have been initiated based on the funds availability.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee notes that the actual expenditure of the Department has gone down from
99.19 per cent in 2013-14 to 96.36 per cent and 92.13 per cent in 2014-15 and 2015-16
respectively. The Department’ s performance of utilizing 99.19 per cent of its allocation in 2013-14
indicates that it has the capability of fully utilizing the resources made available to it.
However, the Department failed to rise to its true potential and could expend only 92.13% of
the allocated resources till 28.03.2016. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Department should review its financial performance during 2015-16 and try to identify the

2
bottlenecks responsible for not optimally utilizing the funds made available to it, so as to avoid
its recurrence in future. (Para 2.3)
Action Taken by Government
The Department has made serious efforts to review the Financial performance and all effort
is now being made to ensure that the pace of expenditure is hastened to ensure that there is optimal
utilization of funds.
Comments
The Committee hopes that the efforts made by the Department to hasten the pace of
expenditure would bring the desired results.
BUDGET ALLOCATION FOR THE YEAR 2016-17
Recommendation
The Committee notes that unlike previous years of the 12th Five Year Plan, the allocation
of the Department was not reduced at RE stage during 2015-16. The Department has indicated
the requirement of an additional amount of
 `  200.00 Crore to implement mission programmes
in livestock and pulses and other inter-ministerial programmes. Keeping in view the fact that
a large amount of its allocation promised for the 12th Five Year Plan is yet to be disbursed
to the Department, the Committee recommends that the plan allocation of the Department
should be suitably augmented at RE stage to enable the Department to achieve its desired
objectives. (Para 3.3)
Action Taken by Government
In view of the fact that there was no reduction in RE in 2015-16 and that in 2016-17, the
Department has received an additional amount of  `  200.00 crores under BE, all efforts are being
made to get the Major Missions launched. The SFC and EFC proposals have been made and are
currently under process. It is expected that by 30th September 2016, more than 50% expenditure
would be incurred and this would help in making a strong case for an enhanced budget at RE
stage.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Department would achieve its
targets and get enhanced budget at RE stage.
MONITORING MECHANISM OF THE DEPARTMENT
Recommendation
The existence of a strong and effective monitoring mechanism to monitor and review the
progress of ongoing schemes and programmes is extremely important. The Committee recommends
that the Department of Biotechnology should periodically monitor all its schemes and programmes
and take corrective measures, wherever required, so as to ensure that all its schemes / programmes
proceed as per the schedule. (Para 4.1)

3
Action Taken by Government
As informed in the report, the Department has a very well structured monitoring mechanism.
All schemes and programmes are reviewed at least once in a year by special Expert Committees.
Major programmes and Missions have special review including International Experts. Based on the
discussions and recommendations of the Committee, corrective actions for the project are taken
wherever felt necessary.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT (HRD)
Recommendation
The Committee has noted the performance of the Department on Human Resource
Development during the last three years. Since human resource form the backbone of research
activities, the Committee recommends the Department should continue to optimally utilize the
allocation made for HRD internally by it. The Committee notes the schemes / programmes of the
Department to encourage, nurture and involve talented researchers in scientific pursuits. The
effort being made by the Department in creating capable and skilled human resource in
biotechnology sector and extending support to students at different levels through short term
training courses, fellowships and awards providing industrial training to students etc. is
commendable. The Committee is of the view that biotechnology will play a major role in
scientific activities in the years to come and recommends that keeping in view the increased
requirement of human resources in the Biotechnology sector in the future, the Department should
undertake a review of its existing capacity to generate human resources and expand its extant
infrastructure to cater to the additional requirement of personnel and provide the requisite quality
human resource in biotechnology sector. The Committee also feels that more allocation is required
for the purpose. (Para 5.7)
Action Taken by Government
Department has undertaken an independent evaluation of all ongoing schemes and suggested
measures have been implemented. Department has announced call for proposals for post graduate
certificate / diploma programme in Genetic Counselling, Molecular Diagnosis, Quality Comfort and
Testing of recombinant products, Bio preservation, Quality Assurance and Testing of agricultural
products and Computational Biology. Department is actively considering to initiate skill development
programme for graduates.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the progress achieved
with respect to expanding the extant infrastructure to cater to the additional requirement
of personnel in biotechnology sector at the time of consideration of Demands for Grants
2017-18 of the Department.

4
BIOTECHNOLOGY FOR SOCIETAL DEVELOPMENT
Recommendation
The Committee feels that the reasons furnished by the Department for underutilization of
funds under ‘Biotechnology for Societal Development’  are not convincing. Further, in view of the
underutilization by the Department under this programme during 2013-14 and 2014- 15, the
Committee is not inclined to accept the view expressed by the Department that balance amount
under the head will be fully utilized. The aim of the programme is to promote use of
biotechnological processes and tools for the benefit of the disadvantaged sections of the society
comprising of women, rural population and SCs/STs and any underutilization of the funds allocated
for the programme directly affects these underprivileged sections of the country. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should undertake a periodic review of the progress of
the programmes under the head and ensure that there is no underutilization of the funds allocated
for the benefit of the underprivileged sections of the society. (Para 6.6)
Action Taken by Government
The Department of Biotechnology is implementing a Biotechnology Programme for Societal
Development addressing the issues pertaining to the SC/ST target population, women and rural
development. The budget earmarked during the Financial Year-2013-14 and 2014-15 was not been
fully utilized since good viable projects were not received. Therefore a wide publicity was given
to announce well-focused project in this area. A programme has recently been advertised in the
identified priority area on “Rural Biotech Innovation and Application Centre (RBIAC)” to establish
Units/ Hubs under Universities/Research Institutes/KVKs and other registered organizations engaged
in Research and extension activities. This will address capacity building programmes on health and
sanitation, agriculture for livelihood generation and entrepreneurial skill development. Programmes
in the priority areas on women sanitation, Post harvest storage technology; Backyard poultry,
vermicompost, bee keeping, fisheries, floriculture, mushroom cultivation based entrepreneurial skill
development; agro-technologies; farm information/ knowledge systems are also being strengthened
during the FY- 2016-17.
Comments
The Committee hopes that the action taken by the Department would yield the desired
results. However, the Committee has not been informed whether any periodic review of the
progress of the programmes under the head is being undertaken or not and would like to
be informed of the position in this regard.
BIOTECHNOLOGY CLUSTERS
Recommendation
The Committee observes that the B.E. allocation of
 `  90.00 crore, both in 2014-15 and
2015-16, was reduced to  `  50.00 crore and  `  10.00 crore during the two financial years and the
actual expenditure was only 32.57 crore and  `  12.49 crores respectively. The Committee is of the
view that there has been gross underutilization of funds in this programme and the contention of
the Department that there was no adverse effect on the overall goals and scope of bioclusters, is

5
not tenable. Further, the Committee feels that the reasons furnished by the Department for
underutilization are administrative and were avoidable. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Department should strengthen its administrative and monitoring mechanism to ensure that funds
allocated are fully utilized. (Para 7.4)
Action Taken  by Government
The funds allocated for the Biocluster could not be utilized, since this was a new activity.
While 2 clusters at NCR & Bangalore are operational, the programmes for the 3 new clusters at
Mohali, Pune and Kolkata are being developed. The proposals have been finalized and the financial
clearances will be obtained during the year. There is a very well structured monitoring, which
exists for the Biocluster review.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
BHARAT IMMUNOLOGICAL & BIOLOGICAL CORPORATION LIMITED (BIBCOL),
BULANDSHAHR, UTTAR PRADESH
Recommendation
The Committee appreciates that BIBCOL has transformed from a sick company to
a profit making one. However, the Committee notes that the financial performance of the
company nosedived during 2014-15 in all parameters i.e. Revenue from operation, profit
before Tax and Profit after Tax, as compared to the previous two financial years. The
Committee recommends that the concerned authorities should take all necessary
measures to ensure that the momentum of the company to generate revenue is not
destabilized and that gains made by the company in 2012-13 and 2013-14 are sustained and
improved. (Para 8.3)
Action Taken by Government
The management of the company is making all efforts to ensure that the momentum of the
company in generation of revenue is maintained.
Comments
The Committee hopes that there would be positive outcome of the efforts made by the
management of the company.
FILING AND GRANT OF PATENTS
Recommendation
The Committee is surprised to know that the Department of Biotechnology does not have a
mechanism data on patents filed / granted even though it supports various projects of different
universities, institutes and non-profit scientific organizations. The Committee is of the view that
patent filing is one of the major indicators of the scientific and technological advancement of a
country. In the absence of any reliable data, it is not possible to undertake a conclusive analysis
of the scientific achievements of the Department in this field. The Committee, therefore,

6
recommends that the Department of Biotechnology should devise a mechanism to keep a record of
the patents filed and granted, both in India and abroad, by the institutions supported by the
Department. (Para 9.2)
Action Taken by Government
The recommendation has been noted. The patents filed & granted from various Autonomous
Institutes supported by the DBT shall be collected at periodic interval for reporting the achievement
in this regard in totality.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that Department would inform the
Committee about the progress made in this direction.
Recommendation
The Committee observes that the number of patents filed (national) dropped from 70 in 2013-14
to 33 in 2015-16. Similarly, the number of patents filed (foreign) dipped from 18 in 2013-14 to
10 in 2015-16. The available data furnished by the Department for the last three years, therefore,
indicates that the performance of the Department has gone down considerably during the last three
years both in terms of patents filed and granted, both in India and abroad. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Department should intensify and galvanise its efforts to improve
upon its performance in terms of filing and grant of patents. (Para 9.3)
Action Taken by Government
Number of patents filed/granted in the years 2013-14 to 2015-16 presented earlier are based
on patent facilitation and does not reflect patents filed under various projects & by the institutions
supported by the Department. As recommended, different subject matter Task forces shall be
directed to intensify filing of patent by researchers.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
RANKING IN RESEARCH PUBLICATIONS
Recommendation
The Committee notes with satisfaction, the improvement in global ranking of India in all
sciences and key basic sciences during the year 2014 and her surging ahead of France in
international research publications on Biotechnology. The Committee hopes that the Department
would further improve its performance and move ahead of other countries in all the three subject
areas in the years to come. The Committee recommends that the Department should leave no stone
unturned to achieve excellence in international research publications and earn India a name in the
field of Biotechnology at the international platform and that funds required for the purpose be
made available to the Department. (Para 10.4)
Action Taken by Government
The Department is making full effort to strengthen the Country’s capacity in Biotechnology
in both Human resource and Infrastructure specifically the area of basic science. Major thrust is

7
also being given to International Collaborations. This would facilitate increase in the number of
good publications specially in International Journals.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
PROJECTS/SCHEMES FOR THE BENEFIT OF NORTH-EASTERN AREAS & SIKKIM
Recommendation
The Committee feels that 10% allocation of the total budget towards biotechnology backed
development activities in the North Eastern region of the country is certainly a boon for the
development of scientific activities in the region. The Committee recommends that the Department
should intensify its efforts and ensure that the requisite 10% allocation of budget is fully utilized
towards the proposed activities. Further, the Department should in coordination with other scientific
Departments, make efforts for creation of skilled human resource and setting up of institutional
resources for much needed growth in this region. (Para 11.3)
Action Taken by Government
The Department has setup a separate Cell for the North East region activities which supports
projects for capacity building  IN Research Institutes and Universities in the North East, Joint
Collaboration projects with other major Institutes/Laboratories across the country are also
supported.  There is special emphasis on fellowship, training and infrastructure creation and
infrastructure strengthening.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
PUBLICITY OF THE SCHEMES AND PUBLIC AWARENESS
Recommendation
The Committee is aware that the Department undertakes many programmes which aim to
create a platform for self employment generation among the target population and diffusion of
proven and field tested technologies through demonstration, training and extension activities. The
Committee is of the opinion that there is a need to give publicity to the research activities
undertaken by the Department and the schemes / programmes of the Department for the benefit of
the people. State Governments, especially North-Eastern States, should be informed of these
schemes so that the benefit of the schemes could reach those for whom these are intended. The
Committee is of the view that the information regarding the schemes / programmes of the
Department must reach down to the lowest level even if it is not beneficial straightaway. The
Committee recommends that there should be a specific provision for publicity to the schemes /
programmes of the Department in the budget allocation of every Ministry / Department so that the
activities of the Department could reach the common people and that the required funds for the
purpose should be made available to the Department. In order to filter down the information to the
grassroots level, the Department should also have regular meetings with the members of the standing

8
Committee and other MPs to brief them about these schemes so that they could communicate the
same to the people in their constituency for their effective utilization. (Para 12.1)
Action Taken by Government
The suggestion of the Committee is noted and the department during the year would make
all efforts to ensure that a well articulated communication strategy is developed to disseminate the
information and knowledge of the Department’s activities to all Stakeholders including the Hon’ble
Members of Parliament.
Comments
The Committee would like to be informed of the efforts made in this direction by the
Department.
NATIONAL BIOTECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2015-20
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that biotechnology is the technology of the future and hopes
that National Biotechnology Development Strategy 2015-20 would play a key role in establishing
India as a world class Biotechnology hub. The Committee recommends that the Government
should provide adequate financial allocations for the implementation of the strategy in the years
to come. (Para 13.3)
Action Taken by Government
A detailed Action Plan has been planned for implementation for National Biotechnology
Development Strategy. Proper budgeting for the major programmes is being done to ensure that
funds are available for the major activities proposed.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
GENERAL OBSERV ATION
Recommendation
The Department of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science & Technology plays a pivotal role in
the promotion of biotechnology in the country. New initiatives in the field of biotechnology play
a significant role in the development of a nation, be it in the field of agriculture, education,
medicine, economy, sports, games, jobs or tourism, etc. All the great scientific discoveries and
technological achievements in our country have improved the Indian economic status and have
created many new ways for the new generations to grow in the technologically advanced
environment. The Committee is of the view that although the Department has undertaken
accelerated efforts for achieving excellence in the field of biotechnology, a lot more needs to be done
and achieved in this sector . In order to successfully meet the challenges of the future, the Committee
recommends that the Department should undertake meaningful initiatives to establish strong
foundations for a leadership role in the world in various areas of biotechnology. (Para 14)
Action Taken by Government
The Department is thankful to the Committee for appreciating the efforts which have been

9
made so far through the National Biotechnology Development Strategy 2015 to 2020 and the
proposed vision 2030. The Department has prepared a detailed plan for strengthening of the
Biotechnology sector with the targets of achieving US$100 billion by 2020-25. With this it is
expected that India would be recognized as a key player in the Global Biotechnology Sector and
be at par with the developed nations in the next 10-15 years.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and wishes the Department all the best in its future
endeavours.

MINUTES

13
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 29th November, 2016 in Room No. ‘67’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shrimati Renuka Chowdhury  —  Chairperson
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya
3. Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan
4. Shri C.P. Narayanan
5. Shri Rangasayee Ramakrishna
6. Ch. Sukhram Singh Yadav
LOK SABHA
7. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer
8. Shri Prabhatsinh Chauhan
9. Kum. Sushmita Dev
10. Shri Ninong Ering
11. Shri Laxman Giluwa
12. Shri Daddan Mishra
13. Shri Chirag Paswan
14. Shri Nana Patole
15. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
16. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
17. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
18. Shri Vikram Usendi
19. Shri Prabhubhai N. Vasava
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Narmadeshwar Prasad, Joint Director
Shri Mohd. Salamuddin, Deputy Director
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. She
informed the Members that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 286th,
287th, 288th 289th, 290th and 291st reports of the Committee on Action Taken by the Government
on the recommendations/observations contained in reports of the Committee on the Demands for

14
Grants (2016-17) pertaining to Departments of Biotechnology, Space, Scientific and Industrial
Research, Science & Technology, Atomic Energy and Ministry of Earth Sciences. The Committee
then considered the draft 286th to 291st Reports and after some deliberations adopted the same.
3. The Committee also decided to present/lay its 286th to 291st reports to both the Houses of
Parliament on 1st December, 2016. The Committee authorised the Chairperson and, in her absence,
Shri Prasanna Acharya and in his absence Shri S.R. Balasubramoniyan to present the reports in the
Rajya Sabha and Shri Vikram Usendi and, in his absence, Shri Laxman Giluwa, to lay the reports
on the Table of Lok Sabha.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 4.05 
P.M.
***Relate to other matters.