111th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/111threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:46]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
ONE HUNDRED-ELEVENTH REPORT
 
ON
 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS / OBSERVATIONS  CONTAINED IN THE
ONE HUNDRED-FOURTH    REPORT   OF   THE   DEPARTMENT - RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2002-2003)
OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT
& FORESTS
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  16TH   DECEMBER, 2002)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  16TH  DECEMBER, 2002)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
DECEMBER, 2002/ AGRAHAYANA, 1924(SAKA)
 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in
Website: http://parliamentofindia.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
INTRODUCTION 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                          
ANNEXURES                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
MINUTE OF THE MEETING                                        
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2002)
 
1.         Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
           
RAJYA SABHA
 

111th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/111threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:46]
     #2.  Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Smt. S. Gokula Indira
Shri C. Apok Jamir
Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
Smt. Savita Sharda
Shri B.P. Singhal
     &
9.  Shri M. V. Rajasekharan
     J10.            Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharma
     *11.Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
     f12. Dr. Vijay Mallya
                 b13. Vacant
        ¥14. Vacant
        § 15.         Vacant
 
LOK  SABHA
 
Smt. Margaret Alva
Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                   
Smt. Bhavna Devrajbhai Chikhalia                   
Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
Adv. Suresh Ramrao Jadhav                            
Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
Shri Babubhai K. Katara
    %
23.            Kunwar Akhilesh Singh            
Dr. Charan Das Mahant
Shri Sadashivrao Dadoba Mandlik
Shri Kailash Meghwal
Shri Madhusudan Devram Mistry
Shri Rupchand Murmu
Shri S. Murugesan                               
Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                            
Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                       
Shri B.K. Parthasarathi
Shri Ajit Kumar Panja  
Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
Shri Prahlad Patel        
Prof. R.R. Pramanik                            
Shri Naresh Puglia                               
Shri Ganta Srinivasa Rao         
Prof. I.G. Sanadi
41.       Shri Ram Prasad Singh
Shri Vishvendra Singh  
Shri V. Vetriselvan
Shri Balram Singh Yadav
Shri Akhilesh Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 

111th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/111threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:46]
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
            Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
            Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
INTRODUCTION
 
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to
 present the Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred-eleventh Report on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the recommendations contained in the
 One Hundred-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the Ministry of Environment & Forests.
 
2.         The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred-fourth Report of
 the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the Ministry of Environment
 & Forests which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 14
th May, 2002.
 
3.         There were eighteen recommendations contained in the One Hundred-fourth Report of the Committee.  Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were
 received from the Ministry on 26th September, 2002.
 
4.         In the meeting held on 11
th December, 2002, the Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report and adopted the same.
 
 
NEW DELHI;
December 11,2002
 
 
C.RAMACHANDRAIAH            
Chairman,
Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests.   
R E P O R T
 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred-fourth Report of the
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2002-2003) of the Ministry of Environment &
 Forests which was presented to Rajya Sabha and laid on the table of the Lok Sabha on          14
th May, 2002.  There were eighteen recommendations in the Report of the Committee.
 Action Taken notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Department                   on 18th September, 2002.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the action taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests are set out in the succeeding
 paragraphs: -
 
OUTLAY FOR NORTH EAST & SIKKIM
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view, that a review of the various Supreme Court decisions with regard to the forests of North-Eastern States should be undertaken with the State
 representatives and progress of working plan preparations for the forest and non-forest areas be conducted on a quarterly basis.  There is an urgent need that states should fulfil their
 commitments for achieving targets for the compensatory afforestation under Forest  Conservation Act.  The progress in compensatory afforestation is generally not as per expectations
 except in case of Sikkim.
(Para 6)
Action taken by the Ministry
The position regarding issues mentioned in paragraph 1 of the Report of  the Standing Committee of Ministry of Environment and Forests is as under:
Review of various Supreme Court decisions
The review of the status of implementation of various decisions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court is done from time to time.  Recently also a meeting of  the Principal Chief Conservator
 of Forests of the North-Eastern States  was  held at Gangtok on 12
th and 13th January, 2002 in which issues  related to the progress of implementation of decisions of the Supreme
 Court was reviewed.   The necessary review will be taken from time to time.The progress of preparation of working plans and progress of compensatory afforestation are   regularly

111th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/111threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:46]
 monitored by the Ministry. The position as on 01.07.2002 is as under:
                       
Sl.
No.
Name of the State No. of  Forest Divisions No. of Divisions for which Working Plans have been prepared.
1. Arunachal Pradesh 21 11 W.P. & 11 W.S
2. Assam 25 9
3. Meghalaya 3 3 W.P. & 3 W.S
4. Manipur 8 -
5. Mizoram 11 3
6. Nagaland 9               19 W.S
7. Tripura 9 3
8. Sikkim 4 1
              TOTAL 90 30 Working Plans
33 Working Schemes
 
                        W.P. – Working Plan
                        W.S. – Working Scheme
 
b)         Targets of Compensatory Afforestation
The position as on 01.09.2002 is as under:
 
Sl.No Name of State Target of C.A. Achievement as on 01.07.2002 (ha)
1. Arunachal Pradesh 5085 2014
2. Assam 2338 1377
3. Meghalaya 266 256
4. Manipur    1   0
5. Mizoram 8574 3977
6. Nagaland   -  -
7. Tripura 1401 588
8. Sikkim 1953 1846
         TOTAL 19618 10058
 
Regular review of the implementation of the various Supreme Court orders with regard to North –Eastern States is undertaken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests with the
 respective State Governments.  Continuous monitoring of progress of working plan preparations for different States is also being done.  The States have been impressed upon to fully
 achieve the targets of the compensatory afforestation.
Comments
            The Committee observes that no working plan or scheme has been prepared in case of Manipur and there has been no achievement regarding compensatory afforestation in
 respect of Manipur and Nagaland.  This needs to be looked into.
WILD LIFE PROTECTION
Recommendation
During its visit to Andaman & Nicobar Islands the Committee was apprised of poaching and smuggling of sea cucumber and other marine products by Vessels from Myanmar,
 Indonesia, Thailand and other neighbouring countries.  There were reports of large scale felling of trees in Diglipur and Mayabunder Islands by old revenue settlers and encroachers as
 well.  One of the reasons attributed to this was existence of ineffective enforcement infrastructure. Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Ministry should create necessary
 enforcement infrastructure both within protected areas and outside protected areas to prevent poaching.
(Para 8.2)
Action taken by the Ministry
Sea cucumbers are included in Schedule 1 of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 w.e.f. 11
th July, 2001 and enjoy full protection under the provisions of the Act.  Protection of marine
 wealth in the Exclusive Economic Zone is the mandate of the Coast Guards.  The Coast Guards, with the help of forest officials, do regular patrolling of the area.
There are reports of large scale felling of trees in Diglipur and Mayabunder Island by old revenue settlers and encroachers.  To prevent the illegal activities, intensive patrolling is done
 by the forest staff of these islands.  To augment the protection and conservation efforts the Central Government provides technical and financial assistance to State Governments. 
 Under Biosphere Reserve scheme an amount of Rs. 2.50 Crore has been sanctioned during 2001-02 to procure a sea worthy boat for effective patrolling in Great Nicobar Biosphere
 Reserve.  Also during the Xth  Plan period a fresh scheme for protection of the wildlife resource has been started in the name, “Protection of wildlife outside the protected areas’.  This

111th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/111threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:46]
 would further strengthen the protection efforts being made. 
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
 Recommendation
            The Committee believes that the “Wild Life (protection) Act, 1972”, is a comprehensive Act.  The provisions regarding punishment for violation of the Act are quite stringent. 
 However, these do not appear to have been enforced effectively because of the inadequacy of field formations both in number and in terms of efficiency in detection of wild life crime
 and successful prosecution.   Intelligence gathering infrastructure is more or less absent.  The problem appears to have been further compounded by the ban on filling of vacant posts
 and the tardy flow of funds to the field level.
(Para 9)
            The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take up immediate steps in co-ordination with various State Governments at the highest level to fill up all the vacant posts
 at the filed level and provide the enforcement staff with adequate mobility, communications network and sophisticated arms.
(Para 9.1)
            The Committee notes with concern that a number of policy recommendations are yet to be considered by the Union Government.  For example, the recommendation of the
 Subramaniam Committee for the Prevention of Illegal Trade in Wildlife has been lying with the government since 1994.  The Ministry should examine the Report in right earnest and
 devise a policy for conservation  - both for scientific or participatory management.
 (Para 9.2)
Action taken by the Ministry
            The Central Government has taken this issue with the State Governments.  The Hon’ble Prime Minister had also expressed serious concern about increased killing of wild
 animals like tiger, panther, elephant, rhino musk deer and other species.  He has written to Chief Minister of all States/UTs on 29.3.2001 regarding filling up of the vacant posts at
 various level in the Forest Department, need for up-gradation of the skills of the staff both in respect of prevention of wildlife crime and successful prosecution of the offenders and
 also developing an effective mechanism for intelligence gathering.  Copy of the letter is placed as Annexure-I.
            Recently Twenty First meeting of the Indian Board for Wild Life was held on 21.1.2002 under the Chairmanship of Hon’ble Prime Minister when the Board adopted a 18 point
 resolution ‘Wildlife Conservation Strategy 2002’ for effective conservation of wildlife.  A copy of the resolution is at Annexure-II.  Item (13) of the resolution concerns with filling up
 of the vacant posts in the frontlines staff of protected areas and providing infrastructure for efficient discharge of duties.  Accordingly, Secretary, E&F has addressed Chief Secretaries
 of all the States/UTs for initiating immediate action for the implementation of the Wildlife Conservation Strategy 2002. Copy of the letter is at Annexure –III.
            As recommended by the Subramanian Committee report of August 1994, this Ministry has already created a Wildlife Crime Cell on 5.3.2002.  A copy of the order is at
 Annexure-IV.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
 
Bt. COTTON & ISSUES RELATED THERETO
Recommendation
            The Committee feels that a satisfactory system of assessing the risks associated with the release of genetically modified (GM) plants; micro organisms, animals and marine
 organisms into the environment must be evolved.  Certain grey areas still exist in the field of genetically modified foods, particularly for people who have food allergies, because they
 are neither subjected to tests nor controlled.  There is thus a need to adopt a cautious approach.
(Para 11)
Action taken by the Ministry
In order to contain possible hazards to environment from the release of Genetically Modified Organisms, the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) has notified  in December
 1989, the ‘Rules for the manufacture, use, import, export and storage of hazardous Micro-organisms/Genetically Engineered Organisms or Cells, under the Environment (Protection)
 Act (EPA) 1986.These Rules are being implemented through a three tiered mechanism:
Institutional Biosafety Committees (IBSCs) at the institutional  level.
Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) in the DBT
Genetic Engineering Approval Committee (GEAC) in the MoEF
The Government is following a policy of case by case approval of transgenic crops. Introduction of any new technology requires careful evaluation and long term sustainable benefits.
 Extensive Rules and guidelines have been framed for evaluating environmental and health safety aspects of genetically modified organisms. Any company involved in the use of
 genetic engineering techniques has to obtain approval of the Review Committee on Genetic Manipulation (RCGM) for conducting testing under laboratory conditions and confined
 field conditions. Thereafter approval of GEAC is required for large scale field trials and introduction to environment.
The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has set up an Expert Committee on Genetically Modified (GM) Foods, to inter-alia:
suggest the structure and capacity required for regulating GM foods in this country from the point of view of consumer health;
identify the parameters on which risk assessment, if any, is required to be done for GM food – both imported and domestically produced and to spell out the modalities for doing so;
advise the Government on risk assessment issues relating to GM foods and to undertake review of such products, where considered necessary.
Further  action  would  be  taken  in  accordance  with  the  recommendation  of  this Committee as and when received.
Comments

111th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/111threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:46]
            The Committee notes the position.
 
OLIVE RIDLEY TURTLE AT GAHIRMATHA BEACH IN ORISSA
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that the non-usage of Turtle Excluder Devices (TEDs) is turning the Gahirmatha beach in Orissa into the largest graveyard for turtles.  Although, the use
 of TEDs has been made mandatory in the State, but trawler operators continue to flout norms with impunity.  The Ministry of Environment and Forests should take-up this issue on
 priority basis in coordination with the State Governments and take steps to strictly enforce the usage of turtle excluder devices (TEDs). 
(Para 13)
Action taken by the Ministry
            Although the use of Turtle Excluder Device has been made mandatory requisite but adequate number of these devices are not available in the market.  Central Institute of
 Fisheries, Nautical Engineering and Training, Cochin has finalized the design of Turtle Excluder Device. 
The Institute at present is involved in the process of popularizing the design of the Turtle Excluder Device and improving its availability. Meanwhile, Fisheries Department of Orissa is
 ensuring that the trawlers which have procured Turtle Excluder Devices use them regularly.
Comments
            The Committee feels that there should be an emphasis on data collection and monitoring programmes to gather information on the nature and magnitude of threats to the turtle
 population.  Besides, the installation of TEDs should be made mandatory on all boats and the development of these devices should be done on priority basis.
           
TAJ PROTCTION MISSION
Recommendation
            The Committee is of the view that the levels of both the pollutants might not have come down due to the pollution load of the Mathura Oil Refinery.  The rise in SPM and SO2
 levels has also been caused because of the heavy vehicles going via Agra.  The Ministry should also examine recommendations of the Vardarajan Committee, appointed by the
 Supreme Court to look into Taj Pollution, which remain unimplemented while checking out various programmes under the Taj Protection Mission.
(Para 15)
Action taken by the Ministry
            The annual average level of SO
2 was as high as 21ug/M3 in 1991, which has come down to 10 ug/m3. The annual average level of NOx was as high as 12 ug/M3 in 1991, which
 has come down to 9 ug/m3. The annual average level of SPM was as high as about 515ug/M3 in 1991, which has come down to about 351 ug/m3. It would be pertinent to point out
 that even the background levels of SPM assuming the complete absence of industrial, vehicular and SPM emitting from the domestic activity, would be above the prescribed levels of
 70ug/m
3. These are due to certain natural conditions that are prevailing in the vicinity such as proximity of the Thar desert in Rajasthan, agricultural activity such as tilling, &
 ploughing and  barren land coupled with blowing winds, pollen of crops, and flowering plants which contribute to the levels of SPM. The low humidity prevalent in this region also
 promotes formation of SPM. One of the most effective economical and useful approach for control of environmental pollution is by tree plantation.  The forests have been described as
 the "green lungs" of the earth.  The project has envisaged plantation in 1244 hectares of land. Plantation has already been completed in 1015 hectares of land. Action has been taken, as
 directed by the Supreme Court for pollution control in the Mathura Refinery and other sources of pollution. 10 schemes have been taken up by the U.P. State Government with funding
 from the Central and the State Governments for control of pollution in the TTZ Area for protection of the Taj Mahal from the environmental pollution. Besides these, the State
 Government is also formulating some more schemes for implementation under the Center-State financing for the protection of the Taj Mahal.  Mathura Refinery has taken various
 pollution control measures viz. setting up of hydro cracker unit and various other devices by which the pollution load from the Refinery has come down .  The Refinery has made an
 investment of Rs. 700.00 crores for technological up gradation/ pollution control equipment for the reduction of SO
2.   As per CPCB report the refinery emits 250-350 kgs./hr. of SO2
 against the prescribed standard of 450 kg/hr.  Attempt has been made by the UP State Government to control the emission  from the  vehicular transportation via  Agra on  National
 and State Highways.  The  Agra bye-pass has been  widened up to 4.70 metres  which act as an alternative route for the transportation of vehicles from Delhi to Gwalior.   
            In response to the Supreme Court's order of 3
rd August, 1995, the Ministry of Environment and Forests, in consultation with all the stakeholders including the State
 Government of Uttar Pradesh, prepared various schemes for the protection of the Taj Mahal. These schemes were submitted to the Supreme Court after the detailed examination of the
 NEERI and Vardharajan Report. The Planning Commission, in consultation with the State Government allocated an amount of Rs.600 crores on a 50:50 per cent (Centre-State)
 matching basis to implement various schemes relating to protection of the Taj Mahal. A separate cell to oversee the progress of the Schemes for which allocation was made by the
 Planning Commission and on behalf of the Central and State Governments, a Mission Management Board (MMB) has been constituted under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary,
 UP. The Ministry of Environment and Forests has vide Notification S.O. No.350 (E), dated 17.5.1999 constituted an Authority known as the Taj Trapezium Zone Pollution
 (Prevention and Control) Authority for monitoring the implementation of various projects undertaken under Taj Protection Mission Scheme. The Mission Management Board
 submitted schemes, as mentioned in Para 14 for the environmental protection of the Taj Mahal.
Comments
            While the Committee notes the reply, it is of the view that no satisfactory improvement appears to have been made by the Government of Uttar Pradesh and Ministry of
 Environment & Forests for control of environmental pollution for the protection of Taj Mahal.  The Committee has observed during its study visit to Agra on 27.10.2002 that inspite of
 allocation of Rs.600 crores by Planning Commission in consultation with the State Government, not much appears to have  been done either in the protection of Taj Mahal from
 environmental hazards or in keeping the surroundings clean.

111th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/111threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:46]
 
VEHICULAR POLLUTION CONTROL MEASURES
Recommendation
            The Committee is of the view that the Ministry of Environment & Forests have adequate powers under section 5 of the Air Act, 1981, and the Environment (Protection) Act to
 enforce more stringent standards for pollution at hot spots.  Apart from the instance of 1997, when it notified the first ever fuel quality norms, the Ministry has never made its presence
 felt.  It has never discouraged the use of diesel by the Indian auto sector.  There has thus been no show of commitment or initiative on the part of the Ministry.
(Para 17)
Action taken by the Ministry
            For control of vehicular pollution, the Ministry of  Environment and Forests has played a major coordinating role with the concerned Ministries and its associated
 bodies/organizations including the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways, the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and the Ministry of Heavy Industry & Public Enterprises for
 up-gradation of automobile technology, supply of improved quality fuel, expansion of urban public transport systems and promotion of integrated traffic management.
            In 1991, for the first time the emission norms for motor vehicles were notified by Ministry of Environment & Forests under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986. The
 progressive stringent emission norms known as Bharat Stage I and II norms akin to Euro I and II have been notified under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 by the Ministry of Road
 Transport & Highways, for which this Ministry played a major role being the member of the standing committee for emission legislation.  Euro I norms were made effective in the
 entire country from 1.4.2000 for all categories of vehicles.  The more stringent Bharat Stage II norms for four wheelers were made effective in Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai in
 a phased manner where the increasing air pollution is attributed to automobile population boom.
            The Ministry notified specification of fuel (Petrol as well as diesel) for emission related parameters on 2
nd April, 1996 commensurate with Euro I norms.  Unleaded petrol has
 been introduced in Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata and Chennai from 1.4.1995 and only unleaded petrol is being supplied in the entire country from1.2.2000.  Diesel with 0.25% sulphur
 content (maximum) was introduced in metros from 1.4.1998 and only this quality diesel is being supplied in the entire country from 1.1.2000.  Ministry of Environment & Forests has
 also notified specification of 2-T Oil for  2 & 3 wheelers and is effective in the entire country from 1.4.1999.  Only pre mixed 2T Oil is supplied in Delhi from 31.12.1998.  Petrol and
 diesel with 0.05% sulphur content (maximum) has been introduced from 1.4.2000 in Delhi, from 1.1.2001 in Mumbai and from 1.7.2001 in Kolkata & Chennai.  Petrol with 1%
 Benzene maximum is made available in the NCT of Delhi from 1.11.2000 and from 1.1.2001 in Mumbai.  Petrol with 3% Benzene maximum is made available in Kolkata and
 Chennai from 1.4.2000.
            Further, keeping in view the environmental health effects attributed to emissions from diesel driven vehicles, the Government has taken various measures to discourage the use
 of diesel by the Indian auto sector. These include the following:
Promotion of CNG, LPG and Propane as auto fuel as contained in the action plans prepared by the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
Adoption of CNG as auto fuel and notification of emission norms for CNG driven vehicles under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (administered by the Ministry of Road Transport &
 Highways ) which is effective from 9.2.2000.
Adoption of LPG as auto fuel and notification of emission norms for LPG driven vehicles under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (administered by the Ministry of Road Transport &
 Highways) which is effective from 24.5.2001.
Fiscal incentives for promoting the use of CNG, LPG and Propane as auto fuel by extending custom duty concession for CNG, LPG and Propane kits and its parts.
Comments
            While the Committee notes the reply of the Ministry it observes that despite the efforts made by the Ministry the magnitude of the problem contains to be enormous and metros
 like Delhi have become a place unfit to live because of the choking smoke engulfing over them.  The efforts to remedy the problem need to be accelerated.
Recommendation
            The Ministry of Environment & Forest’s 1997 white paper on pollution in Delhi is little more than a common position of all the other Union government agencies concerned,
 such as Ministry of Industry, Ministry of Surface Transport and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural gas.  It does nothing more to push for CNG than propose government tradition of
 making toothless but politically correct suggestions.
(Para 17.1)
Action taken by the Ministry
            Keeping in view the increasing environmental pollution, the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) has prepared a white paper on Pollution in Delhi with an Action Plan
 in 1997 after having a series of interactive meetings with concerned Government agencies, NGOs, experts and citizens, with the objective of defining a plan of action to combat
 pollution.  Action plan also emphasizes planning and development of infrastructure to mitigate pollution.   Apart from the activities outlined in the action plan, specific measures
 relating to control of vehicular pollution have been particularly emphasized by the Ministry of Environment and Forests in its deliberations with various Government and NGOses on
 the subject of control of pollution in Delhi.  These include adoption of clean fuel such as CNG as an auto fuel and conversion of commercial taxis and public transport vehicles on
 CNG mode.
            White Paper also envisages measures for control of pollution in Delhi from other sectors as well i.e., water, solid waste management, industrial, noise, institutional and planning
 aspects, public participation and general awareness etc.
            Apart from several steps taken for control of vehicular pollution as given in para 17 above, the Ministry of Environment and Forests has made efforts/coordination activities
 with the Nodal Ministries / Agencies to adopt and use CNG as auto fuel in Delhi.  These include:
Environment Pollution (Prevention and Control) Authority (EPCA) for the National Capital Region was constituted by the Ministry for improving the quality of environment and
 preventing, controlling and abating environment pollution.

111th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/111threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:46]
In the matter of control of vehicular pollution the EPCA in consultation with the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Central Pollution Control Board and Government of NCT of
 Delhi recommended measures inter alia restriction of plying of diesel vehicles and use of CNG as auto fuel for buses, commercial taxis and autos.  These recommendations were
 endorsed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in its order dated 28th July, 1998.
All commercial/transport vehicles which are more than 20 years has been phased out after 2.10.1998, 17 to 19 years old vehicles has been phased out after 15.11.1998 and 15 and 16
 years old vehicles has been phased out after 31.12.1998.
More than 8 years old buses (diesel drive) are not allowed to ply on Delhi except on clean fuels from 1.4.2000.
Entire city bus fleet (diesel driven) has been asked to convert to single fuel mode on CNG from 31.3.2001.
All pre 1990 autos and taxis were ordered to replace them with new vehicles on clean fuels by 31.3.2000.
For successful implementation of expansion of CNG project in Delhi, Indraprastha Gas Limited (IGL)-a joint venture company of Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited and Gas
 Authority of India Limited was incorporated in December 1998.
When the IGL was incorporated in Delhi there were only 9 CNG stations one station on IGL land and the remaining 8 stations on oil company’s existing petrol pumps.  IGL has setup
 86 additional CNG stations in record time of 3 years with an investment of more than Rs. 220 crores.  Ten stations are exclusively dedicated to DTC depots.  The CNG sale is 4.55
 lakh kg/day in June, 2002 from the CNG outlets (27 Mother stations, 13 on line station, 26 Daughter-Booster stations and 29 Daughter stations).
As on April, 2002 there are 53, 479 vehicles including 4463 buses are plying on CNG mode.
From 6
th April, 2002 diesel driven buses are permitted to ply only after depositing the requisite costs.  Rs. 17,03,50,500/- (Rupees Seventeen crore three lakh fifty thousand and five
 hundred only ) has been realised as cost from diesel buses.
As on 4
th July, 2002, 4286 diesel buses has been phased out from Delhi.
 
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
            The Committee is of the view that Environmental regulation through Courts has serious drawbacks.  Judicial intervention is most effective in correcting bureaucratic conduct
 when it is selective and surgical, but in significant environmental litigations such as the Ganga Pollution Case, the Vehicular Pollution Case and Taj Trapezium Case the administrative
 agency – the Ministry of Environment & Forests has been reduced to preparing only knee-jerk responses to judicial orders.  The Committee believes that despite more than a decade of
 judicial activism, there is no evidence to show that the Pollution Control Boards, Department of Forests or the Ministry  have become institutionally stronger, or more capable of
 discharging  their responsibilities today. 
(Para 17.2)
Action taken by the Ministry
            Section 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 empowers the Central Government in the Ministry of Environment and Forests to issue directions in writing to any person,
 officer or authority  for the purpose of implementation of the objective of the EP Act namely, protection and improvement of environment and for matters connected therewith.  These
 directions include the power to direct (a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any industry, operation or process; or (b) stoppage or regulation of the supply of electricity or water
 or any other service.
            The powers under Section 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 have been delegated by the Ministry to the Central Pollution Control Board, State Pollution Control
 Boards and Pollution Control Committees and State Governments to issue directions to the polluting units for compliance with pollution control norms.
            The State Pollution Control Boards and Pollution Control Committees issue directions under section 33 A of the Water (Prevention and control of pollution) Act, 1974 and
 Section 31 A of the Air (Prevention and control of pollution) Act, 1981 to the polluting units for compliance with the pollution  control norms.  The  Central  Pollution  Control  Board
 issue  directions  under section 5 of the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 to the polluting units for compliance with the pollution control norms.  The Central Pollution Control
 Board also issue directions under section 18 (1)(b) of the Water (Prevention and control of pollution) Act, 1974 and / or the Air (Prevention and control of Pollution) Act, 1981 to the
 State Pollution Control Boards and Pollution Control Committees for enforcement of pollution control norms. 
            The Central Pollution Control Board has issued 447 directions to various polluting industries for compliance with pollution control norms under section 5 of the Environment
 (Protection) Act, 1986.  The Central Pollution Control Board also issued 747 directions under Section 18(1)(b) of the Water (Prevention and control of pollution) Act, 1974 and/or the
 Air (Prevention and control of pollution) Act, 1981 to the State Pollution Control Boards and Pollution Control Committees for enforcement of pollution control norms.
            The State Pollution Control Boards/Pollution Control Committees have taken legal action against the defaulting industries.  About 5677 cases have been filed under the Water
 (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 and about 1667 cases have been filed under the Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981.
            For strengthening of the Pollution Control Boards/Committees for effective implementation of Environmental Laws, the following steps have been taken as per the Coimbatore
 Charter resolved in the Conference of State Environment Ministers held during 29-30 January, 2001 at Coimbatore.
Induction of academicians, legal professionals etc, in the Boards/Committees.
Appointment of multi-disciplinary staff.
Training of Personnel.
Streamlining of consent/authorization procedures.
 Formulation of annual action plans
Preparation of State of Environment Reports.

111th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/111threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:46]
Strengthening and upgradation of water and air quality monitoring and laboratory facilities.
 
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
            The Committee is aware of the Supreme Court’s orders on April 5, 2002 regarding plying of all public transport vehicles on CNG in Delhi being implemented by concerned
 agencies but at the same time the Committee is constrained to note the sad plight of commuters who continue to suffer.  As a result of the judicial pronouncement and the consequent
 steps taken by the Government, the commuters continue to suffer with no immediate steps in sight being taken by the government to address their problems.  On the other hand
 transporters seem to be bent upon to exploit them by over charging and making their journeys uncomfortable and costlier.  The Traffic Police as the Press reports suggest, are
 exploiting the situation by forcing the operators to grease their palm.  The Committee feels that the Apex Court should have foreseen these realities being pronouncing an order.
                                                                                                                                (Para 17.3)
Action taken by the Ministry
            As per the Supreme Court’s Order on April 5, 2002 regarding plying of all public transport vehicles on CNG in Delhi, 800 diesel buses are being phased out every month.  The
 Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) has equipped Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) with a new fleet of 2130 CNG buses and it has been decided to
 purchase another 1000 CNG buses.  At the same time a number of buses are switching over to the CNG mode.  As on 23.6.2002, the total number of CNG buses plying on Delhi roads
 are about 5687.  State Transport Authority (STA) has already announced allotment of State carriage (Route) Permits for 1088 buses to ply on routes of their choice.  In addition, a
 scheme for allotment of routes of choice to mini  buses (RTVs, Hari Bhari etc.,) has also been approved.  There has been an encouraging response from owners / operators to this
 scheme.
            Cases / instances of overcharging coming to notice are being dealt under the respective provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act. 
Comments
            While lthe Committee notes the reply, it observes that there is too much shortage of CNG Buses with DTC in the capital particualrly in trans yamuna and far flung colonies and
 the commuters continuing to suffer at the hands of privte transporters.
 
FOREST CONSERVATION, DEVELOPMENT & REGENERATION
Recommendation
The Committee is of the view that the Supreme Court order merely seeks to enforce the law laid down by the government.  Ban on felling of trees is permitted under the Forest
 Conservation Act, 1980 but only a working plan has been approved by the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests.  However, hardly any state appears to have implemented the
 provision.  The order was being misinterpreted to bureaucratise forests.   Since the order asks for a clear definition and identification of forest, some state government have taken this
 as an opportunity to gain control over large areas that remain ‘unclassified’ even today in the Northeast.  Forest officials, who wanted to do away with ‘unclassified’ forests, see this as
 a chance to alienate local people by claiming ownership, which were otherwise under the control of the community.
 (Para 19)
Action taken by the Ministry
            According to Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 diversion of any forest land for non forest activity, its assignment by way of lease to private persons or removal of vegetation
 thereupon requires approval of the Central Government under the provision of Section 2 of the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980.  The category under which forests fall have no
 relevance as far as application of this section of Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 is concerned.
            The directions of the Supreme court that every forest is worked according to a Working Plan basically goes in the favour of tribals because they continue to get access to the
 usufruct like, fuel, fodder, fruits, seeds, etc on a sustained basis.
It is submitted that out of 620 Working Plans remaining Working Plans are also in the process of preparation and sanction of the schemes for infrastructure support to the Forest
 Department would go a long way to expedite the process.
 Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
            The Committee observes that forests in the country continue to be the victims of apathy and inadequate management in the country.  Besides the categorization of forests in
 reserved, protected and village forests, which are essentially administrative categories, does not help in their growth.  The “State of the Forest Report”. Does  not  give a detailed
 classification of India’s forests, the percentage of Natural or pristine and plantation areas, which would be of interest and use to both environmentalists and wood based industry.  The
 neglect of forests has resulted into loss of produce with reported smuggling by mafias, fires – which are termed deliberate.  This has affected their growth as it discourages
 participation of the people.  While tribals in some parts of the country have a right to enter the forests and take a part of the produce, mainly wood, for meeting their bonafide
 requirements, it appears to the Committee that this has not helped in the growth of forests because the denser the forest, the more is the alienation – tribal people are refused entry into
 forests; they cannot cultivate land they believe is theirs.  It is simple.  People want livelihood through forest but government wants control over forests.  The Committee therefore feels
 that it is time the forests are taken out completely from the bureaucratic control and managed by direct participation of the people preferably through cooperatives.  There is thus a
 need to take a dynamic initiative for the management of the forests so that the objectives of the forest policy could be met with direct involvement of the people in the management
 and growth of forests.
(Para 19.1)

111th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/111threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:46]
Action taken by the Ministry
            Forest cover of the country is assessed biennially since 1987 by Forest Survey of India with the help of satellite data.  The result of the assessment are published as ‘State of
 Forest Report’.  The assessment is done on the basis of reflectance from the forest as per growth of the crown and its chlorophyll content which is broadly classified in three classes
 i.e. dense forest       ( 40% and above density),  open forest (between 10 to 40% density) and mangroves forest which have characteristic tone, texture and unique ecological functions. 
 The technology do not permit to give the extent of natural or pristine forests in the country.  However, latest State of Forest Report, 1999 gives details about the total cumulative
 plantation area in various States on the basis of Reports compiled by the Ministry from the information furnished by the State Governments. 
            The JFM Programme of the ministry has strong presence in the tribal areas and around 12 lakhs (of the total 28 lakhs) tribal families in the management of forest through 63000
 JFM Committees covering an area of 14 mha of forests.  The programme has empowered people to manage the forests by themselves through village level institution.
Comments
            The Committee observes that the provision of the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 should not be invoked to alienate the people who had been living in the forests for a long
 time.  The Committee reiterates that with the active participation of the local people, the forest laws can be better implemented.
            Though the Committee feels that Governments move to alienate the tribal people is against their right to livelihood.
Recommendation
            The Committee further observes that the Forest (Conservation) Act is only regulatory in nature and has enough flexibility to meet the development needs of the State
 Government.  Therefore, there is no need to amend the Forest (Conservation) Act.  However, there is a need to re-examine issues under the Indian Forest Act, 1927 so that it takes care
 of the definition of forests.
                                    (Para 21)
Action taken by the Ministry
            The revision of India Forest Act, 1927 is under active consideration of the Ministry in which various directions of the Hon’ble Court have been examined.  Comments of
 various Ministries on the draft of the Indian Forest Act are under active examination of the Ministry.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
 
SUNDERBAN MANGROVES
Recommendation
            The Committee is of the view that the entire Sunderbans is one eco-system and for wild animals, physical boundaries have no relevance.  The tigers move in their entire home
 range, irrespective of these boundaries.  If the food availability is improved and habitat is better managed, the home ranges get reduced and trans-boundary migration gets minimised. 
 However, in the interest of the long term conservation of Sunderbans, the Ministry of Environment & Forests should devise Management Plans which may involve joint effort of India
 and Bangladesh.
(Para 23)
Action taken by the Ministry
            An umbrella project covering Sundarban both in India and Bangladesh addressing conservation issues and the stake holder communities is being launched.  This project is titled
 ‘Biodiversity Management in Sundarbans’ and is funded by UNEP/UNDP.  The project has an ecosystem approach and would lead to an integrated Conservation Development Project
 for Sunderbans in both States.  GEF fund would be leveraged for the project.
Comments
            The Committee is happy to note that both India and Bangladesh are working together to protect the eco-system and Biodiversity of Sunderban.  However, the Committee feels
 that as the deterioration of Sunderban affects both countries, there should be a workable and coordinated approach to be followed in order to save Sunderbans.
BIOMEDICAL WASTE MANAGEMENT
Recommendation
            The Committee recommends that the Ministry should co-ordinate with the State Governments / State Pollution Control Boards (SPCBs) to ensure that Bio-medical waste
 generating units are set up along with the treatment facilities and they obtain authorisation from the SPCBs.
(Para 25)
Action taken by the Ministry
            The Committee has suggested that the Ministry should co-ordinate with State Government/State Pollution Control Board (SPCBs) to ensure that all Biomedical Waste
 generating units obtain authorization and set up treatment facilities.  The Ministry of Environment  & Forests has constituted a Steering Committee to examine the issues pertaining to
 the implementation of Bio-medical Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 1998 & amendments thereof.  A meeting of the Steering Committee is being held on 24 July 2002 in
 which, inter-alia, the status of implementation of the Rules including issuing of authorizations, setting up of common treatment facilities for the benefit of small hospitals, etc., would
 be reviewed.  Depending on policy decisions taken in the meeting, the mater would be pursued with the State Governments and State Pollution Control Boards.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
 
JHUM/SHIFTING CULTIVATION    
 Recommendation

111th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/111threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:46]
            The Committee believes that the national Forest Action Programme in respect of shifting cultivation needs to be rationalised by Settled Cultivation with tree farming under
 various agro-forestry systems.  Rationalisation of Shifting cultivation should be approached in a holistic manner, covering the socio-cultural and economic aspects and issues relating
 to the land tenure.
(Para 27)
Action taken by the Ministry
            The Ministry has already constituted a Task Force to address to the issues of rationalizing the practices of shifting cultivation.  The report of this Task Force is in the
 finalization stage.  The recommendations of the Task Forces would be considered by the Ministry after the final Report is received. 
            Meanwhile, the National Afforestation Programme in the Xth Plan encourages settled cultivation in the Jhum lands through regeneration.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
 ANNEXURES
Annexure – I
Prime Minister
New Delhi
March 29, 2001
 
Dear Shri
            In recent years, there has been an increase in the number of killing of wild animals like tiger, panther, elephant, rhino, musk deer and other species.  Several cases of illegal
 export of wildlife products derived from various species have been detected from time to time.  This is a matter of great concern.
            One of the major reasons for decline in standards of wildlife protection is the large number of vacancies at various levels in the filed formations of the Forest Department and
 need for greater commitment on part of the officials.  Certain States have made drastic cuts in the number of sanctioned posts in the Department and have also banned filling up of
 vacant posts.  Allocations to this sector have been grossly inadequate.  There is also need for up gradation of the skills of the staff both in respect of prevention of wildlife crime and
 successful prosecution of the offenders. An effective mechanism for intelligence gathering needs to be developed and steps for designating special courts for trying wildlife offences
 taken.  Further, effective infrastructure for communication, adequate mobility and supplicated weapons have to be made available to the forest staff if we want to protect and conserve
 our flora and fauna.
I hope after a review of the situation relating to your State, the issues mentioned above would receive your personal attention so that wildlife protection gets the priority it deserves.
With regards,
 
 
Yours sincerely,
 
( A. B. Vajpayee)
Annexure-II
WILD LIFE CONSERVATION STRATEGY 2002
 
Wildlife and forests shall be declared priority sector at the national level for which funds should be earmarked.
Law enforcement agencies must ensure that those engaged in poaching, illicit trade in wildlife products, destruction of their habitat, and such other illegal activities are given quick and
 deterrent punishment.
We should fully tap the potential in wildlife tourism and at the same time take care that it does not have adverse impact in wildlife and protected areas.  The revenue earned from
 increased tourism should be used entirely to augment available resources for conservation.
Protecting interests of the poor and tribals living around protected areas should be handled with sensitivity and with maximum participation of the affected people.  They should have
 access to the minor forest produce, in the forest outside of national parks and sanctuaries.  Employment and means generation for these people is crucial for maintaining symbiosis
 between the forests, wildlife and the people.  People should be encouraged to take up aforestation and conservation in new areas.
While strengthening protective measures against traditional threats to wildlife, we should also respond to newer threats such as toxic chemicals and pesticides.
There should be greater governmental as well as societal recognition and support for the many non-governmental organizations engaged in wildlife conservation.  Mainstream media to
 better highlight their activities as also successes of governmental initiatives that have worked.
Creatively produced Television Programmes on wildlife and ecology are widely appreciated by young and old as seen from the popularity of dedicated T.V. channels like, Discovery,
 National Geographic and Animals Planet.  It is proposed that Prasar Bharati and our private channels alongwith with agencies like WWF for Nature should collaborate and increase
 original Indian content in different languages on our television.
No diversion of forest land for non-forest purposes from critical and ecologically fragile wildlife habitat shall be allowed.
Lands falling within 10 km. of the boundaries of National Parks and Sanctuaries should be notified as eco-fragile zones under section 3(v) of the Environment (Protection) Act and

111th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/111threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:46]
 Rule 5 Sub-rule 5 (viii) & (x) of the Environment (Protection) Rules.
Removal of encroachments and illegal activities from within forest lands and Protected Areas.
No commercial mono-culture to replace natural forests.
The settlement of rights in National Parks and Sanctuaries should not be used to exclude or reduce the areas that are crucial and integral part of the wildlife habitat.
More than 2000 vacant posts in the frontline staff of Protected Areas shall be filled immediately and provided basic infrastructure for efficient discharge of duties.  Ban on recruitment
 of staff against vacant post should be lifted on lines with the Police Department Innovative initiative such as redeployment of surplus employees in other departments, hiring local
 people on voluntary or honorarium basis, raising donations from business houses and other members of the public in return for a greater role for them in implementing programmes
 need to be explored.
Every protected area should be managed by forest officers trained in wildlife management.
Mitigation measures for human-animal conflict and mechanism for crop insurance as also expeditious disbursements of ex-gratia payments, should be instituted by States.
Forest Commission should be set-up to look into restructuring, reform and strengthening the entire forest set up and affiliated institutions in the country.
A working group shall be constituted to monitor implementation of Wildlife Action Plan.
Most importantly let us all resolve that we should end the relative neglect of wildlife conservation in recent years.  To begin with Board should meet more often.  Wildlife conservation
 is too important a task to be treated lightly or ritualistically.
 
P. V. JAYAKRISHNAN
Secretary
 
 
 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
PARYAVARAN BHAWAN
C.G.O. COMPLEX, LODI ROAD,
NEW DELHI-110003
 
 
D.O. No. 6-2/2002-WL-1                                                                           1
st February, 2002
 
Dear Smt. Shailja Chandra,
 
            The XXI meeting of the Indian Board for Wild Life was held on 21
st January, 2002 under the Chairmanship of the Hon’ble Prime Minister.  In his address to the members of
 the Board the Prime Minister expressed serious concern on the declining status of wildlife protection.  He gave a clarion call to the State Governments to end the era of the relative
 neglect of wildlife conservation and make concerted efforts for effective protection of the natural eco-systems which are so crucial for long term welfare of mankind.  After detailed
 deliberations, the Board adopted “Wildlife Conservation Strategy 2002” a copy of which is enclosed.  The salient features of the strategy area:
Wildlife and forests should be declared priority sector at the national level with earmarked funds.
Field formations of the forest department should be strengthened immediate filling of more than 2000 vacant post and redeployment of surplus employees in other departments to the
 forest and wildlife sector.  Ban on the recruitment of staff against vacant posts should be lifted on the lines of police department.
All the protected areas should be managed by the forests officers trained in wildlife management.
Local people should be involved in conservation of forests and wildlife both on voluntary basis and through payment of wages/honorarium.
It must be ensured that the people indulging in poaching and illegal trade in wildlife products or destruction of their habitat get quick and deterrent punishment.
No diversion of forest land forming part of critically fragile wildlife habitats should be done for non-forestry purposes.  Integrity of national parks and sanctuaries is not to the
 compromised by excluding such areas during the settlement process.
Effective measures should be taken to meet the sustenance and livelihood needs of the communities living around national parks and sanctuaries through programmes that are
 compatible with the objectives of conservation.  People should be encouraged to carry out plantation outside government forests.
Hon’ble Prime Minister at this occasion also launched the National Wildlife Action Plan 2002-2016 which outlines areas of concern, strategies and the priority projects that are
 necessary to achieve the goal of wildlife conservation.  A copy of the Action Plan is enclosed for ready reference. May I request you to initiate immediate action for the
 implementation of the Wildlife Conservation Strategy 2002 and the National Wildlife Action Plan on priority basis particularly on the issues mentioned.
With regards,
 
Yours sincerely,
 
( P. V. JAYAKRISHNAN)
Smt. Shailja Chandra
Chief Secretary
Government of NCT of Delhi

111th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/111threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:46]
Delhi Secretariat
I.P. Estate, New Delhi-110 002
 
Encl: as above…
ANNEXURE IV
F.NO. 1-10/94-wl-1
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
Ministry of Environment & Forests
 
Paryavaran Bhavan,
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi – 110003
 
Dated the 5
th March, 2002
ORDER
 
            With the approval of competent authority, it has been decided to create a Wildlife Crime Cell in the Ministry.  The duties of the Wildlife Crime Cell will be as under:
Intelligence gathering on wildlife, poaching and illegal trade from various NGOs in the field of wildlife conservation and various enforcement agencies and intelligence organizations
 of Government of India.
Cell will also be responsible for collation, synthesis and interpretation and pass on the same to the most appropriate agency for enforcement action in consultation with Addl. DGF
 (Wildlife).
            The Wildlife Crime Cell will comprise of two officer of the rank of Joint Director in the scale of pay Rs.12000 – 16,650 / 10,325 – 15,200.  For the time being, Cell would
 operate from the Office of Director (Project Tiger).
 
( S. C. Sharma)
Addl. DGF (Wildlife)
Copy to:
 
PS to MEF
PPS to Secretary (E&F)
PPS to DGF&SS
PPS to Special Secretary
PPS to AS (G)
PPS to AS (SC)
All Joint Secretaries
MINUTE
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 11
th December, 2002 in Room No. 67, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.         Shri C. Ramachandraiah  –– Chairman
           
RAJYA SABHA
 
Shri Manoj Bhattacharya
Smt. S. Gokula Indira

111th Report
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/111threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:21:46]
Shri C. Apok Jamir
Shri M. V. Rajashekaran
Shri Dwijendra Nath Sharma
Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
 
LOK  SABHA
 
Smt. Margaret Alva                 
Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                            
Shri A. Venkatesh Naik                                               
Prof. R.R. Pramanik                            
Prof. I.G. Sanadi                                                                                 
Kunwar Akhilesh Singh            
Shri Ram Prasad Singh
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
Shri P.P.K. Ramacharyulu, Deputy Secretary
Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
2.                     The Committee took up consideration of the draft ***, ***, *** and 111
th Reports of the Committee on the Action taken by ***, ***, *** and Ministry of Environment
 & Forests on the recommendations/observations contained in the ***, ***, *** and One Hundred-fourth Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2002-2003). The
 Committee considered and adopted each of the reports. 
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri ­­­M.V.Rajashekaran to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Prof. R.R. Pramanik and in his absence Shri
 Ali Mohd. Naik to lay the Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha.
4.         *                                                          *                                                                   *
5.                     *                                                          *                                                                   *
6.         The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 P.M.
________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
27
# Nominated w.e.f. 4th January, 2002 
&  Nominated w.e.f. 24th April, 2002 
J Nominated w.e.f. 24th April, 2002 
*  Nominated w.e.f. 14th May, 2002
f  Nominated w.e.f. 23rd September, 2002.
b  Shri Peter Alphonse & Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray  ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of his term  in the  
   Rajya Sabha  w.e.f.  2nd  April, 2002.
¥ Smt. Chandresh Kumari and Shri Lachhman Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee on expiry of his term in the 
   Rajya Sabha  w.e.f. 9th  April, 2002.
§ Dr. C. Narayana Reddy ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.17th July, 2002.
% Nominated  w.e.f. 26th April , 2002.
 
 
(i)