86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
Parliament of India
 Rajya Sabha
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
 ON
  SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
86th REPORT
  ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2001-2002)  OF THEDEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL
 RESEARCH (MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY)  (DEMAND NO.69)
 (presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th April, 2001)
 (laid in the Lok Sabha on 18th April, 2001)   
   
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 April, 2001/Visakha, 1923  (Saka) 
C O N T E N T S   
1.     COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.     INTRODUCTION 
3.     REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                          
4.     SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
5.     ANNEXURES     
i)                    Budget Estimates for the year 2001-2002
ii)                   Replies to the questionnaire
6.      MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE        
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2001)
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah - Chairman
           
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri Debabrata Biswas
3.   Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
4. Shri K. C. Kondaiah
5.   Smt. Chandresh Kumari
6.   Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra                      

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
7.   Dr. D. Masthan                                    
8.   Shri Lalitbhai Mehta                             
9.   Prof.(Smt.) Bharati Ray            
10.  Smt. Savita Sharda
11.  Shri Birabhadra Singh                           
12.  Shri Lachhman Singh                            
13.  Shri B.P. Singhal                                              
14.  Shri Prakanta Warisa                            
15.  Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
  
            LOK  SABHA
 
16.  Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura
17.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                    
18.  Shri Vishwendra Singh Chauhan
19.  Smt. Bhavana Chikhaliya                      
20.  Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza                 
21.  Shri Laxman Giluwa                             
22.  Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
23.Shri Bali Ram Kashyap
24.  Shri Hassan Khan
25.  Dr. Charan Das Mahant
26.  Shri S. Murugesan                                
27.  Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
28.  Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                              
29.  Shri A. Venkatesh Naik            
30.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi             
31.  Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
32.  Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
33.  Shri Prahlad Patel                                 
34.  Prof. R.R. Pramanik                             
35.  Shri Naresh Puglia                                
36.  Shri Ramsagar Rawat                           
37.  Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy
38.  Prof. I.G. Sanadi                                              
39.  Shri Lakshman Seth                              
40.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh             

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
41.  Shri V.S. Sivakumar     
42.  Shri Vaiko
43.  Shri V. Vetriselvan                               
44.  Dr. (Smt.) Rajeswaramma Vukkala
45.  Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
      Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
      Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
      Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
      Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests, having
 been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Eighty-Sixth Report of the Committee.  This Report
 deals with  the detailed Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (Ministry of Science
 and Technology) (Demand No.69).
 
2.         In the meeting of the Committee held on the 29 th  March, 2001 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of Scientific and
 Industrial Research gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the
 performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
3.     The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the Members and
 placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific and
 Industrial Research. 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on  9th April, 2001. 
New Delhi;                                                                                                    C. RAMACHANDRAIAH,
April 9,2001                                                                                                                    Chairman,
                            Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests. 
 
R E P O R T
  
The Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (DSIR) which forms part of the Ministry of Science & Technology is entrusted with the
 task of undertaking activities/programmes in respect of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research; Schemes in specific areas of Scientific and
 Industrial Research such as Research and Development by Industry (RDI), Programme Aimed at Technological Self Reliance (PATSER), Scheme
 to Enhance the Efficacy of Transfer of Technology (SEETOT), National Information System for Science and Technology (NISSAT) and support
 to international scientific institutions such as Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology, New Delhi; and two public sector enterprises
 viz. National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) and Central Electronics Limited(CEL).
2.   The thrust of the DSIR programmes and activities are centered around promoting industrial R&D; development and
 commercialisation of technologies; acquisition, management and export of technologies and consultancy capabilities; and supporting
 development of information systems on S&T.   
3.   The CSIR is the national R&D organisation providing scientific & industrial research for India’s economic growth and human
 welfare. It has a country wide network of forty laboratories and eighty field centres covering fundamental and applied R&D in all areas
 of science and technology barring atomic research, developing and nurturing S&T human resource for the country  through awards,

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 fellowships etc.   Its range of activities cover practically the entire spectrum of industrial R&D ranging from aerospace to mining to
 microelectronics  to  metallurgy and so on.  CSIR was also assigned the responsibility to coordinate and manage the activities relating to
 a new prestigious and challenging scheme, New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership, initiated in 2000 with the objective to 
 secure for India a global leadership position based on technology.  Some of the thrust areas under the consideration of CSIR are
 catalysing civilian aircraft industry, greening of leather industry, new drug discovery through symbiosis of biodiversity, heritage of
 therapeutic knowledge and modern S&T, enhancing hydrocarbons resource base, gas hydrates, promoting National IPR movement,
 spearheading global technology leadership by industry, pioneering knowledge based exports, nurturing budding talent for science.  CSIR
 derives its finances   from  three  major  sources  namely , i)  Budgetary  support  from the Government under plan and non-plan, ii)
 Undertaking of contract R&D, consultancy & Technical services, and iii) Internal receipts.
4.   Some of the notable achievements of CSIR are, operationalisation of the New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative
 (NMITLI); bringing relief to Cyclone affected people of Orissa by providing them drinking water; efforts of Central Institute of
 Medicinal &Aromatic Plants(CIMAP), Lucknow in making India top in Mint Oil production in the world; maximising blast furnace
 productivity; and organisation of 1999  R&D Management Conference with a theme- R&D as a business.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
5.   The financial allocation for the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research  for the year 2001-2002 is Rs. 963.47 crores as against Rs.
 970.38 crores in the B.E. and Rs. 910.61 crores in the R.E. of 2000-2001.
         
The break up of financial allocation for CSIR, DSIR and Public Sector Enterprises is as follows :-
 
 PLAN        NON   - PLAN      TOTAL  
 Demand Made Approved Demands Made Approved Demand Made Approved
CSIR 336.00 332.00 625.05 600.22 961.05 932.22
DSIR 19.43 16.05 3.39 3.15 22.82 19.20
PSE 16.04 11.95 0.20 0.10 16.24 12.05
 TOTAL 371.47 360.00 628.64 603.47 1000.11 963.47
 
6.   The details of the budgetary projections for the programmes of the DSIR during the year 2001-2002 is given at Annexure-I.
7.   The allocation on the plan side has been kept at Rs. 360.00 crores, which represents an increase of about Rs. 32.52 crores over the
 R.E. and about Rs. 5.00 crores over the B.E. of  2001-2002.
8.   The Committee has been informed that over 80% of the Non-Plan expenditure of CSIR goes to meet the committed liabilities on salaries,
 pension and related expenditure of scientists and support staff, on support to nurture human resources for R&D, and remaining 20% for
 contingencies, maintenance of laboratories & residential complexes.  Thus the Non-Plan expenditure has been kept at the barest minimum
 possible.  The laboratories are making all efforts to generate External-Cash-Flow (ECF) to supplement the overall budgetary grant.  The External-
Cash-Flow in 1999-2000 was around Rs.250 crore. Since the Indian industry is presently at cross-roads and is not in a position to make long term
 and substantial investments in R&D.  Thus CSIR is not able to greatly enhance its External Cash Flow.
9.   About new programmes in the field of Scientific and Industrial Research in the year under review, the Committee has been informed
 that  the year 2001-2002 is the terminal year of the Ninth Five Year Plan.  Hence, the emphasis has to be on completion of on-going and
 continuing schemes and not on initiating new ones.  Nonetheless a new scheme on New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership
 Initiative (NMITLI) has been initiated in 2000-2001 to support selectively, innovation centered scientific & technological developments
 in niche areas that could attain for the country a global leadership position. 
10.     The Committee commends the steps being taken by the Department in augmenting its scientific and industrial capabilities towards
 the economic and social development of the Country.  The Committee however   recommends  that  besides the on-going research
 projects, the Department should also support employment generating research such as  research on Bamboo from which millions of
 people earn their livelihood world wide. This would help in generating employment among rural people.
11.   The Committee feels that on the one hand efforts should continue to be made for securing more and more research projects and test-
 work from the industry.  At the same time endeavour should continue by reducing work force by not filling vacancies caused by
 resignations, retirement etc.  This would help ensure optimum utilisation of the human resources and bring about some reduction in non-
plan expenditure.
STAFF STRENGTH
12.In response to a specific question about the staff strength and whether any steps have been contemplated in line with Government’s approach to
 suitably reduce the staff, the Committee has been informed that the total staff strength of DSIR in the year 2000-2001 was 87 and in 2001-02, 64
 only.  The corresponding figures in 40 laboratories, 80 field centres and Headquarters of CSIR were 22,000 and 21,000 as against a sanctioned
 staff strength, after 10% cut, of around 25,000.  Thus the CSIR has already made severe reduction in the sanctioned staff strength.  Nonetheless
 the CSIR had appointed a Committee to reassess and refix the staff strength of laboratories and  Headquarters.  The report of the Committee is

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 under submission.  It is the endeavour of CSIR to make the organization even more slim and trim and work towards a total staff strength not
 exceeding 20,000 by the end of 10th Five Year Plan.
13.     The Committee conveys its appreciation for the efforts made to bring about reduction in the staff strength.  The Committee hopes
 that the Department would keep its word in reducing the staff strength to 20,000 by the end of 10th plan.
14   A mention has been made in the Notes on Demands for Grants 2001-2002 about the residential buildings, staff quarters and other
 amenities.  The Committee considers it to be an important area with regard to the welfare of the officers and staff of the Ministry/DSIR
 including CSIR and Laboratories.  The Department was therefore asked about the details of the project, including cost and the number of
 quarters/details of amenities sought to be provided and the percentage of satisfaction enjoyed by the staff in this regard.
15.  In reply it was stated by the CSIR that the concern expressed by the Committee for housing and other amenities for the employees
 provided ‘psychic’ satisfaction that helps to attract and retain some talent in CSIR.  The location of laboratories is divided under 3
 categories viz. those in (i) Metro cities (ii) other towns and (iii) remote areas.  The present level of satisfaction and the targets set for
 satisfaction for the three categories are metros: 13% vs 50%; other towns: 46% vs. 70% and remote areas: 57% vs. 80%.  Thus there is
 substantial unsatiated demand.  The major activity in 2000-2001 was improving the housing satisfaction level at the metros at Bangalore,
 Hyderabad and Delhi where inroads of IT sector on human resources  were being felt and in remote areas like Palampur and Karaikudi
 where appropriate talent needs to be attracted and retained.  In 2001-02, the initiatives  would be completed and activities in ‘other
 towns’ like Bhubaneshwar, Dhanbad, Mysore and  Nagpur would be initiated.
16.     The Committee feels that in order to make available best talent it is necessary that at least the minimum needs of employees are
 taken care of in this fast changing world.  It is all the more necessary because the monetary benefits given by the Fifth Pay Commission
 have to a large extent been neutralized by high cost of services and rising costs of living. The employees, be they of Central Government
 or elsewhere are again on subsistence wage level with high component of personal taxation whereas according to Taylor’s concept of
 scientific management, a satisfied worker is an asset to an organisation.  The Committee therefore feels that every possible effort
 including adequate budgetary support should be provided for amenities like housing.
 
NATIONAL LABORATORIES
17.  CSIR     today   has     a    network    of    40   laboratories    and  80  field stations/extension centres/ regional centres located all over
 the country to undertake R&D in various S&T  disciplines such as molecular biology to metallurgy, seismicity to science policy, from
 aerospace to reach the diverse users and disseminate knowledge and information on R&D capabilities, techniques and technologies
 developed by the National Laboratories of CSIR. The synergy of CSIR’s competence is sought to be optimized by aligning its R&D
 programme/activities more directly with the socio-economic objectives of the country focusing sharply on areas where investments can
 produce maximum returns for CSIR and the country.
18.While the Committee is aware that the year 2001-2002 being the terminal year of the Ninth Five Year Plan, the emphasis has to be
 given on completion of on-going schemes, the Committee would however like the DSIR to endeavour to bring about diversification in
 R&D work.  While the user services for the industry may continue to be provided, prioritisation and diversification of research may help
 to decrease the dependence on non-plan expenditure.  Efforts should also be made to secure research work from abroad to the extent
 possible.
19.Considering the needto upgrade/replace antiquated and obsolete equipment in realizing  its goals, a scheme on Modernisation of equipment and
 R&D facilities at National laboratories was initiated during the Ninth Five Year Plan.  This labwise modernisation proposals were approved in
 1998-99 and proposed  to be continue in 2001-2002 also.  The equipments and R&D facilities at various laboratories of the CSIR were proposed
 to be  modernized and upgraded in the phased manner which will help in augmenting the  currency and competitiveness of the laboratories.
20.At the same time the Committee is happy to note that in pursuance of its recommendations made earlier for providing adequate budgetary
 support to CSIR for modernisation of its equipment and R&D facilities in the National Laboratories, Government have formulated a separate
 schemes on modernization in the Ninth Five Year Plan (NFYP) and Laboratory-wise modernisation plans were formulated.  The total outlay on
 modernization was Rs.360 crores over NFYP of which Rs.260 crores was budgetary support and Rs.100 crores over was to be met from internal
 receipts.  The selective modernization of equipment and R&D facilities is expected to be completed as per schedule by the end of 2001-2002. 
 However, many of the CSIR laboratories are now five decades old – the laboratory buildings, infrastructure and facilities were built then. 
 Although CSIR has diligently maintained them yet the time has taken its toll, for example the electrical wiring, telephones, laboratory safety
 systems have become obsolete.  These need to be modernized if CSIR is to retain semblance of global competitiveness. 
21.  The Committee clarifies that the modernisation includes all aspects not only with regard to the state-of-the-art machineries etc. for
 testing purposes but also includes interior decoration that is necessary to attract the users by giving the look of a modern office.  It also
 includes repairs or replacement of buildings wherever considered necessary and repair/replacement of electrical fittings, telephones,
 safety systems prevalent in a laboratory.
22.   The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation made in 73 rd report and observes that there is need to progressively modernize
 the CSIR Laboratories.  The Committee observes that the process of modernization should be time bound.  The Department should also
 spell out precisely the areas of modernization being undertaken/proposed to be undertaken in the laboratories.  The Department should
 also ensure that the modernization matches the international  standards.  Also,  the  Committee should be  apprised  about  the
 
 

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
training being imparted/proposed to be imparted to the scientists for handling the upgraded/modernized laboratories.  The Committee,
 however, recommends that CSIR should continue its modernization in the next plan period.
NATIONAL S&T HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
23.  CSIR has been contributing significantly to the development of highly qualified S&T manpower at the national level.  It had been
 able to create and nurture R&D manpower at all levels, over a wide spectrum of disciplines.  The main objective of extra mural S&T
 HRD programmes is to maintain and continuously upgrade the stock of well qualified, highly specialized scientists, engineers and
 technologists for R&D in all disciplines of science and technology in the country. This objective is sought to be achieved by the CSIR by
 offering Junior and Senior Research Fellowships and Research Associateships tenable in Universities and institutions of higher
 education; supporting symposia/seminars; fostering excellence in research by award of prestigious prizes; and operating the Scientists’
 Pool scheme by offering Senior Research Associateships. Under the programme, the expertise of non-resident Indian scientists and
 technologist is sought to be tapped for the benefit of the country through Transfer of Knowledge/know-how Through Expatriate
 Nationals (TOKTEN) scheme and Interface with NON-Resident Indian Scientists and Technologists programme (INRIST).
24.CSIR would continue to support external research through grants to researchers in Universities as it has helped in improving the scientific and
 engineering research in the country and has greatly contributed to spawning of new specialised schools.
25.The Committee has been informed that in order to maintain tempo of scientific research activities  the scheme of Junior Research Fellowship
 and Senior research Fellowship were monitored and reviewed by an extramural, interdepartmental expert Committee chaired by the Director
 General, CSIR.  Moreover, a new scheme “Shyama Prasad Mukherjee Fellowship” has been introduced with a view to support creative and
 innovativeness at the post-graduate level.
26.The Committee observes that the Universities and Institutions will have to play a meaningful role to achieve widespread excellence in
 both teaching quality and high calibre human resources. Therefore, there is a need for reviewing and strengthening/revamping the
 existing S&T support systems in the universities and other educational institutions, be it in terms of infrastructure or quantum of funding
 as well as operational structures and mechanisms. The issues related to the institutional mechanisms, policy guidelines, approval and
 clearance of procedures should be looked into with a view to simplify and make them user friendly.
27.   The Committee feels that CSIR should also consider introducing Scientific Research Scholarships to school leaving students in order
 to encourage them to pursue a career in S&T related areas. National Women Scientific Research Award could also be introduced to the
 outstanding women researchers to encourage their partnership in the mainstream. These initiatives would help in accelerating the pace of
 scientific & technological research for the development of a strong knowledge base and its application for the welfare of humankind.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY 
28.  CSIR’s Intellectual Property(IP) policy seeks to maximise the benefits to CSIR from its intellectual capital by stimulating higher
 levels of innovation through a judicious system of rewards, ensuring timely and effective legal protection for its IP and forging strategic
 alliances for enhancing the value of its IP.  CSIR has set for itself a formidable goal holding a valuable portfolio of at least 1000 Indian
 patents and 500 foreign patents by 2001 so that it can use this as the basis of forging strategic alliances with some of the global
 technological leaders in specific areas and generate at least 1% of its R&D budget from IP licensing/alliances.  CSIR would also
 endeavour to be a national resource and an international reference centre on IP matters. Major programmes under IPR include
 comprehensive protection of intellectual property generated and safeguarding against infringement and patent information services.
29.   The Committee commends the efforts made by the CSIR in maintaining its standards for Intellectual Property Movement by setting
 a formidable goal of achieving 1000 Patents and 500 foreign Patents by 2001. The Committee, however, feels that the Department should
 create a Patent Facilitating Cell which should assist in writing, and completing of all formalities for filing of patents. Roving seminars
 should also be conducted at regular intervals to create awareness on intellectual property rights and related issues.
TECHNOLOGY MANAGEMENT
30.On the Technology Management front, CSIR negotiated and tied  up marketing of technologies with various Indian and Foreign companies and 
 continue to endeavour to catalyse management of technology in the country. The manipulation of technology management as a part of CSIR’s
 strategy is being attempted through alliances and external IPR acquisitions/barter. This would need investments in accessing commercially
 valuable information and data globally thus enhancing acquisition of skills and  competence of the employees. In order to promote in-house and
 national management of technology CSIR organized the prestigious 1999 R&D Management Conference with the theme R&D as Business, in
 association with the famous R&D Management Association U.K.  This has helped to promote a forum for discussing and finding solutions in the
 field of Management of Technology not only in the CSIR but also externally as well.
NEW MILLENNIUM INDIAN TECHNOLOGY LEADERSHIP (NMITLI)
31.  New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative (NMITLI) scheme was launched in 2000  in order to  support innovation
 centered scientific and technological developments as a vehicle to attain a global leadership position in some selected niche areas for the
 country.  It would be based on partnership between the government and private sector.  Appropriate mechanism for accomplishing this
 initiative would be evolved by CSIR.
32.When asked to explain as to how at the last year RE stage the allocation was reduced to half of the total amount i.e. Rs.25 crores, the Secretary
 informed the Committee that after wide-ranging and wide-spread national consultations through letters, media, brainstorming meeting and posters,
 28 potential areas have been short listed and groups were set-up for preparing detailed project      proposals    at   national   level    for   12   of   
 the   areas   in   the   first    phase.    The projects were then subjected to techno-economic evaluation by   High Powered  Committee  (HPC)  and
 the recommendations of  the HPC  were subsequently considered by the Governing Body of CSIR.  Nine projects at a total cost of about Rs.54.00
 crores were approved with the first year’s outlay of around Rs.35.00 crore.  He, however, assured the Committee that during this financial year no

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 amount would be surrendered under NMITLI.
33.The Committee notes with satisfaction that a beginning towards technology leadership has been made in NMITLI. However, it is
 constrained to observe that there has been poor projection of the programme and the financial visualization has been unsatisfactory;
 consequently an amount of Rs. 25 crores was surrendered at the RE stage of previous year. The Committee hopes that the Department
 would take prudent steps to optimize on investments and come up with enduring projects. The Committee also expects that the
 Department would continue its efforts in devising a much more transparent system of implementation and national consultation in
 perfecting the niche opportunity technology areas into project modes.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BY INDUSTRY (RDI)
34.Recognising the need for developing an indigenous technological base for technology absorption and indigenous technology development for
 achieving technological self reliance, the Government has initiated several measures to encourage industry, carry out R&D in order to enable it to
 meet its requirements and  also  for establishing close links between the national laboratory system   and industry. The scheme deals with all the
 activities relating to recognition of in-house R&D industrial units and non-commercial Scientific and Industrial Research Organisations, fiscal
 incentives and other mechanisms and initiatives towards supporting and encouraging the R&D initiatives of industry.  In-house R&D units in
 industry provide a desirable and essential interface between efforts within the national laboratories and the educational sector as well as
 production in industry.  At present there are around 1160 in-house R&D units duly recognised by DSIR.  They employ over 50,000 R&D
 personnel. The R&D expenditure incurred by these units was around Rs.2000 crores in 1999-2000.  The objective of the scheme is to sharply
 focus on R&D by Industry and to strengthen linkages among in-house R&D system, National Laboratory System and educational system and
 strengthen R&D infrastructure in industry and promote and support R&D initiatives of the industry.
35.The Committee observes that the socio-economic advancement of a nation demands a strong relationship between Industry and R&D
 laboratories, which unfortunately is not a reality in India. Rather the wholesome involvement of national R&D with industry, which is a
 hallmark of the advanced industrial societies, is missing in India. The Committee, therefore, recommends that CSIR laboratories should
 put more emphasis on consolidating its partnership with the Industry so that the technologies developed by the laboratories can be
 commercialized and fully exploited. More the commercialization of technologies, more would be the confidence in the CSIR
 laboratories, providing further impetus  to their R&D activities.
NATIONAL INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (NISSAT)
36.The NISSAT programme was initiated in 1977 to envisage promotion and support to the development of a compatible set of information
 systems for science & technology and interlinking these into a network. Its objectives include development of national information services,
 promotion of existing information systems & services, introduction of modern information handling tools & techniques, promotion of
 international cooperation in information, development of indigenous products & services, organization of skill development programmes and
 promotion of R&D in information science & technology. 
37.  In order to promote the development of indigenous products and services and promote national information services, NISSAT has established
 sectoral centres in the areas of leather technology, food technology, machine tools production and engineering, drugs and pharmaceuticals, textiles
 & allied subjects, chemicals & allied industries, management sciences, marine and aquatic sciences.   These centres provide bibliographic as well
 as factual and numeric information to meet various information   needs of academicians, scientists, technologists, entrepreneurs, management
 executives and decision-makers.  The centres are usually built around the existing information sources and facilities.  They maintain extensive
 collection of published and unpublished documents in  the form of books, periodicals, R&D reports, technical reports, standards, patents and trade
 literature in their subject areas. NISSAT has also created a CD-ROM National Collection Centre.  This centre collects products,  documents nation
 wide on CD-ROM.  The Centre also provides services from  this information.
38.NISSAT has two effective media - a quarterly publication, Information Today & Tomorrow (ITT), that acts as an industry – technology watch,
 and (ii) the annual meet on ITT which brings the industry-promoter-service provider-and more importantly the user on a common platform. 
 Besides, most of the NISSAT supported Centres bring out their own publications and databases and leave their websites and web servers to
 provide global access to their services and products.  In addition, representatives  of similar organizations and user institutions are involved in
 various national level/local level committees not only to benefit from their inputs, but also check avoidable duplication.
39.The Committee was informed that in the current year, the Department intended to cover under the programme,  the activities such as
 establishment of a Virtual Information Centre at ICICI  at Hyderabad and an internet Portal on Knowledge Management; emphasis  on web-based
 information content development in their information centers; development of an Indian S&T web server covering a variety of Indian S&T
 information; development of indigenous database activities; and implementation of National Plan of action on Scientometrics  and Biblometrics
 and conduct a series of R&D studies etc.
40.The Committee is of the view that dissemination of  information can be facilitated  through electronic network,  as well as physical
 networks like libraries, booksellers, broadcasting companies and organizations selling information in electronic form e.g. database
 available in the form of CD-ROM, DVD etc. Widespread dissemination of information depends upon availability of reliable and
 dependable networks.  Therefore, The Department should try to create appropriate delivery mechanisms.  Such delivery mechanisms
 would provide quality education, create a strong knowledge base and provide widespread access to information to the research
 community as well. 
PROGRAMME AIMED AT TECHNOLOGICAL SELF-RELIANCE (PATSER)
41.The  Programme Aimed at Technological Self-Reliance  (PATSER) aims at catalyzing and supporting activities relating to technology
 absorption, adaptation and demonstration including capital goods development, involving industry and R&D organizations. The main objective of
 the Programme is to support industry for technological development, demonstration and absorption of imported technology; build indigenous
 capabilities for development and commercialization of contemporary  products and processes of high impact; involving national research
 organizations in joint projects with industry; and technology evaluation in selected sectors/areas. The Department’s support to the projects has
 been catalytic providing impetus to the R&D efforts of industry,  though   bulk  of the financial  input  for  the projects  comes  from  the  industry 

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 itself.
 Generally, DSIR meets 30-40% of the total project cost and the remaining expenditure is met by the Industry.  DSIR has supported over 110
 projects so far, involving  a total project cost of Rs.158 crores with its share of Rs.47 crores   i.e.  around 30%.
42.A distinctive feature of  PATSER  funding is that many of the programmes also involve Govt. research laboratories or IITs, IISc, or
 Universities as partners along with the industrial companies. Further, in order to nurture and promote  technopreneural skills  of Indian citizens  
 at   individual   level,    projects    are    supported   under a scheme viz. “ Technopreneur Promotion Programme (TePP)”, jointly operated by
 DSIR under the PATSER scheme and Department of Science & Technology under the “ Home Grown Technology” scheme.   The
 Technopreneur  Promotion Programme aims to provide financial support to individual innovators having original ideas and helps them convert
 these into working models. So far, over 30 projects have been supported under TePP. 
43.The PATSER scheme has proved  successful in synergising  the R&D efforts of industry and national research organizations. The Committee
 has been  informed that under PATSER scheme, 6 new projects for technology development and demonstration have been approved and 14 more
 were expected to be approved by March, 2001. 75 on-going projects were being monitored for progress  and some of the PATSER projects were
 in an advanced stage of development. Besides, 5 Patents have been filed  or were in the process of being filed or scaled up during 2000-2001.
44.The Committee further been informed that  about 25 new projects and  85 on-going projects for technology development and demonstration
 were planned to be supported during 2001-2002.  Besides, by  inviting fresh proposals from industry, DSIR would proactively interact with other
 ministries for identification of new products/processes required and promote technology development projects with small and medium
 enterprises.  Besides supporting the projects, DSIR would organize/support more interactions of industry, research organizations and concerned
 agencies for identifying future trends and needs for new/improved technologies.
45.The Committee notes with satisfaction the support rendered by the DSIR in the field of technology absorption and adaptation. The
 Department should continue its efforts to interact with other Ministries for wider dissemination and utilization of its technology
 development projects.  This would help in generating new technologies.  An integrated and sustained approach would certainly help the
 Department in realizing its projected goals.  Besides, it is necessary to create awareness about the Technopreneur Promotion Programme
 (TePP) so that enthused and encouraged individual innovators come out with their  creative talents.
 SCHEME TO ENHANCE THE EFFICACY OF TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGY (SEETOT)
46.The SEETOT aims to facilitate acquisition and management of technologies, accelerate export of technologies and services, enhance the
 consultancy capabilities of the Department and increase awareness about the usefulness of consultancy services among the customers. Under the
 scheme, development and commercialization of indigenous technologies is encouraged and international organizations concerned with technology
 transfer, such as Asian and Pacific Centre for Transfer of Technology, are supported.
47.  The main objectives of the scheme are to provide technical and technological inputs for acquisition and management of technologies;
 accelerate technology intensive exports; enhance consultancy capabilities; and  support mechanisms for  technology transfer, facilitate 
 preparation
of reports, newsletters, organisation of seminars and participation in trade fairs related to promotion of technology exports.
48.   The Committee is of the view that the need for transfer of technology   in bringing improvement in industrial productivity can not be
 underestimated. The Committee is pained to observe that Transfer of Technology programmes have moved at snail’s pace.  It is
 necessary to  identify the  prevailing constraints and have insight of Industrial sector problems and then devise appropriate technologies
 to address the problems.  To that end, the Committee recommends that a multi-disciplinary team should work on priority basis for
 identification and solution of the problems being faced with regard to the technology.
49.The Committee would also like to point out that  it is equally necessary to plan the research projects beforehand, concentrate and
 conduct research only in those areas where it can gainfully be employed in the interest of the economy.    The Committee, therefore, feels
 that the scientists and all others working  for transfer of technology should bear in mind all these points
ECOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENT
50.Central Fuel Research Institute(CFRI) Dhanbad has developed energy efficient, environment friendly and low cost coke ovens to produce soft
 coke that dispense with the conventional burning of coal in open atmosphere. CFRI had also developed fly ash soil amendment technology which
 has been extensively demonstrated through field trials with varying proportions of fly ash under different agroclimatic conditions and soil types in
 different types in different parts of the country for cultivation of various cereals, root, leguminous and vegetable crops.  A substantial increase in
 crop yield, early maturity of crops and improvement in physio-chemical properties of  the soil without any adverse effect are the advantages of
 this technology.
51.Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubaneshwar has developed a new method to utilise lignin, a pulp and paper mills waste to produce phenol
 formaldehyde resin powder, used as raw material for making bakelite plastic and vanillin used in cakes and the ice-cream industry. Central
 Building Research Institute, Roorkee has also developed clay flyash bricks through de-airing extrusion and stabilized lime flyash bricks through
 vibro-compaction.
FOOD AND FOOD PROCESSING
52.CSIR is playing a vital role in Food Processing sector.  The R&D programmes being pursued by the Council are related to development of pre
 and post harvest technologies for wide range of fruit with an objective to minimize wastage and increase the shelf life of the produce with
 desirable and acceptable ripening characteristics.
53.The food processing is primarily done to improve and safeguard the agricultural productivity reducing wastage of perishable food items like

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 fruit and vegetables and for improving food availability for domestic markets and for exports.  This would ensure supply of fruit and vegetables
 during the session when the crop for those products does not  grow.
54.  Central Food Technological Research Institute (CFTRI), Mysore in collaboration with the Coconut Development Board (CDB) have
 developed a low cost simple processing technology for the production of Coconut Vinegar used as food preservative and flavouring
 agent from matured coconut water using vinegar generators. CFTRI has also developed two nutrient enriched snacks namely  ‘nitro
 biscuits’ and ‘suruchi meetha’ both valuable as items for the mid-day meal schemes in schools. The laboratory has also developed an
 inexpensive, pilot maize mill with I ton/hour capacity  for dry milling  of maize under the  Technology Mission for Oil seeds,  pulses
and maize. Regional Research Laboratory, Trivendrum, has developed a process for extraction of ginger oil directly from fresh ginger.
55.   The Committee  visited  CFTRI, Mysore a few years back and had the occasion to see some of the machines like large scale dosa
 making machine.  The Committee doubts whether there is demand for machines designed to cater large scale commercial requirement. 
 The Committee would therefore like to impress on all concerned to engage themselves in activities which are either against confirmed
 orders or can otherwise be gainfully exploited.
56.   The Committee feels that in order to provide impetus to the technologies developed by the CSIR laboratories in food processing
 sector, the Department should take the initiative of interacting  with all State Governments for providing sales and trade tax exemption,
 so that interest of the Industry can be sustained in extending the benefit of technologies to the larger sections of the society.
57.   The Committee  suggests that the Department should emphasise on need based R&D activities for cereals, pulses and oilseeds to
 develop marketable products and technology achieving highest recovery and top quality of the desired constituents/parts of the raw
 materials processed with minimum energy spent and no pollution created.
58.   The Committee holds a view that besides food processing technologies, the Department should also augment Post Harvest Technology
 (PHT). The technology so developed must lead to rural industrialization and thereby create employment and income generation
 opportunities. Appropriate PHT would help in enhancing per capita food and fibre availability from the limited and dwindling land and
 water resources.
SPECIAL PACKAGE FOR NORTH-EAST
59.In order to develop North Eastern region of the country, Government have adopted a special approach.  Government have therefore sought to
 give a special package to North Eastern among others, to facilitate their assimilation as also their participation in  the mainstream of National life. 
 Asked whether this has been reflected in the programmes and activities of the Department, the Committee was informed that the Department of
 Scientific & Industrial Research and the CSIR laboratories have accorded due importance to providing R&D of value and S&T outputs for the
 effective utilization of endogenous resources of the NE Region (NER).  CSIR has a full fledged Regional Research laboratory at Jorhat along with
 a branch laboratory at Itanagar and field station at Imphal which provides dedicated S&T inputs for economic & industrial development of NER.
 CSIR was implementing specific projects for the development of NER for example (i) pilot project at Assam Oil Division Refinery of Indian Oil
 Corporation at Digboi for developing a short path distillation technology for making value added products i.e. micro-crystalline waxes and quality
 bitumen from vacuum residues – a waste from the refinery, (ii) DSIR/CSIR have provided technology & finance to establish a pilot plant for
 making fresh ginger oil and spice processing at Manipur; (iii) the light transport aircraft being developed at National Aerospace Laboratories,
 Bangalore  will be of immense value to interlinking the NER to the mainland and within the region.  Besides CSIR has taken up seismic
 monitoring and seismic hazards map preparation, bio-propspection, development of agro-technology and  processing technologies for medicinal
 and aromatic plants, coal assessment and utilization, site specific architectural designs for low cost houses etc. for NER.  Several manpower
 development programmes have been organized by DSIR
& CSIR on diverse S&T based knowledge and skills.  Besides, surveys have been conducted to utilize the latent human & natural resources of
 NER.  Thus DSIR & CSIR were committed to provide S&T inputs for development of North-East Region.  It may be noted that along with other
 scientific departments/agencies, DSIR/CSIR have now (from 2001-2002) been exempted from the mandatory requirement  of earmarking 10% of
 the Budget for the NER & Sikkim.  Thus the allocation of resources for NER has not been indicated separately in the Demands for Grants.
PUBLIC SECTOR ENTERPRISES
60.  There are two public sector enterprises, namely, National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) and Central Electronics
 Limited (CEL) under the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research.
61.National Research Development Corporation (NRDC) is engaged in development, upscaling, licensing and commercialisation of indigenous
 technologies as well as export of technologies. The objectives of the Corporation are to commercialise  indigenous technologies; promote 
 commercialisation of inventions; disseminate  information on technology transfer; and facilitate development and promotion of rural technology.
 Some of the achievements of the Corporation in the year 2000-01 include participation in the equity of M/s Twenty First Century Battery Ltd.;
 Development of Interactive Multimedia Training Package on intellectual Property Rights, submission of a proposal to UNDICO  for setting up a
 training centre on the processing of precious stones in Kalahandi and Bolangir districts of Orissa, signing up an agreement  with the Social Fund
 for Development, Govt. of Egypt for setting up of two Science & Technology Entrepreneurship Parks at different  locations in Egypt, etc.  The
 NRDC has been constantly making profits for over 15 years and its MoU performance in 1999-2000 was excellent registering a gross profit of Rs.
 51.97 lakhs as compared to Rs. 45.96 lakhs in 1998-99.
62.   As regards the performance of National Research Development Corporation (NRDC), the Committee is constrained to observe that
 the meagre gross profit earned is in fact a cover for the losses suffered by the unit.  The Committee therefore, recommends that DSIR
 should periodically review the projects/proposals undertaken by the NRDC and make every effort to bring it out of the red for there is no
 case for survival of such units in fast changing times.
63.  Central Electronics Limited (CEL) holds a unique position among the public sector enterprises in the field of electronics, with its
 emphasis on indigenous technology, inducted both from its in-house developments and from the country’s national laboratories for its

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 production programmes in diverse hi-technology  areas of national relevance. The mission of the Company is to achieve excellence in
 the Technology, Manufacture and Marketing of renewable energy systems and selected electronic materials, components and systems.
 The Company is the nation’s pioneer and largest manufacturer of SolarPhotovoltaic products and is among the top few producers of
 crystalline silicon solar cells/modules in the world.  It is also one of the pioneers in the area of Professional Ferrites for consumer,
 telecommunication and defence applications.  The Company also has a leading position in the area of Railway Electronics and Cathodic
 Protection Systems.
64.   The Committee observes that CEL has been incurring losses even though they have declined from Rs. 5.96 crores to Rs.3.74 crores in
 2000-2001.  The Committee is not happy with the losses.  Serious efforts need to be made to bring them out of the red or else the unit may
 have no case for its survival.
 
65.   The Committee notes that the Department has a well structured system of monitoring the programme/projects/activities for its
 various schemes.  Every scheme has a specialized Committee to monitor and advise on the overall performance of the scheme and
 expert/technical group to examine in detail the specific projects and programmes.  In the CSIR, the S&T programmes are monitored at
 three levels: (i) the research Councils of the respective laboratories; (ii) Review at the Director-General’s/HQ level and (iii) for the major
 and important programmes by Governing Body of CSIR.
   The Committee recommends that the Department should  do its best to ensure that at least for a few minutes every day or on regular
 intervals its programmes and activities are disseminated through Doordarshan and other media   to ensure that they  reach the targeted
 sections of the society.
66.     After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research and assessing the progress of
 various important programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs.963.47
 crores, as sought by the  Department  of  Scientific & Industrial Research  for the year 2001-2002, under Demand No. 69, may be
 approved.
REOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS AT GLANCE
 
1.   The Committee commends the steps being taken by the Department in augmenting its scientific and industrial capabilities towards the
 economic and social development of the Country.  The Committee however   recommends  that  besides the on-going research projects,
 the Department should also support employment generating research such as  research on Bamboo from which millions of people earn
 their livelihood world wide. This would help in generating employment among rural people.
(Para 10)
2.  The Committee feels that on the one hand efforts should continue to be made for securing more and more research projects and test-
 work from the industry.  At the same time endeavour should continue by reducing work force by not filling vacancies caused by
 resignations, retirement etc.  This would help ensure optimum utilisation of the human resources and bring about some reduction in non-
plan expenditure.
(Para 11)
3.   The Committee conveys its appreciation for the efforts made to bring about reduction in the staff strength.  The Committee hopes that
 the Department would keep its word in reducing the staff strength to 20,000 by the end of 10
th plan.
(Para 13)
4.   The Committee feels that in order to make available best talent it is necessary that at least the minimum needs of employees are taken
 care of in this fast changing world.  It is all the more necessary because the monetary benefits given by the Fifth Pay Commission have to
 a large extent been neutralized by high cost of services and rising costs of living. The employees, be they of Central Government or
 elsewhere are against on subsistence wage level with high component of personal taxation whereas according to Taylor’s concept of
 scientific management, a satisfied worker is an asset to an organisation.  The Committee therefore feels that every possible effort
 including adequate budgetary support should be provided for amenities like housing.
(Para 16)
5.  While the Committee is aware that the year 2001-2002 being the terminal year of the Ninth Five Year Plan, the emphasis has to be
 given on completion of on-going schemes, the Committee would however like the DSIR to endeavour to bring about diversification in
 R&D work.  While the user services for the industry may continue to be provided, prioritisation and diversification of research may help
 to decrease the dependence on non-plan expenditure.  Efforts should also be made to secure research work from abroad to the extent
 possible.                                                       (Para 18)
6.  The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation made in 73
rd report and observes that there is need to progressively modernize
 the CSIR Laboratories.  The Committee observes that the process of modernization should be time bound.  The Department should also
 spell out precisely the areas of modernization being undertaken/proposed to be undertaken in the laboratories.  The Department should
 also ensure that the modernization
matches the international standards.  Also, the Committee should be apprised  about the  training being imparted/proposed to be

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 imparted to the scientists for handling the upgraded/modernized laboratories.   The Committee, however, recommends that CSIR should
 continue its modernization in the next plan period.
(Para 22)
7.  The Committee observes that the Universities and Institutions will have to play a meaningful role to achieve widespread excellence in
 both teaching quality and high calibre human resources. Therefore, there is a need for reviewing and strengthening/revamping the
 existing S&T support systems in the universities and other educational institutions, be it in terms of infrastructure or quantum of funding
 as well as operational structures and mechanisms. The issues related to the institutional mechanisms, policy guidelines, approval and
 clearance of procedures should be looked into with a view to simplify and make them user friendly.
(Para 26)
8.  The Committee feels that CSIR should also consider introducing Scientific Research Scholarships to school leaving students in order to
 encourage them to pursue a career in S&T related areas. National Women Scientific Research Award could also be introduced to the
 outstanding women researchers to encourage their partnership in the mainstream. These initiatives would help in accelerating the pace of
 scientific & technological research for the development of a strong knowledge base and its application for the welfare of humankind.
(Para 27)
9.  The Committee commends the efforts made by the CSIR in maintaining its standards for Intellectual Property Movement by setting a
 formidable goal of achieving 1000 Patents and 500 foreign Patents by 2001. The Committee, however, feels that the Department should
 create a Patent Facilitating Cell which should assist in writing, and completing of all formalities for filing of patents. Roving seminars
 should also be conducted at regular intervals to create awareness on intellectual property rights and related issues.
(Para 29)
10.The Committee notes with satisfaction that a beginning towards technology leadership has been made in NMITLI. However, it is
 constrained to observe that there has been poor projection of the programme and the financial visualization has been unsatisfactory;
 consequently an amount of Rs. 25 crores was surrendered at the RE stage of previous year. The Committee hopes that the Department
 would take prudent steps to optimize on investments and come up with enduring projects. The Committee also expects that the
 Department would continue its efforts in devising a much more transparent system of implementation and national consultation in
 perfecting the niche opportunity technology areas into project modes.
(Para 33)
11.The Committee observes that the socio-economic advancement of a nation demands a strong relationship between Industry and R&D
 laboratories, which unfortunately is not a reality in India. Rather the wholesome involvement of national R&D with industry, which is a 
 hallmark  of  the   advanced  industrial   societies,  is  missing  in India.  The  Committee,
therefore, recommends that CSIR laboratories should put more emphasis on consolidating its partnership with the Industry so that the
 technologies developed by the laboratories can be commercialized and fully exploited. More the commercialization of technologies,
 more would be the confidence in the CSIR laboratories, providing further impetus  to their R&D activities.
(Para 35)
12.The Committee is of the view that dissemination of  information can be facilitated  through electronic network,  as well as physical
 networks like libraries, booksellers, broadcasting companies and organizations selling information in electronic form e.g. database
 available in the form of CD-ROM, DVD etc. Widespread dissemination of information depends upon availability of reliable and
 dependable networks.  Therefore, The Department should try to create appropriate delivery mechanisms.  Such delivery mechanisms
 would provide quality education, create a strong knowledge base and provide widespread access to information to the research
 community as well. 
(Para 40)
13.The Committee notes with satisfaction the support rendered by the DSIR in the field of technology absorption and adaptation. The
 Department should continue its efforts to interact with other Ministries for wider dissemination and utilization of its technology
 development projects.  This would help in generating new technologies.  An integrated and sustained approach would certainly help the
 Department in realizing its projected goals.  Besides, it is necessary to create awareness about the Technopreneur Promotion Programme
 (TePP) so that enthused and encouraged individual innovators come out with their creative talents.
(Para 45)
14.The Committee is of the view that the need for transfer of technology   in bringing improvement in industrial productivity can not be
 underestimated. The Committee is pained to observe that Transfer of Technology programmes have moved at snail’s pace.  It is
 necessary to  identify the  prevailing constraints and have insight of Industrial sector problems and then devise appropriate technologies
 to address the problems.  To that end, the Committee recommends that a multi-disciplinary team should work on priority basis for
 identification and solution of the problems being faced with regard to the technology.
(Para 48)
15.The Committee would also like to point out that  it is equally necessary to plan the research projects beforehand, concentrate and
 conduct research only in those areas where it can gainfully be employed in the interest of the economy.    The Committee, therefore, feels
 that the scientists and all others working  for transfer of technology should bear in mind all these points

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
(Para 49)
16.The Committee  visited  CFTRI, Mysore a few years back and had the occasion to see some of the machines like large scale dosa
 making machine.  The Committee doubts whether there is demand for machines designed to cater large scale commercial requirement. 
 The  Committee would therefore  like to  impress on all  concerned to engage
 
themselves in activities which are either against confirmed orders or can otherwise be gainfully exploited.
(Para 55)
17.The Committee feels that in order to provide impetus to the technologies developed by the CSIR laboratories in food processing sector,
 the Department should take the initiative of interacting  with all State Governments for providing sales and trade tax exemption, so that
 interest of the Industry can be sustained in extending the benefit of technologies to the larger sections of the society.
(Para 56)
18.The Committee  suggests that the Department should emphasise on need based R&D activities for cereals, pulses and oilseeds to
 develop marketable products and technology achieving highest recovery and top quality of the desired constituents/parts of the raw
 materials processed with minimum energy spent and no pollution created.
(Para 57)
19.The Committee  holds a view that besides food processing technologies, the Department should also augment Post Harvest Technology
 (PHT). The technology so developed must lead to rural industrialization and thereby create employment and income generation
 opportunities. Appropriate PHT would help in enhancing per capita food and fibre availability from the limited and dwindling land and
 water resources.
(Para 58)
20.As regards the performance of National Research Development Corporation (NRDC), the Committee is constrained to observe that the
 meagre gross profit earned is in fact a cover for the losses suffered by the unit.  The Committee therefore, recommends that DSIR should
 periodically review the projects/proposals undertaken by the NRDC and make every effort to bring it out of the red for there is no case
 for survival of such units in fast changing times.
(Para 62)
21.The Committee observes that CEL has been incurring losses even though they have declined from Rs. 5.96 crores to Rs.3.74 crores in
 2000-2001.  The Committee is not happy with the losses.  Serious efforts need to be made to bring them out of the red or else the unit may
 have no case for its survival.
(Para 64)
22.The Committee notes that the Department has a well structured system of monitoring the programme/projects/activities for its various
 schemes.  Every scheme has a specialized Committee to monitor and advise on the overall performance of the scheme and
 expert/technical group to examine in detail the specific projects and programmes.  In the CSIR, the S&T programmes are monitored at
 three levels: (i) the research Councils of the respective laboratories; (ii) Review at the Director-General’s/HQ level and (iii) for the major
 and important programmes by Governing Body of CSIR.
    
 
     The Committee recommends that the Department should  do its best to ensure that at least for a few minutes every day or on regular
 intervals its programmes and activities are disseminated through Doordarshan  and other media to ensure that they  reach the targeted
 sections of the society.
(Para 65)
 
 
ANNEXURES
                                                                                                 
 
     ANNEXURE - I
BUDGET ESTIMATES 2001-2002

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
                                                                                                ( Rs. in crores)
SR.
NO.
HEAD OF DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS/
 PROGRAMMES/ SCHEMES
 
    Plan          Non-Plan             Total
1. Secretariat Economic Services 0.20 3.15     3.35
 Assistance to Council of Scientific &
 Industrial Research(CSIR)
   
   2. Administration 11.00 145.75 156.75
3.
 
National Laboratories 188.50 387.55 576.05
4. Scientists’ Pool             --- 5.80 5.80
5. Research Schemes, Scholarships and
 Fellowships
5.50 51.10 56.60
6. Pilot Plan             ---
 
1.62 1.62
 
7. Residential Building 10.00 8.40 18.40
8.
 
Modernisation 59.00 -
59.00
9.
 
Intellectual Property & Tech. Management 8.00 -
8.00
10. New Millennium Indian Technology
 Leadership initiative 50.00 - 50.00
 TOTAL ASSISTANCE TO CSIR: 332.00 600.22 932.22
11. Non-Plan Subsidies Interest Subsidy to
 NRDC
- 0.10 0.10
12. National Information System for Science &
 Technology
2.10 - 2.10
13. Assistance to Other Scientific Bodies
   
 
13.1
 
Support for R&D Schemes to Central
 Electronics Limited
3.70 - 3.70
13.2 Other Schemes/Programme
   
i
 
Prof. Aimed at Technological Self Reliance
 
8.40 - 8.40
 
ii.
 
Management, Administration & Infrastructure 2.00 - 2.00
iii Other Schemes 6.10 - 6.10
14. Investment in Public Enterprises    
i. Central Electronics Ltd. 5.00 - 5.00
ii. National Research Development Corporation 0.50 - 0.50
15. Lumpsum provision for Projects/Schemes for
 North-East Region & Sikkim
-
 
-
 
-
 
 Grand Total 360.00 603.47 963.47
ANNEXURE-II
 
REPLY  SUBMITTED  BY  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF   SCIENTIFIC  &   INDUSTRIAL  RESEARCH TO THE PARLIAMENTARY 
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY,  ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS RELATING TO DEMANDS
FOR GRANTS (2001-2002)

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 
Ql.(a)   The total financial outlay for the Department of Scientific & Industrial Research for the year 2001-2002 is Rs. 963.47 crores as
 against Rs. 970.38 crores at B.E. stage and Rs. 910.61 at R.E. stage. While the overall budgetary support has marginally declined in
 comparison to the B.E. last year, the fact remains that the non-plan expend all through remained, more or less, double of plan
 expenditure. What are the reasons and have any steps been contemplated to reduce it? As in the case of National Laboratories too, the
 non-plan expenditure has been more than double of the Plan expenditure whereas in terms of Committee's earlier recommendations, the
 laboratories are expected to generate funds for themselves? What are the reasons for this trend of expenditure in CSIR laboratories?
(b)    Is there any system in the Department to monitor and review the productivity of its ongoing schemes as also the unproductive non-
plan expenditure before formulating proposals for the budgetary support? If so, please furnish Details.
Ans.1(a)The total financial outlay during 2001-02 is Rs. 963.47 crore which consists of Rs.932.22 crore for CSIR and Rs. 31.25 crore for
 DSIR and its PSES. Of the Rs.932.22 crore for CSIR the Plan outlay is Rs. 332 crore and the Non-Plan is Rs.600.22 crore.
(Rs. In Crore)
YEAR                                       Budget Allocation                         Ratio of  Expenditure 
    PLAN      NON PLAN     TOTAL      PLAN    NON PLAN
1998-99                       204.00            509.32         713.32             29          71
1999-2000                     250.00            543.24         793.24             32          68
2000-01 (RE)                  303.00            580.00         883.00             34          66
 2001-02 ( B.E.)              332.00            600.22         932.22            36          64
It will be seen that as a % of the total expenditure the Non Plan component has declined over the past three years. Further over 80% of the
 Non-Plan expenditure of CSIR goes to meet the committed liabilities on salaries, pension and related expenditure of scientists and
 support staff, on support to nurture human resources for R&D, and only 20% for contingencies, maintenance of laboratories & residential
 complexes. Thus the Non-Plan expenditure has been kept at the barest minimum possible. The laboratories are making all efforts to
 generate external-cash-flow, (ECF) to supplement the overall budgetary grant. The external-cash-flow in 1999-2000 was around Rs. 250
 crore. The Indian industry is presently at cross-roads and is not in a position to make long term and substantial investments in R&D.
 Thus CSIR is not able to greatly enhance its ECF. But for the undertaking of externally funded projects and supplementation of resources
 from ECF the CSIR scientists would not have been able to achieve and deliver the desired performance outputs and targets.
 
(b) The Department has a well structured system of monitoring the programme/projects/activities for its various schemes. Every scheme
 has a specialised Committee to monitor and advise on the overall performance of the scheme and expert/technical group to examine in
 detail the specific projects and programmes. In the CSIR the S&T programmes are monitored at three levels: (i) the Research Councils of
 the respective laboratories; (ii) Review at the Director-General's/HQ. level and (iii) for the major and important programmes by
 Governing Body of OSIR.
Q2. In the recent past there have been many Parliament Questions arising out of CAG's reports (e.g. 5 of 2000) on expenditure incurred in
 some of the institutions and laboratories under the CSIR on telephones, foreign visits and such other heads? Have you looked into the
 frivolity or otherwise of such expenditure. If so, with what results?
Ans.     In the C& AG report referred to test check of 14 CSIR laboratories was undertaken and the observations were that few of the
 laboratories had incurred irregular expenditure on hospitality, telephones etc. The irregular expenditure commented upon was only of the
 order of Rs. 38 lakhs out of RsIO,000 lakh of expenditure test checked. The matter of tightening even this minimal misapplication of
 expenditure was examined by a high level committee. Revised stringent instructions/guidelines have been issued thereon with a system
 of checks and balances to ensure transparency and accountability. A Committee has since been constituted to enquire into specific cases
 of expenditure as pointed out by CAG.
Q3.    What is the present staff strength as also in last 2 years of the Ministry of S&T, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research,
 CSIR including the laboratories? Whether any step is contemplated in line with Government's approach to suitably reduce the staff? If
 so, the details thereof?
Ans.   The total staff strength of DSIR in the year 2000-2001 was 87 and in 2001- 2002 64 only. In the 40 laboratories, 80 field centres and Hqrs of
 CSIR the corresponding figures were 22,000 and 21000 as against a sanctioned staff strength, after 10% cut, of around 25,000. Thus the CSIR has
 already made severe reduction in the sanctioned staff strength. Nonetheless the CSIR had appointed a committee to reassess and refix the staff
 strength of laboratories & Hqrs. The report of the committee is under submission. It is the endeavour of CSIR to make the organization even more
 slim & trim and work towards a total staff strength not exceeding 20,000 by the end of 10th Five Year Plan.
Q4.   What are the new areas proposed to be covered in the field of Scientific and Industrial Research in the year under review? What has
 been the basis of selecting these areas?
Ans    The year 2001-2002 is the terminal year of the Ninth Five Year Plan. As per the prevailing guidelines the emphasis has to be on
 completion of on-going and continuing schemes and not on initiating new ones. Nonetheless a new scheme on New Millennium Indian

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 Technology Leadership Initiative (NMITLI) has been initiated in 2000-2001 to support selectively innovation centered scientific &
 technological developments in niche areas that could attain for the country a global leadership position. This initiative will be further
 strengthened in the year 2001-2002.
Q5.   Whether any further steps have been contemplated by the Department to spread the scientific temper and inculcate the spirit of
 research in larger sections of society?
Ans.  The DSIR had initiated a new scheme in 1998-99 titled Technopreneur Promotion Programme (TEPP) that has greatly enthused and
 encouraged individuals to come out with their
latent creative talents. The CSIR also introduced from 1998-99 the Programme on Youth for Leadership in Science. to attract , retain and nurture
 Youth to science that has been acknowledged and appreciated by all sections of society. Besides CSIR publishes popular science journals in
 English, Hindi, Urdu besides reader-friendly S&T books and encylopedias. NRDC also brings out two popular publications in English, Hindi to
 popularise science and scientific temper. These initiatives will be strengthened in the Plan period.
Q6.    Whether any review of the Programmes Research Schemes, Scholarships & Fellowship, for which Rs. 56.50 crores has been kept in 2001-
2002, been undertaken. If so, with what results?
Ans.  There are nine subject wise Committees that continuously monitor and review the programmes of research schemes and suggest any
 modifications thereto from time to time. The scheme of JRF and SRF is monitored and reviewed by an extramural, interdepartmental, expert
 Committee chaired by the Director General, CSIR. Based on the outcome of the deliberations of these Committees a new scheme titled Shyama
 Prasad Mukherjee Fellowship to support creative and innovativeness at the post-graduate level has now been formulated. The overall review of
 the programmes and schemes is undertaken by a Research Advisory Council which meets at least twice a year.
Q7.  Time and again the Committee has emphasized the modernization of CSIR Laboratories with state of the art facilities designed to cater to the
 needs of the users. It appears that the first step of three-tier hardware infrastructure envisaged in terms of LAN at the Headquarters and the
 laboratories has been accomplished. The initiative to set up MIS is in hand and as first step Is personal based MIS' has been set up across CSIR
 and for "Project" in few labs on a trial basis. The Committee would like to have the. details of the project, salient features, cost and the purpose
 likely to be achieved through the project, for its information.
Ans.   The objectives of the MIS Project are to systematically collect & update organizational data on (i) Human Resources in CSIR and (ii)
 Project Monitoring. The project monitoring system will include all the essentials of the project at the approval stage with predefined financial,
 physical, infrastructural, S&T human resource milestones & targets and their periodic progress & achievement. The activity is presently at the
 level of field testing in a few laboratories and after its feedback and successful validation it would be taken up for adoption across the
 organization.
Q8.   The Government has sought to give a special package to NE for a variety of reasons, among others, to increase their assimilation as also their
 participation in the main stream of National life. This does not appear to have been reflected in the programmes and activities of your
 Department? If so, the reasons therefore?
Ans. The Department of Scientific & Industrial Research and the CSIR laboratories have accorded due importance to providing R&D of value and
 S&T outputs for the effective utilisation of endogenous resources of the NE Region (NER). CSIR has a full fledged Regional Research Laboratory
 (RRL) at Jorhat along with a branch laboratory at ltanagar and field station at lmphal which provides dedicated S&T inputs for economic &
 industrial development of NER. CSIR is implementing specific projects for the development of NER for example (i) pilot project at Assam Oil
 Division Refinery of Indian Oil Corporation at Digboi for developing a short path distillation technology for making value added products i.e.
 micro-crystalline waxes and quality bitumen from vacuum residues - a waste from the refinery, (ii) DSIR/CSIR have provided technology &
 finance to establish a pilot plant for making fresh ginger oil and spice processing at Manipur; (iii) the light transport aircraft being developed at
 NAL will be of immense value to interlinking the NER  to the  mainland &  within  the region.  Besides  CSIR has taken up seismic  monitoring &
seismic hazards map preparation, bio-propspection, development of agro-technology and processing technologies for medicinal and aromatic
 plants, coal assessment and utilization, site specific architectural designs for low cost houses etc. for NER. Several manpower development
 progammes have been organized by DSIR & CSIR on diverse S&T based knowledge and skills. Besides surveys have been conducted to utilize
 the latent human & natural resources of NER. Thus DSIR & CSIR are committed to provide S&T inputs for development of North-East
 Region.      It may be noted that along with other scientific departments/agencies, DSIR/CSIR have now (from 2001-2002) been exempted from
 the mandatory requirement of earmarking 10% of the Budget for the NER & Sikkim. Thus the allocation of resources for NER has not been
 indicated separately in the demand of grant.
Q9.  It has been stated that the modernization and upgradation of the equipment and R&D facilities was commenced with the budgetary
 support provided in the year 1997-98. The Committee would like to know whether any time schedule was fixed for the completion of
 modernization and upgradation of the facilities in CSIR laboratories: if so, the details thereof and the extent to which the modernisation
 has been achieved?
Ans.  At the outset CSIR would like to convey its gratefulness to the Committee for its recommendations to the Govt. to fund CSIR for
 Modernisation of its equipment and R&D facilities in the National Laboratories. A separate scheme on modernization was initiated in the
 Ninth Five Year Plan (NFYP) and Laboratory-wise, modernisation plans were formulated. The total outlay on modernization was Rs.
 360 crore over NFYP of which Rs. 260 crore was budgetary support and Rs. 100 crore was to be met from internal receipts. The
 selective modernization of equipment & R&D facilities is expected to be completed as per schedule by the end of 2001-2002. However
 many of the CSIR laboratories are now five decades old - the laboratory buildings, infrastructure and facilities were built then. Although
 CSIR has diligently maintained them yet the time has taken its toll; for example the electrical wiring, telephones, laboratory safety
 systems have become obsolete. These need to be modernized if CSIR is to retain semblance of global competitiveness. CSIR would
 request the Committee to consider this aspect of modernization and if found tenable recommend to the Government the modernization of
 its infrastructural facilities in the Tenth Five Year Plan.

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
Q.10(a) The New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative Programme was initiated in the year 2000-2001 with the objective
 of a global leadership in technology with a allocation of Rs. 50 crores. At the R.E. stage the allocation was surprisingly reduced to half of
 the total amount -i.e. Rs. 25 crores. Whether the sharp reduction in the allocation at R.E. stage indicates that the Department could not
 fulfill its objectives in the last year; if so, what are the reasons?
(b)             Interestingly in the year 2001-2002, the B.E. has been again hiked to Rs. crores. Please explain the reasons for the same?
Ans. (a) A special grant of Rs. 50.00 crore was approved for the new scheme New Millennium Indian Technology Leadership Initiative
 (NMITLI) during the year 2000-01. The scheme is to provide support to innovation centered scientific & technological developments as
 a vehicle to attain for the country a global leadership position, at least in some selected niche areas in a true 'Team India' effort. The
 operationalisation of the scheme required not only innovative thinking to identify the select areas but also national consultations and
 involvement. Thus wide ranging and widespread national consultations were organized. Over 1000 personal letters were addressed by
 DG, CSIR to leaders in academia, S&T, industry etc. seeking suggestions for these niche areas. A special  meeting  of  the  CSIR 
 Advisory  Board (AB)  was held to discuss the NMITLI scheme.
Based on the directions of AB, national and regional level Workshops were organized on the occasion of National Technology bay by all CSIR
 laboratories. A special advertisement was inserted in leading national dailies again on National Technology Day and over 8500 NMITLI posters,
 seeking suggestions on potential niche areas, were sent to diverse educational and R&D establishments. Thus the process of national consultations
 involved fountainheads of wisdom from diverse walks of life. This generated overwhelming enthusiasm in the S&T and industry. community and
 suggestions for over 1000 ideas were received. Thereafter a very stringent and rigorous system of screening, expert evaluation and assessment,
 championing and brainstorming was set up. In this, eminent experts from Industry and Academia and Research Institutions were associated; over
 4000 high quality man days were devoted to identifying 28 potential niche opportunity areas from over 1000 bare ideas and another 2000
 specialists man days were devoted formulating strategic technology projects. In the first phase 12 niche ideas were considered and only nine of
 these ideas were projectised with the help of internationally recognized experts from R&D and industry.    These detailed projects were then
 subjected to techno- economic evaluation by a High-Powered Committee (HPC) and the recommendations of the HPC were subsequently
 considered by the Governing Body of CSIR and nine projects at a total cost of about Rs. 54 crore spread over a period of 2-3 years were approved
 with the first years outlay of around Rs.35 crore. Thus a great amount of national churning went into devising a transparent system of
 implementation and national consultation in perfecting the niche opportunity technology areas into project mode. Thus, the surrender of Rs.25
 crore at the RE stage was a prudent step to optimize on investments and come up with winnable projects.
(b)    In addition to these nine projects taken up in the first phase,  remaining sixteen niche technology areas are being projectised on the
 same stringent     and     rigorous      basis  as evolved. Thus the Rs. 50 crore allocation sought for 2061-2002 is to partly meet the
 allocations for the second year for the nine projects and the first year installment for the new projects that would be taken up. Thus the
 full allocation of Rs. 50 crore is expected to be utilized during 2001-2002.
Qll.   It has been mentioned that the DSIR support for the Programme Aimed at Technological Self Reliance (PASTER) is catalytic and
 major part of the financial support to any project under the Programme has been from the industry.
(a)        The Committee would like to know the details of share between DSIR and the industry under the programme, besides furnishing
 details of different projects supported by the industry.
(b)      With an enhanced allocation of Rs.  8.40 crores in the current year as compared to Rs. 7.20 crores both at B.E. & R.E. of 2000-01,
 what projects Department purposes to undertake in the year under review?
Ans.(a) The   PATSER   Scheme   provides   partial funding   through Grants-in-aid to industry for projects taken up in association with
 other research organizations/ institutions for Development and demonstration of new/improved products and processes, as well as
 absorption & up-gradation of imported technology. DSIR's support cover inter-alia, part of the costs of prototype, pilot, plant,
 consultancy, test equipment/test rigs, testing & trials, etc. Generally, DSIIR support is 30- 40% of the total project cost and the remaining
 expenditure is met by the Industry. Till now, DSIR has supported over 110 projects envisaging a total project cost of Rs. 158 crores with
 DSIR's share being Rs. 47 crores i.e. around 30% on an average.
 
 (b)    Some of the products/processes developed under PATSER include: Digested organic supplement from agricultural waste, Earth
 moving machinery such as 70T dumper, 200 HP front-end loader, IOT excavator, 460 HP Wheel dozer; Xenon and Crypton lamps for
 Laser pumping, 6 Hi cold rolling mill, fresh Detonating Cards for shaped charges.
In 2000-01, 75 projects are in progress such as L(+) Tartaric Acid from Tamarind, a mechanized process for utilization of distillery
 effluents for production of biocomposts, Heat resistant slurry explosives, 500 KW Gas Turbine for co-generation in process plants. High
 Speed Machining Centre, Computerized Braille Printing system and Material handling stockers, tow tractors, etc.
During 2001-02 around 25 new projects and around 85 on-going projects for technology development and demonstration are
 planned to be supported. Besides inviting fresh proposals from industry, DSIR will proactively interact with other ministries for
 identification of new products/processes required and promote technology development projects with small and medium enterprises.
 Besides supporting the projects, DSIR will organize/ support more interactions of industry, research organizations and concerned
 agencies for identifying future trends and needs for new/improved technologies.
Q12.   What has been performance of each of the PSU/Public enterprises under the Department during 2000-2001? Whether, in the line
 with Government's approach, steps are contemplated, during the year under review, to disinvests these units lock, stock and barrel?
Ans.  The performance of the two Public Sector Enterprises under DSIR namely National Research Development Corporation (NRDC)
 and Central Electronics Limited (CEL), during 2000-2001 is as follows:

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
      NRDC
      NRDC has been consistently making profits for over 15 years. The performance rating and gross profits of the Corporation during last
 three years is as follows:
 
Year               Gross Profit    MOU Performance
         (Rs. in lakhs )
1997-98                  30.68             Very Good
1998-99                 45.96                         Very Good
1999-2000    51.97                         Excellent
Thus there is no proposal for its disinvestments.
CEL
      Performance of CEL for the year 1999-2000 and expected performance for the year 2000-01 is as follows:
(Rs. in lakh)
Year                         Production      Sales              Gross profit/loss 1998-99            
4467     5183   -596
1999-2000    5237                         5541                        -374
2000-2001                 6425              6255                        -150 envisaged
 
The performance of CEL has shown significant improvement in 2000-01 compared to 1999-2000. A significant achievement during
 the year by the Company is supply & installation of liver 250 solar powered water pumping systems in many districts of Punjab within a
 short period of three months. As its performance has improved, there is no proposal for disinvestments in the current
 year.                             
Q13.   To what extent the budgetary support remained unutilized during the year 2000-2001 and what are the reasons therefor?
Ans.  The Revised estimates for 2000-01 for CSIR was reduced by Rs. 59.77 crore, this constituted Plan reduction of Rs. 27.52 crore and
 Non-Plan of Rs. 32.25 crore. This was due to a surrender of Rs. 25 crore under Plan for the new scheme New Millennium Indian
 Technology Leadership Initiatives (NMITLI) as explained in the question no. 10. The remaining Rs. 34.77 crore was reduced as an
 economic measures. In respect of OSIR, a total of Rs.9.26 crore is the surrender from the B.E. for the year 2000-2001. This includes
 Rs.3.76 crore under Revenue and Rs.5.50 crore under Capital. At the RE stage, the budgetary support was cut by Rs.2.63 crore. A further
 saving of Rs.6.63 crore is anticipated under various schemes due to inadequate number of desired   project  proposals  and  non-
fulfillment of necessary conditions/requirements by the beneficiaries for release of funds.
Q.14  A mention has been made in the Notes on Demands for Grants 2001-2002 about the Residential Buildings, staff quarters and other
 amenities. This is an important area with regard to the welfare of the officers and staff of the Ministry/DSIR including CSIR and
 Laboratories. What are the details of the project, including cost and the member of quarters/details of amenities sought to be provided
 and the percentage of satisfaction enjoyed by the staff in this regard?
Ans.  CSIR is grateful to the Committee for its sustained support to improve the housing and other amenities for the employees. This is
 the 'psychic' satisfaction that helps to attract and retain some talent in CSIR. The location of laboratories is divided under 3 categories
 viz. those in (i) Metro cities (ii) other towns and (iii) remote areas. The present level of satisfaction and the targets set for satisfaction for
 the three categories are metros: 13% vs 50%; other towns: 46% vs. 70% and remote areas; 57% vs. 80%. Thus there is substantial
 unsatiated demand. The major activity in 2000-2001 is improving the housing satisfaction level at the metros at Bangalore, Hyderabad &
 Delhi where inroads of IT sector on HR awe being felt and in remote areas like Palampur and Karaikudi where appropriate talent needs
 to be attracted and retained. In 2001-2002 the initiatives of 2000-2001 will be completed and activities in 'other towns' like,
 Bhubneshwar, Dhanbad, Mysore & Nagpur, will be initiated.
Q15(a)  What steps the DSIR has taken to make the laboratories under the CSIR self-reliant and income-generating institutions in terms
 of Committee's recommendation in this regard?
(b)     What efforts have been made by the Department in commercializing the R&D developed at these laboratories?
Ans.(a)The   Department   has    established in    collaboration   with  CII  a   Technology Export Development Organisation to promote
 the export of expertise technologies from India particularly from the CSIR laboratories. Besides the Department is encouraging the
 laboratories to establish dedicated business development groups to enhance their income generation.However as explained in reply to
 question 1, the Indian industry is presently at cross-roads and is unable to make substantial investments in R&D.

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 
 (b)  The   PATSER   programme   of   the   Department   has   been   used as a vehicle to utilize the expertise and R&D outputs of the laboratories.
 The NRDC of the Department is also assisting the laboratories in commercialing their R&D on a case to case basis.                    
Q16.(a)            Whether the objectives of National System for Science and Technology (NISSAT) set for the year 2001-2002 have been
 achieved? If not, the reasons.
(b)     Whether the programme/activities proposed to be undertaken in the year 2001-2002 will be achieved with an allocation of Rs. 2.10
 crores.
(c)     The Committee would like to know 'whether the user agencies/departments are regularly apprised about the achievements of the
 various Information Centres? If not, what steps Department are taking for such awareness so that achievements of the Centres can fully
 be utilized?
(d)     The Committee was informed in the Background Note for the year 2001-2002 that under NISSAT, Expert Committees are set up for
 monitoring the implementation of multi-institutional and expensive projects. What are the details of these arrangements and how they function?
Ans.(a)The objectives that were set for NISSAT for the year 2000-2001 have been achieved.
(b)         NISSAT's   emphasis   is   on   application   of   the   Internet   Technology   for information Access and Disseminatioh and
 Content Development projects like library resources, extramural research, expert manpower, electronic theses and dissertations, IPR etc.
 NISSAT would be able to get programmes/activites proposed for 2001-2002 implemented within the allocation of Rs.2.1 crore.
(c)     NISSAT has two effective media to do so: namely a quarterly publication ITT-. Information Today & Tomorrow that acts as an
 industry - technology watch, and the second is the annual meet on ITT which brings the industry-promoter-service provider-and more
 importantly the User on a common platform. Besides, most of the NISSAT supported Centres bring out their own publications and
 Databases and have their websites and web servers to provide global access to their services and products.  In addition, representatives of
 similar organizations and user institutions are involved in various national level/local level committees not only to benefit front their
 inputs, but also disseminate the check avoidable duplication.
(d)     The Expert Committees include subject specialists, representative of agencies and institutions concerned with the subject and
 representatives of users. The Committees meets periodically and review the progress of the projects. The financial and other supports are
 provided to the projects on the basis of' recommendations of these Committees.
Q17.  What is the percentage of total plan outlay (as also in terms of percentage) being spent on R&D?
Ans.About 95% of the Plan outlay amounting to Rs. 340 crore is being spent directly on R&D activates and programmes by the
 Department.
Q18.(a)  Whether in addition to the Asian and Pacific Centre for T'ransfer of Technology (APCTT), any other international Organisation is
 proposed to be supported by the Department during 2001-2002 for development and commercialization of indigenous technologies?
(b)   Whether  there is any area of priorities, in terms of. Programme/Projects/Schemes which the Department feels should have been
 covered but have not been covered for want of budgetary support for 2001-2002.
Ans.(a) There is no other proposal to support any other international organization during 2001-2002 for development and
 commercialization of indigenous technology.
(b)  CSIR is grateful to the Government for its generous support despite the Gujarat earthquake disaster. Also as this is the terminal year
 of the Ninth Five Year Plan consolidation and completion of ongoing programmes were the priority. Thus no new projects were
 proposed.
Q19.  In the year 2001-2002, B.E. of Rs. 8.00 crores has been kept for Intellectual Property & Technology Management. What new
 schemes are proposed to be undertaken in the current year with this budgetary support?
Ans.  The filing for IPR (mainly patents) by CSIR has shown a phenomenal rate of growth; as against patent filing of 377 in India and
 199 abroad in 1999-2000, the envisaged corresponding patent  filing in 2000-01 is 450 and 250, this pace of growth will be maintained in
 2001-02 as well. A no small measure as CSIR is the Indian entity that files the highest patents, with the next one being at half this figure.
 This endeavor itself will need substantial financial inputs. CSIR will continue to spearhead he global movement to recognize the
 traditional/community knowledge as prior art in patent search. CSIR has taken up the initiative to advance the knowledge of R&D
 management through hosting of an annual R&D management conference. The Millennium R&D Management Conference-Leveraging
 Research & Technology Alliances was held in December 2000 and the initiative will be continued further in 2001 as well.
MINUTES
 NINTH MEETING
 

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday the 29th March, 2001 in Room No.139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.   Shri Birabhadra Singh
3.   Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra
4.   Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
5.   Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray
6.   Smt. Savita Sharda
7.   Shri B.P. Singhal
 
      LOK  SABHA
 
8.   Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura
9.   Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
10.Shri Baliram Kashyap
11.Shri Hassan Khan
12.Dr. Charan Das Mahant
13.Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
14.Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
15.Shri B. K. Parthasarathi
16.Shri Suresh Pasi
17.Shri Prahlad Patel
18.  Prof. R. R. Pramanik
19.  Shri Naresh Puglia
20.Shri Ram Prasad Singh
21.  Shri V. Vetriselvan
22.Dr.(Smt.) Rajeshwaramma Vukkala
23.Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
 
 
 
      SECRETARIAT
     Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
      Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
      Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
      Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
     REPRESENTATIVES OF DEPARTMENT OF SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH
 
Dr. R. A. Mashelkar, Secretary
Shri Sudhir Kumar, Joint Secretary (Admn.)
Dr. H. R. Bhojwani, Head (RPBD)
Smt. Pravin Tripathi, Financial Adviser
Dr. S. Mallick, Head HRDG
Shri R. K. Gupta, Head IPMD
Shri A. Wahid, Scientist
Shri A. K. Verma, Scientist
Shri D. K. Chakraborty, Consultant (Budget & Accounts)
Shri C. S. Malik, Sr.FAO
Shri K. V. Srinivasan, Adviser
Shri N. K. Sharma, Managing Director
Shri B. Mylar Rao, CMD, CEL
Shri S. P. Agarwal, Scientist
Shri Jagdish Singh, Scientist
Dr. Vinay Kumar, Scientist
Shri R. R. Abhyankar, Scientist
Shri Ashwani Gupta, Scientist
     Shri R. K. Sharma, Deputy Secretary
2.   At the outset the Chairman welcomed the representatives of Department and requested the Secretary to make a brief presentation
 regarding the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of the Department.  The Secretary made visual presentation of the activities and
 achievements of the Department and briefly explained the budgetary allocation on different heads as also the functioning of the
 Department.  The Members then sought clarification on points relating to the Demands for Grants.  The Secretary replied to the questions
 and assured the Committee to send written comments on the points on which information was not readily available.         
3.   *                             *                             *
4.*                   *                   *
     The witnesses then withdrew.
            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5.   The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 30th March, 2001.
 
*** Relates to other matters.
 
 

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
 
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Monday the 9th April, 2001 in Room No.139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah —  Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.   Shri Birabhadra Singh
3.   Shri K. C. Kondaiah
4.   Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra
5.   Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
6.   Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray
7.   Smt. Savita Sharda
8.   Shri B.P. Singhal
9.   Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
     
LOK  SABHA
 
10.Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura
11.Shri Baliram Kashyap
12.Dr. Charan Das Mahant
13.Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
14.Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
15.Shri Suresh Pasi
16.Dr. Ashok Patel
17.Shri Vaiko
18.Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
      SECRETARIAT
    
     Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
      Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary

86th
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/86th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:22]
      Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
     Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
 
2.   The Committee took up consideration of ***, 86th and *** Draft Reports.  The Committee considered each of these reports.  After
 minor connections of oral nature, the Committee adopted these reports.
3.   The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri B. P. Singhal to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri E.M.
 Sudarsana Natchiappan and in his absence Dr. Ashok Patel to lay the Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha on April 18, 2001.
4.   *                             *                             *
5.   *                                                     *                                                          *
6.   The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 P.M. to meet again on 10th April, 2001.
 
*** Relates to other matters.