R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/87th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:23]
 Parliament of India
 Rajya Sabha
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
 ON
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
 
87th REPORT
 
 ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2001-2002) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY (MINISTRY OF SCIENCE  AND
 TECHNOLOGY) (DEMAND NO. 70) 
 
 (presented to the Rajya Sabha on 9th April, 2001)
 (laid in the Lok Sabha on 18th April, 2001)  
  RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 April, 2001/Visakha, 1923  (Saka)
C O N T E N T S          
1.     COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
2.     INTRODUCTION
3.     REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE
4.     SUMMARY OF  THE RECOMMENDATIONS
5.     ANNEXURES                                                                                                                                                         
(i)  Budget Estimates for the year 2001-2002
(ii)  Replies to the questionnaire 
6.      MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE                                                     
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS ( YEAR 2001)
 
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah — Chairman
           
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.       Shri Debabrata Biswas
3.   Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
4.       Shri K. C. Kondaiah
5.   Smt. Chandresh Kumari
6.   Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra                      
7.   Dr. D. Masthan                                    
8.   Shri Lalitbhai Mehta                             
9.   Prof.(Smt.) Bharati Ray            

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/87th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:23]
10.  Smt. Savita Sharda
11.  Shri Birabhadra Singh                           
12.  Shri Lachhman Singh                            
13.  Shri B.P. Singhal                                              
14.  Shri Prakanta Warisa                            
15.  Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
  
            
LOK  SABHA
 
16.  Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura
17.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                    
18.  Shri Vishwendra Singh Chauhan
19.  Smt. Bhavana Chikhaliya                      
20.  Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza                 
21.  Shri Laxman Giluwa                             
22.  Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
23. Shri Bali Ram Kashyap
24.  Shri Hassan Khan
25.  Dr. Charan Das Mahant
26.  Shri S. Murugesan                                
27.  Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
28.  Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                              
29.  Shri A. Venkatesh Naik            
30.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi             
31.  Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
32.  Dr. Ashok Patel                                               
33.  Shri Prahlad Patel                                 
34.  Prof. R.R. Pramanik                             
35.  Shri Naresh Puglia                                
36.  Shri Ramsagar Rawat                           
37.  Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy  
38.  Prof. I.G. Sanadi                                              
39.  Shri Lakshman Seth                              
40.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh             
41.  Shri V.S. Sivakumar     
42.  Shri Vaiko
43.  Shri V. Vetriselvan                               
44.  Dr. (Smt.) Rajeswaramma Vukkala
45.  Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
      Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
      Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
      Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
      Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
 
INTRODUCTION
 
      I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment & Forests, having
 been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Eighty-Seventh Report of the Committee.  This Report deals
 with the detailed Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the Department of Biotechnology (Ministry of Science and Technology) (Demand No.70).
 
2.  In the meeting of the Committee held on the 27 th  March, 2001 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of Biotechnology gave an
 overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the
 Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
 
3.  The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the Members and
 placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of
 Biotechnology.
 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on  9
th April, 2001.
 
 

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/87th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:23]
  
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                           C. RAMACHANDRAIAH,
April 9,2001                                                                                                                                   Chairman,
 Committee On Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests.
 R E P O R T
 
1.   The setting up of a separate Department of Biotechnology (DBT) under the Ministry of Science and Technology in 1986 gave a new impetus to
 the development of the field of modern biology and biotechnology in India.  In more than a decade of its existence, the Department has promoted
 and accelerated the pace of development of biotechnology in the country.  The Department has made significant achievements in the growth and
 application of biotechnology in the broad areas of agriculture, health care, animal sciences, environmental and industry.
      More than a decade of concerted effort in research and development in identified areas of modern biology and biotechnology have given rich
 dividends.  The proven technologies at the laboratory level have been scaled up and demonstrated in field.  Patenting of innovations, technology
 transfer to industries and close interaction with them have given a new direction to biotechnology research.  Initiatives have been taken to promote
 transgenic research in plants with emphasis on pest and disease resistance, nutritional quality, silk-worm genome analysis, molecular biology of
 human genetic disorders, brain research, plant genome research, development, validation and commercialization of diagnostic kits and vaccines
 for communicable diseases, food biotechnology, biodiversity conservation and bioprospecting, setting up of micro propagation parks and
 biotechnology based development for SC/ST, rural areas, women and for different States.  Department of Biotechnology (DBT) has been
 interacting with more than 5,000 scientists per year in order to utilize the existing expertise of the universities and other national laboratories. 
 There has been close interaction with the State Governments particularly through State S&T Councils for developing biotechnology application
 projects, demonstration of proven technologies, and training of human resource in a number of States and Union Territories.  The impact of the
 biotechnology related developments in agriculture, health care, environment and industry, has already been visible and the efforts are now
 culminating into products and processes.  More than 5000 research publications, 4000 post-doctoral students, several technologies transferred to
 industries and patents filed including US patents, can be considered as a modest beginning.  A unique feature of the department has been the deep
 involvement of the scientific community of the country through a number of technical task forces, advisory committees and individual experts in
 identification, formulation, implementation and monitoring of various programmes and activities.  Necessary guidelines of transgenic plants,
 recombinant vaccines and drugs have also been evolved.  A strong base of indigenous capabilities has been created.  The field of biotechnology
 both for new innovations and applications would form a major research and commercial endeavour for socio-economic development in the next
 millennium.
2.   The main responsibilities of this Department are:
(i)
        To evolve integrated plans and programmes in Biotechnology;
(ii)   Identify specific programmes of Research and Development and oversee related research and manufacturing activities for biologicals;
(iii)  Identify, set up and support centres of excellence for research and development in biotechnology and ensure proper dovetailing of these
 activities with national priorities;
(iv)
     Act as a screening, advising and approving body of Government with regard to import and transfer of new technologies for the
 manufacture of biologicals and biotechnological products and their intermediates;
 
(v)
      Evolve safety guidelines for biotechnology research, development and manufacturing in India;
(vi)     To act as the Central agency for the import of genetically manipulated materials, culture cells, specimens, tissue and biotech products
 including DNA and RNA of any type and for promoting their production in the country;
(vii) Serve as the interministerial and interagency nodal point for all specific international, bilateral and multilateral research and development
 collaboration in the area of biotechnology and act as the nodal point for all technology transfers in the area of biotechnology;
(viii) Manufacture and application cell-based vaccines;
(ix)     To evolve programmes of human resource development in the area of biotechnology;
(x)      To act as the administrative Department for autonomous institutions and ICGEB;
(xi)     Serve as the authorised Department of Government in respect of legislative Parliamentary
      requirements in all areas mentioned under Allocation of Business for the Department.
3.      Biotechnology as a branch of modern biology is hardly two decades old and it is the fastest growing branch of modern science.   It is rapidly
 becoming the cornerstone of industrial development and leading us to the brink of bio-industrial revolution.  In fact, we are now in biotech century
 and our way of life is likely to be more fundamentally transformed in the decades to come. The present day definition of biotechnology is the
 application of scientific and engineering principles to the processing materials by biological agents to produce goods and services.  The
 applications of biotechnology are so wide that virtually every industry including pharmaceuticals, textiles, aquaculture, chemicals, household
 products, manufacturing, environmental cleaning, food processing and forensics, are using the technology. 
4.      Biotechnology is emerging as a major player for enhancing the food productivity, nutritional status, sustainable utilization of biological
 resources, prospecting of new molecules and genes, identification and characterization of biological wealth, development of new vaccines,
 diagnostics and drugs, pollution abatement through biotechnological route, waste recycling, etc.  Bioinformatics and human resource development
 have given rich dividends in terms of highly skilled trained human resource available in the country and a strong information network being
 utilized by a large number of scientists.
5.   The Committee was informed that the Department transferred a number of technologies of diagnostics, tissue cultured plants and biofertilizers
 and biopesticides to the industry, had established more bioinformatic centres and new teaching programmes:  Special initiative was taken by the
 Department to organise a Brain Storming Session on the post Human Genome Sequencing and plan a future strategy.  Emphasis was also laid on

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/87th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:23]
 development of biotechnology for the SC/ST, weaker sections and the rural areas.  Many states were coming forward with a programme to
 generate biotechnology activities of relevance in their respective states.  DBT has been closely associated with their development and planning
 specially in the states of West Bengal, Himachal Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka and Pondicherry.  Plant
 tissue culture industry is moving fast and the micro propagation Technology Parks in Tata Energy Research Institute, New Delhi and National
 Chemical Laboratory, Pune, are acting as an interface between the industry and the developers of the technology.
 
6.   The   Committee has also been informed that the autonomous institutions have done very well in producing of excellent quality publications
 and generation of new products and technologies.  The research publications from all the autonomous institutions have high citation index and
 impact factor.  The peer reviewing and the monitoring mechanisms have been further strengthened and streamlined.  Necessary economy
 measures wherever possible, without sacrificing the quality of science, have been adopted.  Bio-safety protocols, public awareness about potential
 of biotechnology, especially in agriculture, organisations of a large number of seminars and symposia to encourage young scientists and students
 and filing of patents have all progressed well. The Department’s initiative in the international collaboration was becoming very important,
 particularly in the most advanced areas of biotechnology.
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION
7.   Based on the recommendation of the working group, the Ninth Plan proposal was submitted to Planning Commission. The outlay of Rs.1026
 crores for period of five years (1997-2002) was proposed against which an outlay of Rs 675 crores has been recommended. Financial summary of
 last four years is as follows: -
                                                                                                 (Rs. in Crores)
Year Proposed B. E. R. E. Actual Expenditure
1997-98 129.50 107.00  85.00  85.22
1998-99 125.00 107.00 100.81 104.46
1999-2000 139.00 110.00 116.87 116.38
2000-2001 162.97 125.00 139.92 125.00
as on 31st January, 2001
2001-2002 252.00 175.00   
 
The allocation of Rs.186.34 crores allocated for the year 2001-2002 includes 175.00 crores for plan and Rs.11.34 crores for non-plan activities (Annexure I). The increase amounting
 to Rs.35.00 crores over BE of Rs.125.00 crores (plan) of the year 2000-2001 is mainly in the plan budget.  2001-2002,  being the last year of the 9 th plan, most of the projects were
 being undertaken within the scope of ongoing schemes/programmes.
8.   While the Department would continue to pursue the R&D leads towards product and process development, initiate major programmes in
 genomics and related areas, strengthen technology transfer mechanisms for rapid commercialization of technologies developed for societal and
 economic benefit of the country on an environmentally sound basis, some new initiatives in the area of human genetics and genome analysis as
 per the recommendations of the brain storming workshop on post genome perspectives are proposed to be considered during the year.  Besides,
 several projects of socio-economic relevance based on the needs of the country have been initiated.
9.   Many major activities initiated during the current 9 th plan would provide such dividends by the end of the plan period by promoting by  the end of the plan period by promoting
 foreign direct investment and products and processes in the field of health, care agriculture and industry  for the
benefit of society.  Indian Industries are expected to come forward to set up Biotech ventures.  Basic research on all aspects of biotechnology would be perused.   The allocation (Plan)
 for the Department of Biotechnology has gone up to Rs.175 crores for the financial year 2001-2002 as  against Rs.140 crores at R.E. stage and Rs.125 crores at B.E. stage in 2000-
01.  Asked whether the increase in allocation was necessitated by the erosion in the value of money or due to inclusion of new  items of work, the Committee was informed that the
 Department planned to initiate establishment of “GEN-NET INDIA” to cure, control and care genetic  disorders prevalent in the country along with the development of network
 programmes on human genome diversity and biochips in genomoics towards gene identification /diagnostics. Comparative genomics, data annotation, proteomics, pharmaco genomics
 and work on some microbial genomics would be started. Besides an Integrated approach towards utilisation and conservation of medicinal plants for herbal drug development employing
 biotechnology tools and techniques would be started. The Department also shall continue its recently started Indian initiatives on Rice Genome Sequencing and activities of National
 Bioresource Development Board. 
10.  The Committee observes that it is not opposed to enhanced allocations to the Department.  While it is necessary that the Department
 keeps itself posted with the developments abroad in the field of biotechnology, it should choose projects with utmost caution with a view
 to ensure that they are in the best interests of the country. 
AGRICULTURAL BIOTECHNOLOGY    
11.  During 2000-01 the Department received 400 R&D projects out of which 100 projects have been sanctioned in various disciplines, which
 include, among other Basic Research in Modern Biology, Agricultural Biotechnology, Biological Control of Plant Pests, Diseases and weeds,
 Biofertilizers, Biodiversity Conservation and  Environment, Medical Biotechnology, Human Genetics and Genome Analysis.
12.  The Department has continued its efforts to enhance food and agriculture production, quality and nutritional improvement, prevention of pre-
and post harvest losses and to ensure environmental sustainability. The Department carries research in three types of activities; R&D projects in
 priority crops; multi-institutional project on development of transgenics and quality trait studies.  Department also supports identified plant
 molecular biology programmes and its mandate relates to problems of priority crops, development of transgenics, quality improvement and basic
 research in the area of plant molecular biology. It also achieved success in basic plant biotechnology and plant genome research.
13.      Development of markets for high quality protein content and cloning/modification of triticin gene with enhanced lysine content in wheat,
 development of molecular methods for hybrid seed mustard and production of transgenic plants of tobacco with viral resistance are some salient
 achievements.  Besides, transgenic work has been carried out on banana, cabbage, mustard, mungbean and wheat for crop improvement, increased
 nutritional value, disease resistance and better shelf life.  Efforts were being made to develop transgenic in cotton and rice. A nutritionally
 important gene, AmA1 has been transferred to Potato.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/87th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:23]
14.  The Committee has been informed that India is a partner in the international rice genome-sequencing programme, with a responsibility of
 completing sequence of chromosome 11 being undertaken at south campus Delhi University and Centre for Biotechnology, IARI, New Delhi. 
 The commitment is to sequence the 10MB of chromosome in a period of five years.
 15.  Under the Integrated Nutrient Management programme several packages were successfully undertaken to facilitate judicious application of
 chemical fertilizers and adoption of microbial inoculants for various cropping systems.  An antifungal formulation for control of root rot diseases
 was developed and transferred to industry.  An area of 65,000 hectares has been covered in different agro-climatic zones and it has benefited more
 than 30,000 farmers till date.  In order to increase the efficiency of the microbial inoculants, a number of network programmes on development of
 transgenic microbial inoculants were implemented. Under Plant Tissue culture/Micro Propagation parks programme the Department achieved
 success by Tissue Culture for woody species, forest trees, horticulture and plantation crops. It was tested on Tea, Coffee and pepper.  Successful
 studies were continuing on the genetic manipulation of neem and populous, DNA fingerprinting of important clones of forest trees, re-generation
 system of mango varieties, tissue culture of rare and threatened flowering plants, transgenic virus resistant papaya and disease free citrus. 
16.      Technologies for eucalyptus, teak and bamboo have been transferred to Cadila Pharmaceuticals Ltd.  Three turnkey projects for state
 Departments have also been undertaken  for contract production.  A satellite park has been setup at Guwahati for popularization and use of
 technology. 
17.As regards the programmes under the forest trees the same need to be developed extensively with a view to increase the forest cover. 
 This in turn, would help in arresting ecological imbalances.  Besides, the technology be made available for social forestry programmes.
 
MEDICAL BIOTECHNOLOGY
18.  The Committee was informed that the transgenic mice produced at National Institute of Immunology, New Delhi would be useful in the
 development of pharmaceuticals and drugs.  Over 1.5 lakh doses of immunomodulator Leprovac have been supplied to NGO’s and hospitals for
 treatment of leprosy patients.  Further its use as an immuno-prophylactic agent was ascertained by conducting survey of vaccinee population of
 Ghatampur at Kanpur Dehat.  The survey was done by independent agencies and decoding of the results showed protection in 68% of subjects. 
 The Department has transferred a number of technologies to industry for improvements/scale up and commercialization.  Some of these were a
 Mac-ELISA system for the detection of Igm antibodies for detection of dengue virus; Igm Mac-ELISA for detection Hepatitis-A; a new
 expression system for Hepatitis-B genes with the possibility of a new recombinant Hepatitis-B vaccine technology; the ELISA based assessment
 of 4 reproductive hormones and the ELISA systems to monitor the level of alpha-fetoprotein.  The Committee was also informed that a HIV viral
 repository at National AIDS Research Institute, Pune has 91 isolates from different parts of the country.  This repository has both HIV-I and HIV-
II isolates.  A novel anti HIV glycoprotein from the first trimester placental human tissue with a molecular weight of 100 KDa has been isolated
 and found to significantly inhibit the multiplication of HIV-I strain. A novel enzyme alfa aminolevulinate dehydrogenase has been identified as a
 target for new drug development for malaria.  A new molecule to deliver anti-malarial compound has been identified.  The chromosome 10 of
 Leishmania donovani has new drug/vaccine targets like topoisomerase II, adenosine Kinase, cyclophelin and Gp 63.  Complete sequence of the
 chromosome 10 of L. donovani was being carried out for the first time in the world.  The research projects implemented in the areas of major
 infectious and non-infectious disease viz. tuberculosis, HIV,  malaria,  leishmaniasis,  cholera,  H.Pylori, dengue, tuyphoid,  cancer,  heart
 diseases  and
contraceptive vaccine showed significant progress.  Major emphasis was also given on generation of projects on oral cancer and clinical
 applications of the stem cells.
19.The Committee is constrained to observe that the leprosy vaccine developed by the National Institute of Immunology is yet to be
 included by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in its leprosy control programme.  The Committee has been given to understand
 that voluntary agencies have made use of 24 lakh doses of the vaccines whereas the Ministry of Health continues to import the vaccines
 instead of making use of the one developed by the National Institute of Immunology.  If it is really so, the Committee observes that it
 constitutes draining out of the precious foreign exchange from the national exchequer.  This needs to be pursued with the Ministry of
 Health on priority basis.
HUMAN GENETICS AND GENOME ANALYSIS
20.  Fourteen genetic clinics and three major projects were established for providing molecular diagnosis and counseling for the common genetic
 disorders prevalent in the country to the affected families.  About 13,000 affected families so far have been benefited from these units for genetic
 diagnosis including prenatal diagnosis and counselling for major genetic disorders. In the programme on functional genomics powerful
 computational capability for handling large scale human genome sequence data, robotic methodologies for genotyping and PCR based diagnostics
 for common genetic disorders have been developed.  A brain storming session on post-genome era was organized to discuss programmes in
 genomics.
JAI VIGYAN MISSIONS
21.  Four National Jai Vigyan Science and Technology missions covering the areas of vaccines, herbal medicines, mirror sites for genomic
 research and coffee biotechnology network were being monitored by expert committees and the Ministry for Science & Technology.  They were
 progressing as per the identified milestones.  There have been several leads in the area of vaccines, coffee and herbal product development, which
 would deliver potential products and processes.  The mirror sites established at four places for genomic studies have become operational and work
 has gained significant momentum after the announcement of human genome draft sequence.
22.The Committee commends the work done by the Department in the field of rice genome sequencing and observes that more such programmes need to be undertaken especially in crops like
 pulses which are in short supply in the country, maize, oilseeds, and other dry farming crops keeping in view the extremely varied climate, cropping patterns, variety of crops available in the
 country.
BIOTECHNOLOGY PATENT FACILITATING CELL (BPFC)
23.  Intellectual property protection plays an important role in gaining advantageous position in the competitive game for economic growth.  India
 enjoys a large asset of R&D personnel and infrastructural facilities.  Scientists and policy makers need more information and facilities for
 protecting the products of intellectual power of Indian Scientists.  As a step in this direction, a single window Biotechnology Patent Facilities Cell
 was created by the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) at the Bio-informatics Division of the Department, in July 1999.
Objectives
 
      Creating awareness and understanding among biologists and biotechnologists, relating to patents and the challenges & opportunities in this
 area  including arranging workshops, seminars,

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/87th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:23]
conference, etc., at all levels.  Introducing patent information a vital input in the process of promotion of R&D programmes in biotechnology and
 biology.  Providing patenting facilities to biologists and biotechnologists in the country for filing Indian and foreign patents on a sustained basis. 
 Keeping a watch on development in the are of IPR and make important issues known to policy makers, bio-scientists, biotech industry, etc.
Facilities
      High speed LAN based Internet connection for online patent searches using international databases, using the support services of the
 Biotechnology Information Centre (BTIC) at DBT, including CD-ROM based databases.  Mechanism for obtaining full patent documents and
 patents searching elsewhere.  Expert Advisory committee for advice on Patentibility of inventions and related issues.  Panel of patent attorneys
 from all over the country to help BPFC in patenting activities.  Panel of expert faculty for workshops and training programmes for creating
 awareness among the scientists.
24.  The Committee was informed that thirty-two patent applications had been filed including five in the foreign countries. Two US patents and
 seven Indian patents were granted this year.
25.The Committee has perused the information available in respect of Patent Cell over the internet.  While all the institutions etc. can be accessed and through them the homepage of the
 Department, the home page is not directly accessible for some reason of confidentiality attached to it or because of some technical reasons.  This  needs to be looked into.  The Committee is
 also of the view that the efforts be made to make the scientists aware of the need for taking patents and procedures for applying a patent must be simplified and displayed over the internet
 alongwith facilities for downloading of forms as far as possible. The information about the patents applied must also be made available which is perhaps  not available at present.
BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION AND ENVIRONMENT
26.The Committee has been informedthatthe Department has  developed technology packages for eco-restoration of mine spoil dumps, microbial remediation of petroleum sludge and oil
 spill, phyto-remediation, and methods for dye industry effluent treatment, bio beneficiation and desulphurisation technologies have been developed and transferred to industry.  Some
 projects for environmental protection and biodiversity conservation have been supported.  Ecological restoration technology for re-vegetating limestone belt has been successful in
 Mussorie and Delhi regions.  The crude oil and oil sludge degrading bacterial consortia namely “OIL ZAPPER” developed by TERI, New Delhi has been successfully demonstrated at
 Barauni refinery; BPCL, Mumbai and Digboi refinery.  The technology has been transferred to M/s. Sriram Biotech, Hyderabad, for commercial exploitation.
27.The Committee observes that efforts be made for developing cheaper technologies in waste treatment to  enable industries to readily accept and install the same.   As oil spill/sludge has
 become an important cause of pollution in the high seas in the recent years and is liable to affect the marine life, Oil Zapper could be marketed worldwide to contain oil spills.
 
ANIMAL BIOTECHNOLOGY
28.  The embryo transfer technology was being used to produce genetically superior animals for herd improvement.  Major programmes on
 developing transgenic animals were underway.  Transgenic mice expressing neomycin resistance gene, green fluorescent protein gene and
 othergenes have been produced.  A buffalo chromosome probe for sex determination of embryo is being validated and applied in the field.  Rabies
 vaccine for animals using Vero cell culture was being validated before commercialization.  Conjugates were being evaluated in female dogs for
 efficacy of recombinant dog zone pellucida glycoprotein with a view to regulate fertility.
VACCINE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
29.  The Committee has been informed that under the National Jai Vigyan mission, a DNA vaccine for preventing rabies in dogs was being
 developed at Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. Besides Immunogenecity studies on Japanese Encephalitis, DNA based vaccines as
 alternative to BCG, for tuberculosis were also being developed. The immunogenicity of the DNA candidate for HIV-I has been completed. The
 Department has also made progress in developing edible vaccines for cholera in tomato plants and rabies in cabbage using plant transformation
 and expression systems.
30.  The Committee commends the progress made in the field of vaccine development specially the edible vaccines.  The Department
 should endeavour to pass on these technologies to industry for  marketing purposes.  The Committee observes the need to develop more
 such vaccines for diseases like Hepatitis B virus, Hepatitis E virus that are highly infectious.
BIOTECHNOLOGY BASED PROGRAMME FOR WOMEN AND RURAL DEVELOPMENT
31.The Committee has been informed that the Department has initiated National Women Bioscientist Awards, which were conferred on International Women’s Day this year. Eleven
 Projects were undertaken in areas of waste management, biopesticides, biofertilisers, vermicompost, vermiculture,  sericulture, floriculture, mushroom cultivation, conservation and
 propagation of medicinal plant and herbs, poultry and fish farming which aim at developing rural areas and women. The Golden Jubilee Biotechnology park for Women was inaugurated
 on 24
th November 2000.  The Biotechnology Park seeks to provide opportunities for professionally qualified women to take career of remunerative self-employment through organization
 of environment friendly biotechnological enterprises. The park would provide central facilities viz. technology resourcing, training, and marketing.
32.While the Committee is satisfied with the programme related to setting up of Biotechnology Parks, it emphasizes the need for such Parks if they help the cause of development of  wasteland
 in villages which could possibly be another area of augmenting the income of farmers/women in rural areas.
BIOVILLAGE
33.  The  Committee was informed that a biovillage has been established at Morcha village, Probandar, for extension of technologies which are
 pro-poor, pro-women and pro-nature to the grass root level.  These technologies provide income generation opportunities for the targeted
 population.  In the village farmers are trained in production and use of bio-fertilizers, bio-pesticides, Modern farming  practices and cultivation of
 Marine algae seaweeds.  Cultivation  of
Medicinal and economically important plant species has also been undertaken in wasteland of the village.  A desalination unit for pure water has
 also been set up.
34.The    Committee commends the concept of Biovillage taken up by the Department.  The Committee however feels the need for more such projects being undertaken in those villages where
 chemical fertilizer is abundantly used.  Training also needs to be provided for use of the bio-fertilizers in view of their minimal impact on environment.
SERIBIOTECHNOLOGY
35.  The Committee has been informed that the Department’s efforts in developing silkworm genome were showing positive results and a
 programme was being undertaken at Centre for DNA Finger printing and Diagnostics, Hyderabad. The Department aims to produce transgenic
 silkworm cell/caterpillars and mulberry plants to produce better quality silk. Diverse silkworm strains characterized and transgenic silkworm
 lines/caterpillars are being developed. The technique has been standardized for effective degumming of silk using fungal enzyme for better   luster
 and softness of silk.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/87th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:23]
36.The Committee feels that the country must aim to regain its lost glory in silk trade as it  has the advantage of production of all four own commercial silk varieties viz; mulberry, tusser, eri and
 muga.  As sericulture is suitable for marginal, small and landless farmers, it has tremendous scope for expansion in view of its employment generation potential. Efforts should therefore be
 made to strengthen the linkages between extension and R&D units. The technology delivery systems should be streamlined by providing need based training and effective field demonstrations
 by using various communication methods.
BIOINFORMATICS
37.  This programme encompasses all aspects of biological information, viz, acquisition, processing, storage, distribution, analysis and
 interpretation which combines the tools and techniques of mathematics, computer science, and biology with an aim of understanding the
 biological significance of a variety of data and dissemination of up to date information resources to researchers and development of various tools
 for biotechnology and molecular biology applications. At present 55 centres are set up under the programme to carry out Bioinformatics and R&D
 activities Internationally recognised data bases such as EMBnet, PDB, GDB, EBI and plant genome database has been established under National
 Jai Vigyan S&T Mission.  These can be utilised for genomics and R&D activities through high speed and high bandwidth network services. A
 dedicated  high speed ,high bandwidth network is being established for major centers engaged in bioinformatics  R&D and educational activities.
 A directory of industries and institutions in SAARC region has been completed and would be available on  web.
38.The Committee observes that India is one of the first countries in the world to initiate a Bioinformatics programme.  Besides, given the advantages the country has in IT sector and its
 expertise in mathematics and high knowledge base, special emphasis needs to be given to this aspect as  sustainability and dissemination of the data is necessary for the success of  plans.
 The researchers should also have the access to updated knowledge to keep themselves abreast of research elsewhere in the world.   This would help avoid duplicating the research and in
 patenting the research already conducted.
INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION
39.  The Committee has been informed that interaction amongst scientific community was going on through bilateral  and  multilateral 
 collaboration.  India  has  joint projects  with  Switzerland,
USA, Sri Lanka, UK, Germany, Israel, France and Tunisia. In an Indo-Swedish project process for the production of lactic acid using a strain of
 lactobacillus was developed along with a biosensor system. R&D projects under Indo-US programme on Contraceptive and Reproductive Health
 Research have been implemented. Under the integrated long term programme of Indo-Russian collaboration in the biotechnology, a research and
 networking center –Indo-Russian center for Biotechnology was in the process of being established in New Delhi with a focus on research in plant
 and medical biotechnology. A new phase of Indo-Swiss collaboration in biotechnology has been agreed for implementation during 1999-2004
 with  focus on biotechnology applications in agriculture and environment  with special reference to improvement of wheat and pulses. Besides
 bilateral collaborations with Myanmar, Belarus and Israel have also been initiated.
40.  The joint working group of Indo-US vaccine Action Programmemet at NIH, USA to develop strategic plans for new programmes for the next
 decade and to develop candidate vaccines for malaria, tuberculosis and HIV in partnership with other agencies. Two potential candidate vaccines
 for rota viral diarrhoea have been developed at AIIMS, New Delhi and IISc, Bangalore and have been produced in USA for limited field trials.
41.The Committee observes that studies conducted under the bilateral cooperation should aim at research in developing drugs for diseases that are particular to our country such as  Kala-azar,
 plague, tuberculosis  & malaria etc.
AUTONOMOUS INSTITUTIONS
42.  Department of biotechnology supports research activities in various research institutions viz; Indian Institute of Immunology, National Brain
 Research centre, National Centre for Plant Genome Research, Centre for Cell Science and Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics.
CENTRE FOR DNA FINGERPRINTING AND DIAGNOSTICS (CDFD)
43.  The Department has sought an allocation of Rs.10.25 crores for the year 2001-2002 to construct an office complex with a view create an apex
 centre to guide the DNA finger printing, diagnostics and to increase its scope of research. The center was established with an aim to provide DNA
 finger printing services for crime investigation and for settling paternity disputes and (identification of biological parents) provide DNA finger
 diagnostic services.  The centre was also involved in diagnosis of cases suffering from infertility, hemophilia, fragile x, muscular dystrophy and
 other genetic disorders Asked whether the facilities available at the institute were sufficient to cope with the requirements of the increasing
 population, proportionate crime taking place in the country and cases of unnatural deaths etc.  The Committee was informed that a Memorandum
 of understanding (MOU) was signed by the centre with other state forensic laboratories so as to make them at par with the centre to handle routine
 cases on their own as part of the technology transfer.  As such there were no plans  to set up any other institution of its kind.
44.  Centre receives 5-6 cases per day and it has reinforced its diagnostics and molecular diagnostic. This is believed to be because of awareness of
 Indian population to genetic disorders.  The centre has also started a screening programme for diagnosing in born errors of metabolism for newly
 born children, and centre also provides genetic counseling to parents of affected children.
 
 
45.The Committee expresses its satisfaction with the work being done by the Centre for DNA Finger Printing and Diagnostics (CDFD) in the field of Automated Genome Analysis, Bioinformatics
 Diagnostics, DNA Fingerprinting. Instrumentation and Research in, among other areas, cancer Biology, computational Biology and Immunology etc.
46.The Committee however feels that the country’s population having touched 1020 million and as the crimes, conflicts and paternity disputes are expected to arise with more frequency the
 rising pace of population it was time to consider whether there was need to set up full fledged institutes to provide the services to the institutions and people expeditiously and with minimum of
 costs.
NATIONAL BRAIN RESEARCH CENTRE (NBRC)
47.  It serves as an apex center for brain research.  It undertakes basic research of high caliber in neuroscience and establishes linkages with
 national/international organisations involved in neuroscience research.  The major objectives of NBRC are to undertake basic research to
 understand function of the brain in disease and normal conditions. The centre has achieved its objectives both in setting up its main facility (intra-
mural) and its networking activities (extra-mural). Among other activities the centre also conducted an Indo-US workshop to identify areas like
 computational neuroscience, development of tools for image analysis, brain banking and neurogenetics.     Agreements were also being made for
 research cooperation and training with USA & Japan.
48.  Asked for the details of the programmes to be undertaken with the increased allocation of Rs.3.00 crores the Department informed the
 Committee  that it planned to initiate programmes in new areas of neuroscience such as system and cognitive neuroscience and neural stem cell
 research to keep pace with research world wide. Besides, NBRC , has been invited to join “Global Efforts for Development of Neuroinformatics”

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/87th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:23]
 which would provide unified information on neuroscience and training opportunities. It also undertaken to construct its own office complex at
 Manesar  with the help of Department of Atomic Energy at a cost of Rs.14 crores .
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF IMMUNOLOGY (NII)
49.  The National Institute of Immunology (NII) is committed to rigorous, innovative science and systematic exploration of the resultant
 technological possibilities and is striving for excellence in research. It interacts with industry for manufacture of products developed from research
 leads. The centre serves as a national reference centre for immunology and provides consultancy services to medical and veterinary, institutions,
 public health agencies and industries in the country; provides and promotes effective linkages between various Scientific and research
 agencies/laboratories and other organisations in the field of immunology, vaccine development and related areas and collaborate with foreign
 organisations in relevant fields.
50.  The Department informed the Committee that it proposes to undertake new initiatives in examination of chemical biology of mycobacteria,
 neuroimmune regulation of cellular function, analysis of role of carbohydrates in host pathogen interactions, P4 facility, molecular modelling of
 peptides and protein legend complexes using knowledge –based potentials in the current year. The increase in the allocation by Rs.2.10 crore over
 the R.E. of the year 2000-01 would facilitate  completion of small animal experiment research facility block in accordance with the
 recommendations of the Committee for purpose of Control and Supervision of Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA) and establish a technology
 incubator facility to promote institute-industry interaction for commercialisation of in-house technologies.
BHARAT IMMUNOLOGICALS AND BIOLOGICALS CORPORATION LTD. (BIBCOL)
51.  The BIBCOL is a PSU formulating Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV) from imported monovalent bulk since 1996 and supplies it to the National
 immunization Programme.  Asked about the reasons for not allocating any plan allocation for BIBCOL the Department informed the Committee
 that the company has started generating revenues which are sufficient to sustain their regular activities, and it has already paid Rs.16.00 crore to
 financial institutions out of Rs. 18.85 crores obtained from them as term loan.  The committee was also informed that there was no proposal for
 disinvestment or closure of the PSU during the current financial year.
52.  During the year the company has formulated 220 million doses of OPV and supplied the same to National Immunization Programme  (170
 million doses to UNICEF and 50 million doses to Ministry of Health & Family welfare)
53.  The Committee commends the progress made by BIBCOL from a company facing financial crunch to revenue generating one.  The
 Committee is happy to note that it is able to sustain its regular activities. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that
 efforts must be made to produce new & improved vaccines and immunodiagnostics such as rabies, measles, recombinant Hepatitis ‘B’
 vaccine, etc.
54.  The Committee observes that as the programmes of the Department are liable to benefit different sections of the society, the
 Department must take initiative to approach Doordarshan, radio & other media for at least a few minute’s slot to disseminate
 information at least in respect of one programme every day in a bid to reach the sections of the society for whom it was meant.
55.  After making a detailed scrutiny of the Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology and assessing the progress of various
 programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs.186.34 crores, as sought by
 the Department of Biotechnology for the year 2001-2002, under Demand no.70 may be approved.
REOMMENDATION / OBSERVATIONS AT GLANCE
 
 
1.   The Committee observes that it is not opposed to enhanced allocations to the Department.  While it is necessary that the Department
 keeps itself posted with the developments abroad in the field of biotechnology, it should choose projects with utmost caution with a view
 to ensure that they are in the best interests of the country. 
(Para 10)
2.   As regards the programmes under the forest trees the same need to be developed extensively with a view to increase the forest cover. 
 This in turn, would help in arresting ecological imbalances.  Besides, the technology be made available for social forestry programmes. 
(Para 17)
3.   The Committee is constrained to observe that the leprosy vaccine developed by the National Institute of Immunology is yet to be
 included by the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in its leprosy control programme.  The Committee has been given to understand
 that voluntary agencies have made use of 24 lakh doses of the vaccines whereas the Ministry of Health continues to import the vaccines
 instead of making use of the one developed by the National Institute of Immunology.  If it is really so, the Committee observes that it
 constitutes draining out of the precious foreign exchange from the national exchequer.  This needs to be pursued with the Ministry of
 Health on priority basis.
                                                                                                 (Para 19)
4.  The Committee commends the work done by the Department in the field of rice genome sequencing and observes that  more such programmes need to be undertaken especially in crops
 like pulses which are in short supply in the country, maize, oilseeds, and other dry farming crops keeping view the extremely varied climate, cropping patterns, variety of crops available in the
 country.
(Para 22)
5.   The Committee has perused the information available in respect of Patent Cell over the internet.  While all the institutions etc. can be accessed and through them the homepage of the
 Department, the home page is not directly accessible for some reason of confidentiality attached to it or became of some technical reasons.  This needs  to be looked into.  The Committee is
 also of the view that the efforts be made to make the scientists aware of the need for taking patents and procedures for applying a patent must be simplified and displayed over the internet
 alongwith facility for downloading of forms as far as possible. The information about the patents applied must also be made available which is perhaps  not available at present.
(Para 25)
6.   The Committee observes that efforts be made for developing cheaper technologies in waste treatment to enable industries to readily accept and install the same.   As oil spill/sludge has
 become an important cause of pollution in the high seas in the recent years and is liable to affect the marine life, Oil Zapper could be marketed worldwide to contain oil spills.                     

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/87th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:23]
                             (Para 27)
 
7.   The Committee commends the progress made in the field of vaccine development specially the edible vaccines.  The Department
 should endeavour to pass on these technologies to industry for  marketing purposes.  The Committee observes the need to develop more
 such vaccines for diseases like Hepatitis B virus, Hepatitis E virus that are highly infectious.
 (Para 30)
8.   While the Committee is satisfied with the programme related to setting up of Biotechnology Parks, it emphasizes the need for such Parks if they help the cause of the development of
 wasteland in villages which could possibly be another area of augmenting the income of farmers/women in rural areas.
(Para 33)
9.   The    Committee commends the concept of Biovillage taken up by the Department.  The Committee however feels the need for more such projects being undertaken in those villages
 where chemical fertilizer is abundantly used.  Training also needs to be provided for use of the bio-fertilizers in view of their minimal impact on environment.
(Para 35)
10.The Committee feels that the country must aim to regain its lost glory in silk trade as it  has the advantage of production of all four own commercial silk varieties viz; mulberry, tusser, eri and
 muga.  As sericulture is suitable for marginal, small and landless farmers, it has tremendous scope for expansion in view of its employment generation potential. Efforts should therefore be
 made to strengthen the linkages between extension and R&D units. The technology delivery systems should be streamlined by providing need based training and effective field demonstrations
 by using various communication methods.
(Para 36)
11.The Committee observes that India is one of the first countries in the world to initiate a Bioinformatics programme.  Besides, given the advantages the country has in IT sector and its
 expertise in mathematics and high knowledge base, special emphasis needs to be given to this aspect as  sustainability and dissemination of the data is necessary for the success of  plans.
 The researchers should also have the access to updated knowledge to keep themselves abreast of research elsewhere in the world.   This would help avoid duplicating the research and in
 patenting the research already conducted.
(Para 38)
12.The Committee observes that studies conducted under the bilateral cooperation should aim at research in developing drugs for diseases that are particular to our country such as  Kala-azar,
 plague, tuberculosis  & malaria etc.
(Para 41)
13.The Committee expresses its satisfaction with the work being done by the Centre for DNA Finger Printing and Diagnostics (CDFD) in the field of Automated Genome Analysis, Bioinformatics
 Diagnostics, DNA Fingerprinting. Instrumentation and Research in, among other areas, cancer Biology, computational Biology and Immunology etc.
(Para 45)
14.The Committee however feels that the country’s population having touched 1020 million and as the crimes, conflicts and paternity disputes are expected to arise with more frequency the
 rising pace of population, it was time to consider whether there was need to set up full fledged institutes to provide the services to the institutions and people expeditiously and with minimum of
 costs.
(Para 46)
15.  The Committee commends the progress made by BIBCOL from a company facing financial crunch to revenue generating one.  The
 Committee is happy to note that it is able to sustain its regular activities. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that
 efforts must be made to produce new & improved vaccines and immunodiagnostics such as rabies, measles, recombinant Hepatitis ‘B’
 vaccine, etc.
(Para 53)
16.  The Committee observes that as the programmes of the Department are liable to benefit different sections of the society, the
 Department must take initiative to approach Doordarshan, radio & other media for at least a few minute’s slot to disseminate
 information at least one programme every day in a bid to reach the sections of the society for whom it was meant.
(Para 54)
ANNEXURES
  ANNEXURE-I
BUDGET ESTIMATES FOR THE YEAR 2001-2002
 
(Rs. In Crores)
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
S. No.                NAME OF THE SCHEME                                                PLAN                             NON-PLAN
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A-S&T SECTOR
1.                    HUMAN RESOURCE                                                                               10.00                             -----
DEVELOPMENT
2.          CENTRES EXCELENCE,                                                                   11.00                             -----
            FACILITIES, REPOSITORIES &                                         

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/87th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:23]
            SERVICES
3.          BASIC AND PRODUCT                                                                    77.25                             -----
            ORIENTED R&D
4.          BIOTECH PRODUCT &                                                                    11.00                             -----
            PROCESS DEVELOPMENT
5.          BIOINFORMATICS                                                                     06.30                             -----
6.          INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION                                                03.50                             -----
7.          SECRETARIAT                                                                               01.20                             04.64    
AUTONOMOUS BODIES
8.          NII                                                                                                     16.00                             01.20
9.          NCCS                                                                                               08.50                             00.50
10.        CENTRE FOR DNA FINGERPRINTING                                      10.25                             -----
            AND DIAGNOSTICS
11.        NBRC                                                                                                 08.00                             -----
12.        NCPGR                                                                                       05.00                             -----
13.        NBDB                                                                                                 07.00                             -----
14.        ICGB                                                                                                    -----                              05.00
       CAPITAL SECTION
INVESTMENT
15.        BIBCOL/IVCOL                                                                              -----                               -----
______________________________________________________________________________________            ______________                                                                                           TOTAL   
             175.00                            11.34    
____________________________________________________________________________________________________
                                                                                                  
TOTAL:  186.34
 
 
ANNEXURE-II
 
REPLY  SUBMITTED  BY  THE  DEPARTMENT  OF   BIOTECHNOLOGY TO THE PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY,  ENVIRONMENT &
 FORESTS RELATING TO DEMANDS
FOR GRANTS (2001-2002)
 
1.  The financial allocation for 2001-2002 for the Department of Biotechnology is Rs.186.34 crores as against the revised allocation of  Rs.150.89 crores. The allocation of Rs.186.34
 crores, seen against the background of budgetary support provided during the year 2000-2001 represents an increase of about Rs.50 crores or about 37% (precisely 36.82%) over the
 year's amount. The committee would like to know whether the increase of about Rs.50 crores is due to the erosion in the value of money or due to inclusion of new items of work for
 which budgetary support is required.
Ans: The budget of Rs.186.34 crores allocated for the year 2001-2002 includes Rs. 175.00 crores for plan and Rs. 1 1.34 crores for non-plan activities. The increase is mainly in the
 plan budget amounting to Rs.35.00 crores over the RE of Rs.139.92 crores (plan) and Rs.50.00 crores over the BE of Rs.125.00 crores (plan) of the year 2000-2001. The new
 programmes, which will be initiated during 2001-2002, include establishment of "GEN-NET INDIA" to cure, control and care genetic disorders prevalent in the country alongwith the
 development of network programmes on human      genome      diversity    and    biochips      in   genomics      towards       gene identification/diagnostics. Comparative
 genomics, data annotation, proteomics, pharmaco genomics and work on some microbial genomics would be started. The second initiative includes  integrated approach towards
 utilization and conservation of medicinal plants for herbal drug development employing biotechnology tools and techniques. Other  programmes recently initiated such as Indian Initiative
 on Rice Genome Sequencing and activities of National Bioresource Development Board as well as  National Brain Research Centre will be implemented as per targets. There is also
 increase for Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics and Brain Research activities.
2.    It is a commendable effort on the part of DBT to have kept the non-plan expenditure at the level of Rs.1 I crores. But if one sees the allocation of Rs.1 75 crores under the plan
 expenditure, it represents an increase of 40 % over the budgetary support enjoyed by the department in the previous year. What have been the reasons for this substantial increase?
Ans: During the year 2001-2002, new programmes on Genome Research, Biotechnology of Medicinal Plants for Herbal/Drug Development and implementation of activities of recently
 initiated projects such as Indian Initiative on Rice Genome Sequencing and activities of National Bioresource Development Board as well as National Brain Research Centre will be
 undertaken utilising specifically the increased budgetary support under plan (as detailed in the answer for the question 1).
3.  National Institute of Immunology has been allocated Rs.17.20 crores with an increase of Rs.2.10 crores. What has necessitated the increase?

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/87th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:23]
Ans: Completion of small animal experiment research facility block in accordance with Committee for Purpose of Control and Supervision of Experiments on Animals (CPCSEA) and
 establishment  of   technology  incubator  facility to  promote  institute – industry  interaction  for
 
 
commercialisation of in-house technologies is proposed for implementation during the current financial year for which necessary preparations and project estimates have already been
 worked out.   This has necessitated an enhanced budget of Rs.2.1 0 crores.
4.    The plan allocation for Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics has been kept at Rs.10.25 crores in year 2001-2002 with an increase of Rs.4.25 crores from Rs.6.00 crores
 during BE and RE stage in the year 2000-2001. The Centre for DNA Fingerprinting is an area where the tempo of work would be in proportion to the crime-taking place in the country
 in cases of unnatural deaths etc. The Committee would like to know whether the facilities  available at the institute are sufficient to cope with the requirements of the country. Whether
 any thought has been given for setting up any other institute in any other part of the country for facilitating quicker access.
Ans: The Plan allocation for the Centre for Fingerprinting and Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad has been kept  as Rs. 1 0.25 crores for the year 2001 - 2002 (marking an increase of
 Rs.4.25 crores over the RE of 2000-01) in view of the construction programme for the CDFD office complex and increased scope of research activities. DBT proposes to equip CDFD
 to become an Apex institution, which will guide the DNA fingerprinting, diagnostics and other related activities in the country. The Centre is envisaged to become a referral centre for
 the other DNA laboratories. This Department does not propose setting up any other institution of this kind at present.
5.  (a) National Brain Research Centre has been allocated Rs.8.00 crores with a substantial increase of Rs.3.00 crores from the year 2000-2001.  Please give the details of the
 programmes to be undertaken with the increased allocation?
Ans: The National Brain Research Centre (NBRC) was set up with the aim, inter- alia, to undertake aid, promote, guide and coordinate research of high caliber in basic and clinical
 neuroscience and to encourage and augment effective linkages between various  scientific and research agencies/laboratories and other organisations working in the field of brain
 research.    NBRC has, till date, successfully networked 35 institutions in the country, which are working in neuroscience and allied areas. The Centre has been invited to join "Global
 Efforts for Development of Neuroinformatics", a new discipline that would provide unified information on neuroscience and training opportunities. NBRC has initiated programmes in new
 areas of neuroscience such as system and cognitive neuroscience and neural stem cell research to keep pace with research elsewhere, in the world. Further, NBRC has undertaken to
 construct its own office complex at Manesar with the help of Department of Atomic Energy at a cost of approximately Rs.14 crores. The increased allocation has been sought to meet
 the expected expenditure on construction and increased scope of research activities. Targets have been achieved.
(b) It has been stated that the construction of the centre's building at Gurgaon has already been started. The Committee would like to know the time frame of its completion specifically
 indicating whether any cost escalation has taken so far?
Ans: The Phase - I of the National Brain Research Centre (NBRC) office complex is proposed to be completed by the end of the financial year 2002 - 2003. No cost escalation on the
 project is anticipated. The Department of Atomic Energy is executing the construction programme on behalf of NBRC. Revised EFC has been circulated.
6.   The plan allocation under Human Resource Development in 2000-2001 was Rs.10.00 crores during both BE and RE stage. It has been retained
 at Rs.10.00 crores in the current year as well.
 
Whether it would affect the pace of activity due to erosion in the value of money or inflation. Whether it would result in curtailing any activity, if
 so, the details thereof?
Ans: The plan allocation for the Human Re-source Development has not been enhanced as no new major activity/programme is proposed to be undertaken during the last year of the
 9
th Five-Year Plan. The department does not propose to curtail any activity/programme.
7.  The plan allocation for Centres for Excellence, Facilities, Repositories and Services in BE stage was Rs.10.50 crores but was increased to
 Rs.29.50 crores in RE stage in 2000-2001. However, in the year under review only Rs.11.00 crores has been sought. What necessitated seeking
 the increased allocation in the RE stage and seeking reduced budgetary support for the year under reference?
Ans: During the year 2000-2001 under the budget head, a project under the international rice genome sequencing programme to map chromosome 11 has been initiated at Delhi
 University and Indian Agriculture Research Institute at a total cost of Rs.48.90 crores for a period of five years. Under the commitment India has to sequence IO Mb of chromosome 11
 in a period of five years. An amount of Rs.21.00 crores  has been sanctioned for the year 2000-2001. Therefore, this has necessitated seeking the increased allocation in the R.E.
 stage. Further, the expenditure for the ongoing projects during the year 2001-02 has been estimated around Rs.11.00 crores, reduced budgetary support for the year is provided.
8.  (a) There has been steep increase of allocation under the head "Basic and Product Oriented R&D" for the year 2001-2002 which is Rs.77.25 crores as compared to Rs.43.75 at BE
 and Rs.39.35 at RE in the previous year. What has necessitated the Department to seek enhanced allocation?
Ans: During the year 2001-2002, new programmes on Genome Research, Biotechnology of Medicinal Plants for Herbal/Drug Development and implementation of activities of recently
 initiated projects such as Indian Initiative on Rice Genome Sequencing and activities of National Bioresource Development Board (as detailed in the answer for the question 1).
(b) Whether any review of National Jai Vigyan S&T Missions has been undertaken and if so, with what results?
Ans: The Department of Biotechnology has launched four Jai Vigyan Missions each in the area of development of new generation vaccines, establishment of mirror sites for genomics,
 herbal product development and coffee improvement. These projects have been launched during the financial year 1999-2000 and have been periodically monitored by Biotechnology
 Research and Promotion Committee (BRPC) of the department as well as specific expert committees. Further, the overall progress of these projects was reviewed by Hon'ble Minister
 for S&T in April 2000 as an annual feature. The achievements are as follows-.
      (i)   All the four missions are implemented as per the targets.
      (ii)  Under the mission on new generation vaccines, on completion of phase-I clinical trials of the recombinant oral cholera vaccine,
 preparations for phase-II and phase-III have been initiated. Scale up protocols to achieve higher cell yields of DNA vaccine for rabies
 standardized and its efficacy studies in dogs, cattle and buffaloes have been completed. Candidate Japanese encephalitis virus have been
 sequenced, grown in vero cells and its efficacy in comparison with the vaccine in the market is studied. GLP grade (General Laboratory
 Practices)  facility  has  been setup  for  developing vaccine for malaria.  The
                  candidate vaccine has been purified, characterized and process to produce large quantities standardized. Efforts to produce new
 vaccines for tuberculosis and novel vaccine for HIV are progressing well.
      (iii)Four mirror sites have been established one each at Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, Institute of Microbial Technology,
 Chandigarh; University of Pune-I Pune and Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. All the mirror sites have made good progress in
 mirroring the international databases on genomics and proteomics and the same are accessed by large number of users.
      (iv)In the project on herbal product development, an improved agro technology was developed for high yielding variety of anti-malarial plant
 (Artemisia annua) and transferred to industry. An immunomodulatory compound isolated from Tinospora cordifolia has been developed

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/87th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:23]
 for enhancing the efficacy of vaccines and a patent application on the same has been filed in India. Experimental results on ayurvedic drug
 suggested its potential for management of hyperlipidemia.
      (v)  Under the coffee improvement programme, molecular analysis of coffee species and development of mapping populations has been carried
 out to understand genetic variability in the coffee species for use in breeding for better varieties. Development of a transformation system
 and identification of bacteria degrading caffeine are other results.
9.   The financial allocation for Biotech products and processes has  marginally been reduced by Rs.0.15 crores (Rs.11.00 crores in current year) from Rs.11.15 crores during RE and
 Rs.11.25 crores in BE stage in the year 2000-2001. With the plan to launch biotechnology based programmes especially  for women and weaker section, doesn't this reduction in
 allocation affect the progress of this endeavour and deny opportunities to major beneficiaries?
Ans: During the year 2000-01, the R.E. of Rs.2.45 crores was provided for biotechnology based programmes for women under the scheme biotech products and process development
 due to commitments for implementing the activities in the golden jubilee women biotechnology park at Chennai. The department was implementing about I 1 projects for providing
 opportunities to beneficiaries. For the financial year  (2001-2002), B.E. has been kept at Rs.1.10 crores to meet these ongoing projects and initiate few new projects for women
 empowerment and skill development. Besides, the budgetary support under programmes for rural areas  under the same scheme has been increased from an R.E. level of Rs.90.00
 lakhs during the year 2000-01 to a B.E. of Rs.2.00 crores for the financial year  2001-02 to initiate a special programme involving biotechnology interventions  in relief and rehabilitation
 of earthquake victims of Gujarat.
 
10. There is no increase in allocation for International Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB)? Is it likely to affect the pace
 of research being undertaken by the centre in the current year?
Ans: Based on the discussions at Enlarged Bureau of ICGEB held in June 1998 in Rome and V meeting of Board of Governors at Triesty, Italy in September 1998 as well as request
 of additional funds for air-conditioning and P-3 facility as one time grant, an annual contribution of Rs.5.00 crores to be continued beyond 1999 till the end of 9 th plan period, under
 non-plan, was considered appropriate. This proposal was approved by the Cabinet in its meeting in August 1999 to continue contribution of Rs.5.00 crore per annum to ICGEB upto
 financial year 2001-02 and one time grant of Rs. 1. 1 9 crores for infrastructure. This amount should be sufficient to sustain the present research activities.
11.   The Department has not sought any plan allocation for BIBCOL. However, it has asked for Rs.10.96 crores under non-plan expenditure in 2000- 2001. What was the specific
 purpose for making these allocations? What is the current financial health of the unit. Any chances of its closure or disinvestments during the current year?
Ans: The Bharat Immunologicals & Biologicals Corporation Limited (BIBCOL) is a PSU formulating Oral Polio Vaccine (OPV) from imported monovalent bulk since 1996.  The company
 has been registered under BIFR. The IDBI has prepared a revival plan and submitted to BIFR for final approval. The final hearing is scheduled in April 2001. During the current
 financial year the company has formulated 220 million doses of OPV and supplied to National Immunization Programme (170 million doses to UNICEF and 50 million doses to Ministry
 of Health & Family Welfare. The company has already paid Rs.16.00 crores to financial institutions  out of Rs.18.85 crores obtained from Fis as term loan. At present, the company  is
 generating revenues to sustain their regular activities. Hence, the department has not sought any plan allocation during the next financial year. The company has projected a non- plan
 expenditure of Rs.10.96 crores during financial year 2000-01 to be met form Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources  (IEBR) (Rs.7.71 crores from internal resources and Rs.3.25 crores
 as loans from outside sources). There is no such proposal for closure or disinvestments during the current financial year.
12.   The allocation made under the head "Other Scientific Research" has been substantially increased to Rs.175 crores in the current year from Rs.140.00 crores at RE stage and
 Rs.135.96 crores at BE stage. What are the details of the projects being covered under the enhanced allocation?
Ans: Under the head 'Other Scientific Research', the budget has been increased to initiate following programmes of immediate importance.
      (i)   Taking advantage of the announcement of working draft of human genome, programmes will be implemented in the areas of sequencing of
 specific pathogens relevant to the country, global gene expression studies using microarray technology, development of Single Nucleotide
 Polymorphisms (SNPS) for specific haematological disorders, programme support to Centre for Human Genetics at Bangalore,
 pharmacogenomics.
      (ii)      Integrated wheat genomic programme and functional genomic of rice will be taken up.
      (iii)A special integrated programme in collaboration with other ministries and departments on bioprospecting and conservation of medicinal
 plants towards development of new herbal drug formulations will be initiated.
      (iv)A special programme involving biotechnology interventions in relief and rehabilitation of earthquake victims of Gujarat will be taken up
 under programmes for rural areas.
      (v)  Building construction and new research activities under National Brain Research Centre will be further taken up.
     (vi)          Completion of animal house facility and establishment of technology incubation facility at National Institute of Immunology will be undertaken.
 
 
M I N U T ES
   
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday the 27th March, 2001 in Room No.63, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah —  Chairman
         
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.   Shri Birabhadra Singh
3.   Smt. Chandresh Kumari

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/87th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:23]
4.   Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
5.   Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray
6.   Smt. Savita Sharda
7.   Shri B.P. Singhal
 
      LOK  SABHA
 
8.   Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura
9.   Shri  Bhavana Chikhaliya
10.Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
11.Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
12.Shri Hassan Khan
13.Dr. Charan Das Mahant
14.Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
15.Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
16.Shri Suresh Pasi
17.Dr. Ashok Patel
18.Shri Prahlad Patel
19.Prof. I. G. Sanadi 
20.Shri Ram Prasad Singh
21.Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
   SECRETARIAT
  
   Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
        Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
        Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
      Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
 
 
 
 
   REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY
 
     Dr. (Mrs.) Manju Sharma, Secretary
     Dr. (Mrs.) Amita Biswas, Adviser
     Dr. M. Balasubramanaian, Adviser
     Dr. J. R. Arora, Adviser
     Dr. V. K. Vinayak, Adviser
     Dr. S. Natesh, Adviser
     Dr. B. M. Gandhi, Adviser
     Shri Arun Sharma, JS&FA
     Shri S. L. Bhat, JS
     Dr. S. R. Rao, P. Scientific Officer
     Dr. (Ms) Renu Swarup, PSO
     Shri O. P. Rastogi, Under Secretary (Parl.)
 
2.   *                             *                                      *
 
3.   *                             *                                      *
 
4.   Thereafter the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Department of Bio-technology, who introduced themselves to the Members of
 the Committee.  The Committee then took up for consideration the Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the Department of Biotechnology
 (Ministry of Science & technology).  The Secretary made visual presentation of the activities and achievements of the Department and briefly
 explained the budgetary allocation on different heads as also the functioning of the Department.  The Members then sought clarification on points
 relating to the Demands for Grants that emerged out of the presentation of the Secretary.  The Secretary replied to the points and assured the
 Committee to send written comments on the points on which information was not readily available.         
 
     The witness then withdrew.
 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
 
5.   The Committee then adjourned at 1.15 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 28th March, 2001.
 ________________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.
 
XI

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/87th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:23]
                              ELEVENTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 03.00 P.M. on Monday the 9th April, 2001 in Room No.139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah —Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.   Shri Birabhadra Singh
3.   Shri K. C. Kondaiah
4.   Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra
5.   Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
6.   Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray
7.   Smt. Savita Sharda
8.   Shri B.P. Singhal
9.   Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
 
      LOK  SABHA
 
10.Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura
11.Shri Baliram Kashyap
12.Dr. Charan Das Mahant
13.Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
14.Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
15.Shri Suresh Pasi
16.Dr. Ashok Patel
17.Shri Vaiko
18.Shri Balram Singh Yadav
 
   SECRETARIAT
  
   Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
        Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
        Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
     Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
         
2.   The Committee took up consideration of ***, *** & 87 th Draft Reports.  The Committee considered each of these reports.  After minor
 connections of oral nature, the Committee adopted these reports.
 
3.   The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Shri B. P. Singhal to present the Reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan and in his
 absence Dr. Ashok Patel to lay the Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha on April 18, 2001.
 
4.       *                                 *                             *
 
5.         *                                                          *                                                          *
 
6.   The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 
P.M. to meet again on 10th April, 2001.
 
 
 
 ______________________________________________________________________
*** Relates to other matters.