PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
  
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS  
  
ONE HUNDRED TWENTY-EIGHTH  REPORT 
ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2004-2005) 
OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT 
(DEMAND NO. 68) 
  
  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 26TH  AUGUST, 2004) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 26TH  AUGUST, 2004) 
  
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
AUGUST, 2004/BHADRAPADA, 1926  (SAKA) 
                    
  
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
  
C O N T E N T S 
          
1.     COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                              
2.     INTRODUCTION                   
3.     REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.     SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS                                                                 
5.     ANNEXURE                                                                                                                    
6.    MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE   
                                                                     
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,  
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2004) 
  
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz  
3. Dr.Prabha Thakur  
4. Shri Jaswant Singh  
5. Shri Dili
p Singh Judev  
Page 1 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

6. Dr Biplab Dasgupta  
7. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav  
8. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
9. Smt. Kum Kum Rai  
10. Shri Birabhadra Singh  
  
LOK  SABHA 
  
11. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal  
12. Shri Jasubhai D. Barad              
13. Shri Sujan Chakraborty  
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhery  
15. Shri Mohan S. Delkar                
16. Shri Anantrao Gudhe  
17. Shri Babubhai Katara  
18. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik             
19. Shri Brahmananda Panda  
20. Smt. Neeta Pateriya  
21. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                          
22. Shri K.C.Singh Baba     
23. Smt. Jayaben  Thakkar  
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                                
25. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh                             
26. Shri D. Venugopal  
27. Shri Sita Ram Yadav  
28. Shri V.Aruna Kumar  
    *29. Shri Rakesh Singh          
    #30. Shri Shivajirao A.Patil 
  @31. Vacant 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
      Shri N.C. Joshi, Additional Secretary 
      Shri R.K. Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary  
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer 
_____________________________________________________________________ 
    * Nominated w.e.f. 13th August, 2004. 
    #  Nominated w.e.f. 20th August, 2004. 
   @ Shri Atma Singh Gill ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f. 20th August, 2004 consequent 
upon his nomination to the       
       Committee on  Food, Consumer Affairs & Public Distribution. 
  
INTRODUCTION 
  
      I, the Chairman of the Department-rel ated Parliamentary Standi ng Committee on Science &
Technology, Environment & Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on
Page 2 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

its behalf, present this One Hundr ed-Twenty Eighth Report of the Co mmittee.  This Report deals with 
the detailed Demands for Grants  (2004-2005) of the Department of Ocean Development (Demand 
No.68). 
  
2.  In the meeting of the Committee held on 11 th August, 2004 the Secretary a nd other Officers of the 
Department of Ocean Development gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the
Members sought clarifications on various aspects of the performance of the De partment to enable it to
scrutinise the Demands for Grants. 
3.  The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the
clarifications sought by the Memb ers and placing before it the re quired material to enable the
Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development. 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 24th August, 2004. 
  
  
  
R  E  P  O  R  T 
  
            Oceans have always influenced the life and history of mankind. From time immemorial, man has
been using oceans in several ways. According to our mythology, the Gods and Demons churned the
ocean and extracted amrita, the elixir of life. Even in the presen t ages, we get mineral, food and energy 
resources from the oceans. 
            The oceanic part of the world has an area of about 361 million sq km  (that is 71% of the globe),
an average depth of about 3,730 m, and a total volume of about  1,347,000 million cubic km.  The 
deepest part of the oceans is the Mariana Trench (11,516 m) in the Pacific Ocea n.  Compare this with 
the 8,849 m above sea level of the highest peak, the Mt.Everest.  Because of its vastness and interplay of 
processes, oceans control the atmosphere and global climate besides being a vast storehouse of resources
necessary for sustenance of life on  earth. Appreciating the importance of the subject, Government o f
India established Department of  Ocean Development in 1981 with  an aim to create a deepe r
understanding of the oceanic regime of the northern and central Indi an Ocean and also to develop
technology and technological aids  for harnessing of resources a nd understanding of various physical,
chemical and biological processes.  The Ocean policy statement was also enunciated in 1982. 
2.         The Department of Ocean Developmen t is the nodal Department for organising, coordinating 
and promoting development activitie s relating to ocean development in  the country.  The national level 
R&D laboratories, educational institutions and industries assist the Department in carrying out its multi-
disciplinary plans and programmes of national importa nce.  Further, marine research and capacity 
building is one of the key areas of the Department to promot e basic research in marine science for self-
reliance. Hence, the activities of the Department are targeted toward s scientific research and technology
development with orientation towa rds its applications and harnessing ocean resources. The Department
has also the mandate towards inte rnational programmes arising out of  international obligations and
bilateral and multilateral coopera tive ventures to create a technol ogical capacity building and human
resource development for self-reliance. 
3.         The programmes of the Department are directed towards: 
NEW DELHI; 
August 24, 2004 
P.G.NARAYANAN, 
Chairman, 
Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on  
 Science & Technology, Environment & 
Forests
Page 3 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

(i)                  Technology Development for future applications  with strategic, i ndustrial and economic 
significance. 
(ii)                Society with direct/indirect benefit for the community by technology applications and pilot
project demonstration with the participati on of the community for their socio-economic 
prosperity, and for coastal area development. 
(iii)               Marine Resource for exploration of mari ne living and non-livi ng resources, techno-
economic studies to evolve strategies for sustainable exploration and utilization, and resource
enhancement. 
(iv)              Multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary Polar Science Programmes and Antarctic
Expeditions with scientific and geo-political significance. 
(v)                Capacity Building towards self-r eliance through basic scientific research  in ocean sector,
human resource development and establis hing Centres of Excellence in academic
institutions. 
(vi)              Creation of pubic awareness of ocean development, its immense potential and diverse uses. 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2004-05 
4.         The total budget demand for the year 2004-05 is Rs.230.08 crores which includes plan allocation
of Rs.200.00 crores and non-plan allocation of Rs.30.08 crores. The Plan outlay for 2004-05 is Rs.25.00 
crores more than the outlay for 2003-04. The stat ement regarding alloca tion for 2004-05 and budget 
demands made/approved and actually utilized du ring 2001-02, 2002-03 and 2003 -04 is attached as 
Annexure. The following areas have been identified for focus during the year 2004-05: 
(i)         The approved outlay for the Antarctic Research is Rs.24.00 crores which would be given 
as Grants-in-aid to National Centre for Antarcti c & ocean Research (NCAOR ), Goa for launching the 
24th  Scientific Expedition to Antarctica, carrying out scientific experiments, maintenance of the
permanent research station "Maitr i" at Antarctica and infrastructu re development, operation & manning
of the NCAOR. 
(ii)        In the case of Polymetallic N odules Programme, an outlay of Rs.22 crores has been 
provided. Under this programme, the activities planned include, continuation of survey of nodules in the
Central Indian Ocean Basi n (CIOB) area alongw ith the selected profiles fo r identifying and validating
the trends of higher a bundance of nodules; continua tion of Environmental Impact Assessment o f
simulated sea bed disturbance; re search to upgrade existing mining sy stem in a phased manner with a
view to ultimately mining the nodul es at 6000m depth; development of  unmanned submersible, capable
of operation upto water depth of 6000m; and designing of a remotely  operated vehicle for underwate r
examination and continuation of extractive metallurgy. 
(iii)       For National Institute of Ocea n Technology (NIOT) an outlay of Rs.25.00 crores is 
provided which also include allocation for Island De velopment programme. Duri ng the year, activities
of Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) a nd other programmes on Technology for sea bed
mining, coastal engineering, marine instrumentation and is land related programmes will be continued.
For Delineation of the Outer Limits of Continental Shelf, an outlay of Rs.2.43 crores is provided.  
(iv)       During the year 2004-05, a provisi on of Rs.6.02 crores has be en made for the Ocean
Awareness programme with a compone nt of Rs.4.27 crores toward IT  and computers for e-governance 
and other critical activities. The other components are Semi nars, Symposia, Exhi bition etc. with an
allocation of Rs.1.75 crores. 
(v)        Under Marine Living Resources Programme, the proposed out lay is Rs.4.00 crores fo r
Assessment of Marine Living Resources and Rs.4.00 crores for the ongoing Drugs from Sea
programme. During the year 2004-05, a provision of Rs.2.5 crores has b een made for the Marine Non-
Page 4 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

living Resources programme. 
(vi)       For the Ocean Observation & Info rmation Services, an outl ay of Rs.26.00 crores has
been provided. Out of this, the provi sion for the Indian National Cent re for Ocean Information Services
(INCOIS) at Hyderaba d is Rs.4.00 crores and expenditure will  be incurred on creation of permanent
infrastructure and other operational programmes.       For the Nati onal Data Buoy Programme and the 
other Ocean Observing System programmes, a sum of Rs.22.00 crores has been provided. It is proposed
to procure a dedicated vessel for the data buoy programme during 2004-05. 
(vii)      An outlay of Rs.2.00 crores and Rs.5.00 crores has been made for Coasta1 Ocean 
Monitoring and Prediction Systems (COMAPS) and Coastal Research Vessel (CRV) respectively during
the Annual Plan 2004-05. For the Integrated Co astal and Marine area Management (ICMAM)
programme, an outlay of Rs.4.00 crores has been provided.  
(viii)      During the year 20 04-05, activities relating to the Expl oration of Gas Hydrates with the 
aim of identification of areas in  the seas around India will be ca rried out with a budget allocation o f
Rs.18.00 crores.  A programme of Comprehensive Sw ath Bathymetric Survey with an allocation o f 
Rs.10.00 crores will be carr ied out to survey the Exclusive Ec onomic Zone to s upport the activities
relating to exploration of non-living resources in this area. The Geo-physical study of Laxmi Basin will 
be continued with an allocation of Rs.1.25 crores in order to understand the geology specially the crystal
characteristics of the Laxm i Basin in the Arabian sea. In order to support the changing needs of the
technology development and related programmes, an activity for designing a new research vessel will be
initiated with an initial allocation of Rs.40.00 crores. 
5.         The Department informed the Committee that during the year 2003-04, the B.E. of the 
Department i.e. Rs.175.00 crores had been reduced to  Rs.150.00 crores at the R.E. stage. Due to this,
scaling down of activities  had to be made under most of th e programmes. The major variations,
therefore, were made in the following programmes: 
            i)          Polar Science/ Antarctic Research 
BE -     Rs.24.00 crores                                    Actual -            Rs.17.79 crores 
Scaling down of activities had to be resorted due to selective supporting of project activities,
hence the reduction in anticipated expenditure. 
ii)         Polymetallic Nodule Programme 
BE -     Rs.22.00 crores                        Actual -            Rs.17.86 crores 
The major variation is due to procedural delays on part of Russian Academy of Sciences Institute
in commencing work on unmanned submersibles and as  specifications  of two shallow bed multibeam 
sonars could not be finalized. 
iii)        BENFAN 
BE -     Rs.1.75 crores                          Actual -           Rs.0.16 crores 
The reduction in expenditure was mainly due to reduction in the funds provided for charter hire
of specialized research vessel. 
iv)        Delineation of Outer Limits of Continental Shelf 
BE -     Rs.8.00 crores                         Actual -            Rs.16.23 crores 
Additional surveys were required in order to just ify the Indian claims over the continental shelf,
hence the increased expenditure.   
v)         Comprehensive Swath Bathymetric Survey of Indian EEZ 
BE -     Rs.12.00 crores                                    Actual -            Rs.10.00 crores
Page 5 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

The reduction in the requirement is due to more time taken in  obtaining the requisite approvals
from the appropriate authorities. 
vi)        Gas Hydrate Exploration and Technology Development for Exploitation 
BE -     Rs.18.00 crores                                    Actual -            Rs.9.43 crores 
The shortfall in utilisation of th e funds to the budgeted levels is due to the delay in getting the
necessary Government approvals. 
vii)       Ocean Observation and Information Services 
BE -     Rs.35 crores                             Actual -            Rs.25.37 crores 
The saving is due to defermen t of payment towards constr uction of permanent campus at
INCOIS, Hyderabad and keeping cert ain activities of Ocean Observati on System for a letter time fo r
logistic purposes. 
viii)      Geophysical Study of Laxmi Basin 
BE -     Rs.2.5 crores                            Actual -            Rs.1.23 crores 
The reason for variation is  due to deferment of re fraction survey to next year on account of bad
weather required for geophysical studies of Laxmi Basin. 
6.         It was further informed to the Comm ittee that the activities in abovementioned schemes were
planned and the financial outlays were phased in such a manner as not to affect any activities, projects or
schedules. However, the effect of reduction of funds at the RE stage was minimised by not affecting the
projects implemented under Polar Sc ience, Polymetallic Nodules Programme, Ocean Observation &
Information Services, Marine N on Living Resources (BENFAN, De ep Sea Mineral Exploration),
Comprehensive Swath Bathymetr y, Gas Hydrates and Geophysical  Study of Laxmi Basin and by
restructuring the long term schemes by way of re-assessing certain requirements and also postponing the
requirement to the next financial years. 
7.         The Committee expressed the view that the variations in the allocation for any programme of the 
Department are indicative of the need on the part of  the Department to review their system of budgetary
assumption and efficiency of their programmes. However, the Department didn’t agree with these views 
and stated that the budgetary es timates are normally ba sed on the actual requi rement of funds fo r
implementing the programmes, in line with the EF C/SFC approved Annual Plan outlays. However, at
the R.E. stage, invariably there is a cut in budge tary support provided to  Departments/Ministries,
keeping in view the resource position available with the Government for apportioning to various priority
sectors. Variations in some of the programmes of Department with respect to budget allocation is only to
restructure the total budgetary support made available to  the Department, in a particular year, either at
B.E./R.E. stage. On the basis of the allocation available, the Department also takes up an exercise for re-
prioritising some of the activities. Since the total approved outlay for a project during a Plan period does
not normally get altered, it is ensu red that the prescribed target s under various programmes of the
Department are fulfilled without any shortfall and al so at the same time ensuring the efficiency of the
programmes. 
8.         The Committee observes that ther e were major variations in th e budgetary allocations and their 
utilization.  The non-utilisation of the allocation meant less or reduced activities of the Department.  The 
Committee feels that the Departme nt should have foreseen the re asons advanced by it for the non-
utilisation of funds befo re asking for budgetary allocation and s hould have evolved suitable mechanism
to monitor the budgetary proposal and its allocations. 
9.         Regarding mechanism existing in the Department  to monitor and review  the progress of its 
ongoing schemes, it was apprised to the Committe e that the ongoing schemes of the department were
formulated after studi es/recommendations by expert groups and followin g due process of a pprovals of
Page 6 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

Standing Finance Committee (SFC )/Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). The approved schemes
have clear details of overall budget, scope of work, manpower, equipments requirements, services, year-
wise expenditure etc. The progre ss in all areas particularly prog ress in implementation vis-à-vis 
expenditure is monitored. Simila rly, the expenditure incurred vi s-à-vis overall approved limit o f 
expenditure is also periodical ly reviewed. Based on these, proposals for budgetary support are
formulated and finalized. 
10.       Regarding the efforts being taken by the Department to disseminate the information about its 
research activities and achievements to the masses, the Committee was informed that Department being 
a scientific R&D department, there is no regular pub lic dealing or interaction with the public. However,
programmes and activities of the department  are of benefit to the public like coastal community, 
fishermen etc. The information on Potential Fishi ng Zone (PFZ) is regularl y relayed to the coastal
fishermen and this is on a properly organized manner. Further, various data generated by the department
is relayed to the user Departments who in turn generate data products  that are of use to the public at
large directly or indirectly. Th e Department, on important occasions , publicises its activities in the
newspapers and media. Further, it regularly takes pa rt in exhibitions in different parts of the county to
familiarize the public with importa nt aspects of its act ivities. The Departme nt has brought out a boo k
‘Story of the Oceans’ which is aimed at educating sc hool children about our oceans and seas. A 
bimonthly newsletter “WISTA: O cean Wealth” on activities of DOD & other related aspects and a
“Journal for Indian Ocean Studies” for disseminating information on oceans is being published through
the Society for Indian Ocean Studies, New Delhi. Th e Department has also been interacting with the
coastal States in order to find out their existing projects and need  for assistance in establishing
oceanaria.  
POLAR SCIENCE (ANTARCTIC RESEARCH) PROGRAMME 
11.       The objectives of the Antarctic Research Programme are to identify and initiate programmes o f
scientific and economic significance besides establ ishing infrastructure.  The Antarctic Research 
Progamme has been designed to ta ke advantage of the unique locat ion and environment of the icy
continent for understanding the key global processes which are manifested and controlled by this pola r
cap.  Antarctic is a pristine and natural laboratory, which enables th e scientists to study, detect and 
monitor global phenomena, such as th e atmospheric patterns and ocean circulations.  Glaciological and 
geophysical research provide s a clue to the geologica l history and evolution of  the earth.  In addition, 
Antarctica provides a singular platform for conducting studies on so lar terrestrial interaction, adaptation
of organisms, including human beings in the cold  land isolated conditions .  During 2004-05, the XXIV 
Antarctic expedition is proposed to be launched.  This expedition will ca rry out research in the fields o f 
atmospheric, geological, biologica l, environmental, medical and engineering sciences and global
change. 
12.       The success of the Antarctic Programme and sustained capabilities in Antarctic science and 
logistics prompted the Depa rtment to establish the first polar res earch lab of the country at Goa namely
the National Centre for Antarctic Ocean Research (NCAOR ) in 1998 which is res ponsible for carrying
out all the activities relating to Antarctic expediti ons. The research on polar science and expeditions to
Antarctica was being planned, executed and launch ed annually on behalf of the Department by the
Centre.  The Centre has a specific  R&D mandate in the realm of pol ar science and to coordinate an d
launch Indian Antarctic expeditions.  The Centre ha s a unique laboratory for lo w-temperature research 
on ice cores retrieved from  Antarctica and the Himalayas.  It w ould also have the facility for the 
application of remote sensing tec hniques aimed at understanding the s ea-ice-atmosphere interaction in 
the Polar Regions.  It would also have an Antarctic museum and a database repository on polar sciences.
13.       In response to a question about adequacy  of Rs.24.00 crores allocation in the ensuing year to 
carry out the activities under the Programme, the Co mmittee was informed that the actual project
estimate as approved by EFC/CCEA  for the financial y ear 2004-05 for the im plementation of Pola r 
Science Pro gramme and other research ac tivities of NCAOR is Rs.36.00 crores.  However due to 
Page 7 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

reduction in overall allocation for the Department and ba sed on the prioritised item of expenditure fo r
Polar Science Programme and other research activities of NCAOR, an allocation of Rs.24.00 crores with
an additional fund of Rs.1.00 crore under Capital Head is made for the year       2004-05.  It is expecte d 
that the major planned activities under this programme  will be undertaken with in this allocation and i f
required, allocation of additional funds will be taken up at RE stage. 
14.       The major achievements of Polar Science progr amme in the fields of  Earth Sciences are –
Geological mapping of over 15,000 s q. km area covering Schirmacher  Oasis, Wohlthat and Orvin
Mountains; experiments in Snow Dr ift and Albedo and rate of accumu lation of ice shelf near Maitri
which has shown an increas e from average 50 cm/year to 70 cm/y ear; Seismic Activities studies and
establishment of permanent seismic station and permanent Geo-magnetic station at Maitri.  More than 
150 papers have been published in ear th science.  Achievements in th e fields of Atmospheric Science 
and Climateological Studies are experiments on Ozone layer and Ozone hole over Antarctica, impact o f
Antarctic Circulation on Global we ather systems and studies on Pale o-climate from ice-core obtaine d 
from Antarctica. A Brewer Spectrome ter has been installed at Antarc tica and K. Banerjee Centre fo r
Atmospheric & Ocean Studies ha s been supported at Allahabad.  The MSMR studies conducted by 
Indian Scientists at Antarctica have estimated 12.73 million sq. km sea ice during 1999-2000 and further 
studies through Polar Remote Sensing indicate an  increasing trend of sea ice by approx. 0.0438 million
sq. km per year.  An inventory of flora & fauna of Schirmacher Oasis and surrounding area has been 
prepared and 20 out of 100 new species of bacteria di scovered in Antarctica, are by India.  Further, 
identification of new genes involved in survival of life forms in extreme cold conditions and research on
cold adaptation of bacteria has led to technologica l innovation in biodegradati on of waste in extreme
cold conditions.  In addition, ps ycho-physiological investigations , UV and cold stress studies on 
humans, experiments in Indian Tr aditional Medicine-Ayurvedic thera py in cold conditions, are also 
being under taken.  A cold Acclimatisation Lab and permanent environmental lab has also been set up at
Maitri for Environment Impact Assessments (EIA ). Assessment of Southe rn Ocean resources and
experiments in Southern Oceanography have also been carried out.  So far 40 research papers have been 
published in reputed journals based on research in Biological Sciences, at Antarctica.  
15.       To carry out state-of-the-art experi ments in Polar science, the Committee was given to 
understand that an ice-core laborator y facility, the first of  its kind in India, ha s been established at
NCAOR, Goa and this facility is expected to beco me operational within this financial year.  NCAO R 
has also set up a permanent envir onmental laborator y at Maitri to monitor various environmental
parameters so as to reduce any e nvironmental impact in and around Ma itri Station as required under the
Environmental Protocol of the Antarctic Treaty.  NCAOR also launched the first Southern Ocean Cruise 
of the departmental Oceanographic Research Vessel ‘Sagar Kanya’ in Ja nuary, 2004.  This cruise lasted 
for about three months and scien tists on board the research vessel conducted experiments in Southern
Oceanography and other Marine Sciences upto 55° S outh Latitude.  Apart from  providing logistics and 
research facilities at Maitri to  other institutes and organizations , NCAOR is also planning in-house 
scientific facilities in the fields such as Polar Remote Sensing, Antarctic Limnology, and an Antarctic
Data Centre, in additi on to ice-core repository and analyt ical facility an d Southern Ocean
Oceanography. 
16.       About the future plan of setting up a ne w Antarctica station, it was informed by the Department 
that during the 23rd expedition, preliminary survey of a suitable site for a new station was carried out at 
LARSEMANN HILLS at 75° East Latitude in Antarctica.  In this year, further surveys are planned to be 
carried out of the selected  site by the team of experts for de veloping a detailed proposal for the new
station, as per the guidelines and norms framed by the Antarctic Tr eaty Consultative Meeting (ATCM)
for setting up of new station. 
17.       Exploration of the icy continent is a challengi ng task before the Department.  The Committee 
feels given the extremity of the prev ailing situation in this continent of ice, Department has taken the
real pain to embark upon a formidable task of in itiating scientific exper iments in an extreme cold
conditions.  Althou gh the Committee is full y convinced about the quality of the research wor k
Page 8 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

undertaken till date in this uninhabited and inhospita ble mass of ice land, it fe els the following areas o f
research should be given more attention due to th eir global, social, medical , scientific and economic
importance: 
a)                  Studies on evolution of Antarctic Glaciology; 
b)                  Studies on ozone hole issues; 
c)                  Studies in geological and geophysical investigation of the Schirmacher Oasis and Orwin 
and Wolhthat mountains; 
d)                  Studies about Antarctic microbe s specially cynobacteria with  special reference to thei r 
survivality rate in extreme cold situation so that any new knowledge about the process of
biological withstanding of extr eme low temperature could be utilized for Indian defence
personnel staying in Siachen Glacier; 
e)                  Studies in Antarctic pollution; 
f)                    Studies in Krill biology; 
g)                  Studies in auroral   phenomenon; 
The Committee while strongly recommending basic and in depth researches in these fields urges
the Department to uphold its commitment to protect the pristine nature of the Continent.  
18.       The Committee hopes that sustained efforts of  the Department in the di rection of setting up new
station will yield positive results. However, notwithstanding different surveys involved, some target date
should be fixed for comple ting the task undertaken. In the absence of any time frame, it may lose the
importance and urgency that is called for.  
POLYMETALLIC NODULES (PMN) PROGRAMME 
19.       The Polymetallic Nodules Programme  (PMN Programme) is a national programme with
international commitments which envisages eventual exploitation of the nodules from the allotted
1,50,000 sq. km. mine site in the Central Indian Ocean Basin. The programme consists of fou r
components-Survey & Exploration of Polymetallic N odules in the Central Indi an Ocean Basin (CIOB); 
Environmental Impact Assessment studies at CIOB; Technology Devel opment for mining of nodules;
and Technology Development for extraction of meta ls from nodules. During 2004-05, the programme is 
supported with an allocation of Rs. 22.00 crores. 
20.       The Committee was informed that a join t collaborative programme between NIOT, Chennai and
Experimental Design Bureau of  Oceanological Engineering (EDBOE), Russia, for design and
development of unmanned submersi bles capable of operation up to  6,000 m was likely to be taken up
soon in pursuance of a MoU signed between DOD and Russian Academy of Scienc es. Besides, a
continuous demonstration pilot plant of 500 kg/day capacity for extraction of Copper, Nickel and Cobalt
from nodules was set up at Hindus tan Zinc Limited (HZL), Udaipur.   An Environmental Impact 
Assessment (EIA) monitoring cruise is also proposed during 2004-05 as a part of continuing studies in 
the pioneer area for assessi ng the impact of the simulated mining at  deep seabed at the site of nodules
occurrence. 
21        The Committee was informed that for th e first time a plant has be en commissioned in India at
M/s Hindustan Zinc Limited, Udaipur for the extraction of metals from polymeta llic nodules. Currently
trial routes are under evalua tion for testing the efficacy of process routes for extracting metals from the
ferromanganese nodules and efforts ar e continued to get the required purity of metals from the plant.
Thereafter efforts will be directed towards commer cialization of the plant.  About the progress in design 
and development of a seabed mining system capable of operating up to depth of 6000m, it was informed
that once the shallow bed mining sy stem is re-tested for a longer dur ation to improve the confidence
level, the activities pertaining to development of mining system up to 6000m water de pth will be taken
Page 9 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

up. 
22.       Although the Committee is happy with the contents and perf ormance of projects under Poly 
Metallic Nodules programme of Department, it is, however, scep tical about the Department’s 
assessment about the preservation of environmental norms for optimal sea ecology at the mining site.   
            The Committee is of the opinion that  before a comprehensive pla nning is undertaken for on-site 
mining of nodule, the Department should prepare an experimental chart about the precise disturbance of
the sea floor at the mining area to  assess its geological and ecologi cal conditions.  The Committee feels 
that while organisms would be de stroyed in the mined area undisturbe d areas would remain because o f
the complex terrain of sea bed which could serve as  biological reservoir for recolonizing the destroyed
section.  
23.       The Committee is of the opinion that dangers arising from the release of underlying heavy metals
when the upper sediment layer is removed, could change or disrupt geochemical systems that has been
stabilized over geological time, possibly creating zones of reduce d oxygen where life would become
impossible. 
            The Committee, therefore, feels that  before mining is initiated, Department must examine the
effect of mining on local animals at the site caused by dragging of plough across the bottom to stimulate
the effects of nodule mining on the se a bed, including the rates at whic h animals of the same species
returned to the disturbed area.  The study should be  done in this respect on mega fauna animals large 
enough to be seen at the ocean botto m.  The Committee is of the opinion  that the effects of mining will 
be greatest on the sea sponges that liv ed directly on the nodules because their habitat will be completely
destroyed.  Other free swim ming species will suffer a considerable  reduction in numbers due to serious 
disruption in food supply.  The Committee, therefore, is of the view that from emerging picture above 
the evaluation of bio-threat exposed by sea bed mi ning is indispensable to  be addressed thoroughly 
before venturing into mining operation and the Commit tee feels that any such evaluation is difficult
without better knowledge of the orga nisms living at the mining site a nd the eco-system in which they 
function.  It is quite appa rent that animals at the site area woul d be killed by the im pact of the mining
vehicle and by resettlement of the se diment cloud that impact of the mining vehicle will raise from the
sea floor.  
            Another potential effect of mining on the ocean floor is the bri nging up of unwanted materials 
during a mining operation i.e. sedi ments, trace metals from nodule waste and cold and nutrient rich
bottom water into the upper ocean. Owing to this probl em, the Committee feels that deep or mid ocean
level will be most desirable area for discharging of  miners waste as it would not be harmful to the
environment.  
24.       The Committee further feels that burial sens itivity of sea bed organism s i.e. the consequences o f
dumping a layer of sediment on t op of them as a direct reperc ussion of mining should be studied
thoroughly by Department as lesson for Environmental Impact Assessm ent of sea-bed mining.  The 
Committee feels such studies c ould be undertaken by the Depart ment through Remotely Operated
Vehicle (ROV). 
            The Committee, therefore recommends  that Department should undert ake critical assessment o f 
different mining technique s and their subsequent effects on Geochemistry  and Ocean Biology and
Department should generate relia ble data for determining the optimal mining techniques i.e. ideal
extractive metallurgy to minimize environmental impacts.  
            The Committee, therefore strongly recommends for constant assessment of environmental 
impact of deep sea-mining by Depa rtment before venturing into ac tual mining operation keeping the 
following into consideration for a meaningful assessment of the impact:- 
(a)                Biodiversity, species ranges and rates of gene flow in the nodule areas; 
Page 10 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

(b)               Burial sensitivity of deep-s ea animals and their response to  the type of disturbance 
caused when nodules are scraped from the se a floor, as well as recovery of marine
organisms in space and time; 
(c)                Impact on ocean column by rising unwanted  materials from mining operation located 
above a mine site; 
(d)               Natural variability in deep ocean ecosystems over space and time; 
(e)                Access to sea bed data which may be gene rated by Central Data Repository under the 
control of Department for accurate assessment of environment for determining the choice
of correct mining technique; 
(f)                 Month to month, year-to-year and place-to-place changes to be investigated as a furthe r 
means of understanding the environment in which deep sea mining will operate. 
25.       The Committee also recommends that ap art from the mining of Poly  metallic Nodules, the
Department should also thoroughly assess the potentials of mining Hydrothermal Polymetallic Sulphides
and Cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts from the Ocean bed keeping in view the export potentials of such
metals in the international market.  
DRUGS FROM SEA 
26.       Worldwide researchers believe that oc eans hold the key to a w hole range of new drugs fo r
chronic pain, epilepsy and Parkinson’s disease.  The current attempt to reap a chemical harvest from the 
seas is just a continuation of the bio prospecting that the big drug co mpanies have been doing in jungles
for the past few decades.  The National Project on Drugs from Sea is a multi-institutional project aiming 
at developing potential drugs and chemicals from the marine flora and fauna. This project has led to
identification of five marine orga nisms showing potent activity as anti- diabetic, anti-viral, anti-fungal, 
anti-cholesterol and spermicidal ag ents for developing new drugs. Th e exploratory attempts will be
continued in an intens ive manner during the 10 th plan period. The Department has fostered the search
for novel drugs from the sea and wi ll continue to encourage these activities, supporting extensive
bioassay guided screening programmes.   
27.       The Committee was informed that the pr ogramme has been revamped to cover exploratory and 
product development phases.  After successful completion of clinical  trial possible participation o f
pharmaceutical industries would be incorporated.  Pharmacological and toxicological studies were 
completed for anti-diabetic compound and clinical trial is in progress.  The anti-cholesterol compound is 
awaiting the clearance of Committe e for the Purpose of Control a nd Supervision of Experiments on
Animals (CPCSEA) for its toxicity studies in mo nkey.  The systematic collection, extraction and 
biological evaluation of 150 species,  and evaluation of biologically potential organisms, leading to
possible development of new drugs would be carried out along with development of suitable models for
biological activity in certain prio rity areas. As against last ye ar’s allocation of Rs.2.50 crores, 
programme is supported with an allocation of Rs.4.00 crores duri ng 2004-05 which would enable the
advanced stages of drug development for the two lead compounds for anti-diabetic and anti-cholesterol .
28.       The Committee notes with satisfaction that under the Drugs from  the Sea Programme, the
Department is in the proc ess of doing a commendable work.  The Co mmittee is happy with the fact that 
various steps have been taken by the Department for identificati on of numerous marine organisms
showing enormous potential for extraction of such drugs as are anti-diabetic, anti-viral, anti-fungal, anti-
cholesterol and spermicidal agents for developing new drugs. 
29.       The Committee, however, feels that des pite these initiatives b y the De partment, there is still 
Page 11 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

enough scope left for extr action of potentially anti-c ancerous drugs from the de pth of the ocean.  The 
Committee is of the opinion that  pharmaceutical uses of micro-alg ae which are a great source o f 
unexplored chemical  compounds, are extremely beneficial for a possible source of noble drugs.  Micro-
algae are primitive single celled or ganisms that live in a variety of environments and have a high
potential for producing noble chemic al structures.  The Committee is given to understand that bulbous
yellow soft coral that disrupts erra tic cell divisions in cancer cells and ocean molds that live in sea
grasses also contains sufficient vi rus killing proteins.  Apart from th is, the sea sponges are also a real 
source for extraction of anti cancer drugs.  Other cancer drugs like Didemnin-B isolated from Sea squirt,
Bryostatin-1 that could be isolated from Bugula, Dolestatin-10 that could be de rived from Indian Ocean 
Mollusk and Dolabella, a Sea hare, are also sources of potential drugs  for the treatment of cancer and
other incurable diseases.  Apart from this, several pain killer compounds could be extracted from
horseshoe crabs from the depth of  the Ocean.  The Committee feel s that if the department takes 
comprehensive action to study the extraction of these drugs, the entire system of curative medicine could
be revolutionized on its path of treating and  curing life threatening ailments like cancer and AIDS.  The 
Committee would however, like to lay down that during the extraction of these drugs particularly from
the sea coral enough precaution shoul d be taken by the Department so  that ecological and biological
damages done to such coral surroundings should be reduced to the minimum so that scientific researches
in the field may not stand on the way of preserva tion of holistic sea-ecol ogy with a preposterous 
consequences. 
COASTAL OCEAN MONITORING AND PREDICTION SYSTEM (COMAPS) 
30.       Under the Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Pred iction System (COMAPS) Programme, the 
Department of Ocean Development had taken up scientific monitoring of pollution at different locations.
The programme aimed to assess the st atus and likely trends in coasta l marine environment quality and
contribute directly to the developm ent of strategies for maximising the economic benefits derived from
the intelligent and sustainable use of marine e nvironment and resources.  The programme had been
continuing since 1991 for monitoring the level of various marine po llutants and its impacts on marine
fauna and flora of the country. Th e data collected under the progra mme was made available to the
Pollution Control Boards and periodically discussed with them. Any significant increase in pollutants at
a particular location was brought to the notice of the Central Polluti on Control Board for control as well
as remedial actions.  The main objective of the Programme was to constantly assess the health of India’s 
marine environment and indicate areas that needed immediate and long -term remedial action.  Data on 
25 environmental parameters were bei ng collected at 82 locations last year with the help of nine R&D
institutions.   
31.       During 2004-05, the allocation for COMAPS ha s been kept at the level of last year i.e. 2.00 
crores. It was informed that the activities to be undertaken under the programme during the third year o f
the 10 th Plan would have to be accordingly maintained at the level of the current year and is not 
expected to significantly hamper  the progress of pollution monito ring work under the programme. The
allocation made under the COMAPS pr ogramme is adequate as there are no additional parameters and
study area included during 2004-05. 
32.       The Committee observes that the efforts of the Department to monitor pollution in the coastal 
areas need to be continued vigorously. The Depa rtment should identify locations for periodical
monitoring alongwith stipulated para meters for diffusion and dispersi on characteristics.  Besides, the
stations for collection of near-shore samples must be  planned with a view to reflect the pollution load 
that was occurring there and the da ta collected should be processed and forwarded to State Pollution
Control Boards for taking remedial measures. 
33.       The Committee also observes that the land- based pollutants effect the marine and coastal 
environment, including estuaries and inshore coas tal waters, which are th e most productive areas.
Therefore, it recommends that a well- planned and well-mana ged marine water quality monitorin g 
Page 12 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

system is required to predict change s of trends in the qua lity of a particular marine water body so that
curative or preventive measures can be taken to restore and mainta in ecological balance in the wate r
body. Monitoring is needed to ensure that standards and criteria set by the regulatory agencies are met
for the protection of marine water quality. 
MARINE RESEARCH AND CAPACITY BUILDING 
34.       The objectives of the programme are to foster the concept of st ewardship through education,
training and human resource development and increasing awareness at all levels. The activities proposed
in the programme include promotion of research under the basic categories of marine ecology, marine
biology, marine microbiology, ma rine benthos, coastal marine  culture systems, marine
geology/geophysics and ocean engine ering & underwater robotics.  Besides the ongoing programme o f 
award of fellowships to students  for pursuing higher studies in a cademic/educational institutions in
various disciplines of ocean science and technology, organizing exhibitions and fairs to create awareness
among the public on the oceans would continue. 
35.       The Scientific Research and Te chnology Development program mes for exploration an d
sustainable use of the marine resources are multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional.  Basic research and 
developments are required in a wide spectrum of areas to gain adequate knowledge and expertise.  
Required infrastructure and trained personnel are essential for successfully  implementing different
programmes.  There is need for effective inte raction between R&D inst itutions, academicians an d
industries.  
36.       The Committee feels that for strengthening o cean research centers, the Department should focus
its efforts in assisting Universiti es to create infrastruc ture facilities and bu ilding up a skilled human
resource base in marine sciences. Moreover, marine  science teaching on the su stainability of ocean
space and its resources should be strengthened at all levels, from primary to adult education; in curricula
at university level; in adult e ducation programmes for ocean users (fishermen, seamen, workers in oil
industry, coastal engineers) and for managers of ocean affairs. 
37.       The Committee would like to define th e term Bio Technology as reference to a range o f
techniques for identifying, developing and using the propertie s of living  things  to make products o r 
services, it selects natural strains of organisms that carry desirabl e traits makes hybr ids by fusing cells
from different parental sources, us es chemicals and radiation to creat e mutant strains or genetically
engineered plants, animals and microorganisms to produce specific phenotypic characteristics. 
            The Committee by keeping in light the crux of the above comprehensive definition of Bio-
Technology, is of the firm opinion th at any oceanographic research remains incomplete unless emphasis
is given for a deep study in Mari ne Bio Technology for better aqua  culture and improved sea food
supply and increased potential for commercial and Industrial productio ns of Marine substances through
Marine Scientific Research ha ving potential market value. Th e Committee also advocates fo r
encouragement of advanced studies in the field of Marine Scientific  Research through indepth emphasis
on Marine Bio-Technology Research. 
COASTAL RESEARCH VESSELS 
38.       Two research ships ORV Sagar Kanya and FORV Sagar Sampada have been carrying out 
oceanographic surveys for the exploration of non-living and living resources in the Exclusive Economic 
zone (EEZ) and beyond, around Indian Ocean region since 1984.  These vessels were being utilised fo r 
multi-disciplinary research on the physical, chemical, geological and biological aspects of the Indian
Ocean.  The vessels were also engaged in campaigns for valida ting satellite oceanographic data,
assessment of marine living resour ces and for various technology demo nstration activities. The vessels
facilitate systematic collection of  samples and immediate analysis of the mandatory parameters like
nitrate, phosphate etc. for the Coastal Ocean Monitoring  & Pr ediction   System  (COMAPS) 
programme.   Both    the   vessels   are e quipped with so phisticated scientific  facilities for onboar d
Page 13 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

analysis and navigational equipmen ts alongwith communicati on facilities. In order to strengthen the
programme on monitoring of marine pollution along the coastal waters of the country and to promote
research on near shore phenomena, the two vessels do sampling at desired locations of the transects
identified for potential hot spots. The Nationa l Institute of Ocean Te chnology, Chennai through its
Vessel Management Cell is main taining these vessels. During the y ear 2004-05 an allocation of Rs.5.00 
crores has been earmarked for the programme. 
39.       These vessels are being used for pollu tion monitoring under the Coas tal Ocean Monitoring and 
Prediction System (COMPAS) program me of the Department and also  Integrated Coastal and Marine
Area Management programme.  These have complete d 56 cruises for 15 instit utions along the west an d
east coast of India.  The ship time is being effectively utilized by engaging the vessels for various
programmes and preventive  and periodical mainte nance was ensured for trouble free functioning o f
onboard equipment and machineries.  During th e cruises, these vessels undertook CTD, ADCP 
observations, dreadging, water  sampling and plankt on net operations.  In addition  the cruises 
participated in the Marine  Archaeo logical findings at Gulf  of Cambay and Multib eam sonar survey at 
Ennore and Haldia ports.  Public sector underta kings and corporate agen cies like IGCAR, ONGC
utilised the service of these vessels. 
40.       The Committee was informed by the Depart ment that  Coastal Vessels have been providing 
useful data under several programme s. These vessels are used by ONGC , GAIL, etc. for environmental
data collection, by Department fo r the COMAPS studies of the pol lution hotspots, for near shore
mapping for the NIOT programs, fo r the Marine Archeological studi es etc. The vessels can collect
multibeam swath bathymetry data, water samples, se diment samples, temperature, salinity data etc.  The 
Department proposes to sustain the tempo of acti vities and the amount of  Rs. 5.00 crores provided
during 2004-05 is the minimum requirement for the operation of these two vessels. 
41.       The Committee is also happy to no te that two other ocean coasta l research vessels namely Sagar 
Purvi and Sagar Pashimi are main ly being used by the Department  of Ocean Development for the
assessment of sea pollution within the Exclusive Economic Zone of India.  
            The Committee would like to s uggest that since the assessm ent of the sea pollution and 
subsequent action plan for dealing with the density of pollution is extremely important from the point of
view of maintaining an optimal sea ecology, it is necessary that indepth re search through these two
vessels should be undertaken for a complete monitoring of the ocean pollution and initiating subsequent
steps to control them.  The Co mmittee accordingly, would like to  advise the Department that 
biogeochemical pump, which are micr oorganisms at the sea surface and which take Co2 from the
atmosphere and convert it via phot osynthesis into the organic carbon of  their cells should be studied in
minute details.  When these Microor ganisms die subsequently or cons umed and excreted, some portion 
of that carbon sinks to these floors where it is buried.  As the entire world is confronting the threat of the 
global warming, understanding this concept of biogeochemical pump is essential because it could extract
huge amount of excess heat trapping Co2 from our atmosphere.  A key clue lies in the tiny interface 
where sea water meets se a floor and this critical chemical  reaction determines how much carbon
dissolves back into the water and how much remains in the sediments.  This is known as carbon flux.  
42.       The Committee feels that if Department undertakes a detailed study on this phenomena of carbon 
flux, particularly within the Ex clusive Economic Zone of the I ndian Ocean, comprehensive knowledge
and essential data could be made  available in establishing the role of the oceans in governing
atmospheric Co2 content and also the quantum of sink of Co2 and other gr een house gases on the sea
floor.  
            Accordingly, the Committee feels that  the aforesaid entire progra mme could be made a success 
only if the following primary objectives are kept before it by the Department:- 
1.                  Applying the knowledge and experience gain ed through ocean research to develop
technology in s pecific fields like studi es in carbon flux throu gh biogeochemical pump,
Page 14 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

sea bed mining, ocean energy etc; 
2.                  To assist the ocean scientists in th e development of su itable engineering an d
instrumentation system of effective study of ocean pollution; 
3.                  To develop technology for emerging concept of coastal zone management; 
4.                  To effectively coordinate with various te chnical institutes and other R&D institutes in
the country for monitoring the entire con cept of ocean pollution through an effective
technological programme;  
5.                  And to utilize energy from the ocean wa ves for producing electricity through powe r
plants as an alternative to the conventional sources. 
The Committee therefore strongly advocates the Department to initiate comprehensive
programme to fulfill these objectives as a part of their ocean pollution studies and control.  
INTEGRATED COASTAL AND MARINE AREA MANAGEMENT (ICMAM) 
43.       The Integrated Coastal and Marine  Area Management (ICM AM) programme focuses on 
development of expertise in ICMA M oriented activities and dissemin ation of knowledge gained by the
users like coastal states through organized training program mes; developing capab ilities in the coastal
states and UTs for adoption of ICMAM through training; creating a ba se for human resource
development in the fields of IC MAM and ensuring sustainable deve lopment and management of the
ocean resources and enforcement of rules and regulations for regulation of ocean related activities in the
ocean zone to make Indian oceans clean and productive.  
44.       The programme has two components, name ly (i) Capacity building and (ii) Development o f
Infrastructure for R&D, Survey and Training for ICMAM.  The capac ity building component is being 
funded by the International Developm ent Association containing the activ ities, namely (i) Development
of Geographic Information System (GIS) for 11 critical habitats in the coastal and marine Areas in India
(II) Determination of Waste Assimilation Capacity at selected estuaries along coastal areas of India, (iii)
Development of Guidelines for Environmental Im pact Assessment and (iv)  Preparation of Model
Integrated Coastal and Marine Ar ea Management Plans.  Under the component on infrastructure, 
training, laboratories and other facili ties have been established in the NIOT Campus, Chennai.  The 
determination of Use Classification  for Coastal/Waters and no impact zone for selected habitats like
coastal lakes and mangroves were in progress. 
45.       During 2004-05, the allocation for ICMAM wa s reduced to Rs. 4.00 crores as compared to Rs. 
5.50 crores. The Department informed that the reduced  allocation is mainly due to limited increase o f
overall budget of the Department fo r the year 2004-05.  If need be, additional required support will be
taken from other institutions like National Institute of Ocean Technology so that the schedules stipulated
for this programme during the current year will not get affected.  In case savings from other programmes
are available, those will be utilised to procure equipment. 
46.       The Committee is of the view that the collection and analys is of primary and secondary
data/information for the locations identified along the coast for zona tion of coastal waters should be
carried out as zonation of coastal waters will be useful in sust ainable management and effective
planning for future developmental activities without jeopardizing coastal habitats. 
INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
47.       The objectives of the Department through this programme is:  
i)                    to contribute and participate effectively in all the international/bilateral organizations, 
meetings, conferences, committees etc. with a view to projecting I ndia’s role in ocean 
development activities  
ii)                   to exchange information and ex pertise in different as pects of ocean sc ience & technolo gy 
Page 15 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

between the Department and its organizations and other countries , for upgrading knowledge and fo r
fostering technical cooperation. 
48.       The Committee would like the De partment to actively participat e in international events an d
expositions so that our scientists get exposure to the developments and innovations taking place in other
countries.  It will also help in exchanging knowledge about the scientific developments of other nations. 
OCEAN OBSERVATION & INFORMATION SERVICES (OOIS) 
49.       Recognizing the need to operationalise the oceanographic services in the new areas of Science & 
Technology, the Department has implemented the Ocea n Observation and Inform ation Services (OOIS)
programme from the beginning of the 9 th Plan.  The objective of the Programme is to provide ocean 
information services for various a pplications in the ocean section.   OOIS is struct ured  around fou r 
major  themes  namely,  Ocean  Observing  Systems,  Ocean  Information Services, Satellite Coastal and 
Oceanographic Research (SATCORE) and Indian Ocean Modelling & Ocean Dynamic(INDOMOD). 
50.       The Ocean Observing Systems envisage collection of sea truth campaigns using moored data
buoys, expandable bathythermographs (XBT), current  meter arrays and tide  gauges, and designed
particularly for acquisition of real-time sea surface, meteorological and upper oceanographic parameters 
from the coastal and deep waters.  Validation of the satellite sensors has also been undertaken using the 
sea truth data generated under this programme.  The Data Buoy Programme was initiated in 1996 with
partial financial assistance from Norwegian Agency for Developmen t (NORAD) and Na tional Institute
of Ocean Technology (NOIT) has been entrusted with the responsibilities for deployment, operation and
maintenance of the data buoys. 
51.       The Ocean information service envisage s generation and disseminati on  of ocean data/data 
products on an operational basis.  The 14 National Marine Data Centres wi ll be continued under the 
Ocean Information & Services.  A dedicated centre “Indian Nationa l Centre for Ocean Information 
Services (INCOIS)” started func tioning at Hyderabad from 1999 fo r  efficient development and 
dissemination of data products.   INCOIS is involve d to synthesis, generate , promote, provide and 
coordinate various endeavours in the field of ocean sciences, ocean observations, satellite oceanography,
and ocean information and advisory  services.  INCOIS has a visi on to emerge as a knowledge and 
information technology enterprise for the oceanic realm.  Synergy and knowledge networking with 
centers of excellence in ocean, atmospheric scienc es, space applications and information technology as
well as translating this scientific  knowledge into useful  products and services comprise the cornerstone
of INCOIS. 
52.       During the X Plan, INDOMOD and SA TCORE components have been integrated to 
development of a wide range of o cean atmosphere models for operati on use at INCOIS.  These include 
development of regional algorithms,  data assimilation te chniques and operational models, which would
be transferred to the OOIS Cent re for operational use.   The ocean modeling and dynamics projects 
address basic issues on the ocean dyna mic, climate variability, ocean stat e forecast, sea level variations,
ocean flux studies etc.  Some of  the models generated under the pr ogramme have already been made 
operational at INCOIS. 
53.       Asked about reasons for reduction of allocat ion during last year and ag ain increase this year, it
was informed by the Committee that although budgetary allocati on for OOIS was reduced from
Rs.35.00 crores (B.E.) to Rs. 25.00 cr ores (R.E.) during the year 2003- 04, this has not affected the 
ongoing activities adversely. Postponement of cert ain payments by INCOIS , Hyderabad towards
construction of Phase-I buildings & campus devel opment and deferring the acquisition of a dedicate d
vessel for Ocean Observing System led to reduction in the requireme nt of funds for the programme.
During 2004-05, there is a marginal increase of allocation for the progr amme, which is mainly
earmarked for continuation of activities proposed under various projects of the scheme. The allocation is 
Rs. 26.00 crores in the ensuing year. 
Page 16 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

54.       The Committee commends the activ ities being pursued by the Indi an National Centre for Ocean
Information Services (INCOIS) in the field of Ocean information and observations.  However, being the 
nodal agency for providing coastal and ocean data  and value added products to the users, the
Department should monitor the performance a nd work-mechanism of the INCOIS to process an d 
disseminate ocean data and data pr oducts to user communities like fi sheries, weather, climate, ports,
shipping etc. on a regular basis so that ocean weather forecasting is precise. 
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OCEAN TECHNOLOGY 
55.       The National Institute of Ocean Tec hnology (NIOT) was establishe d in November, 1993 as a
registered society under the administrative control of the Department of O cean Development with a
view to developing technology in the ocean sector. The main aim of NI OT is to develop and  promote  
technology  in mission  mode  for  specific  purposes   in  ocean  related  areas. The multifarious 
activities of NIOT are carri ed out as in-house technology de velopment programmes and fiel d
demonstration projects. Init ially NIOT’s spectrum of activities includes the four core mission activities
i.e. Ocean Energy, Deep Sea Mining, Coastal and Environmental e ngineering and Marine
Instrumentation. Subsequently, NI OT was also entrusted with th e operation & maintenance of two
CRVs by establishing a  Vessel Management Cell in 1996 and National Data Buoy Programme in 1997. 
In 1998-99, one more project on Isla nd Development was added to the activities of NIOT and rename d
as Ocean Science & Technol ogy for Islands. NIOT is also entruste d to undertake Hi-tech consultancy 
service in ocean related activi ties.  During 2003-04, the major activities, ongoing as well as new,
undertaken by NIOT are testing of  1MW Ocean Thermal Energy Conve rsion (OTEC) Plant, design o f
mining system for depth upto 6000 m, preparat ion of Environmental Im pact Assessment (EIA)
guidelines for Coastal Ocean management, devel opment of Under Water Marine Instruments and
calibration of the same and continuing the project on enhancement of Marine Living Resources. For the
project Ocean Science & Technology for Islands, NIOT has already made a headway in enhancement of
marine living resources in the island groups by ta king up technology development for breeding, rearing
and fattening lobsters to begin with. The facilities both at the Is land groups and at the mainland have
been augmented for this purpose. It  is proposed to expand the activ ities under this programme to othe r
marine organisms on selective basis and also to coordinate the impl ementation of all the programmes of
the Department in the island groups for the benefit of the island community. 
56.       The Committee was informed that dur ing 2003-04, the fund allocation of NI OT was increase d 
from Rs.25.00 crores to Rs.33.50 cror es at RE stage, mainly to provide additional funds for OTEC
programme, as recommended by the EFC.   The revision of cost of this  project became essential due to
loss of 1000 mts long intake pipe at  the time of deployment of the OT EC plant barge at high seas due to
rough weather conditions.  However the proposal for providing additional fund to NIOT was finally not
agreed by the Ministry of Finance and the actual allocation of fund to NIOT during 2003-04 remained at 
Rs.25.00 crores.  The proposed outlay of NIOT for the year 2004-05 as  per the approved outlay for 10 th
Plan is Rs.30.26 crores.  However, th e fund allocation is ke pt at Rs.25.00 crores due to cut in overall
projected outlay of the Depa rtment.  The requirement of additional funds for NI OT will be reviewed at
RE stage. 
57.       Under NIOT Grants-in-aid programmes, acti vities will be undertaken in the five major ongoing 
programmes of energy and fresh wa ter from sea, deep sea technol ogy and ocean mining, environmental
engineering, marine instrumentati on and ocean science and technology fo r islands.  These will include 
technology demonstration of OTEC plant, designing and establishmen t of 1 lakh litre/day capacity
desalination plant for Laks hdweep islands using warm sea surfa ce and cool deep sea water and Low
Thermal Flash Evaporation technology.  NIOT also plans to transfer tec hnology of indigenously 
developed Acoustic Tide Gauge.  Th e national Acoustic Test Facilit y has been commissioned at NIOT
in June, 2004 with state-of-the-art  equipment for testin g acoustic equipments and their calibration.  
NIOT plans to undertake technology development for deep sea mariculture, and further enlarge the
transfer of technolo gy, alread y develo ped for crab and lobster fattenin g, to coastal fishermen
Page 17 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

communities.  
OCEANOGRAPHIC RESEARCH 
58.       The Committee is pleased to note that the Depa rtment is mainly using two Ocean Research 
Vessels, namely Sagar Sampada a nd Sagar Kanya for deep sea rese arch.  These vessels are using 
remotely operated vehicle (ROV) and Autonomous Underwater vehicl e (AUV) to study about deep sea
life forms at considerable depth.  However, the Committee feels that scope of deep sea research could be
more challenging and informative if machineries could dive be yond a depth of 6000 meters.  The 
Committee is therefore of the opinion that for a r eal deep sea study Advanced  Tethered Vehicle (ATV)
is needed by Department which is  an unmanned vehicle equipped with  latest advanced technology and
which can easily undertake researches beyond a dept h of 6 thousand metres.   The most striking 
advantage for using the ATV for underwater research is that it is extremely helpful to make researches at
extreme depth where it is dangerous  for divers to venture.  The Co mmittee is given to understand that 
such vehicles are cost affective and can be used in oc ean abyss with much flexibility.  It is observed that 
the vast majority of the ocean depths are bone chilling cold, completely dark and have ambient pressures
equivalent to the weight of the hundreds of atmosphe res. The exploration of th e deep sea is, therefore,
impossible without a subs tantial investment on la test technology.  The Comm ittee therefore strongly 
recommends that the Department may use Advanced Tethered Vehi cle (ATV) for the purpose of deep
sea research in view of its deep sea advantages and cost effective a pplications.  This vehicle will be 
extremely helpful for researches at  ocean benthos where gr eater variety of biotic  and abiotic elements
are available and a study of which could add consid erably to the store house of human knowledge about
ocean depth.   
ACQUISITION OF NEW RESEARCH VESSEL 
59.       The new vessel is meant for technology de monstration. It will serv e as a platform for the 
programme envisaged in th e X Plan and also serve as a utility science vesse l that will augment the
capacity need of the marine living and non-living resources programme of th e Department.  The NIOT 
would be the nodal agency to implement this program me and to operate and maintain the vessel.  A 
financial allocation of Rs.40.00 crores has been sought for the year 2004-05.  The Department’s focus in 
the next 5 years will be to develop sustainable technology for the exploitation of various non-living 
resources.  Under “Vessel for tec hnology services and demonstration programme”, suitable platform is 
required to replace the vessels and crafts chartered by the DOD at pr esent, which caters to the above
demand.  Without such a facility, the implementation of the technology development programmes would
be delayed.  For initial expenditure on design etc the proposed sum of funds are essential and progamme
is expected to be initiated upon obtaining requisite approvals.  
60.       The Department is moving ahead with  the acquisition of  the new Technology Demonstration
Vessel. Due to the delay in obtaini ng clearances from ministry, appr oval of the EFC,  clearance from
Ministry of Finance and finally from the Cabinet Com mittee on Economic Affair s, the project could
start only from February 2004, Hence, the funds al located to the program dur ing 2003-04 could not be 
utilized. However, the design of the new vessel, appointment of design consultant and the model tests of
the proposed vessel have already been completed. The pre-qualification for identifying the shipyar d 
where the vessel is to be built is in progress and the fina l selection of the yard  will be completed by
November 2004.  The projected amount Rs 40.00 crores  during the year will be utilised, as the
construction of the vessel (keel laying) will commence by the year -end. In fact, as the department 
envisages the comple tion of the vessel construction by 2006- 2007, more funds may be required during 
the year to increase the pace of vessel construction. 
61.       The Committee has been recommending for a Research Vessel for the Department and therefore 
notes with satisfaction th at the sustained efforts of  the Department helped th e project approved.  The 
Committee recommends that this project to procure new research vesse l will be implemented as soon as
possible to enable the Department to do its important work for ocean development. 
GAS HYDRATES 
Page 18 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

62.       With ever increasing gap between de mand and indigenous production of natural gas and the
huge import bill incurred by India, it is necessary to look for alternative resources and Gas hydrates have
the potential in this direction.  The Gas hydrates program me consists of both scientific & technology 
development for gas hydrates. The st eps in this programme will be to Understand the generation and
accumulation of hydrates in sedime nts, estimate impact of gas di ssolution on geological environment
and climate, develop or adopt environmentally safe technology fo r production and tran sportation of gas
from hydrates, draw up plans to  monitor and manage environm ental perturbation during hydrate
harvesting. The allocation of  Rs.18.00 crores during the current financ ial year is to meet the projection
of activities planned for the programme in 2004-05. 
63.       The Committee feels that Gas Hydr ates have the potent ial of providing  en ergy security to the 
country. Therefore, the Department  should encourage excellence in national laboratories to focus on
niche areas of hydrate research with special emphasis on resource ex tent evaluation and environmental
impacts and development of technology for detection and qualification of gas hydrates in sediments.  
PRESISTENT ORGANIC POLLUTANTS 
64.       The Committee feels that Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs) are the most common sea 
pollutants which are consta ntly affecting the Ocea n environment and optimal  marine ecology.  The 
POPs usually gets generated in th e deep sea environment from the d ead biotic organisms. When the
particles of this organisms get sink in the sea bed, a degradation of organic matr ix occurs and
consequently POPs get released in the surr ounding water.  Under anoxi c conditions, sediments 
containing organic carbon releases contaminants into the surrounding water.  POPs not only affect 
microbial food chain but also coas tal environments which are the most productive areas of the sea.
POPs  are also ubiquitous.  Accord ingly, it is an extreme threat towards maintenance of optimal sea 
ecology and it has high exposure to  humans also.  Keepi ng the gravity of the situation into active 
consideration, the Committee feels that Sagar Purvi and Sagar Pasc himi two ocean research vessels,
which are monitoring research on ocean pollution may also direct a major chunks of their study towards
the understanding of POPs behavior and subsequent control of  the same from spreading on the sea
benthos so that the entire biotic community of ocean flora and fauna could be effectively preserved from
environmental pollution.  
            The Committee also feels that two of the main POP group namely dioxin and furans which are
the principal threat to humanity s hould also be studied as a part of  the pollution control programme by
the Department.   
65.       After considering the Demands for Gr ants of the Department of Ocean Development an d
assessing the progress of various important programmes and project s administered by it, the Committee
recommends that the budgetary allocation of Rs.230.08 crores, as sought by the Department for the yea r
2004-2005, under Demand No. 68, may be approved. 
  
SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMMENDATIONS 
  
1.         The Committee observes that ther e were major variations in th e budgetary allocations and their 
utilization.  The non-utilisation of the allocation meant less or reduced activities of the Department.  The 
Committee feels that the Departme nt should have foreseen the re asons advanced by it for the non-
utilisation of funds befo re asking for budgetary allocation and s hould have evolved suitable mechanism
to monitor the budgetary proposal and its allocations. 
                                                                                                                                    (Para 8) 
2.         Exploration of the icy continent is a challenging task before the Department.  The Committee 
feels given the extremit y of the prevailing situation in this continent of ice, De partment has taken the
Page 19 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

real pain to embark upon a formidable task of in itiating scientific exper iments in an extreme cold
conditions.  Although the Co mmittee is fully convinced about the quality of the research wor k
undertaken till date in this uninhabited and inhospita ble mass of ice land, it fe els the following areas o f
research should be given more attention due to th eir global, social, medical , scientific and economic
importance: 
h)                  Studies on evolution of Antarctic Glaciology; 
i)                    Studies on ozone hole issues; 
j)                    Studies in geological and geophysical investigation of the Schirmacher Oasis and Orwin 
and Wolhthat mountains; 
k)                  Studies about Antarctic microbe s specially cynobacteria with  special reference to thei r 
survivality rate in extreme cold situation so that any new knowledge about the process of
biological withstanding of extr eme low temperature could be utilized for Indian defence
personnel staying in Siachen Glacier; 
l)                    Studies in Antarctic pollution; 
m)                Studies in Krill biology; 
n)                  Studies in auroral   phenomenon; 
The Committee while strongly recommending basic and in depth researches in these fields urges
the Department to uphold its commitment to protect the pristine nature of the Continent.  
          (Para 17) 
3.         The Committee hopes that sustained efforts of the Department in the direction of setting up new
station will yield positive results. However, notwithstanding different surveys involved, some target date
should be fixed for comple ting the task undertaken. In the absence of any time frame, it may lose the
importance and urgency that is called for.  
         (Para 18) 
4.         Although the Committee is happy with the contents and performanc e of projects under Poly 
Metallic Nodules programme of Department, it is, however, scep tical about the Department’s 
assessment about the preservation of environmental norms for optimal sea ecology at the mining site.   
            The Committee is of the opinion that  before a comprehensive pla nning is undertaken for on-site 
mining of nodule, the Department should prepare an experimental chart about the precise disturbance of
the sea floor at the mining area to  assess its geological and ecologi cal conditions.  The Committee feels 
that while organisms would be de stroyed in the mined area undisturbe d areas would remain because o f
the complex terrain of sea bed which could serve as  biological reservoir for recolonizing the destroyed
section.  
          (Para 22) 
5.         The Committee is of the opinion that dangers arising from the release of underlying heavy metals
when the upper sediment layer is removed, could change or disrupt geochemical systems that has been
stabilized over geological time, possibly creating zones of reduce d oxygen where life would become
impossible. 
            The Committee, therefore, feels that  before mining is initiated, Department must examine the
effect of mining on local animals at the site caused by dragging of plough across the bottom to stimulate
the effects of nodule mining on the se a bed, including the rates at whic h animals of the same species
returned to the disturbed area.  The study should be  done in this respect on mega fauna animals large 
enough to be seen at the ocean botto m.  The Committee is of the opinion  that the effects of mining will 
be greatest on the sea sponges that lived directly on the nodules because thei r habitat will be completely
Page 20 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

destroyed.  Other free swim ming species will suffer a considerable  reduction in numbers due to serious 
disruption in food supply.  The Committee, therefore, is of the view that from emerging picture above 
the evaluation of bio-threat exposed by sea bed mi ning is indispensable to  be addressed thoroughly 
before venturing into mining operation and the Commit tee feels that any such evaluation is difficult
without better knowledge of the orga nisms living at the mining site a nd the eco-system in which they 
function.  It is quite appa rent that animals at the site area woul d be killed by the im pact of the mining
vehicle and by resettlement of the se diment cloud that impact of the mining vehicle will raise from the
sea floor.  
            Another potential effect of mining on the ocean floor is the bri nging up of unwanted materials 
during a mining operation i.e. sedi ments, trace metals from nodule waste and cold and nutrient rich
bottom water into the upper ocean. Owing to this probl em, the Committee feels that deep or mid ocean
level will be most desirable area for discharging of  miners waste as it would not be harmful to the
environment.  
          (Para 23) 
6.         The Committee further feels that burial se nsitivity of sea bed organisms i.e. the consequences o f
dumping a layer of sediment on t op of them as a direct reperc ussion of mining should be studied
thoroughly by Department as lesson for Environmental Impact Assessm ent of sea-bed mining.  The 
Committee feels such studies c ould be undertaken by the Depart ment through Remotely Operated
Vehicle (ROV). 
            The Committee, therefore recommends  that Department should undert ake critical assessment o f 
different mining technique s and their subsequent effects on Geochemistry  and Ocean Biology and
Department should generate relia ble data for determining the optimal mining techniques i.e. ideal
extractive metallurgy to minimize environmental impacts.  
            The Committee, therefore strongly recommends for constant assessment of environmental 
impact of deep sea-mining by Depa rtment before venturing into ac tual mining operation keeping the 
following into consideration for a meaningful assessment of the impact:- 
(g)                Biodiversity, species ranges and rates of gene flow in the nodule areas; 
(h)                Burial sensitivity of deep-sea animals and their response to the type of disturbance 
caused when nodules are scraped from the se a floor, as well as recovery of marine
organisms in space and time; 
(i)                  Impact on ocean column by rising unwante d materials from mining operation located 
above a mine site; 
(j)                 Natural variability in deep ocean ecosystems over space and time; 
(k)               Access to sea bed data which may be gene rated by Central Data Repository under the
control of Department for accurate assessment of environment for determining the choice
of correct mining technique; 
(l)                  Month to month, year to year  and place to place changes to  be investigated as a furthe r 
means of understanding the environment in which deep sea mining will operate. 
          (Para 24) 
7.         The Committee also recommends that apart from the mining of Po ly metallic Nodules, the
Department should also thoroughly assess the potentials of mining Hydrothermal Polymetallic Sulphides
and Cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts from the Ocean bed keeping in view the export potentials of such
Page 21 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

metals in the international market.  
          (Para 25) 
8.         The Committee notes with satisfacti on that under the Drugs from  the Sea Programme, the 
Department is in the proc ess of doing a commendable work.  The Co mmittee is happy with the fact that 
various steps have been taken by the Department for identificati on of numerous marine organisms
showing enormous potential for extraction of such drugs as are anti-diabetic, anti-viral, anti-fungal, anti-
cholesterol and spermicidal agents for developing new drugs. 
          (Para 28) 
9.         The Committee, however, feels that desp ite these initiatives by the Department, there is still 
enough scope left for extr action of potentially anti-c ancerous drugs from the de pth of the ocean.  The 
Committee is of the opinion that  pharmaceutical uses of micro-alg ae which are a great source o f 
unexplored chemical  compounds, are extremely beneficial for a possible source of noble drugs.  Micro-
algae are primitive single celled or ganisms that live in a variety of environments and have a high
potential for producing noble chemic al structures.  The Committee is given to understand that bulbous
yellow soft coral that disrupts erra tic cell divisions in cancer cells and ocean molds that live in sea
grasses also contains sufficient vi rus killing proteins.  Apart from th is, the sea sponges are also a real 
source for extraction of anti cancer drugs.  Other cancer drugs like Didemnin-B isolated from Sea squirt,
Bryostatin-1 that could be isolated from Bugula, Dolestatin-10 that could be de rived from Indian Ocean 
Mollusk and Dolabella, a Sea hare, are also sources of potential drugs  for the treatment of cancer and
other incurable diseases.  Apart from this, several pain killer compounds could be extracted from
horseshoe crabs from the depth of  the Ocean.  The Committee feel s that if the department takes 
comprehensive action to study the extraction of these drugs, the entire system of curative medicine could
be revolutionized on its path of treating and  curing life threatening ailments like cancer and AIDS.  The 
Committee would however, like to lay down that during the extraction of these drugs particularly from
the sea coral enough precaution shoul d be taken by the Department so  that ecological and biological
damages done to such coral surroundings should be reduced to the minimum so that scientific researches
in the field may not stand on the way of preserva tion of holistic sea-ecol ogy with a preposterous 
consequences. 
          (Para 29) 
10.       The Committee observes that the efforts of  the Department to monitor pollution in the coastal 
areas need to be continued vigorously. The Depa rtment should identify locations for periodical
monitoring alongwith stipulated para meters for diffusion and dispersi on characteristics.  Besides, the
stations for collection of near-shore samples must be  planned with a view to reflect the pollution load 
that was occurring there and the da ta collected should be processed and forwarded to State Pollution
Control Boards for taking remedial measures. 
          (Para 32) 
11.       The Committee also observes that the land- based pollutants effect the marine and coastal 
environment, including estuaries and inshore coas tal waters, which are th e most productive areas.
Therefore, it recommends that  a well-planned and we ll-managed marine wate r quality monitoring 
system is required to predict change s of trends in the qua lity of a particular marine water body so that
curative or preventive measures can be taken to restore and mainta in ecological balance in the wate r
body. Monitoring is needed to ensure that standards and criteria set by the regulatory agencies are met
for the protection of marine water quality. 
          (Para 33) 
12.       The Committee feels that for strengthening o cean research centers, the Department should focus
its efforts in assistin g Universities to cr eate infrastructure f acilities and buildin g u p a skilled human
Page 22 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

resource base in marine sciences. Moreover, marine  science teaching on the su stainability of ocean
space and its resources should be strengthened at all levels, from primary to adult education; in curricula
at university level; in adult e ducation programmes for ocean users (fishermen, seamen, workers in oil
industry, coastal engineers) and for managers of ocean affairs. 
          (Para 36) 
13.       The Committee would like to define th e term Bio Technology as reference to a range o f
techniques for identifying, developing and using the propertie s of living  things  to make products o r 
services, it selects natural strains of organisms that carry desirabl e traits makes hybr ids by fusing cells
from different parental sources, us es chemicals and radiation to creat e mutant strains or genetically
engineered plants, animals and microorganisms to produce specific phenotypic characteristics. 
            The Committee by keeping in light the crux of the above comprehensive definition of Bio-
Technology, is of the firm opinion th at any oceanographic research remains incomplete unless emphasis
is given for a deep study in Mari ne Bio Technology for better aqua  culture and improved sea food
supply and increased potential for commercial and Industrial productio ns of Marine substances through
Marine Scientific Research ha ving potential market value. Th e Committee also advocates fo r
encouragement of advanced studies in the field of Marine Scientific  Research through indepth emphasis
on Marine Bio-Technology Research. 
          (Para 37) 
14.       The Committee is also happy to note that two ot her ocean coastal research vessels namely Saga r 
Purvi and Sagar Pashimi are main ly being used by the Department  of Ocean Development for the
assessment of sea pollution within the Exclusive Economic Zone of India.  
            The Committee would like to s uggest that since the assessm ent of the sea pollution and 
subsequent action plan for dealing with the density of pollution is extremely important from the point of
view of maintaining an optimal sea ecology, it is necessary that indepth re search through these two
vessels should be undertaken for a complete monitoring of the ocean pollution and initiating subsequent
steps to control them.  The Co mmittee accordingly, would like to  advise the Department that 
biogeochemical pump, which are micr oorganisms at the sea surface and which take Co2 from the
atmosphere and convert it via phot osynthesis into the organic carbon of  their cells should be studied in
minute details.  When these Microor ganisms die subsequently or cons umed and excreted, some portion 
of that carbon sinks to these floors where it is buried.  As the entire world is confronting the threat of the 
global warming, understanding this concept of biogeochemical pump is essential because it could extract
huge amount of excess heat trapping Co2 from our atmosphere.  A key clue lies in the tiny interface 
where sea water meets se a floor and this critical chemical  reaction determines how much carbon
dissolves back into the water and how much remains in the sediments.  This is known as carbon flux.  
          (Para 41) 
15.       The Committee feels that if Department undertakes a detailed study on this phenomena of carbon 
flux, particularly within the Ex clusive Economic Zone of the I ndian Ocean, comprehensive knowledge
and essential data could be made  available in establishing the role of the oceans in governing
atmospheric Co2 content and also the quantum of sink of Co2 and other gr een house gases on the sea
floor.  
            Accordingly, the Committee feels th at the aforesaid entire progr amme could be made a success 
only if the following primary objectives are kept before it by the Department:- 
1.      Applying the knowledge and e xperience gained through oc ean research to develop
technology in specific fields  like studies in carbon flux through biogeochemical pump, sea
bed mining, ocean energy etc; 
2.      To assist the ocean scientists in the develo pment of suitable engineering and instrumentation
Page 23 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

system of effective study of ocean pollution; 
3.      To develop technology for emerging concept of coastal zone management; 
4.      To effectively coordinate with various technical  institutes and other R&D institutes in the
country for monitoring the entire concep t of ocean pollution through an effective
technological programme;  
5.      And to utilize energy from the ocean waves for producing electricity through power plants as 
an alternative to the conventional sources. 
The Committee therefore strongly advocates the Department to initiate comprehensive
programme to fulfill these objectives as a part of their ocean pollution studies and control.  
          (Para 42) 
16.       The Committee is of the view that th e collection and analysis of primary and secondary
data/information for the locations identified along the coast for zona tion of coastal waters should be
carried out as zonation of coastal waters will be useful in sust ainable management and effective
planning for future developmental activities without jeopardizing coastal habitats. 
          (Para 46) 
17.       The Committee would like the Department  to actively participate in  international events an d
expositions so that our scientists get exposure to the developments and innovations taking place in other
countries.  It will also help in exchanging knowledge about the scientific developments of other nations. 
          (Para 48) 
18.       The Committee commends the activities be ing pursued by the Indian National Centre for Ocean
Information Services (INCOIS) in the field of Ocean information and observations.  However, being the 
nodal agency for providing coastal and ocean data  and value added products to the users, the
Department should monitor the performance a nd work-mechanism of the INCOIS to process an d 
disseminate ocean data and data pr oducts to user communities like fi sheries, weather, climate, ports,
shipping etc. on a regular basis so that ocean weather forecasting is precise. 
          (Para 54) 
19.       The Committee is pleased to note that the Department is mainly using two Ocean Research 
Vessels, namely Sagar Sampada a nd Sagar Kanya for deep sea rese arch.  These vessels are using 
remotely operated vehicle (ROV) and Autonomous Underwater vehicl e (AUV) to study about deep sea
life forms at considerable depth.  However, the Committee feels that scope of deep sea research could be
more challenging and informative if machineries could dive be yond a depth of 6000 meters.  The 
Committee is therefore of the opinion that for a r eal deep sea study Advanced  Tethered Vehicle (ATV)
is needed by Department which is  an unmanned vehicle equipped with  latest advanced technology and
which can easily undertake researches beyond a dept h of 6 thousand metres.   The most striking 
advantage for using the ATV for underwater research is that it is extremely helpful to make researches at
extreme depth where it is dangerous  for divers to venture.  The Co mmittee is given to understand that 
such vehicles are cost affective and can be used in oc ean abyss with much flexibility.  It is observed that 
the vast majority of the ocean depths are bone chilling cold, completely dark and have ambient pressures
equivalent to the weight of the hundreds of atmosphe res. The exploration of th e deep sea is, therefore,
impossible without a subs tantial investment on la test technology.  The Comm ittee therefore strongly 
recommends that the Department may use Advanced Tethered Vehi cle (ATV) for the purpose of deep
sea research in view of its deep sea advantages and cost effective a pplications.  This vehicle will be 
extremely helpful for researches at  ocean benthos where gr eater variety of biotic  and abiotic elements
are available and a study of which could add consid erably to the store house of human knowledge about
ocean depth.   
Page 24 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

          (Para 58) 
20.       The Committee has been recommending for a Research Vessel for the Department and therefore 
notes with satisfaction th at the sustained efforts of  the Department helped th e project approved.  The 
Committee recommends that this project to procure new research vesse l will be implemented as soon as
possible to enable the Department to do its important work for ocean development. 
          (Para 61) 
21.       The Committee feels that Gas Hydrates ha ve the potential of provid ing energy security to the 
country. Therefore, the Department  should encourage excellence in national laboratories to focus on
niche areas of hydrate research with special emphasis on resource ex tent evaluation and environmental
impacts and development of technology for detection and qualification of gas hydrates in sediments.  
                                                                                                                                  (Para 63) 
  
22.       The Committee feels that Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs)  are the most common sea 
pollutants which are consta ntly affecting the Ocea n environment and optimal  marine ecology.  The 
POPs usually gets generated in th e deep sea environment from the d ead biotic organisms. When the
particles of this organisms get sink in the sea bed, a degradation of organic matr ix occurs and
consequently POPs get released in the surr ounding water.  Under anoxi c conditions, sediments 
containing organic carbon releases contaminants into the surrounding water.  POPs not only affect 
microbial food chain but also coas tal environments which are the most productive areas of the sea.
POPs  are also ubiquitous.  Accord ingly, it is an extreme threat towards maintenance of optimal sea 
ecology and it has high exposure to  humans also.  Keepi ng the gravity of the situation into active 
consideration, the Committee feels that Sagar Purvi and Sagar Pasc himi two ocean research vessels,
which are monitoring research on ocean pollution may also direct a major chunks of their study towards
the understanding of POPs behavior and subsequent control of  the same from spreading on the sea
benthos so that the entire biotic community of ocean flora and fauna could be effectively preserved from
environmental pollution.  
             
The Committee also feels that two of the main POP group namely dioxin and furans which are 
the principal threat to humanity should also be studied as a part of the pollution control programme by 
the Department.   
                                                                                                      (Para 64) 
  
ANNEXURE 
 
Page 25 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR THE YEAR 2003-04 
             
       (Rs.in cror
  
BUD
S.No. Name of the Scheme 2003-04
1. Polar Science 24.00
2. Pol ymetallic Nodules Programme 22.00
3. Ocean Observation and Information Services 35.00
4. Marine Research & Technolo gy Development 21.50
4.1 Oceanographic Research Vessel (ORV & FORV) and MLR            2.50
4.2 Drugs from Sea 2.50
4.3 Assistance for Research Projects 5.0
4.5 Ocean Awareness 1.00
4.6 Man power Training 0.50
4.7 Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM) 5.50
4.8 Dee p Sea Mineral Exploration 0.75
4.9 BENFAN 1.75
5. National Institute of Ocean Technolo gy (NIOT) 25.00
6. Coastal Research Vessel (CRV) 5.00
7. Delineation of Outer Limi ts of Continental Shelf 8.00
8. Com prehensive Swath Bathymetric Survey of Indian EEZ 12.00
9. Gas-hydrate Exploration & Technology Development for 
Exploitation 
18.00 
10. Ac quisition of new Research Vessels 2.00
11 Geo- physical Study of Laxmi Basin 2.50
                                           Total 175.00
Page 26 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

6. Shri Sujan Chakraborty  
7. Shri Anantrao Gudhe  
8. Shri Babubhai Katara  
9. Shri Brahmananda Panda  
10. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                          
11. Shri K.C.Singh Baba     
12. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh                             
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
             
            Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer
 
  
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT   
1.      Dr. Harsh K. Gupta, Secretary 
2.      Shri  Naresh Chaturvedi, Addl. Secretary & Fin. Adviser
Page 27 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

3.      Dr. S.P. Seth, Joint Secretary 
4.      Shri S. K. Das, Scientist ‘G’ 
5.      Dr. B. R. Subramaniam, Scientist ‘G’ 
6.      Dr. P.C. Pandey, Director 
7.      Shri Ajai Saxena, Director  
8.      Dr. S. Kathiroli, Director NIOT 
9.      Dr. K. Radhakrishnan, Director 
10.  Dr. V. Kodagali, Scientist 
11.  Shri R.K. Sharma,  Scientist 
12.  Shri Dinesh Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
13.  Shri Jung Bahadur, Scientist 
14.  Dr. K. Somasundar, Scientist 
15.  Dr. S.A.S. Naqvi, Scientist 
16.  Shri P. Madeswaran, Scientist 
17.  Shri A.B. Choudhury, Scientist 
18.  Dr. S.A.S. Naqvi, Scientist 
19.  Shri K. Narayanan, Under Secretary 
  
OFFICERS FROM OTHER OFFICERS/ORGANISATIONS CONNECTED WITH 
DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT   
  
1.   Dr. Ram Raghbir Deputy Director, Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow 
2.      Dr. M.D. Zngde, Scientist-in-charge, Regional Centre NIO, Mumbai 
3.      Shri B.K. Saha, D.D.G., G.S.I. 
4.      Shri Prem kumar Project Director, NIOT, Chennai 
  
  
2.         At the outset the Chairman welcomed th e Secretary and other repres entatives of the Department
of Ocean Development and requested them to make a presentation on Demands for Grants (2004-05) o f 
the Department.  The Secretary made visual pres entation of the activities and achievements of the
Department of Ocean Development and explained the budgeta ry allocations on diff erent heads as also
the functioning of the Depa rtment.  The Secretary also informed the Committee about the plans of the
Department to establish a new st ation at Antarctica. He also in formed the Committee about the Poly
metallic Nodules plant set up at M/s Hindustan Zinc Ltd. at Udaipu r which has the Nodule processing
capability of 500 kg/day. The Members then sought  
clarifications on points arising out of the presentation. The Secretary replied to them.  
  
      The witnesses then withdrew.  
  
3.         The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 11.15 a.m. for tea break a nd re-assembled at 11.30 a.m. 
to hear the Secretary, Department of Atomic Energy.
 
  
4.         *                                                             *                                                             * 
5.         *                                                             *                                                             * 
6.         *                                                             *                                                             * 
  
            A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
7.         The Committee then adjourned at 02.05 p.m. 
  
  
Page 28 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm

***Relates to other matters. 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
      The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 24 th August, 2004 in Room No. 63, First Floor, 
Parliament House, New Delhi.  
             
PRESENT 
  
1.   Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Prof. Saif-ud-din Soz  
3. Dr. Prabha Thakur  
4. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav  
5. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy  
6. Shrimati Kum Kum Rai  
  
LOK  SABHA 
7. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty  
8. Shri A.Vankatesh Naik  
9. Shri Bachi Singh Rawat                          
10. Shri Sita Ram Yadav  
11. Shri V. Aruna Kumar  
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
             
            Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty 
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary 
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer 
Shri Trilok Nath Mishra, Research Officer 
  
2.   The Committee took up fo r consideration the Draft 128 th, ***, *** and *** Reports of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants (2004-2005) pertaining to Depart ment of Ocean Development, ***,
*** and ***, respectively.  After discussion and suggest ing some changes, the Committee considered 
and adopted each of the above reports.  
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy to 
present the Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri  Bachi Singh Rawat and in  his absence Dr. Sujan
Chakraborty to lay the Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha. 
4.         *                                                               *                                                            * 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 10.50 A.M. 
  
***Relates to other matters. 
Page 29 of 29128threport of Science and Technology
7/16/2008http://10.21.217.2/book2/reports/science/128threport.htm