Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 
REPORT NO. 
266
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the 23rd July, 2015)
Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the 23rd July, 2015)
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY SIXTH REPORT
E - Waste and E - Radiation

Hindi version of this publication is also available
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDRED SIXTY SIXTH REPORT
E - Waste and E - Radiation
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on the  23rd July, 2015 )
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on the  23rd July, 2015)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
July, 2015/Shravana, 1937 (Saka)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. A CRONYMS .............................................................................................................................. ( iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—9
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A G LANCE ............................................................ 10—11
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 13—15
7. A NNEXURES ............................................................................................................................. 17 —25

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(Constituted on 1 st September, 2014)
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Anil Madhav Dave
3. Shri Prem Chand Gupta
4. Shri C. P. Narayanan
5. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
6. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy
7. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
8. Shri Bhupinder Singh
 9. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
10. Shri Ronald Sapa Tlau
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Badruddin Ajmal
12. Shri Muzaffar Hussain Beig
13. Shrimati Bijoya Chakravarty
14. Shri Pankaj Chaudhary
15. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapsinh Chauhan
16. Kum. Sushmita Dev
17. Shri Ninong Ering
18. Shri Laxman Giluwa
19. Dr. K. Gopal
20. Shri Daddan Mishra
21. Shri Shivaji Adhalrao Patil
22. Shri Nana Patole
23. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
24. Shri Harinarayan Rajbhar
25. Shrimati Sandhya Roy
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
27. Shri Nagendra Singh
28. Shrimati Renuka Sinha
29. Shri Vikram Usendi
30. Shrimati Vasanthi M.
*31. Shri Chirag Paswan
*Nominated w .e.f. 25 th  March, 2015.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V . S. P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorized by the Committee
to present the Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Sixty-sixth Report on
‘E-waste and E-radiation.
2. In its meeting held on the 20
th November, 2014, the Committee heard the views of the
Ministries of Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Science and Technology and
Department of Telecommunications on the subject.
3. The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Ministries of Environment,
Forest and Climate Change; Science and Technology and Department of Telecommunications
for placing before the Committee the required material and replying to the clarifications sought
by the Members on the subject.
4.      In its meeting held on 21 st July, 2015, the Committee considered the draft report and
adopted the same. 
ASHWANI KUMAR
 N EW D ELHI; Chairman,
 21 July, 2015 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
18 Shravana, 1937           Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests
Rajya Sabha

(iv)
ACRONYMS
PBB : Polybrominated Biphenyls
PBDE : Polybrominated Diphenyl Ether
UNEP : United Nations Environmental Programme
SPCBs : St ate Pollution Control Boards
EPR : Extended Producer’s Responsibility
RF : Radio Frequency
EMR : Electromagnetic Radiation
WHO : World Health Organisation
ICMR : Indian Council of Medical Research
AIIMS : All India Institute of Medical Science
DOT : Department of Telecommunication
TERM : Telecom Enforcement Resource & Monitoring
BTS : Base Transceiver Station

REPORT
E-Waste means Wastes from electrical and electronic equipment, whole or in part or
rejects from their manufacturing and repair process, which are intended to be discarded e.g.
computer equipments, electronic gadgets, TVs, Mobile phones etc. E-waste is highly hazardous
as it contains toxic substances such as lead, cadmium, mercury, Hexavalent Chromium
Polybrominated Biphenyls (PBB) and Polybrominated Diphenyl Ether (PBDE), that have an
adverse impact on human health and environment, if not handled properly.
2. There has been a rapid rise in the volume of e-waste being generated in the country
which increased approximately from 1.5 lakh tonnes in 2005 to nearly 8 lakh tonnes in 2012.
As per a report by the United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP), the volume of
e-waste being produced including mobiles phones and computers could rise by as much as 500
percent over the next decade in many counties including India. Roughly about 10 percent of
the total e-waste generated in the country was being suitably disposed off which was
abysmally very low. Concerned at the enormity of the problem and the associated hazards, the
Committee took up the issue for consideration.
3. The Committee also took up the issue of e-radiation emanating from mobile towers
which pose a serious threat to human beings and birds too, a subject being repeatedly
addressed in the public domain.
4. The Committee started consideration of the issue by hearing the views of Secretaries
of Ministries of Environment, Forest and Climate Change; Science and Technology and
Department of Telecommunications at its meeting held on the 20th November, 2014.
E-WASTE
5. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change informed the Committee about
the existing legislative frame-work in India to deal with e-wastes.  The Acts/legislations dealing
with E-wastes are listed below:-
(1) Hazardous Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 1989; (electronic
industry-not mentioned).
(2) 1992-obligation under ‘Basel Convention on Control of Transboundary
Movement of Hazardous Waste and its Disposal’.  Ratified by India on 24th
June, 1992.
(3) Hazardous Wastes Rules, 1989 were amended in 2000 and 2003.
(4) Superseded by Hazardous Wastes Rules, 2008 incorporating e-waste industry as
Hazardous and thus regulating its import/export.
(5) The e-waste (Management and Handling) Rules, 2011; in force since May, 2012.
6. The Ministry admitted that presently ‘The E-waste (Management and Handling) Rules,
2011 were at a nascent stage of implementation and there is a need to revisit the rules and

2
address several issues based on the experience gained so far. The Committee was informed that
the matter was under examination and the Ministry would be coming out with legislative
proposals shortly.
7. On being enquired about the facilities/arrangements in place to deal with the huge
quantum of e-waste generated in the country, the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate
Change provided the following State-wise details of registered E-Waste recyclers/dismantlers:-
Sl. No. State 2014
1. Andhra Pradesh 2
2. Chhattisgarh 1
3. Gujarat 7
4. Haryana 7
5. Karnataka 53
6. Madhya Pradesh 1
7. Maharashtra 22
8. Rajasthan 9
9. Tamil Nadu 11
10. Uttar Pradesh 9
11. Uttarakhand 3
12. West Bengal 1
TOTAL 126
8. The Ministry also furnished the following State-wise list of one hundred eleven
collection centres who have been authorized for e-waste collection:-
Sl. No. State 2014
1. Andhra Pradesh 4
2. Assam 2
3. Bihar 2
4. Chandigarh 1
5. Delhi 19
6. Gujarat 29
7. Goa 2

3
8. J & K 4
9. Kerala 4
10. Madhya Pradesh 1
11. Maharashtra 22
12. Odisha 7
13. Rajasthan 4
14. Uttarakhand 1
15. U. P . 09
TOTAL 111
9. The Ministry further informed the Committee that under the E-Waste (Management and
Handling) Rules 2011, registration of Dismantlers and Recyclers of e-wastes with the State
Pollution Control Boards/Committees (SPCBs/PCCs) has been made mandatory.  SPCBs, on
being satisfied that the applicant propose to utilize environmentally sound technologies to
reprocess e-waste, grant registration initially for two years and thereafter depending upon the
performance, renew further for a period of five years.  Under the above rules dismantlers and
recyclers are required to submit annual returns to the State Pollution Control Boards concerned
which in turn submit annual reports to the Central Pollution Control Board.
10. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change informed the Committee that
Extended Producer’s Responsibility (EPR) is the main feature of the E-waste (Management and
Handling) Rules, 2011, wherein the producer of electrical and electronic equipment has the
responsibility of managing such equipment after the end of its life. Thus, the producer is
responsible for their products once the consumer discards them.  Under this EPR, producer
is also entrusted with the responsibility to finance and organize a system to meet the costs
involved in complying with EPR.
11. The Ministry further informed that producers are required to obtain authorization from
SPCB/PCCs for implementing their EPR, which can be achieved by setting up collection
centres, or implementing take back systems or joining a collective scheme or joining a
collection centre for effective channelization of E-waste to the registered dismantlers/recyclers
which shall be specified in their application for authorization.   The Committee was informed
that under the E-Waste Rules, Micro and Small Enterprises as defined in MSME Development
Act, 2006, have been exempted from application of the said e-waste Rules with respect to the
responsibility of producers.
Sl. No. State 2014

4
12. The Committee was informed by the Ministry that following 123 producers have so
far been granted authorization by Central Pollution Control Board in 11 States for managing
their EPR:-
Sl. No. State No. of Producers granted
authorisation for EPR
1. Andhra Pradesh 3
2. Bihar 1
3. Delhi 40
4. Goa 15
5. Gujarat 3
6. J & K 12
7. Karnataka 19
8. Maharashtra 27
9. Odisha 1
10. Rajasthan 1
11. Uttar Pradesh 1
TOTAL 123
13. Submitting his views before the Committee, Secretary, Ministry of Science &
Technology stated that there are some new technologies to deal with the e-waste that convert
waste into energy but these are at an early prototype stage. He suggested to the Committee
that the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Department of
Bio-technology can work on developing waste-to-energy technology which will be an added
component to the already existing measures.
14. In view of the foregoing, the Committee makes the following observations/
recommendations:
(i) The Committee notes that the quantum of e-waste is not only huge but
is increasing at a staggering pace and thus the issue needs to be
addressed in a purposive manner and on urgent basis. There is a yawning
gap between the e-waste generated and the capacity developed to deal with
it. The Committee feels that the number of 126 E-Waste recyclers/
dismantlers is abysmally inadequate to treat the quantum of nearly 8 lakh
tonnes of e-waste generated in the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Central/State Authorities to take immediate remedial
measures to suitably and efficiently address the issue by enlarging the
infrastructure in place to deal with the issue. The Committee believes
that there is an immediate need to increase the number of dismantlers/

5
recyclers/collection centres specially in States generating large quantum of
e-wastes and the gap between the e-waste generated and the capacity to
deal with it should be bridged at the earliest possible.
(ii) The Committee feels the need to increase the coverage of Extended
Producer’s Responsibility to involve more producers in the management of
e-wastes.  The Committee feels that EPR has not been adequately
enforced nor is the present legal and policy architecture adequate to
enforce the same. Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change
should immediately set in motion steps to address the issue.
(iii) The Committee is constrained to note that the e-waste rules are still at
a nascent stage of implementation despite the fact that generation of
e-waste had crossed 8 lakh tonne way back in the year 2012. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should bring forward
necessary amendments in the e-waste rules incorporating the best
practices and incentive schemes prevailing internationally for encouraging
recycling.
E-RADIATION
15. The effects of electromagnetic radiation on health of human beings, animals, birds and
honeybees  through  radiations from mobile phone towers is  a matter of concern and intense
public discourse. The Committee feels that the issues arising therefrom, needed to be flagged.
16. Electromagnetic fields are part of the electromagnetic spectrum which extend from
static electric and magnetic fields, through radio frequency (RF), infrared radiation, and visible
light to X and gamma-rays. Part of the electromagnetic spectrum extending from 3 KHz
frequency to 300 GHz is referred as radio frequency (RF). Television and radio transmitters,
mobile telephones, radars, baby monitors and radio-controlled toys etc. use RF. Radio
frequency fields are non-ionizing radiation i.e. they lack the energy to liberate electrons, i.e.
ionize or effect changes in atomic structure.
17. The Committee was informed by the Secretary, Department of Telecommunication that
Electromagnetic Radiation (EMR) may also occur from natural sources like ultraviolet light
from the sun and lightning. EMR may also be generated by man made sources like power
(electricity) lines, TV/Radio broadcast, fixed and mobile radio communication, radars, medical
devices, satellite communications, X-rays, radioactive material, etc.
18. The Committee was also informed by the Department of Telecommunication that World
Health Organisation (WHO) has referred to approximately 25,000 articles, published around the
world over past 30 years, and based on an in-depth review of scientific literature, has
concluded that current evidence does not confirm the existence of any health consequences
form exposure to EMF radiation. World Health Organization (WHO) in its fact sheet No-304,
May 2006 on Electromagnetic Fields and Public Health (Base Stations and Wireless
Technologies) has concluded that “considering the very low exposure levels and research
results collected to date, there is no convincing scientific evidence that the weak RF signals
from base stations and wireless networks caused adverse health effects. From all evidence

6
accumulated so far, no adverse short or long term health effects have been shown to occur
from the RF signals produced by based stations.” The fact sheet No-304 is at Annexure-I.
19. In respect of EMF radiations from mobile handsets, WHO in its publication in June
2011 had concluded that “a large number of studies have been performed over the last two
decades to assess whether mobile phones pose a potential health risk. To date, no adverse
health effects have been established as being caused by mobile phone use”. Since the effects
on human being are to be studied over a long period of time, further studies are going on
around the world. The WHO study thus felt that the effects of EMF radiations from mobile
handsets needs to be studied further.
20. To further the international research on the subject, World Health Organisation (WHO)
established the International EMF Project in 1996 to assess the scientific evidence of possible
health effects of EMF in the frequency range from 0 to 300 GHz. While summarizing the key
points on health effect of EMF radiation, WHO website mentions the following i.e.  “WHO’s
International EMF Project was launched to provide scientifically sound and objective answers
to public concerns about possible hazards of low level electromagnetic fields. Despite extensive
research, to date there is no evidence to conclude that exposure to low level electromagnetic
fields is harmful to human health.”
21. The Committee was further informed by the Ministry of Environment, Forest and
Climate Change that an ‘Expert Committee’ with the following mandate to study the possible
impacts of communication towers on wildlife including birds and bees, was constituted by the
Ministry on 30th August 2010.
(i) To review all the studies done so far in India and abroad on aspects of ill
effects of mobile towers on animals, birds and insects.
(ii) To assess the likely impacts of the growth in the number of mobile towers in
the country.
(iii) To suggest possible mitigatory measures.
(iv) To formulate guidelines for regulating the large-scale installation of mobile
towers in the country.
(v) To identify the gap areas for conducting further detailed research.
22. After considering all aspects, the Expert Committee made the following
recommendations :-
(i) EMF should be recognised as a pollutants/regular auditing of EMF should be
conducted in urban localities/educational/hospital/industrial/residential/recreational
premises and around the protected areas and ecologically sensitive areas.
(ii) Introduce a law for protection of urban flora and fauna from emerging threats
like ERM/EMF as conservation issues in urban areas are different from forested
or wildlife habitats.
(iii) Bold signs and massages on dangers of cell phone tower and radiation which
is emitted from it are displayed in and around the structures where the towers

7
are erected. Use visual daytime markers in areas of high diurnal raptor or
waterfowl movements.
(iv) To avoid bird hits, security lighting for on-ground facilities should be minimized
and point downwards or be down-shielded.
(v) Independent monitoring of radiation levels and overall health of the community
and nature surrounding towers is necessary to identify hazards early. Access to
tower sites should be allowed for monitoring radiation levels and animal
mortality, if any.
(vi) Procedure for removal of existing problematic mobile towers should be made
easy, particularly in and around protected area or urban parks and centres
having wildlife.
(vii) Strictly control installation of mobile towers near wildlife protected areas,
important Bird Areas, Ramsar Sites, turtle breeding areas, bee colonies, zoos,
etc up to a certain distance that should be studied before deciding and should
also be practical. Ecological assessment/review of sites identified for installing
towers before their installation also may be considered in wildlife/ecologically/
conservational important areas.
(viii) The locations of cell phone towers and other EMF radiating tower along with
their frequencies should be made available in the public domain. This can be at
city/district/village level. Location-wise GIS mapping of all cell phone towers be
done by DOT. This information will help in monitoring the population of birds
and bees in and around the mobile towers and also in and/or around wildlife
protected areas.
(ix) Public consultation to be made mandatory before installation of cell phones
towers in any area. The forest Department should be consulted before
installation of cell phone towers in and around Protected Areas and zoos. The
distance at which these towers should be installed should be studied case by
case basis.
(x) Awareness drive with high level of visibility in all forms of media and regional
languages should be undertaken by the Government to make people aware about
various norms in regard to cell phone towers and dangers from EMR. Such
notices should be placed in all wildlife protected areas and in zoos.
(xi) To prevent overlapping high radiations fields, new towers should not be
permitted within a radius of one kilometre of existing towers.
(xii) If new towers must be built, construct them to be above 80ft and below 199
ft. tall to avoid the requirement for aviation safety lighting. Construct  towers
with platforms that will accommodate possible future co-locations and build
them at existing ‘antenna farms’, away from areas of high migratory bird
traffic, wetlands and other known bird areas.

8
23. The Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change also informed that it had
issued an advisory on use of mobile towers to minimize their impact on wildlife including birds
and bees. A copy of the Advisory is at Annexure-II.
24. The Committee was further informed that in a Writ Petition filed in Hon’ble High Court
Allahabad, Lucknow bench, the Hon’ble Court constituted a Committee including Members
from IITs Kharagpur, Kanpur, Delhi, Roorkee, Bombay and from other scientific institutions of
the country including Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and All India Institute of
Medical Science (AIIMS) Delhi which submitted its Report on 17-01-2014. In February 2014,
after due consideration of the human health concerns on account of EMF radiation being raised
in public and the Report of the Committee, the Government felt that the present prescribed
precautionary EMF safe exposure limits are adequate and need no further change at this stage.
25. Elaborating further on the subject during the meeting of the Committee held on 20th
November, 2014, the Secretary, Department of Telecommunications stated as under:-
“The Department is still open for further studies because the time-frame of twenty or
thirty years may not be sufficient to reach on all the conclusions as such kinds of
studies on human health effect or even on the health effect on birds and animals, flora
and fauna, continue for long, long time and human information and knowledge keeps
on changing over the time based on different information. So, another Inter-Ministerial
Committee was formed which was under the chairmanship of former Director-General,
ICMR, and it has representatives from IIT, Chennai, Indian Institute of Toxicology
Research, Lucknow, Department of Telecom, Ministry of Environment and Forests and
the Science and Engineering Research Board. Based on this, they have invited R&D
proposals from eligible scientific organizations on studies of different kinds, like the
study on the life of the bees, birds, humans, flora and fauna, and the SERB has
constituted an Export Committee and Task Force to consider these R&D proposals.
They have shortlisted 79 proposals for further examination. So, when these studies are
conducted, maybe, further knowledge will be thrown up which will be very much
country specific, India specific. But, at the moment, whatever norms the Department
are adopting in this country are very,very safe.”
26. The Committee was informed by the Department of Telecommunication (DOT) that its
role is confined to regulate the EMF radiation from BTS installed at the towers and from
mobile handsets. Since 2008, it has been monitoring global developments and has already taken
necessary steps and adopted stricter norms for safety from EMF radiation that are emitted
form mobile towers and mobile handsets.
27. The present limits/level for EMF fields exposure in the telecommunication sector as
mentioned by the Department of Telecommunication are:-
Frequency Range E-Field Strength H-Field Strength Power Density
(V olt/Meter (V/m)) (Amp/Meter (A/m)) (W att/Sq. Meter (W/Sq. m))
400MHz to 2000 MHz 0.434f ½ 0.0011f ½ f/2000
2GHz to 300 GHz 19.29 0.05 1

9
(f is frequency in MHz)
28. The Department of Telecommunications further informed the Committee that keeping
the precautionary EMF safe exposure limits for the radio frequency field (Base Station
Emissions) as 1/10th of the safe limits prescribed by ICNIRP for all areas in India, eliminates
the need for fixing lower limits for specific areas like schools, hospitals, residential premises,
children playground; a segregation of which is impractical in densely populated localities.
29. The Department of Telecommunications also informed the Committee that a full-fledged
division of the Telecom Enforcement Resource & Monitoring (TERM) cell is basically the unit
for the enforcement of the guidelines for restricting EMF radiation. The Committee was
informed that the Base Transceiver Station (BTS) self certifies that it is meeting the radiation
norm and this self certification is submitted to the respective TERM cells.  The TERM cells
audit the compliance of self-certificates regularly for the purpose of limiting the EMF radiation
exposure and keeping safe the general public areas in the vicinity of BTS.  In case of violation
of the prescribed EMF norms and public complaints against BTS sites, the TERM cell takes
stringent actions.
30. The Committee takes note of the various reports and studies and feels that in
view of unrestricted location of mobile towers/antennas in cities and smaller towns, cell
towers are having a concentrated effect. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Department of Telecommunications consider framing suitable regulations and
guidelines regarding the location and inspection of the mobile towers. The number of
qualified inspectors to carry out inspections to check the effects of EMR from cell
towers be increased.
31. The Committee is aware that Indians are more vulnerable and prone to risk from
radiations as compared to European countries because of their low body mass index and
low fat content.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that comprehensive scientific
studies need to be undertaken to conclusively establish the level of risks and adverse
health effects of EMR of cell towers. The Committee presently working on the issue
should be directed to expedite their reports which should be given within a stipulated
time-frame.
32. The Committee recommends that the recommendations of the expert Committee
constituted to study the impact of Mobile Towers on Birds and Bees should be
implemented so that the harmful effects of EMF radiation on birds, bees, insects etc.
may be minimized.
33. The Committee takes note of the supervision by TERM cells to ensure
compliance of BTS to the prescribed guidelines.  The Committee, however, recommends
that apart from self-certification, random checking and inspection reports should be
made public so that public at large is aware of the issue. Stringent penalties for
violation of norms and guidelines be prescribed and these should go beyond fiscal
penalties.

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — AT A GLANCE
(i) The Committee notes that the quantum of e-waste is not only huge but
is increasing at a staggering pace and thus the issue needs to be
addressed in a purposive manner and on urgent basis. There is a yawning
gap between the e-waste generated and the capacity developed to deal with
it. The Committee feels that the number of 126 E-Waste recyclers/
dismantlers is abysmally inadequate to treat the quantum of nearly 8 lakh
tonnes of e-waste generated in the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommends the Central/State Authorities to take immediate remedial
measures to suitably and efficiently address the issue by enlarging the
infrastructure in place to deal with the issue. The Committee believes
that there is an immediate need to increase the number of dismantlers/
recyclers/collection centres specially in States generating large quantum of
e-wastes and the gap between the e-waste generated and the capacity to
deal with it should be bridged at the earliest possible.
(ii) The Committee feels the need to increase the coverage of Extended
Producer’s Responsibility to involve more producers in the management of
e-wastes. The Committee feels that EPR has not been adequately enforced
nor is the present  legal and policy architecture adequate to enforce the
same. Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change should
immediately set in motion steps to address the issue.
(iii) The Committee is constrained to note that the e-waste rules are still at
a nascent stage of implementation despite the fact that generation of
e-waste had crossed 8 lakh tonne way back in the year 2012. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should bring forward
necessary amendments in the e-waste rules incorporating the best
practices and incentive schemes prevailing internationally for encouraging
recycling. (Para 14)
2. The Committee takes note of the various reports and studies and feels that in
view of unrestricted location of mobile towers/antennas in cities and smaller towns, cell
towers are having a concentrated effect. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Department of Telecommunications consider framing suitable regulations and
guidelines regarding the location and inspection of the mobile towers. The number of
qualified inspectors to carry out inspections to check the effects of EMR from cell
towers be increased. (Para 30)
3. The Committee is aware that Indians are more vulnerable and prone to risk from
radiations as compared to European countries because of their low body mass index and
low fat content. The Committee, therefore, recommends that comprehensive scientific
10

studies need to be undertaken to conclusively establish the level of risks and adverse
health effects of EMR of cell towers. The Committee presently working on the issue
should be directed to expedite their reports which should be given within a stipulated
time-frame. (Para 31)
4. The Committee recommends that the recommendations of the expert Committee
constituted to study the impact of Mobile Towers on Birds and Bees should be
implemented so that the harmful effects of EMF radiation on birds, bees, insects etc.
may be minimized. (Para 32)
5. The Committee takes note of the supervision by TERM cells to ensure
compliance of BTS to the prescribed guidelines. The Committee, however, recommends
that apart from self-certification, random checking and inspection reports should be
made public so that public at large is aware of the issue. Stringent penalties for
violation of norms and guidelines be prescribed and these should go beyond fiscal
penalties. (Para 33)
11

MINUTES

XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 21 st July, 2015 in Room No. ‘67’,
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Ashwani Kumar — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri C. P. Narayanan
2. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian
3. Shri Arvind Kumar Singh
4. Shri Bhupinder Singh
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Prabhatsinh Pratapshinh Chauhan
7. Kum. Sushmita Dev
8. Shri Ninong Ering
9. Shri Laxman Giluwa
10. Shri Daddan Mishra
11. Shri Nana Patole
12. Shri Nagendra Kumar Pradhan
13. Shri Nagendra Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri M. K. Khan, Joint Secretary
Shri Rohtas, Director
Shri V . S. P. Singh, Joint Director
Shri Rajiv Saxena, Assistant Director
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and informed
them that the meeting had been convened to consider and adopt the draft 266th *** reports
on ‘E-Waste and E-Radiation’ *** respectively.
3. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the 266
th *** reports. The Committee
also decided to present/lay its *** 266 th *** reports to both the Houses of Parliament on 23rd
July, 2015.
4 . *                                  *                                  *
5 . *                                  *                                  *
6. The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.45 P.M.
15
*** Relate to other matters.

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE -I
Electromagnetic fields (EMF)
Electromagnetic fields and public health
Base stations and wireless technologies
Backgrounder May 2006
Mobile telephony is now commonplace around the world. This wireless technology
relies upon an extension network of fixed antennas, or base stations, relaying information with
radiofrequency (RF) signals. Over 1.4 million base stations exist worldwide and the number is
increasing significantly with the introduction of third generation technology.
Other wireless networks that allow high-speed internet access and services, such as
wireless local area networks (WLANs), are also increasingly common in homes, offices, and
many public areas (airports, schools, residential and urban areas). As the number of base
stations and local wireless networks increases, so does the RF exposure of the population.
Recent surveys have shown that the RF exposes from base stations range from 0.002% to 2%
of the levels of international exposure guidelines, depending on a variety of factors such as the
proximity to the antenna and the surrounding environment. This is lower or comparable to RF
exposures from radio or television broadcast transmitters.
There has been concern about possible health consequences from exposure to the RF
fields produced by wireless technologies. This fact sheet reviews the scientific evidence on the
health effects from continuous low-level 31 human exposure to base stations and other local
wireless networks.
Health concerns
A common concern about base station and local wireless network antennas relates to
the possible long-term health effects that whole-body exposure to  the RF signals may have, to
date, the only health effect from RF fields identified in scientific reviews has been related to
an increase in body temperature (> 1 °c) from exposure at very highfield intensity found only
in certain industrial facilities, such as RF heaters. The levels of RF exposure from base
stations and wireless networks are so low that the temperature increases are insignificant and
do not affect human health.
19


20
The strength of RF fields is greatest at its source, and diminishes quickly with
distance. Access near base station antennas is restricted where RF signals may exceed
international exposure limits. Recent surveys have indicated that RF exposures from base
stations and wireless technologies in publicly accessible areas (including schools and hospitals)
are normally thousands of times below international standards.
In fact, due to their lower frequency, at similar RF exposure levels, the body absorbs
up to five times more of the signal from FM radio and television than from base stations -
This is because the frequency used in FM radio (around 100 MHz) and in TV broadcasting
(around 300 to 400 MHz) are lower than those employed in mobile telephony (900 MHz and
1800 MHz) and because a person’s height makes the body an efficient receiving antenna.
Further, radio and television broadcast stations have been in operation for the past 50 or more
years without any adverse health consequence being established.
While most radio technologies have used analog signals, modern wireless
telecommunications are using digital transmissions. Detailed  reviews conducted so far have not
revealed any hazard specific to different RF modulations.
Cancer: Media or anecdotal reports of cancer clusters around mobile phone base
stations ha\€ heightened public concern. It should be noted that geographically, cancers are
unevenly distributed among any population. Given the widespread presence of base stations in
the environment, it is expected that possible cancer clusters will occur near base stations
merely by chance. Moreover, the reported cancers in these clusters are often a collection of
different types of cancer with no common characteristics and hence unlikely to have a
common cause.
Scientific evidence on the distribution of cancer in the population can be obtained
through carefully planned and executed epidemiological studies. Over the past 15 years, studies
examining a potential relationship between RF transmitters and cancer have been published.
These studies have not provided evidence that RF exposure from the transmitters increases the
risk of cancer. Likewise, long-term animal studies have not established an increased risk of
cancer inform exposure to RF fields, even at levels that are much higher than produced by
base stations and wireless networks.
Other effects: Few studies have investigated general health effects in individual exposed
to RF fields from base stations. This is because of the difficulty in distinguishing possible
hearlh effects from the very low signals emitted by base stations from other higher strength
RF signals in the environment. Most studies have focused on the RF exposures of mobile
phone users. Human and animal studies examining brain wave  patterns, cognition and behavior
after exposure to RF fields, such as those generated by mobile phones, have not identified
adverse effects. RF exposures used in these studies were about 1000 times higher than those
associated with general public exposure from base stations or wireless networks. No consistent
evidence of altered sleep or cardiovascular function has been reported.
Some individuals have reported that they experience non-specific symptoms upon exposure
to RF fields emitted from base stations and other EMF devices. As recognized in a recent WHO
fact sheet “Electromagnetic Hypersensitivity”, EMF has not been shown to cause some symptoms.
Nonetheless, it is important to recognize the plight of people suffering from these symptoms.

21
From all evidence accumulated so far, no adverse short or long-term  health effects
have been shown to occur from the RF signals produced  by base stations since wireless
networks produce generally lower RF signals than base stations, no aderse health effects are
expected from exposure to them.
Protection standards
International exposure guidelines have been developed to provide protection against established
effects from RF fields by the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection
(ICNIRP, 1998) and the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers (IEEE, 2005).
National authorities should adopt international standards to protect their citizens against
adverse levels of RF fields. They should restrict access to areas where exposure limits may
be exceeded.
Public perception of risk
Some people perceive risks from RF exposure as likely and even possibly severe.
Several reasons for public fear include media announcements of new and unconfirmed
scientific studies, leading to a feeling of uncertainty and a perception that there may be
unknown or uncovred hazards. Other factors are aesthetic concerns and a feeling of a lack of
control or input to the process of determining the location of new base stations. Experience
shows that education programmes as well as effective communications and involvement of the
public and other stakeholders at appropriate stages of the decision process before installing RF
sources can enhance public confidence and acceptability.
Conclusions
Considering the very law exposure levels and research results collected to date, there
is no convincing scientific evidence that the weak RF signals from base stations and wireless
networks cause adverse health effects.
WHO initiatives
WHO, through the International EMF Project, has established a programme to monitor
the EMF scientific literature, to evaluate the health effects from exposure to EMF in the range
from 0 to 300KHz. to provide advice about possible EMF hazards and to identify suitable
mitigation measures. Following extensive international reviews, the International EMF Project
has promoted research to fill gaps in knowledge. In response national governments and
research institutes have funded over $250 million on EMF research over the past 10 years.
While no health effects are expected from exposure to RF fields from base station and
wireless networks, research is still being promoted by WHO to determine whether there are
any health consequences from the higher RF exposures from mobile phones.
The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), a WHO specialized agency, is
expected to conduct a review of cancer risk from RF fields in 2006-2007 and  the
International EMF Project will then undertake an overall health risk assessment for RF fields
in 2007-2008.

Further Reading
ICNIRP (1998) www.icnirp.org/documents/emfgdlpdf
IEEE (2006) IEEE C95.1-2005 “IEEE Standard for Safety Levels with Respect to Human
Exposure to Radio Frequency Electromagnetic Fields, 3 KHz to 300 GHz”
Related links.
Base stations & wireless networks: Exposures & health consequences
Fact sheet: Electromagnetic fields and public health: Electromagnetic Hypersensitivity
WHO handbook on “Establishing a Dialogue on Risks from Electromagnetic Fields”
2006 WHO Research Agenda for Radio Frequency Fields pdf, 100kb
For more informationcontact:
WHO Media centre
Telephone: +41 22 791 2222 E-mail: mediainquiries@who.int
22

ANNEXURE -II
Government of India
Ministry of Environment and Forests
(Wildlife Division)
Paryavaran Bhawan
CGO Complex, Lodhi Road
New Delhi-110003
B.No. 15-11/2010/WL-I Date : 9 th August 2012
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Sub: Advisory on the use of Mobile Towers to minimize their impact on Wildlife including
Birds and Bees-conveyed.
In pursuance to the report submitted by the Expert Committee constituted by the
Ministry of Environment and Forests to study the possible impact of communication towers
on wildlife including birds and bees and subsequent consultations held with the stakeholders,
and advisory containing the actions to be undertaken by various agencies involved in
providing, regulating and dealing in any other manner with the EMR based services has been
prepared by the Ministry with the objective to avoid and mitigate the impacts of EMR on
such species.
A copy of the aforesaid advisory is enclosed for information, record and requisite
action on the part of concerned stakeholders.
(Vivek Saxena)
Deputy Inspector General (WL)
Encl: As above
Distribution:
1. The Chief Secretary, all States/U.T. Governments.
2. The Environment Secretary and Forests Secretary all States/UT Governments.
3. Department of Telecommunications, Ministry of Communications and Information
Technology Government of India.
4. The Planning Commission, Government of India.
5. Ministry of Panchayati Raj Government of India.
23

24
6. Chairmen and all members of the ‘Expert committee to study the possible impacts of
communication towers on wildlife including Birds and Bees’.
Copy to:
1. PPS to Additional Secretary (MM) MoEF
2. PPS to ADG (WL), MoEF
3. PA to IGF (WL), MoEF
4. PPS to Addl. Director (CP), MoEF
5. The Member Secretary, Central Pollution Control Board.
6. The Director, Wildlife Institute of India
Advisory on use of mobile towers in a way minimize their impacts on
wildlife including birds and bees
An ‘Expert Committee to Study the possible Impacts of Communication Towers on Wildlife
including Birds and Beet ‘ was constituted by the Ministry of Environment and Forests,
Government India on 30th August 2010. The report of the expert  committee has been submitted
to the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
The review of the available scientific  information by the Expert Committee in the report
indicates that the Electro–magnetic Radiations (EMIR) interfere with the biological systems. On
the basis of the report of the Expert Committee and subsequent deliberations with the
stakeholders, a list of actions to be undertaken by various agencies involved in providing,
regulating, and at along in any other manner with, the EMR based services, has been prepared.
Main objective of the listed actions is to avoid and mitigate the impacts of EMR. The Ministry
of Environment and Forests accordingly requests the concerned departments, State
Governments, user agencies, ane the public at large to rake following actions:
I. Ministry of Environment and Forests:
1. The Electro Magnetic Radiations from the communication towers may have
varying . negative impacts on wildlife especially birds and bets; Accordingly, the
information on the impacts related to different forms of wildlife as well as
humans, should be provided to the concerned agencies for regulating the norms
for notification of standards for safe limits of EMR taking into consideration the
impacts on living beings.
II. State/Local Bodies;
1. Regular auditing and monitoring of EMR should be conducted in urban
localities/educational/hospital/industrial/residential/recreational premises and
especially around the Protected Areas (PAs) and ecologically sensitive areas
w.r.t. notified norms of Department of Telecommunications. Problematic towers
from EMR point of view should be got suitably relocated/removed.

25
2. Bold signs and messages on the dangers of cell phone towers and associated
radiations are displayed in and around the structures of the towers. In addition
to these signs, use of visual daytime markers in areas of high diurnal raptor or
waterfowl movement, should also be promoted.
3. Before according permission for construction of towers, ecological impact
assessment and review of installation sites will be essential in wildlife and/or
ecologically important areas. The Forest Department should be consulted before
installation of cell phone towers in and around PAs and zoos.
III. S tate Environment and Forest Departments:
1. Regular awareness drive with high level of visibility through all forms of media,
and in regional languages should be undertaken by the State Governments and
concerned Departments to make people aware about various norms and
standards with regard to cell phone towers and dangers of EMR from the same.
Such notices should also be placed in all wildlife protected areas and zoos by
the Forest Department.
IV. Department of  Telecommunications:
1. To prevent overlapping of high radiation fields, new towers should not be
permitted within a radius of one kilometer of the existing towers. Sharing of
passive infrastructure if made mandatory for Telecom Service Providers can
minimize need of having additional towers. If new towers must be built, these
should be constructed with utmost care and precautions so as not to obstruct
flight path of birds and also not to increase the combined radiations from all
towers in the area.
2. The location and frequencies of cell phone towers and other towers emitting
EMR, should be made available in public domain. This can be at city/district/
village level. Location-wise GIS mapping of all cell phone towers should be
maintained which would,  inter alia,  help in monitoring the population of birds
and bees in and around the mobile towers and also in and/or around wildlife
protected areas.
3. There is an urgent need to refine the Indian standard on safe limits of exposure
to EMR, keeping in view the available literature on impacts on various life forms.
Till such time the Indian standards are reformed, a precautionary approach shall
be preferred to minimize the exposure levels and adopt stricter norms possible,
without compromising on optimum performance of the networks.
V . All concerned agencies:
1. Security lighting for on-ground facilities be minimized, and as far as possible,
point downwards or be down-shielded to avoid bird hits.
2. Any study conducted on impact of EMF radiation on wildlife needs to be shared
with Forest Department and Department of Telecommunications to facilitate
appropriate policy formulations.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.