148th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/148threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED FORTY-EIGHTH  REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY ON THE
 RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED FORTY-FIFTH REPORT OF
 THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
 ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS ON THE
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2005-2006)OF THE
DEPARTMENT OF ATOMIC ENERGY
PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 22ND DECEMBER, 2005)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 22ND DECEMBER, 2005)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
NOVEMBER, 2005/ PAUSA, 1927 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
                                            
1.      COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                                                                       
2.      INTRODUCTION                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                              
3.      REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
                                                                                                                    
4.      MINUTES OF THE MEETING                                                                                                
                                                                                                                    
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2005)
----------
1. Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Dr.Prabha Thakur
4. Shri Dilip Singh Judev
5. Shri Nand Kishore Yadav
6. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
7. Smt. Kum Kum Rai
8. Shri Birabhadra Singh
    *9.   Dr. Chhattrapal Singh Lodha
  Ф10.   Vacant
            LOK  SABHA
 
11. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
12. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad            
13. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
14. Shri Pankaj Choudhary
15. Shri Mohan S. Delkar  
16. Shri Francis Fanthome 
17. Shri Anantrao Gudhe

148th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/148threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
18. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
19. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik           
20. Shri Brahmananda Panda
21. Smt. Neeta Pateriya
22. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil        
23. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
24. Shri K.C. Singh “Baba”
25. Shri Rakesh Singh
26. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh                                              
27. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh   
28. Smt. Jayaben B. Thakkar                     
29. Shri D. Venugopal
30. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
31. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
 
            SECRETARIAT
      Shri N.C.Joshi, Additional Secretary
      Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
      Shri Alok Kumar Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
      Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
 Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Forty-eight Report
 on the Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations contained in One Hundred Forty-fifth Report of
 the Committee on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Atomic Energy.
2.         The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations
 contained in the One Hundred Forty-fifth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science &
 Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Atomic Energy which was
 presented to the Rajya Sabha on 25th April, 2005.
3.         There are twenty-seven recommandations contained in the One Hundred Forty-fifth Report of the Committee.  Action Taken
 Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Department on 25th  July, 2005.
4.         In the meeting held on 20th December, 2005 the Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report and adopted the same.
NEW DELHI ; 
December 20, 2005
P.G.NARAYANAN
  Chairman,
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests
                                         .     
REPORT
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Department of Atomic Energy on the recommendations
 contained in the One Hundred Forty-Fifth Report of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science
 & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2005-2006) of the Department of Atomic Energy,
 presented to both the houses of Parliament on 25
thApril, 2005. There were twenty-seven recommendations contained in the
 Report Action Taken note on those recommendations was received from the Department on 25th July, 2005.  The
 Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report in its meeting held on 18th November, 2005 and decided to seek
 clarification/additional information on certain points contained in paras 20, 25.1to 25.9, 27 to 32 and 39.  The Department’s
 clarification/additional information on the points was received on  1
st December, 2005.  
            The Committee’s recommendations, Action Taken thereon  by the Department of Atomic Energy, points raised by
 the Committee (wherever necessary ), clarifications by the Department and comments of the Committee thereon are set out
 in the succeeding paragraphs: -
 
PLAN OUTLAY 2005-06 (DEMAND NO. 6-NUCLEAR POWER SCHEMES)
Recommendation

148th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/148threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
The Committee notes that there has been an increase of Rs.933.19 crore in BE  2005-06 (Rs.4700.00 crore) over RE 2004-05
 (Rs.3766.81 crore) in respect of Nuclear power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL). This increase is further narrowed
 down to Rs. 659.99 crore as a Supplementary Grant of Rs.273.20 crore that was obtained for Russian Credit during 2004-
05.  This is on account of KK-1&2 project which has now entered advanced stage of expenditure on account of delivery of
 equipment from Russian Federation. The credit utilization accordingly has grown from Rs.1445 Crore (RE 2004-05) to
 Rs.2004 crore (BE 2005-06). However, in Bhartiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Ltd. (BHAVINI), BE 2004-05 could not be
 utilized because of slow pace of work.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that NPCIL should make all efforts to
 ensure that there is no delay in execution of the projects on account of increased Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources 
 (IEBR) from  Rs 1496.00 crore to Rs.2696.00 crore during the year 2005-06 and fully utilize the budgetary provisions made
 during 2005-06                          (Para 14)                       
Action Taken by the Department
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd. (NPCIL) will have to borrow from the market in addition to the utilization of
 internal reserves to meet the requirements of funds. NPCIL, being a AAA Company, has been able to obtain funds from the
 market at attractive rates. All the projects being executed by NPCIL are currently progressing as per schedule. A monitoring
 mechanism to monitor the physical and financial progress of work and take corrective measures, if necessary, at several
 levels periodically is in place. NPCIL is confident that funds will not be a constraint for the execution of its projects.
An amount of Rs.253.30 Crores was approved in BE 2004-05 for Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR).  Since the
 financial sanction for PFBR was accorded in September '03, the BHAVINI was formed in October '03 and Certificate of
 Commencement of Business was received in November '03, action for awarding of various contracts could be started only
 after November '03.  Since it was felt that the full approved budget provision would not be spent during 2004-05, while
 preparing RE 2004-05 an amount of Rs.165 Crores only was requested for.  Out of the amount of  Rs.165 Crores also, an
 amount of Rs.41.25 Crores which would have been drawn by BHAVINI sometime in January '05 in the normal course
 could not be drawn because of  "TSUNAMI" which struck Kalpakkam on 26.12.2004,  has affected the construction work
 very badly.  Large quantity of sea water, muck and slush entered the pit while concreting on Nuclear Island Connected
 Building (NICB) raft was going on.  Work could be re-started only after complete removal of the water, muck and slush and
 cleaning of the pit and after getting the regulatory clearances.  The pit was made ready to reconstruct the raft within a short
 period of 4 months.  Re-concreting of the raft was started on 27.04.2005. 
Comments
            The Committee notes that the work on the Bhartiya Nabhikiya Vidyut Nigam Limited (BHAVINI) was greatly
 hampered by the onslaught of the ‘TSUNAMI’.  The Committee hopes that the reconstruction work would progress as per
 the new schedule and would be completed at the earliest.  
Recommendation
The Committee also recommends that measures like ensuring availability of designs and clearances in advance of the project
 financial sanction, advance procurement of long delivery and critical items, completion of pre-project activities and
 essential infrastructure works, use of modern CAD tools for design and project management coupled with adoption of the
 concept of execution of large supply-cum-erection
 packages would not only lead to reduced gestation periods of the projects
 under construction but would also reduce the financial cost component of the capital cost, thereby increasing the normative
 capacity factors. The Department should devise strict monitoring and a phased-wise completion schedule for BHAVINI
 which should be strictly adhered to.                                                                                                             (Para 14.1)               
Action Taken by the department
BHAVINI is already implementing the measures recommended by the Committee.  The action, for procurement of long
 delivery and critical nuclear steam supply system components was taken in advance of the project financial sanction.  Pre
 project-activities like excavation, geo-technical investigation and construction of Site Assembly Shop (SAS) were started
 well in advance and completed.  The advanced software tools are planned to be procured for design, erection and
 construction.  The concept of supply cum erection packages are being envisaged for systems like Turbine Generator (TG)
 equipment, Switch Yard, Cabling, Piping and I&C system.  Project planning tools like Prima Vera software is used for
 monitoring of the activities, resources and rescheduling.
Comments
The Committee appreciates the measures taken by the Department to ensure timely completion of the projects.  The
 Committee recommends that such advance measures be undertaken in all the projects under the jurisdiction of the
 Department to ensure time bound completion of the projects.         
Recommendation
The Committee finds that the pace of expenditure by the Department of Atomic Energy has not been uniform and the
 reasons attributed are more of administrative nature. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department should
 formulate strict monitoring mechanism with proper planning and co-ordination of projects/programmes for regular infusion
 of funds in various projects/schemes in all quarters of the financial year to ensure total utilization of plan allocation and
 avoid surrender/shortfall of funds  in the last quarter of the financial year.                         

148th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/148threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
                        (Para 17)                    
Action Taken by the Department
All the DAE Units have been asked to work out quarter-wise fund requirements at the beginning of the financial year 2005-
06.  A critical review of projections for the first quarter of the year was made by conducting a review meeting on 18.05.2005
 with all the Units and prevailed upon  to ensure that both physical and financial target is achieved.  The quarter-wise review
 to assess the achievements and plan of action for the ensuing quarter is envisaged to keep the pace of expenditure uniform 
 throughout the year.  In addition, a meticulous review of physical targets and achievements of  project costing  more than
 Rs. 10.00 crore is also carried out during every quarter independently by Secretary, DAE with the  Units.
In the DAE Units  a  mechanism to monitor the quarter-wise infusion of funds in different projects/ schemes has been
 institutionalized at  the beginning of the year 2005-06 itself. The Project Manager and the Apex Project Coordinator have
 been entrusted with the responsibility of close monitoring of progress of the X Plan Projects and also follow up of the
 procurement action for the various items required for the projects as per the time schedule and utilization of the funds
 thereof.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply of the Department. 
Recommendation
The Committee notes that there is a major shortfall in the programmes of Bhabha Atomic Research Centre (BARC). The
 shortfalls in R&D and I&M Sector accounted to the tune of       Rs. 125 Crores. While, the shortfall in utilization of funds in
 R&D Sector was mainly due to restricted policy of suppliers from abroad on import of sophisticated machinery and
 equipment, however, the reasons attributed like delay in obtaining safety clearances for spent fuel and waste storage
 facilities are mostly administrative in nature and could have been foreseen and avoided through proper advance planning.
 The Committee recommends a strict monitoring and periodical review of progress of work to improve the pace of progress
 in BARC. Regarding the delay in execution of three Projects in IGCAR, the Committee recommends that the Department
 should initiate all out efforts to complete the pending projects during 2005-06. Further, the Committee hopes that the
 reduction under Industries & Minerals Sector (I&M) in the budgetary support from the proposed amount of Rs. 692.19 to
 Rs. 614.69 will not have any adverse impact on the progress of the Plan schemes under Department of Atomic Energy
 projects and Uranium Corporation of India Limited.                                                                                            (Para 20)     
           
Action Taken by the Department
As far as the comments on the project of BARC are concerned, BARC has noted the recommendations of the Committee. 
 The progress of all the plan projects is monitored periodically at various levels viz. Apex Project Co-ordinators, Planning &
 Coordination Division, Trombay Council and by the Director, BARC. The reviews include monitoring the physical
 progress, constraints, achievements of milestones, financial expenditure and strategies to expedite the progress of the
 projects.  Similar procedure is followed in other Units. 
The project 3mgd Water Supply Scheme being executed at Kalpakkam is progressing very well at present and will be
 completed during the year 2005-06 by Tamil Nadu Government.  The details of the reservoir, to be constructed at IGCAR
 have been finalized and will be taken up during 2005-06. It is expected that this will be completed in all respects during the
 beginning of 2006-07.
The project Refurbishment of Facilities for Fast Breeder Test Reactor (FBTR) Fuel Pin Production is being executed for the
 supply of fuel pins for sustained operation of FBTR.  There were certain difficulties in the procurement of some of the fuel
 inspection gadgets, as import license could not be obtained.  Hence, there was a shortfall in the expenditure during 2004-05.
 However, all efforts are on hand to circumvent the problems and complete the project during 2005-06.
There were difficulties in the procurement of the telephone exchange during 2004-05 for the project Communication
 Facilities and Attendance System.  However, action has been initiated to overcome this problem and the telephone exchange
 is expected to be received during the year              2005-06.  An alternate indigenous system is being planned to be
 developed for the attendance system and is expected to be in operation during 2006-07.  All actions are being initiated to
 complete the R&D and I&M projects during X Plan, as originally envisaged. 
Point raised by the Committee
The Department has stated that there were certain difficulties in the procurement of  some of the fuel inspection gadgets, as
 import licence could not be obtained. The difficulties encountered and the action taken by the Department to resolve these
 difficulties may be mentioned.
 
Clarification by the Department 
Because of the restrictive practices being adopted by other countries in the matter of supply of equipment to us, the
 procurement of items got delayed. Most of the items are now acquired and are being commissioned for actual use. Action is
 on hand for acquiring remaining items
 

148th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/148threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
Comments
            While noting the reply of the Department the Committee feels that the Department needs to make some contingency
 plan to obviate such situations in future for smooth and timely completion of the projects.
 
Recommendation
The Committee is of the opinion that the aided institutions, like Tata Memorial Centre (TMC), Institute of Physics (IOP),
 Harish Chandra Research Institute (HRI), Atomic Energy Education Society (AEES) require more funds for augmenting
 their activities, but if they are unable to utilize their full budgetary support, the ongoing research programmes would be
 seriously affected, besides it would lead to a reconsideration of their research activity. Therefore, the Committee
 recommends that the aided institutions should review and strengthen the budgetary mechanism and planning process so as
 to ensure full utilization of their allocated amount.                                                                                                             (Para
 21)
Action Taken by the Department
The budgetary mechanism and planning process have been reviewed and efforts have been made to expedite the progress of
 all schemes so as to fully utilize the budgetary allocation of all the Aided Institutions.
Comments
             The Committee hopes that concrete action would be taken to fully utilize the budgetary allocation of all the Aided
 Institutions.  
 
Recommendation
The Committee appreciates the effort of the Department in achieving criticality of TAPP-4 within five years from the first
 pour of concrete. The Committee hopes that the gestation periods of Kaiga 3&4 and RAPP 5&6 projects that are being
 constructed with a tight schedule of 60 months and 66 months for the first and second units respectively from the first pour
 of concrete to commercial operation doesn’t escalate over. Similarly, the Department should make all-out efforts to reduce
 the gestation period of Kudankulam -1  (KK-1)  and complete it within the Xth plan period itself, so that it is completed in
 five years from first pour of concrete to commercial operation.                                                                                            
            (Para 23)
 
Action Taken by the Department
All the projects being executed by Nuclear Power Corporation of India Ltd.  (NPCIL) are progressing as per schedule.
 Monitoring progress and expediting project activities at all levels is an on going exercise in NPCIL, to complete the projects
 at the earliest.
All efforts are being made to advance the completion of Kudankulam project so that unit 1 is completed within X Plan
 period. This in fact means cutting down of the completion schedule by 9 months. Apart from expediting the progress of
 work being carried out at the site, a high level committee from both countries (India and Russia) meets quarterly, on an
 average, to closely monitor the progress of work and identify the actions for early completion of the project. A resident
 Russian team is stationed at the site to ensure that there is coordination between the two agencies on a day-to-day basis.
 Specific advancement of deliveries of equipment on a case-to-case basis, are also being attempted depending upon their
 urgency of the same at site for advancing the project completion.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation
An allocation of Rs.82.80 crore has been made during 2005-06 for VECC, Kolkata However, the Committee is constrained
 to note the slow execution of this project during 2004-05 due to which the allocated fund  could not be utilized, resulting
 into reduction of RE.  The Committee recommends that since SPECT isotopes are presently imported from abroad, setting
 up of Medical Cyclotron in VECC, Kolkata would considerably reduce our dependence on import. Once the Medical
 Cyclotron becomes operational, production of radioisotopes and radio pharmaceutical (SPECT & PET) for advanced
 medical diagnostic purpose would become easily available.  Therefore, this programme may be accorded high priority for
 early completion. The Committee hopes that the enhanced allocation in 2005-06 will be fully utilized in installing the
 Medical Cyclotron Facility and other projects at VECC, Kolkata.                                (Para 24)
 
Action Taken by the Department
Land acquisition for the setting up of “Medical Cyclotron Project” has been done. Land development is nearing completion.
 Clearance from Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB)  to locate the medical cyclotron at this site has been obtained.
Variable Energy Cyclotron Centre (VECC) has been giving top priority to meet the targets. Technical evaluation of the two-
part tender is completed. Based on the recommendation of the Steering Committee, visits of facility of Suppliers have been
 completed. Placement of purchase order is targeted by September 2005. In parallel, Consultancy Contract  for Building

148th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/148threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 Design & Architecture is being finalized. Award for the Consultancy Contract  is targeted by October 2005. All attempts are
 being made to utilize the B. E. of    Rs.14 crore against this project.
Respective Plan Project Review committees closely monitor all projects towards meeting physical and financial progress.
 
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply of the Department and recommends that the projects wherein technical independence
 and self-reliance of the country can be obtained, be given priority by the Department.  This  would  result in our dependence
 on imports and also help in conserving scarce foreign exchange.
 
CHOICE OF FUEL FOR FAST BREEDER REACTOR (FBR)
Recommendation
The Committee welcomes the idea and feels that this advanced fuel will reduce the cost of production of electricity through
 Fast Breeder Reactor (FBR) and not only that by reducing the capital cost of production of electricity the plant life span will
 also increase by incorporating better safety features for these reactors.  Faster the breeding, quicker will be the rise in the
 FBR’s capacity. Other nuclear fuels for FBR and PFBR (Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor) like oxide, nitride and carbide
 fuels may now take the back seat for being used as fuels for FBR.                     
(Para 25.1)
The choice of fuels for breeder reactors, the Committee feels, is a choice between doubling time versus the cost of
 production. The Committee, however, feels that oxide fuel with a ratio of 30% plutonium oxide and 70% uranium oxide is a
 well-proven fuel world over.  In India, however, mixed oxide fuel (MOX) could be used for Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor
 (PFBR).                                                                                                                                             (Para 25.2)
The Committee, on the other hand, feels that carbide fuel is very difficult to fabricate on a large scale as it is highly
 pyrophoric and is highly susceptible to oxidation and hydrolysis.  Moreover, reprocessing of spent carbide fuel is difficult
 as it is difficult to dissolve in nitric acid and leaves behind organic complexes.  Apart from this, the carbide fuel  has low
 burn up value in comparison to oxide fuel. The fuel ‘burn-up’ in a nuclear reactor refers to the amount of energy extracted
 from the fuel before it is discharged for storage or reprocessing.  Higher the burn-up, lesser will be the fuel cycle cost.          
                                                                     (Para 25.3)
The Committee understands that cost of power production comes down with increased burn up value.  Also oxide fuel is
 easy to fabricate as it is not pyrophoric and hence needs no inert atmosphere during fabrication.  The Committee is,
 therefore, of the opinion that use of oxide fuel would be more vital for making a foray into fast breeder power
 plants.                          (Para 25.4)
The Committee understands that breeder technology works on the principle of self-sustenance and ability to produce more
 plutonium than it actually consumes to produce power.  The breeding ratio, which is 1.1 in case of oxide fuel, is 1.2 – 1.4 in
 case of carbide and nitride fuels.  While it is maximum in case of metallic fuel i.e. 1.4 – 1.5 and hence doubling time       
 (i.e. surplus plutonium produce to start a new reactor) is shortest in case of a metallic, carbide and nitride fuels respectively
 in comparison to oxide fuel.                                                      (Para 25.5)
The Committee, therefore, is of the opinion that doubling time becomes paramount when the country goes on
 commissioning new reactors.  Hence, the stress on using advanced fuel is necessary.  The Committee feels that making
 technology available for producing power at cheaper cost may gain more public acceptance, which is vital to breeder
 programme.   (Para 25.6)
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that lower burn up by using carbide fuel is not economical since fabrication and
 reprocessing would increase cost of power production.  However, the Committee feels that long-term strategy calls for fuels
 with shorter doubling time.  Sometimes it is felt that nitride fuel seems to be more preferable due to its easier reprocessing
 and improved performance.                                                                                                        (Para 25.7)
 
The Committee recommends that the Department of Atomic Energy may like to consider the following choices:-
i)          High breeding ratio and shorter doubling time
ii)         High burn up value and less fuel cycle cost
iii)         Faster breeding and quicker capacity of fast breeder reactor
iv)        High burn up value and low production cost of power; and between
v)         Easy fabrication and reprocessing and low cost of power production before ending itself finally by choosing the most
 ideal fuel for its FBR and PFBR programme.                                                             (Para 25.8)
 
The Committee feels that without choosing the best options from among the above series, the choice of fuel for future
 reactors of the Department of Atomic Energy may not be optimally fulfilled unless maximum efficiency in power
 production is derived at least possible opportunity cost.                                                                                                             

148th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/148threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
         (Para25.9)
 
Action Taken by the Department
 
The 40 MWt Fast Breeder Test Reactor (FBTR) at Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research (IGCAR), Kalpakkam uses a
 Pu-rich U-Pu mixed carbide as the fuel. The choice of this fuel was necessitated by the non-availability of enriched uranium
 and the technical problems expected with the use of oxide fuel with high percentage of Pu  ( about 70 %  PuO
2). The
 carbide fuel was indigenously developed and has performed exceedingly well at FBTR, having attained a burn-up of
 140,000 MWd/t without any fuel pin failure.  The Reprocessing Group at IGCAR has also successfully demonstrated the
 capability to reprocess mixed carbide fuel of 50,000 & 100,000 MWd/t burn-up.
However, it is to be noted that the reprocessing technology for carbide fuel has not been established on a commercial scale
 in any country. Also, since the carbide fuel is air-sensitive, difficulties are envisaged in the large scale manufacture of
 carbide fuel. On the other hand, the performance of mixed oxide fuel in fast reactors has been proven in other countries and
 sufficient technical data is also available in published literature on their properties. Also, the fuel has been fabricated and
 reprocessed on a commercial scale in other countries. Considering the difficulties associated with fabrication and
 reprocessing of carbide fuel on a commercial scale as well as the lack of international experience on carbide fuel cycle, the
 well proven mixed oxide fuel with lower PuO
2  content ( 21% PuO2  in inner zone and 28% PuO2 in outer zone) has been
 selected for the 500 MWe PFBR.
 It is envisaged that in addition to PFBR, 4 more FBRs of 500 MWe capacity are planned to be constructed by the year 2020
 as part of DAE Vision 2020 Programme.  Since the main objective of these reactors is to prove the techno-commercial
 viability of the FBR technology when multiple units are constructed, mixed oxide fuel has been considered for these
 reactors also. However, through the use of better materials and design, it is aimed to improve the burn-up of the oxide fuel
 as well as the breeding ratio in these reactors.
It is realized in the department that the rapid growth of fast reactors is only possible through adoption of fuels and fuel
 cycles which would ensure higher breeding and consequently, lower doubling time. It is therefore necessary to switch over
 to fuels like metallic fuel, which has higher breeding ratio. It is at the same time recognized that a good amount of R&D
 efforts is required to establish a reactor and fuel cycle based on metallic fuel, since the experience with respect to metallic
 fuel is also limited.
IGCAR has therefore taken up the planning of necessary R & D to establish the fuel cycle, carry out test irradiations in
 FBTR and gain sufficient experience with respect to the metallic fuel with the long term goal of establishing fast reactors
 with metallic fuel. The core configuration of the later 500 MWe FBRs will be chosen in such a way that the metallic fuel
 can replace some of the oxide fuel bundles.
             Thus, the approach in the Department is to proceed with oxide fuel for the next four 500 MWe FBRs and then
 switch over to metallic fuel to get lower doubling time.  This approach gives continuity in the programme and also adequate
 time to generate necessary data on the utilization of metallic fuel.
During Mid-Term Appraisal (MTA) of Plan Projects, a new Scheme has been introduced for initiating advance action in
 R&D activities to be taken up for development of metallic fuels.  The said project is already sanctioned.  All efforts are
 made to begin with the development of metallic fuel for FBRs, in the X Plan itself, so as to achieve the long-term goals.
 
Point raised by the Committee
The Department has stated that in addition to PFBRs, 4 more FBRs of 500 MWe capacity are planned to be constructed by
 the year 2020 as part of the DAE Vision 2020 Programme. The salient features of the DAE Vision 2020 Programme,
 specially as regards the construction of FBRs, may be given.
Clarification by the Department
The strong correlation between per capita electricity generation and per capita gross domestic product (GDP) is well known. 
 Therefore, to realize the high growth rates envisaged by the country, electricity generation has to increase in tandem.
A group in the Department studied  available information on GDP and population growth forecasts, trends with regard to
 energy-GDP elasticity and electricity intensity of industries and developed a scenario for the growth of electricity. 
 Scenarios have been developed by other agencies as well, though the numbers differ depending on the assumptions made
 for building the scenarios.  The message from all such exercises is the same and that is, India is a poor fuel resource country
 and there is a need to tap every fuel resource to meet India’s energy needs.  The contribution of nuclear energy, therefore,
 has to be increased at the fastest possible pace so that nuclear electricity is able to meet about a quarter of the national
 electricity demand after about five decades and gets poised to make still higher contribution in the subsequent years.
Nuclear Power Corporation of India Limited (NPCIL) together with other institutions under the DAE framework has a
 mature knowledge of the Pressurized Heavy Water Reactor (PHWR) technology.  The known reserves of uranium in the
 country can support about 10GWe of installed electricity capacity based on PHWRs for a life time of 40 years at 80%
 capacity factor.  With 12 PHWRs under operation and 6 under construction, about half the first stage of the nuclear power

148th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/148threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 programme has been realized. 
This phase of the programme has established a sound technological base for nuclear power in the country and the rest of the
 PHWR programme can be realized with comparative ease.  If the ongoing exploration efforts in the country locate
 additional uranium reserves, PHWR programme can also be expanded beyond the envisaged 10 GWe now considered
 feasible.  The PHWR programme has also provided the initial inventory of plutonium needed to seed the Fast Breeder
 Reactor (FBR) programme.
NPCIL must finalize the design of 700 MWe PHWR at the earliest and all PHWR units to be constructed hereafter should be
 of this size.  In addition to the PHWR programme, two Pressurized Water Reactors (PWRs) of 1 GWe each are being set up
 at Kudankulam in technical cooperation with Russian Federation.  The present plan is to set up 6 additional PWRs of 1GWe
 size and 4 additional FBRs of 500 MWe size by the year 2020.  It was proposed to immediately initiate design of 1 GWe
 FBR and complete it at the earliest.  R&D for deployment of metal alloy fuels having high breeding ratio must be
 completed in the next 10-15 years and all the FBRs to be constructed after the year 2020 should be based on such a fuel and
 should be of 1 GWe size.
 
Comments
            The Committee commends the efforts of  the Department for indigenously developing the Carbide fuel for use in the
 40MWt Fast Breeder Test Reactor (FBTR) of Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research, Kalpakkam. However, keeping in
 view the difficulties in the large scale manufacture of Carbide fuel and the advantages in the performance of mixed oxide
 fuels, the Committee is of the opinion that a right decision has been made by choosing the mixed oxide fuels for the 500
 MWe Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR). The Committee  recommends that R&D efforts may be activated towards
 developing metallic fuels which have a higher breeding ratio and also holds a bright future.
 
TATA MEMORIAL HOSPITAL (TMH) & ADVANCED CENTRE FOR TREATMENT, RESEARCH AND
 EDUCATION IN CANCER (ACTREC) 
 
Recommendation
Although the Committee feels that TMC is providing state-of-the-art treatment against this killer disease, it would still like
 to recommend a new line of research in the field of oncology. The Committee feels that Gene Therapy experiment is the
 most important therapy for finding a permanent solution against the disease.  In  Gene Therapy  process, the healthy copy of
 the missing gene is inserted into the cell using a virus known as Adeno-Associated Viral Vector that is no longer harmful
 and as such it could be termed as a disabled virus.  Cells that have been successfully changed by this gene therapy process
 are separated out, grown and returned to the patient’s body to fight against the disease.  In other cases, disabled viruses are
 used to deliver healthy gene directly to cells within the patient’s body.                                                           (Para 27)
            The Committee is also of the opinion that following fields in Cancer Research apart from the above, need research
 and deep attention.
a)         Role of angiogenesis inhibitors in Cancer treatment;
b)         Role of Tumour Suppressor Genes like pRB and p53 in Cancer Control and
c)         Role of Farnesyl Transferase Inhibitors (FTIs) – Tumour Necrosis Factor(TNF) and Endothelial Growth Factors
 Receptors(EGFs) in promoting neoplastic transformation.                                    
(Para 28)
ANTI-SENSE THERAPY AND CANCER CONTROL
Recommendation
In this connection, the Committee would like to draw the attention of the ACTREC research group to  a finding achieved by
 a group of scientists working in Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology, (CCMB)  Hyderabad where they have been
 working on RNA interference (RNAi) based therapy for nearly three years. During the visit of the Committee to Centre for
 Cellular and Molecular Biology, (CCMB) the Committee was apprised that  scientists of the institute has pioneered in the
 field in isolating this unusual transgene silencing in animals.  This gene has been targeted in several viral diseases and had
 successful delivery on human applications.  This group of scientists has successfully showed that RNAi controls
 heterochromatin formation and cell cycle progression.  They found a way to control diseases like cancer which are related
 to cell-cycle progression and cell proliferation which take place almost in different types of tumor formation in cancer. 
 They have also worked on short interfering siRNA for viral inhibition and has generated siRNA for Human Pappilloma
 Viruses (HPVs).  In HPV they have targeted a combination of E6 and E7 genes and coat protein of the virus.  Apart from
 this, this group has also generated a new generation of  adeno-associated viral vectors (AAVV) for better delivery of siRNA
 in different tissues.  The Committee feels that such researches may provide a meaningful solution in understanding the
 mechanism of carcinogenesis and their subsequent control through wider clinical trials of such findings and ultimately
 applications on human volunteers.                                                                               (Para 29)
In view of the importance of the research, the Committee would like to strongly recommend TMC research group and

148th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/148threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 CCMB research group to work in collaboration with each other on such findings so that an effective targeted drug could be
 designed which may answer the complexities of cure of many forms of cancer with greater successes.                 
            (Para 30)
 
CANCER DRUGS FROM THE SEA
Recommendation
The Committee understands that one of the greatest sources of extraction of anti-cancer medicine are the oceans and seas of
 the world.  Keeping this in view, the Committee in its 128
th Report on Demand for Grants 2004-05 for the Department of
 Ocean Development recommended for initiatives to be undertaken by the Department for extraction of potentially anti-
cancerous drugs from the depth of the ocean.  The Committee further recommended that bulbous yellow soft coral that
 disrupts erratic cell divisions in cancer cells and ocean moulds that live in sea grasses are the great source of anti-cancerous
 drugs.  The Committee further recommended that sea sponges are the real source of anti-cancerous drugs and drugs like
 Didemnin-B that could be isolated from sea squirt, Bryostatin-I that could be isolated from Bugula, Dolestatin-10 that could
 be derived from Indian Ocean Mollusk and Dolabella, a sea hare are also potential sources of drugs for anti-cancer
 treatment and other incurable diseases.  In response to these recommendations of the Committee, the Department of Ocean
 development has replied that possibilities are being explored for participation of more and more institutions under the
 “Drugs from Sea” programme for extraction of potentially anti-cancerous drugs from the depth of the ocean from these
 microalgae as mentioned above.  They have further stated that for understanding the details of Didemin-B from sea squirt,
 Bryostatin-1 from Bugula and Dolestatin-10 from Indian Ocean Mollusc & Dolabella//Seabella the focus from the year
 2005-06 onwards would be strengthened to frame comprehensive action plans to study the extraction of these drugs for
 cancer treatment and pain management etc.                                               (Para 31)                      In pursuance of the above,
 the Committee would like to recommend strongly that research wing of the ACTREC should jointly collaborate with the
 Department of Ocean Development for an active participation in the drugs from sea programme for extraction of this
 potentially anti-cancerous drugs as mentioned above.  They should also collaborate with the Department of Ocean
 Development for a comprehensive action study for giving this extraction of drug project a head start from 2005-06 onwards
 so that the nature’s prized possession in the form of anti-cancer drugs in sea biology could be utilized functionally to find
 out a potential answer in curative medicine for the treatment of this dreaded disease named “Cancer”.                   (Para 32)
Action Taken by the Department
The suggestions of the Committee at Sr. No. 27 to 32 in respect of Role of angiogenesis inhibitors in Cancer treatment; Role
 of Tumour Suppressor Genes like pRB and p53 in Cancer Control and Role of Farnesyl Transferase Inhibitors (FTIs) –
 Tumour Necrosis Factor (TNF) and Endothelial Growth Factors Receptors (EGFs) in promoting neoplastic transformation,
 have been well taken.  It is also pointed out that research in Gene Therapy has already been initiated at Advanced Centre for
 Treatment, Research and Education in Cencer (ACTREC). Collaboration with CCMB, Hyderabad and the Department of
 Ocean Development will be taken up at an appropriate time.
 
Points raised by the Committee
The Department has stated that the suggestions of the Committee at Sr.No27-32 in respect of role of angiogenisis inhibitors
 in Cancer treatment; Role of Tumor Suppressor genes like pRB and p53 in Cancer Control and role of Farnesyl Transferase
 Inhibitors (FTIs)-Tumor necrosis Factor (TNF) and Endothelial growth factors receptors (EGFs) in promoting neoplastic
 transformation, have been well taken.  What specific action does the Department propose to take in view of the
 recommendations of the Committee?
 
 Clarification by the Department
Work on gene therapy for oral cancer has been ongoing and is at the pre-clinical trial stage. This will form the basis for
 Phase 1 clinical trials in patients with oral cancer. We propose to introduce a gene – HSVTK which will make the tumour
 cells sensitive to a non-toxic drug and by converting it to a toxic form thereby killing only the tumour cell. We will use a
 viral vector such as mouse retrovirus or adenovirus to introduce the gene by intra-tumoural injection followed by the non-
toxic drug. A phase 1 clinical trial protocol has been prepared and will soon be submitted to the local and national regulatory
 bodies for approval. Once the protocol is approved the clinical trials will commence at Advanced Centre for Treatment,
 Research & Education in Cancer (Clarification to Para 27).
Inhibitors to these molecules are in different phases of clinical trials world wide.  As soon as they are available for
 assessment, Tata Memorial Centre  would undertake the same to evaluate their action and cost effectiveness (Clarification
 to Para 28).
TMC/ACTREC is addressing several aspects of deregulation of the cell during transformation using siRNAs.  In particular it
 is evaluating the effect of siRNA on the cell cycle molecules, galactosyltransfereases (molecules which regulate transfer of
 sugar moieties to proteins), which are involved in metastasis, and the bcr-abl gene responsible for chronic myeloid
 leukemia. ACTREC and CCMB are interacting with each other on other programs and can also complement each others

148th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/148threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 research focus towards developing effective targeted drugs (Clarification to Para 29&30).
ACTREC has experience in anticancer drug testing in cell lines, in murine models and in xenografts in nude mice.  It can use
 this expertise to evaluate extracts from biological material from the sea in collaboration with Institutes who can source this
 material and provide the appropriate extracts.  Department of Ocean Development can facilitate this interaction for a fruitful
 collaboration towards identifying new drugs from the sea (Clarification to Para 31 & 32).
 
Comments
            The Committee hopes that concrete steps would be taken to implement the recommendations of the Committee.  The
 Committee recommends that the possibility of collaboration with the Department of Ocean Development may be examined
 early, so that the knowledge gained by it could be utilised by the Department of Atomic Energy as well.   
 
FOOD IRRADIATION
Recommendation
The Committee, therefore, feels that some precautionary measures should be taken by the Department of Atomic Energy
 while irradiating foods so that the possible health risks involved before consumption of irradiated food could be effectively
 dealt with. In this connection, Radiological Safety, Microbiological Safety, Nutritional adequacy and Toxicological Safety
 measures may be kept in view.                                                                                              (Para 35)
Action Taken by the Department
The safety and nutritional adequacy of the irradiated foods have been thoroughly studied for past several decades. Perhaps
 no other method of food processing has been subjected to such a thorough assessment of safety as the radiation processing.
 The various aspects of wholesomeness and safety of radiation- processed foods have been studied in great detail. These
 include investigations on Possibility of induced radioactivity, Microbiological safety, Safety of chemical changes,
 Nutritional adequacy, Animal feeding and Human trials.
Only after studying the results of the above and decades of research, the technology has been approved for commercial use.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee also feels that long term effects of irradiated food should be studied thoroughly from the point of view of the
 fact that how ionizing radiation alters chemical structure of food material.  This could be managed if a monitored safe label
 of exposure of food to radiation is laid down by the Department of Atomic Energy.                                              (Para 36)
Action Taken by the Department
The changes that take place in food material as a result of processing by radiation have been thoroughly studied. The long-
term effects of consuming radiation-processed foods have been studied in multi-generation feeding trials on animals. Human
 volunteers have eaten irradiated foods for long periods without any side effects. Astronauts and cosmonauts have been
 eating irradiated foods during space flights.  At the energies of the gamma rays from cobalt-60 (1.3 MeV) and those
 recommended for using X-rays (5 MeV) and accelerated electrons                  (10 MeV), there is no induction of
 radioactivity. The microbiological aspects of radiation- processed foods have been studied in detail. None of these studies
 have indicated that foods preserved by radiation pose any special problems in relation to microflora. It has been found that
 there are no unique radiolytic products formed and free radicals in the system disappear depending on the nature of the
 commodity and its post-irradiation storage and treatment. In fact, the chemical differences between radiation processed
 foods and non-irradiated foods are too small to be detected easily. Though rough composition of food remains largely
 unchanged, some losses in vitamins may be encountered. However, these losses are often minor.
In 1980 a joint Expert Committee on Food Irradiation (JECFI) consisting of Food and Agricultural organization
 (FAO)/Internal Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)/World Health organization (WHO) reviewed the extensive data on
 wholesomeness collected up to that time and concluded that irradiation of any commodity up to an over all dose of 10 kGy
 presents no toxicological hazards and introduces no special nutritional or microbiological problems. An Expert Group
 constituted by WHO in 1994 once again reviewed the wholesomeness data available till then and validated the earlier
 conclusion of JECFI. In 1998 another Expert Group constituted by WHO/FAO/IAEA affirmed the safety of food irradiated
 to doses above 10 kGy. Codex Alimentarius Commission that sets standards for food worldwide and the World Trade
 Organization has also recognized the technique.   In addition, a number of scientific bodies and associations have also
 endorsed the safety of radiation-processed foods. These include naming a few:
American Medical Association
The American Gastroentrological Association
American Dietetics Association
American Meat Institute
Institute of Food Technologists
In 1994 Government of India amended Prevention of Food Adulteration Act (1954) Rules and approved irradiation of onion,

148th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/148threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 potato and spices for domestic market. Additional items were approved in April 1998, and approval for fish, in fresh, frozen
 and dry form came in May 2001 (Table 1) given below.  In 2004, Ministry of Agriculture, Govt. of India, approved use of
 irradiation for quarantine treatment. Many other countries including U.K., South Africa, Brazil, and Thailand have also
 approved the process.
Table 1
Items of food permitted for irradiation under Indian Prevention of Food Adulteration Act (PFA) Rules:
Sr. No. Name of food Dose of irradiation (kGy) Purpose
  Min Max  
1 Onion 0.03 0.09 Sprout inhibition
2 Potato 0.06 0.15 Sprout inhibition
3 Shallots (small onion) garlic,
 ginger 0.03 0.15 Sprout inhibition
4 Rice 0.25 1.00 Insect disinfestations
5
Semolina (Sooji or Rawa),
 Wheat atta
and Maida
0.25 1.00 Insect disinfestations
6 Pulses 0.25 1.00 Insect disinfestations
7 Dried sea-food 0.25 1.00 Insect disinfestations
8 Raisins, figs and
dried dates 0.25 0.75 Insect disinfestation
9 Mango 0.25 0.75 Shelf-life extension and quarantine
 treatment
10 Meat and meat products
 including chicken 2.50 4.00 Shelf-life extension and pathogen control
11 Fresh sea-food 1.00 3.00 Shelf-life extension
12 Frozen sea-food 4.00 6.00 Microbial pathogen control
13 Spices 6.00 14.0 Microbial decontamination
Comments
            The Committee appreciates  that necessary laws have been enacted to control the irradiation of some vegetables,
 spices, fish and for quarantine treatment.  However, the Committee feels that the scope of the laws can be enlarged to
 include in its ambit other eatables like agricultural and poultry products. 
Recommendation
The Committee feels that high voltage electron beams generated from linear accelerators which could be a better alternative
 for food irradiation technology than application of Cobalt-60 and cesium 137 because the penetration depth of gama
 irradiation is not there and with shorter exposure time, the food could be safe with this method.  With all other existing
 methods of food irradiation, the Committee feels only low efficiency could be maintained combined with high cost of
 production of irradiated foods.                                                                         (Para 37)
Action Taken by the Department
It is possible to use both machine sources (accelerated electrons and X-rays) as well as radioisotope sources (cobalt-60 and
 cesium-137) emitting gamma rays. Both have their advantages and limitations. The choice of the source would depend upon
 several product and process parameters.  In case of electrons, the depth of penetration is a major problem, that can be solved
 by their conversion to X-rays. However, the conversion of electrons to X-rays is not economical.  On the other hand, cobalt
 sources are very rugged and reliable.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.
Recommendation
The Committee feels that in order to make the food irradiation a success, the following factors for judging the bactericidal
 efficacy of a given dose of irradiation may be adopted:
Kinds and species of organism composing the food.
Numbers of organisms present because the dose of radiation should be proportional to the number of organism present in the
 food.
Composition of the food.
Presence and absence of oxygen
The physical state of the food during irradiation including moisture content and temperature.
Condition of the organism, that is, its age, temperature for growth etc.          (Para 38)                   
Action Taken by the Department

148th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/148threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
As described above, studies on all these aspects  have been carried out and published in scientific literature. Some of these
 references that include above information are given below:
Diehl, J.F.. 1997. Safety of Irradiated  Foods, Marcel Dekker, Inc, New York.
Josephson, E.S., and Peterson, M.S. (Eds.). 1983. Preservation of food by ionizing radiations Vol.1, 2 & 3, CRC Press Inc.,
 Boca Raton, Fl., USA., WHO. 1994. Safety and Nutritional Adequacy of Irradiated Food. World Health Organization,
 Geneva.
Comments
            The Committee notes the reply.       
Recommendation
The Committee is of the opinion that in order to make the entire project of food irradiation a success, the DAE needs to lay
 down not only certain safety criteria for irradiation, including adequate studies on toxicity aspect of irradiation, long term
 biological effects of food irradiation, detail assessment of occupational hazards of irradiation, stringent methods to be
 adopted for improving the operational efficiency of the irradiating machine through lowering cost of irradiation, control
 over accidental spillage of radiation from place of work and transportation to construction site for placing food irradiation
 technology that may include high voltage electron beam generated from linear accelerator but also by placing proper safety
 label on irradiated food products for its increased public acceptance through informing the consumers  adequately and
 extensively  by educating them more about the health advantages of irradiated food.        (Para 39)
Action Taken by the Department
In India commercial food irradiation could be carried out only  in a facility licensed to do so. The licence could be obtained
 only after fulfilling the requirements of the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB).  As per provision of Prevention of
 Food Adulteration (PFA) Rules, the labeling of irradiated products is carried out after irradiation.  The licence is issued only
 after receiving a final safety compliance report from the facility.  The procedure for handling, transport and installation of
 Cobalt-60 sources is carried out by the Board of Radiation and Isotope Technology under the guidelines and procedures of
 AERB.
 
Informing consumers about irradiated food products in order to increase public acceptance are being made through public
 awareness programmes, like National Awareness Workshop on Radiation Processing organized by other institutions jointly
 with BRIT are also organising exhibitions.
Point raised by the Committee
Consciousness and acceptability of the irradiated food products by the public is not much.  The Department may give the
 details of the public awareness programme carried out by it.
 
Clarification by Department
 
1. During 2004-2005, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre  has carried out the following activities for increasing consciousness
 and acceptability of the irradiated food products by the public :
1.1 Participation in exhibition
First Agro-Industrial Exhibition, Indian Agricultural Research Institute (IARI), New Delhi, November 8-9, 2005.
Maharashtra Public Works Department (PWD) Flower Exhibition, Nashik,on January 26, 2005.
Maharashtra State Agriculture Department and APMC, Dahanu, Kisan Mela &   Exhibition, Dahanu, on December 23-24,
 2004.
Maharashtra State Agriculture Department, Local Farmers Meet, Chandwad,   on December 22, 2004.
Maharashtra PWD Flower Exhibition, Aurangabad, February 2004. Maharashtra PWD Flower Exhiibtion, Nashik, January,
 2004.
1.2 Kisan Mela
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre arranged a Kisan Mela at Radiation Technology Awareness Centre, Krushi Utpadan
 Sanrakshan Kendra (KRUSHAK), Lasalgaon on  March 23, 2004.
1.3 Audiovisual Material
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Maharashtra  prepared a documentary film on food irradiation in Marathi with the
 help of inputs from Food Technology Division of  Bhabha Atomic Research Centre .
Visualization of matter for 20 posters in Marathi for the FDA and acquisition of audio-visual aids.
1.4 Invited Talks by BARC  Scientists   
Recent developments in radiation processing of food and allied products, in the National Association for Application of
 Radioisotope and Radiation in Industry (NAARRI) Annual Conference (NAARRI Annual Conference -2005), Mumbai,on
 November 10, 2005.
Radiation processing of food and agricultural products.  Awareness program on applications of Radioisotopes and Radiation
 Technology for Societal benefits (ARRTS 2005), Regional Research Laboratory (RRL), Jorhat, on October 19-20, 2005.

148th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/148threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
Addressed members of the media on radiation processing of food during Journalist Scientist Meet, at New Delhi, on 
 November 26, 2004.
Addressed students of Arunodya & other Public Schools , East Delhi, during Student-Scientist Program,  on November 25,
 2004.
Radiation processing of food, Paschim Banga Vigyan Mancha, Burdwan University, on October 31, 2004.
Food preservation by ionizing radiation, 55
th IANCAS(Indian Association of Nuclear Chemist and Allied Scientist) 
 Workshop, Burdwan University, on October 30, 2004.
Radiation Processing of Foods and Agricultural Commodities, World of Food India 2004, International Exhibition &
 Conference for the Processed Food & Beverage Industry, Hyderabad, on September 12, 2004.
Radiation processing of food and agricultural products, In NAARRI Awareness Program on Applications of Radioisotopes
 and Radiation Technology for Societal Development , Anna University, Chennai, during July 13-15, 2004.
Radiation Processing of Food and Agricultural products, In Awareness Program of the DAE, Saurashtra Education Society,
 Rajkot, on July 22, 2004.
Bioscience Research in BARC, Interaction with the students of Biotechnology Centre, Nagarjuna University, Guntur, on
 February 2, 2004.
Radiation Processing of Food Products – In 3
rd  Global Food Tech & Hospitality 2003, Mumbai, during October 17-18,
 2003.
1.5 Invited Talk by Foreign Scientists
Bhabha Atomic Research Centre invited Prof. Rudolfo Nayga, Professor Agricultural Economics, Texas Agricultural and
 Mechanical  University, who  visited India in April 2005 to
deliver talks on the subject at various places as follows: .
Delivered a talk on “Consumer acceptance and willingness to pay for irradiated foods” in A Block Auditorium, Modular
 Labs, BARC, on April 15, 2005.
Delivered a talk on “Consumer acceptance and willingness to pay for irradiated foods” at the Department of Livestock
 Product Technology, Kerala Agriculture University, Thrissur, on April 12, 2005.
Delivered a talk on “Consumer acceptance and willingness to pay for irradiated foods” at the Venkateshwara Group Head
 Office, Pune, on April 14, 2005.
1.6 Magazine Articles
Chander R and Sharma, A(2005) chilled extravagance, Times Agricultural Journal, June-July 2005, 23-26.
Sharma, A.,(2005) Food Rules, Safety Grill, Times Agricultural Journal, March-April, 2005, pp.32-34.
Sharma, A.(2005) Crop Radiation, Cover Story, Times Agricultural Journal, Jan-Feb, 2005, 16-18.
1. List of Awareness Programmes and Exhibition organized by National Association for Applications of Radioisotopes and
 Radiation in Industry (NAARRI) in association with Board for Radiation & Isotope Technology (BRIT)
A 2 day Awareness Programme and Exhibition on “Application of Radioisotopes and Radiation Technology for Societal
 Benefit” was held at Regional Research Laboratory, Jorhat, Assam during October 19 – 20, 2005  The above programme
 was meant for Graduate/Post-graduate students, Faculty members, Medical Professionals, Research Scholars, Industrialists
 of private organizations, scientists and technologists from academic institutions.
A 2 day Awareness Programme and Exhibition on “Applications of Radioisotopes and Radiation Technology for Human
 Welfare (ARRTH-2005)” was organized in Kolkata during February 7–8, 2005 in association with BRIT and M/s Organic
 Green Foods Ltd., Kolkata wherein more that 400 students and faculty members participated.
Awareness Programme and Exhibition was organized at Chennai during July 13 – 14, 2004 on the occasion of Golden
 Jubilee Celebration of Department of Atomic Energy in association with INS and ISNT, Kalpakkam wherein about 1000
 post-graduates from various colleges in and around Chennai, industrialists, professionals from various medical and
 engineering colleges and institutions participated
A 2 day State level Awareness Programme on “Applications of Radioisotope and Radiation Technology” was organized in
 association with NSS Hindu College, Chenganacherry, Kerala wherein more than 1000 participants from Spices Board,
 Rubber Board, Research organizations, industrialists and Post-graduate students and faculty members from various
 Universities such as Mhatma Gandhi University, Kerala University, Calicut University, Cochin University participated.
A 2 day Awarenss Programme on “Applications of Radioisotopes and Radiation Technology” was organized in association
 with Institute of Physics, Bhubaneswar during November 21 – 22, 2002 wherein about 400 participants from Orissa and
 Andhra Pradesh participated.
A 2 day Awareness Programme on “Applications of Radioisotopes and Radiation for the Societal benefit” was organized
 during May 31 – June 1, 2001 at Imphal, Manipur in association with Manipur Science and Technology covering 400
 participants from research institutions, science and technology councils of North-eastern region and students and faculty
 members from various colleges.
A 2 day Awareness Programme on “Applications of Radioisotopes and Radioactivity for Societal Benefit” was organized in
 association with North Eastern Hill University, Shillong, Deptt. Of Science and Technology and Geological Survey of

148th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/148threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 India, during November 26 – 27, 1999 wherein about 400 post-graduate representatives from research institutions, science
 and technology personnel, faculty members from entire north-east region participated.
A 2 day Awareness Programme in association with District Science Centre, Tirunalveli was organized during March 2 – 3,
 1999 at Tirunalveli wherein medical professionals, industrialists, post-graduate students and faculty members (650 nos.)
 participated.
An Awareness Programme on “Applications of Radioisotopes and Radiation Technology” was organized at Anna University
 Chennai during 1996 wherein about 500 students and faculty members from various colleges in Chennai and nearby
 districts participated.
A state level Awareness Programme was organized in association with Bishop Moore College, Mavelikara during 1995
 wherein 1300 post-graduate / graduate students, faculty members, general public and professionals from industries and
 research organizations participated.
Comments
The Committee is of the opinion that consumer awareness regarding irradiated food products is very low in the country
 leading to low acceptance by the people.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that in addition to the existing measures
 taken by the Department, it may take the help of the print and visual media to spread awareness about such food.  
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 03.30 p.m. on Tuesday, the 20
th December, 2005 in Room No. 121 (Committee Chairman’s Room),
 First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
                        PRESENT
 
1.         Shri P.G.Narayanan  –– Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
Prof. Saif-ud-din Soz
Dr. Prabha Thakur
Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
Shrimati Kum Kum Rai
 
LOK  SABHA
 
Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
Shri K.C. Singh ‘Baba’
Shri Rakesh Singh
Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
 
SECRETARIAT
                       
Shri R.K.Singh, Officer on Special Duty
            Shri Alok Chatterjee, Deputy Secretary
Shri C.B.Rai, Under Secretary
Shri S. Rangarajan, Committee Officer
 
2.         The Committee took-up consideration of revised draft 147
th, ***,  ***, ***, *** and 152nd Action Taken Reports of
 the Committee on the Action Taken by Government on the recommendations contained in its One Hundred Forty-third,
 ***, ***, ***, *** and *** reports on Demands for Grants (2005-2006) relating to Departments of Ocean Development;
 ***; ***; ***; ***; and ***, respectively.  After discussion and suggesting a minor change in 147th report, the Committee
 adopted all the reports.
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy to present the
 Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Sujan Chakraborty, and in his absence, Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli to lay the Reports

148th Report of Committee on S&T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/148threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:35:12]
 on the table of the Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 22nd  December, 2005.
3.         The Committee authorised the Chairman, and in his absence, Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy to present the
 Reports in the Rajya Sabha and Dr. Sujan Chakraborty, and in his absence, Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli to lay the Reports
 on the table of the Lok Sabha on Thursday, the 22nd  December, 2005.
 
4.         The Committee, then, decided to hear the oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Environment and
 Forests in respect of control and supervision on experiments on Animals for the purpose of Drugs and Pharmaceutical
 Research, in its next meeting to be held on the10
th January, 2006. The Committee also decided to hear the Drugs Controller
 General of India and representatives of Indian Council of Medical Research in the matter in its future meetings.
 
5.         The Committee then adjourned at 04.35 p.m.
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                                                        C. B. RAI
December 20, 2005                                                                                                            UNDER SECRETARY
 
☼ Pursuant to the adoption of the 5th Report of the Committee on Ethics on 13.12.2005, the Member was suspended from the Rajya Sabha pending the presentation of the final
 Report of the Committee on Ethics.
Ф Shri Jaswant Singh ceased to be a Member of the Committee w.e.f.  11th August, 2005 consequent upon his resignation from  the Committee.
 
*** Related to other matters.