PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 200
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/KARTIKA, 1930 (SAKA)OCTOBER, 2008/KARTIKA, 1930 (SAKA)
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY , 
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDREDTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF 
THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS ON THE 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09) OF THE MINISTRY OF EARTH SCIENCES
RD  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 23 OCTOBER, 2008)
RD  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 23 OCTOBER, 2008)
RD  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 23 OCTOBER, 2008)
RD  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 23 OCTOBER, 2008)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TWO HUNDREDTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED
AND EIGHTY-SEVENTH REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09) OF THE MINISTRY
OF EARTH SCIENCES
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 23 RD OCTOBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 23 RD OCTOBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
OCTOBER, 2008/KARTIKA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. P REFACE ................................................................................................................................. (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—16
4. M INUTES OF THE M EETINGS .................................................................................................. 17—20

MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2008-09)
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
3. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
4. Shri Kamal Akhtar
5. Shri Saman Pathak
6. Dr. Ejaz Ali
7. Shri Jabir Husain
8. Shri D. Raja
9. Shri Nandamuri Harikrishna
10. Vacant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Akbar Ahmad Dumpy
16. Shri Francis Fanthome
*17. V acant
18. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
19. Shri Brahmananda Panda
20. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
21. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
22. Shri Pratik P. Patil
23. Shri Bachi Singh ‘Bachda’ Rawat
24. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
25. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
26. Dr. Rampal Singh
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
29. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
30. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
31. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
*Shri Babubhai K. Katara ceased to be a member of the Committee Consequent upon his expulsion from the
membership of the Lok Sabha w.e.f. 21st October, 2008.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shrimati S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
PREFACE
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundredth Report on the Action Taken by the Ministry of
Earth Sciences on the recommendations contained in One Hundred and Eighty-seventh Report of
the Committee on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Earth Sciences
on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Eighty-seventh Report of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and
Forests on the Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences which was
presented to the Rajya Sabha on 29th April, 2008.
3. There were twenty recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Eighty-seventh
Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were
received from the Department on 7th August, 2008.
4. In the meeting held on 13th October, 2008 the Committee considered the draft Action Taken
Report and adopted the same.
DR. V . MAITREYAN
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
October 13, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Earth Sciences
on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred Eighty-seventh Report of the Department
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests on
the Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Ministry of Earth Sciences, which was presented to both
the Houses of Parliament on 29th April, 2008. There were twenty recommendations in the One
Hundred Eighty-seventh Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recommendations of
the Committee were received from the Ministry on 7th August, 2008.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee
on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Earth Sciences are set out in the succeeding paragraphs:—
BUDGETARY ALLOCATION FOR 2008-09
1. Recommendation (Para - 3.5)
The Committee is constrained to note that the projected demand of Rs.1566 crore made by
the Ministry was drastically reduced to virtually half to the tune of Rs.750 crore only. This will
adversely affect the major programmes that are to be undertaken during the current year. The
Committee is of the view that unless there is a raise in the allocation, the Ministry will not be able
to translate their dream into reality. The Committee, at the same time is of the opinion, that
Ministry should also plan its projects/schemes meticulously so as to avoid any drastic cut in their
projections because of poor performance in utilization of previous fund.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry appreciates the concerns expressed by the Committee towards allocation of
funds for the year 2008-09. The Ministry had undertaken a detailed exercise by conducting a series
of review meetings at different forums such as Research Advisory Council, Earth Commission,
Council of Earth Science Organisation (ESO) etc. to assess the realistic Budget requirement for
various programmes. Further, upon approach of the Ministry, the Planning Commission had assured
the necessary additional required budgetary support to meet the shortfall in the allocation at R.E.
Stage. Although, a great deal of planning had taken place, the Ministry could not achieve the target
in the previous year due to lack of financial delegation to the Earth Commission, which was
discovered only in November, 2007. Currently, the Ministry is working out a strategy for utilization
of funds judiciously.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and opines that the Ministry should monitor its
programmes/projects in a time bound manner and strive for implementation of its projects.
It also opines that Ministry must ensure that Planning Commission release necessary
additional budgetary support to meet the shortfall at R.E. stage as per its assurance.
MECHANISM DEVELOPED TO MONITOR AND REVIEW THE ONGOING SCHEMES
2. Recommendation (Para - 4.2)
The Committee notes with concern that despite the existing mechanism to monitor and
review the ongoing schemes, most of the major programmes, which were undertaken during the
last year saw a large scale under utilization of funds. The Committee hopes that the Department
will further strengthen this mechanism for effective implementation of its programmes so as to
avoid delay in the implementation of various projects and also in avoiding underutilization of the

2
funds allotted to it. The Committee is of the view that procedural and administrative delays could
have been avoided through well focused planning and management. Therefore, the Committee
recommends the Ministry to review its mechanism and make sure that fund allocations are made
as per requirements and are utilized to the maximum possible.
Action Taken by Government
A strong mechanism has already been embedded for review and monitoring of the schemes.
However, due to lack of financial delegation and full-fledged Financial Adviser to the Ministry for
obtaining the approvals for implementation of this programme, there was some under utilization of
funds in the previous years. The Ministry has now initiated corrective measures to avoid
administrative delays and focus on proper planning and management, by quickly adopting
conventional mode of approval viz., EFC/SFC. A significant number of programmes have been
appraised so far. Also the Ministry is in the process of setting up of a review mechanism for
utilization of funds as per the requirement. During the last Earth Science Organisation (ESO)
Council meeting, all the centres of the Ministry have been advised to gear up with implementation
of the programme including the financial targets set for the current financial year.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry will stick to its objective
of strict monitoring of schemes. It further desires that administrative shortcomings must
be overcome through proper planning and management, and urges the Ministry to uphold
its commitment to avoid any delays in future.
POLAR SCIENCE/ANTARCTIC RESEARCH
3. Recommendation (Para - 6.5)
The Committee commends the research work carried out by the Ministry in the Antarctica
as initiating scientific research and exploration in extreme cold conditions is not an easy task.
In addition, the Committee is of the view that the Ministry may also conduct a prospective
study on heart rate variabilities under extreme cold climate and prolonged isolation on expedition’s
team members to reveal the physiological changes in the heart due to exposure to cold climate.
At the same time study may also be carried out to examine the effect of such cold climate on
vital body parameters like blood pressure, pulse rate, hemoglobin levels, sleep duration of the
members.
Action Taken by Government
A specialist from All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, namely Dr. S.K.
Khandelwal was deputed with the team of 27th Indian Antarctic Expeditions for undertaking
the studies on the stress on human health and performances, associated with isolation in
extreme climatic conditions at Antarctica. Health assessment at different phases was completed by
Dr. Khandelwal and the same will be followed by the current wintering team medical officer,
namely Dr. A. Bhatia. The studies will include the examination of vital body parameters like blood
pressure, heart rate, hemoglobin level, sleep duration and other points recommended by Hon’ble
Committee.
Comments
The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the efforts made by the Ministry in
conducting health assessment studies on the members of its expedition team. The
Committee hopes that the Ministry would also undertake studies on the psychological
changes on the members of the expedition’s team as extreme cold climate could also affect
the human psychology.

3
4. Recommendation (Para - 6.6)
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should study the icy continent’s atmospherics
and ozone depletion. Besides ongoing activities, it should also plan to undertake studies on lake
water and its biology, Antarctic microbes. In addition, the Ministry should also think of undertaking
a shallow drilling in Antarctica for retrieval of ice core for paleo-climatological studies.
Action Taken by Government
Studies pertaining to the atmospheric sciences and meteorology are an integral part of the
Antarctic Expeditions. India Meteorological Department (IMD) and National Physical Laboratory
(NPL) conduct regular studies for monitoring the green house gases and the ozone level at surface
and upper atmosphere. These studies are of on-going nature and will be continued.
The studies of the lake water including trace and heavy metal concentration, biodiversity in
the lacustrine and marine environment etc. are also being undertaken as recommended by the
Hon’ble Parliamentary Committee.
The study of Antarctic Microbes in different media like soil, glacier, melt water etc., is
an important part of the biological research and is being pursued by Scientists of CCMB and NCAOR.
As regards Shallow Ice Core Drilling in Antarctica is concerned, a larger scientific
involvement in terms of participation with international communities like ITASE (International Trans
Antarctic Expedition) of SCAR (Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research) has already been
established and a close co-operation with the recent initiatives of SCAR, like the IPICS
(International Partnerships of Ice Core Studies) is also underway. The Director NCAOR is the
steering member of this Group. A significant step towards the Indian Commitment on expanding
the horizons of Antarctic ice core research is the close collaboration envisaged with the Asian
countries under the aegis of AFOPS (Asian Forum on Polar Sciences).
NCAOR is planning to increase the capacity of its ice core drill to raise shallow ice cores
from shelf and deep continental ice sheet.
Comments
The Committee commends the studies undertaken by the Ministry in the field of
polar science and Antarctic research. The Ministry should ensure that all its existing
technological facilities are utilized to their utmost capacity so as to derive maximum
understanding of atmospheric sciences, weather etc.
5. Recommendation (Para - 6.7)
The Arctic Ocean and the surrounding regions are one of the most important areas that not
only govern the earth’s climate but have also faithfully recorded the past climatic history. The
region is an excellent harbinger of future changes as the signals and clues that signify climate
change are much stronger in the Arctic region than anywhere else on the earth. This region has
always been significant to the Indian subcontinent due to the probable tele-connection between the
northern polar region and Indian monsoon intensity, which is critical for an agrarian economy like
ours. The Committee appreciates the fact that India has embarked upon Arctic Research by
launching her first scientific expedition to this region under the leadership of Director, National
Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research (NCAOR) last year. The Committee recommends the
Ministry to continue to aspire for a strong presence in the Arctic region.
Action Taken by Government
In pursuance of the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendation, NCAOR had deputed a team to
Arctic during winter to pursue the ongoing research in atmosphere science, biodiversity and
glaciological fields.

4
Hon’ble Committee will be pleased to note that an Indian Research Station at Ny-Alesund
located in the northern most land in the Arctic Region was inaugurated by Hon’ble Minister of
Earth Sciences, Shri Kapil Sibal on July 1st, 2008. Dedicated to the research on climate change
and associated disciplines of the sciences, the research station ‘HIMADRI’ will be occupied by a
team of Indian researchers from NCAOR, Barkatullah University, BSIP, NPL, GSI, and Lucknow
University in 2008.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply with satisfaction and, would like the Ministry to
continue its ongoing research in atmosphere science, biodiversity and glaciological fields
with extreme dedication.
POLYMETALLIC NODULES PROGRAMME
6. Recommendation (Para - 7.4)
The Committee feels that the country is faced with an enormous task of carrying
out development and meeting the challenges of modern times for which there is requirement of
minerals. Therefore, the efforts of the Ministry should be directed towards developing technology for
sufficient metal recovery from the polymetallic nodules and tapping rich resources from ocean. It will
help in meeting the requirement for minerals for the country besides attaining self-sufficiency.
Action Taken by Government
During the Eleventh Plan, a programme on design, development and testing of a proto-type
mining system to exploit nodules from a depth of 6 km. would be implemented in phases as a part
of technology development of exploitation of nodules from the seabed. In addition, for extraction
of the metals (Co, Ni, Cu, Mn), process packages have been developed with the help of various
research laboratories. One of the promising process packages for Ammoniacal Sulphur Dioxide
leaching for extraction of metals has been demonstrated successfully in pilot plant of 500 kg. per
day capacity. The metal recovery of the plant has been achieved more than the designed efficiency
of the pilot plant. The pilot plant at HZL (U) premises has already demonstrated its efficiency and
accomplished the objectives set for the pilot plant.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and would like to know whether the
current technology being used is sufficient to meet the mineral requirements of the country
and attain self-sufficiency.
OCEAN OBSERV ATION and INFORMATION SERVICES
7. Recommendation (Para - 8.5)
The Committee expresses its satisfaction that Ministry’s sincere efforts have finally led to
the setting up of a full-fledged National Tsunami Early Warning Centre at INCOIS, Hyderabad for
providing warning on a 24x7 basis. In view of the above, the Committee recommends that Ministry
must make optimum use of this Centre to disseminate data to the concerned authorities as early
as possible.
Action Taken by Government
The National Early Warning Centre generates and disseminates timely advisories to the
Control Room of the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) through a satellite based virtual private
network for disaster management support (VPN DMS) for further dissemination to the public. VPN
DMS enables early warning centre to disseminate warnings to the State Emergency Operations

5
Centres also. In addition, messages are also being sent by Phone, Fax, SMS and e-mails to
authorized officials. In case of confirmed warning National Early Warning Centre is being equipped
with necessary facilities to disseminate the advisories directly to the administrators, media and
public through SMS, e-mail, Fax etc. The cyclone warning network of IMD and electronic
information boards of INCOIS could also be effectively used for dissemination of warnings directly
to the public. Electronic Display Board of INCOIS is one of the state-of-art technologies which
can be remotely updated from INCOIS through various modes of communication. The Ministry is
making optimum use of this centre for dissemination of data to all stakeholders.
Comments
The Committee while taking note of the reply is of the view that the Ministry should
take every possible step for timely dissemination of data to all stakeholders and utilize its
National Tsunami Early Warning Centre at INCOIS to  its best of ability in order to prevent
recurrence of another disaster.
8. Recommendation (Para - 8.7)
The Committee commends the efforts made by the Ministry to  forecast key ocean
parameters and disseminate the information such as availability of  fish stocks, ocean state, tsunami,
etc. which will immensely help the weaker sections of  the society both  in terms of  the security
and income for  the fisherman. The Committee would like the Ministry to  provide ocean data,
information and advisory services to  society, industry, government and scientific community
through sustained ocean observations and constant improvements through systematic and focused
research, data and information management and ocean modelling.
Action Taken by Government
Efforts would be made to  provide user oriented data product to  all the concerned sectors
by conducting sustained observations and improvements for  the benefit of the coastal community.
Towards this, the Ministry is making use of all the potential data and information available from
National and International resources to  give a better ocean information services.
Comments
The Committee would  like to know the details of initiatives taken by the Ministry
to make use of all the potential data and information available from ocean observations and
to give better ocean information services to  the concerned sectors.
MARINE RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT
9. Recommendation (Para - 9.5)
The Committee is of  the view that Fisheries Oceanographic Research Vessel (FORV) Sagar
Sampada forms  the backbone of  Marine Living Resources surveys and notes with satisfaction that
during last year ORV Sagar Kanya and FORV Sagar Sampada had undertaken various cruises to
meet the requirements towards the implementation of the Marine Living Resources programme. The
Committee recommends the Ministry to carry out activities such as charting of exploitable
resources of the deep sea, promoting operational fishery oceanographic services, ecosystem
monitoring and modelling, promoting basic Research and Development on Marine Living Resources
and transfer of technology for societal development.
Action Taken by Government
The Committee has recommended for five different activities under MLR programme. The
recommendation-wise follow-up action taken is given below:
(i) Deep-Sea and distant water Fishery:  It has been taken up as a major activity under the
Marine Living Resources (MLR) programme during the Eleventh Plan period. In addition to the

6
survey and assessment of the deep-sea fishery resources in the continental slope (200-1000m
depth) of the Indian, EEZ, survey and assessment of the myctophid resources in the Central and
Western Arabian Sea, survey and assessment of the living resources in Central Indian Ocean and
the Indian Ocean sector of Southern Ocean are taken up. The objective is to diversify the fishing
efforts to deep-sea and distant waters by the end of the Eleventh Plan period;
(ii) Operational Fishery Oceanographic Services: R and D efforts on this will be carried out
by Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology (CMLRE), an attached off of the Ministry,
Kochi and the operational part of this need to be entrusted to Indian National Centre for Ocean
Information Services (INCOIS), an autonomous Institute of MoES, Hyderabad;
(iii) Ecosystem Monitoring and Modelling:  This has been taken up for implementation under
the MLR scheme during the Eleventh Plan period. Activities include monitoring and surveillance of
Harmful Algal blooms in the Indian EEZ, monitoring of the during environment of the Indian EEZ
and ecosystem modelling of the west coast;
(iv) Basic R & D on MLR:  Following R  and D projects are taken up for implementation during
the Eleventh Plan period: (a) Bio-prospecting for novel anti-microbial peptides from marine biota;
(b) Farming and pearl production in black-lip pearl oyster in A and N islands; (c) Development of
technology for hatchery production of marine gastropods and ornamental fishes; (d) Development
of miniaturized archival tags; (e) Commercialization of Marine Pearl Culture Technology; and
(vi) Transfer of technology for societal development: Technologies developed under MLR
programme would be transferred for societal development during Eleventh Plan period through
suitable mechanism.
Comments
The Committee takes note of the reply and desires that the Ministry should make
optimum use of its Research Vessel. It reiterates that technologies developed under Marine
Living Resources programme must be transferred for societal benefits.
DRUGS FROM SEA
10. Recommendation (Para - 10.3)
The Committee observes that marine organisms have attracted much attention as potential
source of drugs over the recent years. The discovery, development and production of drugs from
marine bacteria, fungi, microalgae, sponges remain largely in the realm of experimentation. The
Committee observes that there is a need to look at this aspect more thoroughly and therefore,
recommends extensive research and study to harness bioactive compounds from the marine
organisms for human therapeutic purposes. The Committee also recommends that the extraction
and development of potential drugs and chemicals from the depth of the ocean should be pursued
with well-focussed mechanism. It further recommends that clinical stage trials should be expedited
so that drugs are available in the market at the earliest for the benefit of the people.
Action Taken by Government
As per the recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry has taken action to expand the
programme activities by involving more new institutions in a phased manner. During Eleventh Plan
period, there are six more new centres, [ viz., (i) Advanced Centre for Treatment, Research and
Education in Cancer (ACTREC), Mumbai; (ii) Topiwala National Medical College (TNMC) & BYL
Nair Ch. Hospital, Mumbai; (iii) Central Institute of Fisheries Education (CIFE), Mumbai;
(iv) Department of Fisheries, Government of West Bengal, Kolkata; (v) Madras University, Chennai;
and (vi) Annamalai University, Parangipettai] have been inducted and the mechanism of
implementation of the programme would be modified in order to expedite all the activities related
to drugs discovery and development with state-of-the-art facilities. More financial support is needed

7
to strengthen participation of more centres located along the coastal States including Andaman and
Nicobar (A&N) Islands. The Ministry has taken action to explore deep sea organisms for bio-
evaluation of novel active compounds for human therapeutic purposes, with the involvement of
Centre for Marine Living Resources and Ecology (CMLRE), an Attached Office of the Ministry of
Earth Sciences (MoES), Oceanographic Research Vessel (FORV) – Sagar Sampada. Further, the
Ministry has entrusted the responsibility of conducting Clinical trials of all the active compounds
discovered under “Drugs from the Sea” programme to Topiwala National Medical College, Mumbai,
so as to expedite the product development.
The Director, Central Drugs Research Institute (CDRI), Lucknow, the Coordinator of this
programme has given license to a Private firm for collaborative development of drugs for anti-
diabetic-cum-anti-hyper-lipidaemic properties. It is expected that these drugs are available in the
market at the earliest for the benefit of the people.
Comments
The Committee appreciates the actions undertaken by the Ministry to expand the
activities under the Drugs from sea programme by involving new institutions. The
Committee feels that for additional financial support Ministry must approach Planning
Commission at R.E. stage so that the programme may not lose the importance that is called
for on account of financial shortfalls. Further, the Committee is of the view that the
participation of centres from Coastal States and especially Andaman and Nicobar islands
need to be augmented.
GAS HYDRATES AND TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT FOR EXPLOITATION
11. Recommendation (Para - 11.6)
The Committee is of the view that Fossil fuels besides being costly are continuously
depleting and will not last long. Gas Hydrates have the potential of providing energy security to
the nation, as it can prove to be an alternative source of energy. The Committee is however,
constrained to note that the budgetary support allocated under this programme was not fully utilized
during the last year. Non-availability of suitable collaboration partner and other technical inadequacy
were the reasons attributed for this shortcoming. The Committee is constrained to observe that the
Ministry has been citing the same problem since 2005-06. The Committee fails to understand as
to why the Ministry has not been able to find a suitable collaborative partner for so long and why
alternative arrangements are not being made? The Committee recommends that Ministry must find
a solution in this regard at the earliest.
Action Taken by Government
The National Institute of Ocean Technology has been able to find a suitable collaborative
partner for development of Autonomous Coring System. The Contract has been signed with
M/s Williamson and Associates, USA for the development of 3000 m depth rated Autonomous
Coring System with wire line technology. System design shall be capable to recover 100 m core
and incorporated with pressure core sampler to recover gas hydrate at in-situ pressure condition.
Design for the system development is completed and two reviews were completed for design
acceptance. System subcomponent procurement and fabrication are under progress. The coring
system shall be tested at USA at a water depth of 100 m for the recovery of 100 m core. It shall
be ready for sea trial in India by the middle of 2009.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and urges that the activities be carried on rigorously
so as to meet the objective as per schedule.

8
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF OCEAN TECHNOLOGY
12. Recommendation (Para - 12.4)
The Committee commends the activities of the Ministry in the area of desalination of sea
water. The Committee feels that an integrated and coordinated effort of various Departments of
Government/organizations involved in this direction will achieve better results and also reduce the
cost factor involved. The nation, particularly its coastal areas can think of getting safe drinking
water at affordable cost in the near future. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should
expand and extend this programme so that more areas facing scarcity of drinking water could be
covered and more and more people are benefited.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry is grateful for valuable comments of the Committee on the project. Currently,
an integrated approach is being adopted by the Ministry to address the technological aspects of
desalination particularly to reduce the cost of production of fresh water. A number of possible
methods are being considered for consolidation of this technology to generate fresh water for both
coastal and island communities. Currently, a desalination plant with a capacity of 10 MLD is being
designed for scaling up to higher capacity plants towards commercialization of technology. As the
requirement of fresh water in the coastal States is much higher than the island territories, higher
capacity plants are being planned preferable on a barge or floating platform.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and it would like to know the status of the action
taken by the Ministry regarding setting up of additional Low Thermal Desalination Plants
in eight more islands in Lakshadweep after successful installation of LTTD Plant in
Kavaratti, as informed to the Committee earlier.
ACQUISITION OF TECHNOLOGY DEMONSTRATION VESSEL “SAGAR NIDHI”
13. Recommendation (Para - 13.2 )
The Committee appreciates the Ministry’s efforts that led to the launch of new Research
Vessel Sagar Nidhi with state-of-the art navigational facilities as per its stipulated time schedule. The
Committee is of the view that this Research Vessel which is a multi purpose vessel for technology
services and demonstration, acquired to cater to various programmes, such as Deep Sea Mining,
Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV), Autonomous Underwater Vehicle (AUV), Gas Hydrates and
Manned submersibles, supporting under water observation system and instrumentation will enable the
Ministry to carry out its important task of ocean development and use its services in best possible
way. The Committee, therefore, desires that the Ministry should make optimum use of this vessel.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry has already constituted a Scientific and Technical Advisory Committee for planning
of scientific cruise in advance for Research V essel Sagar Nidhi. All efforts would be made to make
optimum use of this Research V essel for implementation of various programme of the Ministry.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
INDIA METEOROLOGICAL DEPARTMENT
14. Recommendation (Para - 15.6)
The Committee hopes that this year the total budget of Rs.364 crore which has been

9
allocated under the programme namely Modernization of India Meteorological Department (IMD)
would be fully utilised. The Committee desires that the Ministry of Earth Sciences should make all
efforts so as to bring IMD at par with world-class weather forecasting network in near future.
It feels that after modernisation, IMD would be able to offer more accurate monitoring and
warnings for severe weather events like thunderstorms, dust storms, heavy rainfall, windstorms,
hail heat waves and cold waves and improved monitoring of tropical cyclones and better prediction
of their movement and rainfall. It would also go a long way in predicting with some precision the
trend of monsoon on which agriculture of our country is heavily dependent. There is also an urgent
need to instill confidence in the minds of common man about the capabilities of the Department
to predict weather more accurately. Efforts should also be made to ensure that media reports the
updated information only.
Action Taken by Government
(i) Ministry of Earth Sciences (MoES) had taken initiatives in November, 2006 to procure High
Performance Computing System (HPCS) for its constituent units including IMD. Under this
programme, IMD is expected to get computer system with peak speed of ten terra flops for use
at IMD, HQ, New Delhi. Another system of one terra flops for IMD, Pune and High End Servers
for use at 12 major Meteorological Centres ( RMCs- Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Nagpur, Kolkata,
Guwahati, MCs- Ahmedabad, Bangalore, Bhubaneswar,  Chandigarh, Hyderabad and W F Pune) to
run state-of-art numerical models (Global as well as regional high resolution models) at various time
scales on operational basis. The Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) has evaluated the bids
received and submitted its final report to MoES which has been approved. Price bids have also
been opened recently. The case is now under consideration of competent authority.
(ii) IMD is going to establish Forecasting System for which Letter of Intent has been signed
and issued. Formal Contract has also been signed and system will be delivered in 24 months.
Supply order has been placed for procurement of 12 Doppler Weather Radars (DWRs). All Radars
expected to be installed and commissioned by the end of 2009 in a phased manner. Order has also
been placed for 1350 Nos. Automatic Rain Gauges for which design review will soon be conducted
by the firm.
(iii) Modernization of airports has been taken up and order for purchase of equipments is likely
to be placed after getting clearance from IFD. Order is also likely to be placed for procurement
of 550 Nos. of Automatic Weather Stations after approval of competent authority. IMD is in the
process of procuring GPS radiosonde systems, Optical and Electronic theodolites, Radiosondes for
improved data quality for deployment in the Upper Air Network during the current financial year
2008-09. The induction of above state-of-art equipments in the Forecasting System will help to
disseminate improved forecast of weather phenomenas. Efforts are on for expeditious procurement
of equipments so that allocation of funds for capital provided to IMD for the year 2008-09 is
utilized to the maximum possible extent. Some savings are expected as a result of availability of
some of the equipment at lower costs as compared to the costs originally envisaged. A clear picture
will emerge sometimes during next month at the time of preparation of Revised Estimates.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like the Ministry to ensure that the
modernization of India Meteorological Department programme is completed within the
stipulated time to avoid cost overrun.
15. Recommendation (Para - 15.7)
The Committee is also of the view that the modernization of IMD would lead to
dissemination of forecast products at district level, particularly for use by the farming community
and for better planning, disaster management and agro advisories. It would also help in getting

10
more tailor made applications for different sectors like civil aviation, tourism, agriculture, power
generation and hydrological purposes, which will generate additional revenue.
Action Taken by Government
(i) IMD started agro-met Service at the state level in 1976. National Centre for Medium Range
Weather Forecasting (NCMRWF) was created in 1988 with the mandate to provide medium range
weather forecast at 127 agroclimatic zone level. After creation of Ministry of Earth Sciences,
Agroclimatic Zone level Agromet Advisory Service has been integrated with services of IMD as
“Integrated Agromet Advisory Services” (IAAS).
(ii) Under IAAS, IMD has started issuing quantitative district level weather forecast up to 5
days from 1st June, 2008 with a Multi Model Ensemble technique developed jointly by IMD,
NCMRWF and Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM) using forecast products available
from a number of models of India and other countries. The products comprise of quantitative
forecasts for 7 weather parameters viz., rainfall, maximum and minimum temperatures, wind speed
and direction, relative humidity and cloudiness. In addition, weekly cumulative rainfall forecast is
also provided. These products are disseminated to Regional Meteorological Centres and
Meteorological Centres of IMD located in different States. These offices undertake value addition
to these products and communicate advisories to 130 Agromet Field Units (AMFUs) located with
State Agriculture Universities (SAUs), institutes of Indian Council of Agriculture Research (ICAR)
etc.
(iii) After receiving the forecast from RMC/MCs the AMFUs prepare district-wise agro-
advisories. The District level Agro Advisory Service is multidisciplinary and multi-institutional
project. It involves all stakeholders such as State Agricultural Universities (SAUs), Indian Council
for Agriculture Research (ICAR), Krishi Vigyan Kendras (KVK), Department of Agriculture and
Cooperation, State Departments of Agriculture/ Horticulture/ Animal Husbandry/Forestry (Up to
District level offices), NGOs, Media Agencies, etc. This project is being implemented through five-
tier structure to set up different components of the service spectrum.
(iv) All India Com posite weekly weather based agro advisory bulletins is also prepared by IMD,
Pune for dissemination to Crop Weather Watch Group (CWWG), of Ministry of Agriculture, State
level CWWG, and Planners etc.
(v) Weather based advisories prepared by AMFUs are disseminated to the farmers through mass
media dissemination, Internet etc. as well as through fax and district level intermediaries. The
advisories are communicated through multi-channel dissemination system including All India Radio
(AIR), Doordarshan, private television channels, FM radios, print media (newspapers), Internet
(web pages of IMD, SAUs etc.) and Community Service Centres of Ministry of Information
Technology, Cell Phone-SMS, KVKs/ District Agricultural Offices (DAO), Kisan Call Centres,
NGOs etc.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and urges the Ministry to continue its efforts in this
direction.
16. Recommendation (Para - 15.8)
The Committee further recommends that along with the modernization process, adequate
care needs to be taken towards the human resources of the Department. A state-of-the-art facility
warrants that talented and dedicated staff are in place to utilize the available resources to its
optimum level. Without a perfect combination of technological resources and human resources, the
efforts would not yield the desired results.

11
Action Taken by Government
Department has noted the recommendation towards the need of human resources and to
utilize available resources to its optimum level to obtain desired results. New recruitments of Senior
Observers and Meteorologist Gr. II levels are under process so that requirement of talented man
power could be fulfilled for effective utilization of latest technology. Appointment of Scientists on
short term contract basis as research associates is also being considered. Action on the
recommendation of S. K. Das Committee report regarding restructuring of organization/ manpower
is under consideration of Government at appropriate level. The implementation of the report will
take care of required human resources.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
INDIAN INSTITUTION OF TROPICAL METEOROLOGY
17. Recommendation (Para 16.4)
The Committee observes that Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM) has been
playing a leading role in the development of empirical models for long-range prediction of seasonal
mean monsoon rainfall and has taken major initiatives for the prediction of seasonal mean Indian
summer monsoon rainfall and its variability. The Committee recommends that IITM has to widen
its objectives and scope of research activities to meet the critical challenges and the national needs
for providing information relating to various aspects of atmosphere and the increasing concern
among the Government and general public about a variety of environmental issues.
Action Taken by Government
Indian Institute of Tropical Meteorology (IITM)
IITM, Pune has widened its objectives and scope of research activities to meet the critical
challenges and the national needs for providing information relating to various aspects of
atmosphere and the increasing concern among the Government and general public about a variety
of environmental issues through following activities proposed and undertaken by the IITM under
its Eleventh Five Year Plan programmes:
Long Range Prediction of Indian Summer Monsoon Rainfall and its Variability
• A group of scientists at the Institute (IITM) is actively involved in developing the
(experimental) forecast of the seasonal rainfall over India during the summer monsoon (in research
mode and attempting the forecast with a two tier approach using dynamical General Circulation
Models and statistical models. The IITM has developed at least two statistical prediction techniques
to predict the rainfall during the summer monsoon, which have the prospect of being operational.
Currently research is being undertaken to make them operational. All the IITM models (statistical
as well as dynamical) predicted above normal monsoon rainfall for 2007, quite close to the
observational, in contrast to IMD’s prediction which was quite off the targets of this year.
• The extended range prediction is more useful at smaller domains rather than all India average.
The performance (skill) of the extended range prediction model seems to vary from one part of
India to the other. In view of this proper modelling approach has been formulated for the region-
wise study.
• Vigorous intraseasonal oscillations (ISOs) in the form of active and break episodes are
integral part of the Indian summer monsoon. Prediction of the active and break episodes 2-3 weeks

12
in advance is of great importance as sowing, harvesting and water management for agriculture
within the season depends crucially on the rainfall associated with these phases of the monsoon
ISOs. Development of a system for long range prediction of seasonal mean monsoon and extended
range prediction of active/break spells has been undertaken. It involves assessing component
models, coupling strategy, assessment of bias of the coupled model, data assimilation, development
of forecast strategy etc. Improvement of the skill of prediction of the active and break spells can
come only if one could objectively identify and characterize different shades of each phase of the
oscillation ( e.g. active and break conditions) and their evolutions. Such an objective method has
been developed by IITM scientists.
Science of Climate and Monsoon: Diagnostics, Prediction and Applications
• Over the last two decades, the conceptual basis for climate prediction has been established.
Considerable research on predictability of the monsoon (including some pioneering work by IITM
scientists) has established that the Indian Summer Monsoon has a limited potential predictability. It
has also been recognized that ocean-atmosphere coupling is crucial in determining the potential
predictability of the monsoon. Therefore, a coupled ocean-atmosphere climate model will be
required for predicting the monsoon. In India, experimentations are still on with short runs of
atmospheric general circulation models (GCMs). One has to go a long way even to reach the level
achieved elsewhere. But if one wants to achieve the goal of reaching the limit on potential
predictability, one has to better the efforts made elsewhere in the world. IITM has undertaken to
develop such a system.
• Work of estimation of monsoon climate under different climate change scenarios through
downscaling using a regional climate model, quantification of uncertainty in estimation of monsoon
climate under climate change scenarios and study of sensitivity of the estimate of monsoon climate
under climate change due to downscaling of the output from a large number of global models and
understanding of roles of internal variability and external forcing in predicting the future monsoon
climate have been undertaken.
• A better understanding of the climate and environmental changes that occurred during the
past few centuries (encompassing the Little Ice Age and the Medieval Warm Period) can provide
important insights into the rates of regional to global scale changes that are expected to occur
within the Earth system in the next few decades. Information on climate during the Holocene,
particularly during the past 1000 years, which is the period of man’s greatest impact on the planet,
is vital to understand the various external and internal forcing on the climate and thereby make
reliable future projections. In this time frame, the high resolution proxies such as tree-rings,
speleothemes, verves with their inter-annual resolution, have been globally recognized to be the best
source of proxy climate data. The dendroclimatological activities at IITM are being enhanced by
establishing the Stable Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer Laboratory. It is being equipped with mass
spectrometers, gas chromatograph and other necessary equipments. This new palaeoclimatology
activity is one of the major programmes of the Institute’s Eleventh Five Year Plan.
• Climate has been globally recognized as one of the most critical factors in present as well
as future socio-economic development. Therefore, a concerted effort will be made to orient climate
research at the Institute towards development of specific climate applications in the areas of
agriculture, water resources and public health etc. This is believed to help the Indian population
at large in coping with the climate variability in a much better way by effectively incorporating the
seasonal climate information into the decision making processes at different levels.
Centre for Climate Change Research at IITM
There is an urgent need to undertake systematic research on changes in climate that are
happening, and likely to happen, over the Indian region along with their linkages to the global

13
changes. In order to build research strengths and maintain a sustained flow of, quality science into
our national climate change agenda and India’s international response it is necessary to launch a
strong, well-coordinated programme for addressing the Climate Change Science that is of relevance
to the Indian region. This will also ensure India’s effective contribution into international
assessments and policymaking process. Without such initiatives the scientific understanding or
implementation of global adaptation and mitigation strategies will not be sustained. The programme
should establish strong linkages with leading international research groups and research centres
involved in allied areas, and will be supported by a well equipped with state-of-the-art centre of
excellence for inter-disciplinary research and training in the area of science of climate change. The
centre will also serve as a nucleus for research in the tropical and Asian monsoon region.
Considering the potential of the Institute a proposal of Establishment of a dedicated Centre for
Climate Change Research at IITM with appropriate infrastructure to lead research initiatives has
been proposed in its Eleventh Five Year Plan.
Interaction between Clouds and Environment and Precipitation Enhancement
• For improvement of the climate models, formulation of convection in the General
Circulation Models needs to be improved. Efforts to improve the understanding of clouds and its
interaction with environment leading to precipitation are being taken. This involves simultaneous
observations of cloud processes and environment involving a cloud and weather radar system, GPS
radiosonde, a network of lightning discharge etc. Acquisition of necessary equipment and
instruments proposed under the Eleventh Five Year Plan is under progress.
• Indian Summer Monsoon Rainfall (ISMR) shows large interannual and intra-seasonal
variability. Peninsular India is one of the most vulnerable regions of ISMR. During the weak
monsoon years, acute water shortage prevails over this region. To alleviate the stresses generated
by water shortages, cloud seeding experiments for rain enhancements have been carried out by
State Governments of Maharashtra, Karnataka and Andhra Pradesh in recent years. The operational
programmes carried out in the last few years by various State Governments were not scientifically
planned also no observations of environment as well as clouds were taken. Hence no conclusions
could be drawn regarding the impact of the seeding. In this situation there is a strong and urgent
need for a definitive and authoritative conclusion to be drawn primarily for the scientific reasons
to understand different pathways and to provide science based guidance to State Governments and
other social organizations who consider seeding as a solution to mitigate the drought conditions.
A coordinated sustained national programme of cloud studies has been designed to reduce the
knowledge gaps in the science of cloud seeding. Cloud seeding experiments will be a part of major
cloud physics programme. Additionally, there are requirements of aerosol observations for
understanding aerosol-cloud interactions as aerosols play an important role in the earth-atmosphere
energy balance and cloud formations. Scientific and technical resources in the country will come
together to have an observational programme to focus on the key uncertainties in aerosol
distribution and rain formation processes. Cloud microphysics studies are prerequisite for such
experiments. A five year programme has been planned to understand cloud-aerosol interactions and
the potential of rain enhancement by seeding the clouds. Simultaneously, it is proposed to put
together a system of Doppler precipitation cum weather radar on a mobile platform and form a
multi-parameter system. The system would, mainly, involve Ka Band Radar of 33-37 GHz (for
cloud observations) and X-Band Radar of 9.3 - 9.6 GHz (for environmental observations), GPS
Radiosonde and a network of lightning detectors for thunderstorm dynamics and nowcasting. The
system would be extremely helpful in developing 3-D cloud models and its interaction with the
environment. Acquisition of instruments and equipments is under advanced stage.
• As a part of the observational programme a lightning location network is proposed to be
set up in the north-eastern India to detect the occurrence of lightning flash. The network will be
useful to detect, locate intra-cloud and cloud-to-ground lightning and map the lightning activity

14
occurring in a thunderstorm and follow its development in real time. Such information is useful for
the development of theoretical models for very short range forecasting (nowcasting) of the
weather. It can also be used to study the relationship of lightning activity with the development
of microphysics and dynamics of the thunderstorm. In addition, the information received from
such a network is widely used in several areas of practical importance such as aviation, power
generation, forest fires, recreation, defence and for the protection of life and property on the
ground. Selection of sites for the network and acquisition of instruments/ equipments are under
advanced stage.
Urban Air Pollution Studies Pollution and Transport Modelling
• Studies of the impact of atmospheric trace gases and particulate matters of both natural and
anthropogenic origins on global/ regional/local weather and climate have gained importance due to
changes in atmospheric chemical composition as a result of human activities. Study with a new
dimension has been undertaken, in recent time, after the concept of long distance transport of
pollutants and its effects has emerged which is broadly categorized as a component of chemical
weather. The work has been undertaken with an objective to study the pollution change from local
to regional scale through understanding the mechanism of transport and chemical reactions using
both theoretical models and observations for better understanding of chemical weather.
• It is proposed to develop a meso-net around central India and organize special intense
observations during some specific periods to study the boundary layer ozone chemistry along with
other related secondary pollutants. Estimates of carbon sources and sinks also need to be made which
are poorly known over Asia and the Indian Ocean, especially because of the sparseness of the spatial
data that lowers the resolvability of inverse solutions. Current estimates are found to be very coarse
in terms of time and space as seen by a wide range of studies. A good coverage of stations and
high quality of measurements and good transport models are proposed. With this the existing air-
pollution studies and chemical transport modelling in the Institute will be enhanced further.
Middle Atmosphere Dynamics
• Study of middle atmosphere dynamics has been undertaken to understand different
atmospheric processes and their influence on climate change and various meteorological
phenomena. Atmospheric parameters such as temperature, ozone, water vapour and other chemical
species play key role in dynamics of stratosphere/mesosphere and troposphere including in
Stratosphere Troposphere Coupling (STC) and radiative forcing of the atmosphere. Similarly, the
middle atmosphere responses to solar activity and wave interaction/ propagation are considered to
be important for the physical understanding of meteorological phenomenon in the troposphere.
Training Programme for Manpower Development
• A large pool of trained manpower on specialized area is required for success of the above
programmes. Training programme for the existing junior level scientists and research fellows at the
IITM has been undertaken to produce a pool of scientists to take up exciting problems and develop
necessary skills to address them in the field of atmospheric sciences especially in climate dynamics
and development of capabilities in extended range prediction of monsoon. In addition to the in-
house training the Institute’s scientists would be trained at the selected international centres of
excellence in other countries as well as inviting a few internationally reputed scientists to impart
training in specialized areas. Also, efforts to recruit experts required for different aspects of the
programme are being made vigorously and proactively.
Computational and other Infrastructural Development
• The existing computing infrastructure at IITM is very insufficient. The modelling work to
develop a state-of-the-art monsoon prediction system requires a computing system with about 5

15
teraflop number crunching capabilities with appropriately large memory and an automatic data
storage and retrieval system with about 100 terabyte storage capacity. Such a computing system
is being acquired under the Eleventh Five Year Plan of the institute. Upgradation of the existing
laboratories, renovation of workplace, modernization of library, information and publication activities
and other supporting facilities like workshop have also been undertaken as an important activity
under the Eleventh Five Year Plan.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.
NATIONAL CENTRE FOR MEDIUM RANGE WEATHER FORECASTING
18. Recommendation (Para 17.3)
The Committee is of the view that Research and Development policy under this programme,
which aims towards improving medium range and extreme weather events prediction, should be an
integral part of the National Centre for Medium Range Forecasting (NCMRWF) activity. The
Committee observes that the Centre has been contributing regularly to human resource development
in Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) and NWP  capability building in other institutions within the
country and neighboring countries. It recommends that its products should be provided to various
agencies in the Government and other users in a number of socio-economic sectors.
Action Taken by Government
The observations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands of Grants 2008-09 in respect of NCMRWF are gratefully
acknowledged. The action taken on the points contained in the observations are as follows:
Research and Development activities aimed towards improving the Numerical Weather
Forecast products form an integral part of NCMRWF activities. The R  and D activities cover all
aspects of modelling, data assimilation and diagnostic studies. The scientists of the Centre have
published a number of research papers in journals of international repute and also internal technical
and research reports. In the coming years, the R  and D efforts will be focused on assimilating
various types of satellite data, especially the upcoming Indian satellites (INSAT-3D, Megha-
Tropiques etc.) and improving the model by increasing its resolution, number of vertical levels,
physics etc. For this purpose, the R  and D activities have been divided into a number of projects
with well defined tasks. However, it may be mentioned here that NCMRWF has continued to suffer
due to lack of human resource and infrastructural facilities of desired level. The scientific staff is
less than one tenth of what is required to sustain such an activity.
NCMRWF has been contributing regularly to human resource development in NWP and
NWP capability building in other institutions within the country and neighbouring countries. The
Centre periodically organizes training Programmes for scientists/users from within the country and
abroad in NWP, use of NWP products, and their applications. Recently, forecasters of India
Meteorological Department from their various forecasting offices spread all over the country has
been imparted training in two batches. A training course shall be conducted for Navy in August-
September, 2008 which is part of a series of courses being conducted for defence forces. Indian
Air Force and Snow and Avalanche Studies Establishment (SASE) have been able to start their own
Numerical Weather Forecast Programmes benefiting from NCMRWF support.
One of the major efforts at NCMRWF is to underpin forecasting capability of the India
Meteorological Department. NCMRWF Numerical Weather Prediction (NWP) products on medium,
extended and seasonal scale are made available on routine basis to IMD. Based on requirements of
other operational and Research organizations such as INCOIS, Indian Air Force, Indian Navy,

16
SASE, BARC, ISRO etc. selected products are made available on real time and to various academic/
research groups and other user agencies on demand. Customized forecasts are provided from time
to time for special requirements which include defence exercises, adventure sport, tourism,
entertainment, power sector etc. NCMRWF products are also made available on its web page
(www.ncmrwf.gov.in ).
Comments
The Committee observes that NCMRWF suffers a lot due to lack of human resource
and desired infrastructural facilities. The Committee would like to know the remedial
measures taken by the Ministry to counteract these shortcomings in order to sustain the
pace of its activities.
19. Recommendation (Para 18)
The Committee is happy to note that the Ministry of Earth Sciences has initiated a new
programme on global and regional climate change and propose to set up a dedicated climate change
research centre with the state-of-art research facilities in the current plan period. This is indeed
a timely initiative. The Committee recommends that all out effort should be made to make this
centre operational within the targeted time-frame so that necessary research work in this field could
be carried out.
Action Taken by Government
A Detailed Project Report and Note for the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) have been
prepared. Views on the draft EFC Note are being sought.
Inputs on the proposal have been communicated for inclusion in the National Action Plan
on Climate Change.
Proposal has been presented and discussed at various inter-ministerial meetings and bi-lateral
meetings with UK, EU and other international fora to create national visibility and seek potential
network partners for research projects.
Planning Commission has given an allocation of five crores for the current financial year
2008-09.
Comments
The Committee observes that addressing climate change issue involves extensive
study and research and requires high level technical expertise. It hopes that setting up of
a dedicated climate change research centre may exclusively cater to the concerns pertaining
to the climate change mitigation and adaptation measures.
20. Recommendation (Para 19)
After considering the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Earth Sciences and assessing
the progress of various important programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee
recommends that the budgetary allocation of Rs.971 crore, as sought by the Ministry for the year
2008-09, under Demand No. 28, may be approved.
Action Taken by Government
The Ministry wishes to express gratitude to the Hon’ble Committee for making a
recommendation of the budgetary allocation of Rs.971 crore, as sought by the Ministry for the year
2008-09, under Demand No. 28.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply.

17
MINUTES

18

19
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Monday, the 13th October, 2008 in Committee Room
‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty — In the Chair*
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Kamal Akhtar
4. Shri Saman Pathak
5. Shri Jabir Husain
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
7. Shri Francis Fanthome
8. Shri Brahmananda Panda
9. Shri Jayasingrao Gaikwad Patil
10. Shri K.C. Singh ‘‘Baba’’
11. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
12. Shri Sitaram Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
2. The Committee took-up for consideration its draft ***, ***, ***, ***, *** and 200th
Reports pertaining to the Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained
in the ***, ***, ***, ***, *** and 187th Reports of the Committee on Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the ***, ***, ***, ***, ***, and Ministry of Earth Sciences respectively. The
Committee adopted all the reports with certain additions/modifications as suggested by some
Members.
19
* In the absence of Chairman, Dr. Sujan Chakraborty chaired the meeting.
*** Relate to other matters.

20
3. ***, ***, ***, the Committee now decided to present those Reports to the House ***, and
195th to 200th Reports on Action Taken by the Government on Demands for Grants (2008-09)
Reports of various Ministries/Departments on the 23rd October, 2008. The Committee authorized
its Chairman and in his absence Shri Jabir Husain or Shri D. Raja to present the reports in Rajya
Sabha and Shri Francis Fanthome and in his absence Shri Thupstan Chhewang to lay the copies
of the reports on the table of Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 12.20 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.