PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/22nd%20Report%20for%20net.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
 TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1995-96)
TWENTY -SECOND REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1995-96) OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (DEMAND NO. 22)
(Presented on May 11, 1995)
 
RAJY A SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI
May, 1995/Vaisakha, 1917 (Saka)
CONTENTS
 
1.      COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE......................
2.      INTRODUCTION..................................................
3.      REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE....................................
4.      MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE.....................
 
 
COMPOSMON OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMEN­TARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND
 TECHNO­LOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(1995-96)
1. Syed Sibtey Razi -- Chairman
RAJY A SABRA
2.    Dr. M. Aram
3.    Shri Ajit P. K. Jogi
4.    Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
5.    Shri K. Rahman Khan
6.    Prof. M. G. K. Menon
7.    Shri Suresh Pachouri
8.    Shri N. Giri Prasad
9.    Shri Satchidananda

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/22nd%20Report%20for%20net.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
10.    Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
11.    Dr. Ranbir Singh
12. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
LOK SABRA
13.   Shri EI Ahamed
14.    Shri P. C. Chacko
15.    Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
16.    Shri Jitendra Nath Das
17.    Shri Sharad Dighe
18.    Shrimati Saroj Dubey
19.    Shri Oscar Fernandes
20.    Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
21.    Shri P. Kumarasamy
22.    Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
23.    Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
24.    Shri M. V. V. S. Murthy
25.    Shri Harpal Panwar
26.    Shri Balraj Pasi
27.    Shri Bhim Singh Patel
28.    Shri Chandresh Patel
29.    Shri Vijay Naval Patil
30.    Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
31.    Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
32.    Shri Rama Chandra Rath
33.    Shri M. G. Reddy
34.    Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
35.    Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
36.    Shri Harchand Singh
37.    Shri Ram Prasad Singh
38.    Shri K. G. Shivappa
39.    Shri Bapusaheb Thite
40.    Kumari Sushila Tiriya
41.    Kumari Frida Topno
42. Shri Ram Kupal Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary Shri N. C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G. C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to
 submit the Report on its behalf, present this Twenty Second Report, on the Demands for Grants pertaining to the Ministry of Environment
 and Forests for the year 1995-96 (Demand No. 22).
2. In its meetings held on April 6 and 20, 1995 the Committee considered the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Environment and
 Forests on the basis of the documents made available to it and the submissions made before it by the Secretary and the other representatives
 of the Ministry.
3. The Committee thanks the officers of the Ministry for providing necessary information to the Hon'ble Members to facilitate
 consideration of its Demands for Grants.
4. The Committee· considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on May 4, 1995.
 
NEWDELHI;
May 4,1995
SYED SIBTEY RAZI,
Chairman, Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests
 
REPORT
The Ministry of Environment and Forests is the nodal agency at the national level for planning, promotion and co-ordination of
 environmental and forestry programmes . Its mandate includes survey and conservation of flora, fauna, forests and wildlife; prevention and
 control of pollution; afforestation and regeneration of degraded areas; and in general protection of the environment. Pursuant to this mandate,
 the tasks undertaken by the Ministry are: environmental impact assessment; eco-regeneration; assistance to organisations implementing
 environmental and forestry programs; enactment of environmental legislation; formulation of environmental policies; promotion of
 environmental and forestry . research, extension, education and training to augment the requisite manpower; dissemination of environmental
 information, creation of environmental awareness among all sections of the country's population; and international cooperation.
2. A total outlay of Rs. 435.41 crores for the year 1995-96 has been proposed, vide demand no. 22 for the Ministry of Environment and
 Forests to enable it to fulfill its mandate. The Plan component of this outlay is Rs. 370.50 crores and the Non-Plan component Rs. 64.91
 crores. The allocations for the year 1995-96 represent an increase of Rs. 10.50 crores in the Plan Sector and about Rs. 5 crores in the Non-
Plan Sector over the revised estimates for the year 1994-95. In terms of activity-wise allocations, the Plan allocations for forestry and wildlife
 have gone up from Rs. 203.09 crores to Rs 210.15 crores for ecology and environment from Rs. 149.60 crores to Rs. 153.24 crores; for civil

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/22nd%20Report%20for%20net.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
 works there has been a marginal decrease from Rs. 7.31 crores to Rs. 7.11 crores~ As regards the Non-Plan allocations, there has been a
 small increase from Rs. 17.16 crores to Rs. 17.27 crores for forestry and wildlife and from Rs. 39.39 crores to Rs. 44.10 crores for ecology
 and environment.
       3.      Before       taking       up       examination        of the            Demands       for       Grants
(1995-96) of the Ministry of Environment and· Forests in .some detail, the Committee went into two issues relating to the position of
 allocations of the Ministry for the annual plans vis­a-vis the total outlay for the 8th Plan; and the utilisation  of funds allocated to the
 Ministry for its different programmes. While considering the Demands for Grants for the year 1994­95, the Committee had noted that as
 against the total 8th Plan outlay of Rs. 1200 crores for the Ministry, Rs. 957.7 crores has already been spent during the first three years of
 this Plan period. This leaves Rs. 242.50 crores nominally for the remaining two years, as against an annual plan expenditure of around Rs.
 360 crores (e.g. for 1994-95). The question was posed as to the current views of the Planning Commission on the 8th Plan allocation for this
 Ministry. The Secretary of the Ministry clarified that the Planning Commission had in general supported the Ministry's proposed t1ays; and
 assuming that there is 10% increase every year in the outlay, the Ministry s expected to function with a Plan size of Rs. 1790 crores for the
 entire Plan Period. e Committee, then wanted to know as to what were the projections made by the Ministry to the Planning Commission for
 its different programmes during the remaining 2 years of the 8th Plan, at the time of its mid-term appraisal. The Committee was told that the
 Ministry had projected a requirement of Rs. 983 crores for the years 1995-96 and 1996-97 put together, but the Planning Commission has
 taken a general stand that any enhancement in the 8th Plan outlays will be taken care of only at the time of the annual plan allocations when
 the requirements and performance of the Ministry and availability of the resources with the Commission will be gone into. The Committee
 feels that the picture about the likely shape of budgetary allocations for the Ministry for 1996-97 remains yet unclear since the allocations
 would be subject to the position obtaining when the figures for that year are placed before the Planning Commission. The Ministry has
hither to been planning its programmes and projections on the assumption that there would be a 10% increase by the Planning Commission in
 its budgetary outlays each year, but the allocations for the year '1995-96 belie their assumption as the increase has been far below 10%. The
 Secretary attributed this to the problem of resources with the Planning Commission, and submitted that the pattern of allocations has,
 therefore, been more or less the same as for the year 1994-95. The Committee is of the view that the environmental issues facing the nation
 are quite serious, and the budgetary allocations for the year 1995-96 do not seem to reflect Government's concern to grapple with these issues
 on a priority basis.
4. In his presentation before the Committee the Secretary informed that in so far as the annual utilization of the budgetary outlay for the
 year 1994-95 is concerned the final figures are still not available, though utilization as expected to be to the tune of Rs. 350 crores against a
 Plan outlay of Rs. 360 crores. The shortfall is expected to be of the order of Rs. 10
                                                            crores. I
5. There are 4 main components of this Plan outlay namely; National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board Forestry and Wildlife;
 Ganga Action Plan; and 'Prevention and Control of Pollution. The Plan outlay for National Afforestation and Eco-development Programme
 during the year 1994-95 was Rs. 103 crores against which the anticipated expenditure is of the order of Rs. 103.23 crores; for Forestry and
 Wildlife the Plan outlay was Rs. 9S.95 crores against which utilisation is estimated to be of the order of Rs. 98.87 laths. It may be seem that
 the outlays have been fully utilized in these two areas Rs.78 crores had been provided for the control of pollution in Ganga, against which
 utilisation has been of the order of Rs. 38 crores leaving a gap of Rs. 40 crores; and against an allocation of    Rs. 25.30 crores under the head
 'Prevention and Control of Pollution' an amount of Rs. 10.18 crores is anticipated to be spent. Under these two heads there has been
 significant under-utilisation to the tune of about Rs. 55 crores.
6. The Committee wanted a detailed explanation on this state of affairs, Secretary stated that there were savings in the Ganga Action' Plan
 due to change in scope of work/design and contractual problems on some projects. Besides, detailed surveys and preparation of project
 reports by the concerned States too longer time than anticipated which led to delay in tendering of work and execution of schemes. Similarly
 in the area of prevention and control of pollution the savings were as a result of non-materialisation  of equipments for which purchase orders
 had been placed through DGS&D; revision of EFC memo consequent upon the revision of certain components and inclusion of new
 objectives in the scheme for management of hazardous substances and pendency of a bill relating to environmental policy and law
 Environmental Commission and Tribunal.
7. The Committee notes that the Ministry has not been able to utilize an amount of about Rs. 85 crores during the year 1994-95 which were
 allocated for specific major areas, though the Secretary of the Ministry has projected total figure of just about Rs. 10 crores which the
 Ministry would have to surrender. The basis on which this figure has been worked out is the transfer of Rs. 54.74 crores to the programmes
 under Indo-Canadian Environment Faculty, for which the Budget Estimates were Rs. 5O lakhs, and the likely expenditure would be Rs. 55.24
 crores. The reason given by the Ministry for such a high variation was that higher receipts than anticipated were received from the Canadian
 Government and they had to be transferred in entirety to the ICEF Society. The Secretary pointed out that the excess expenditure under ICEF
 has aothing to do with the Department per see The money had to be paid to the Canadian Government but it is allowed to remain in India as 'a
 grant to be spent for environmental purposes, particularly for giving aid to the state Governments to carry out
various activities in this sector. The Department is simply acting as a kind of budget conduit for money to flow.
8. The Committee bas noted the position regarding utilisation of funds, as presented to the Committee by the Secretary of the Ministry in
 the course of the evidence, and finds that the phenomenon of under-utlisation  in key sectors has been continuing as ever before. In such a
 situation, when the Ministry is unable utilise fully the approved Budget outlays, its deinands, as are made to the Planning Commission for its
 annual plan, will not have credibiUty and obviously will not evoke a favourable response. The Ganga Action Plan and Control of Pollution
 are two major areas for which substantial allocations had been sought by the Ministry and approved by the Planning 
Commission. But
 inability to spend properly in these two areas, to the extent of Rs. 55 crores, reflects lack of adequate planning and proper management. It is
 true that the Ganga Action Plan is being administered by the Ministry through State Government agencies concerned, but the problems
 indicated are of a contractual nature, land acquisition, tendering and change in design in design and scope etc. The fact that the problems of
 this nature still continue to affect implementation of a national plan of such a magnitude calls for expeditious action to bring about
 improvement at different levels of management. The Committee was assured that the majority 'of the constraints which resulted in the short
 fall in meeting the targets during the year 1994-95 have been removed and there will be full utilisation  of the Budget Estimates to the tune of
 Rs. 79 crores proposed for the Ganga Action Plan during the year 1995-96.
9. Forestry and wildlife constitute an important component in the mandate of the Ministry of Environment and Forests, as is borne out by
 the budgetary outlays of Rs. 210.15 crores under for this sector during 1995-96. This amount works out to more than 55% of the total plan
 outlay for the year 1995-96, which in itself shows the priority accorded to this sector. The Secretary informed the Committee that the Forest
 Survey of India, which is a key element in giving an assessment about the forest cover in the country, and thus helps in the formulation of the
 Plan at national, state and local levels to facilitate scientific forestry management, has undertaken an inventory of forest resources of 26,000

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/22nd%20Report%20for%20net.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
 sq. kms. and is also engaged in the preparation of maps reflecting the area under vegetation cover in the country. There exist 5 Regional
 Offices which have been entrusted with the task of monitoring the implementation of the Forest Conservation Act by the State Governments.
 Nine hundred cases have been listed for monitoring under this Act as compared to 400 cases  which come within the purview of the
 Environment Protection Act. These 5 Regional Offices, which have forest officers as well as scientists, oversee the functioning of the project
 authorities on whom conditions have been imposed to protect the environment. The reports prepared by these Regional Offices are submitted
 to the State Governments concerned so that action, wherever necessary, can be initiated. The Secretary also referred to the National Forestry
 Action Programme which is being prepared for the entire country and would highlight- the state of forests and facilitate  preparation of a
 Comprehensive Action Plan for the conservation and development of the forests for short, mid and long term planning. This will be a major
 strategy document in the management of forests in the country. Regional seminars are being conducted to elicit information from non-
governmental organisations and various state authorities on the Forestry Action Programme. Under the National Afforestation and Eco-
Development Programme which has a Plan outlay of Rs. 104 crores for the year 1995-96,20,000 hectares of land under fuelwood and fodder
 scheme, 22,000 hectares in the mining plans and 22,500 hectares under aerial seeding scheme is proposed to be covered, in addition to
 67,000 hectares under the integrated afforestation eco-development projects. Twenty-two states will be assisted under the Seed Development
 Scheme and 35 projects will be administered by voluntary agencies.
10. The Committee has noted that the Ministry of Environment and Forests has a number of schemes in the forestry sector, the outlays of
 which are given in the Performance Budget.  While the achievements in respect of some of these schemes have been quite notable, there are
 others which have not been able to match the arets and there have been significant shortfalls.  The figures in respect of forest survey, forest
 conservation and National Afforestation and Eco-Development Board (NAEB), as given in Annexure, do not present an encouraging picture.  
 The Ministry has been planning to acquire a Digital Cartography System to strengthen the capacity of the Forest Survey of India ever since
 the inception of the 8
th Plan.  At the time of consideration of its Demands for Grants by this Committee last year, the Ministry had expressed
 confidence in acquiring this during 1994-95 itself  on the basis of the recommendations of the Technical Evaluation Committee.   However,
 since the provision for the Digital Cartography System has been shown in the Budget Estimates for 1995-96, the Committee wanted to know
 the reasons for the delay in acquiring this system.  The Committee was told that the high powered committee comprising of the
 representatives of the Department of Electronics, Survey of India, National Informatics Centre and Integrated Finance Division of Ministry of
 Environment and Forests etc.  has since given the technical evaluation report of the tenders received; and the issue is now under examination
 of the Ministry.  The Committee is of the view that even though the current level of shortfalls in achieving the targets in the areas of forest
 survey, forest conservation and National Afforestation and Eco-Development  Programme do not give the final picture, they are by no means
 encouraging.  There is urgent need for the Ministry to make determined efforts to achieve the optimum targets.  The Committee has taken
 note of the inordinate delay in acquiring the Digital Cartography System. The urgency of which seems to have been lost and which has not
 only hampered efforts in carrying out forest survey but also seems to have led to cost escalation.   The Committee, therefore, urges upon the
 Government to take expeditious action in this regard and ensure that the Digital Cartography System is acquired and made available to the
 Forest Survey of India without any further delay.
11. The attention of the Ministry was drawn to the destruction/degradation of country's forest wealth which can  outweigh the benefits of
 afforestation; and a point was raised as to the strategy adopted by the Ministry to check this rising menace. The clarification given by the
 Ministry was that the main reasons for destruction/degradation of the forests are: huge demand for fuel wood, fodder and non-timber forest
 products; increasing demand for industrial timber bamboos and other commercial products; practice of shifting cultivation particularly in the
 North-East; encroachment on forest lands; smuggling of forest products; un-restricted grazing of cattle in forest areas; forest fires, etc. The
 strategies which the Ministry has adopted to deal with -these problems are growing of plants in open and degraded areas; joint/participatory
 forest management; working on and encouraging wood substitution; import of timber; efficient utilisation of agro-forest; improved protection
 against forest fires, smuggling etc. through better communication system and patrolling and central assistance to States for control of forest
 fire. The Committee appreciates that the Ministry has worked out cogent strategies to cope with the destruction/degradation of forest wealth,
 but feels that these strategies have Dot fully yielded desired results. The pressures on our forest wealth are tremendously increasing. Whilst
 the people living within the forests or its neighborhood have certain rights particularly with regard to usufructs, and do relatively with
 damage, except for their increasing population the real large scale deforestation and degradation is due to Industrial and commercial
 pressures. The Committee feels that the Ministry should adopt a more stringent and co-ordinate approach for preservation of the forest wealth
 of the country and administer the provisions of the law more rigorously. Ravaging fires are also one of the main reasons for devastation of
 forests the Committee's had, in its 9th Report, gone into this aspect in some detail and emphasized the need for higher allocations for
 employing modem methods of fire control, coupled with the need to make the law more stringent with deterrent penalties for those who
 deliberately set the forests on fire and cause huge loss of national wealth. In the Action Taken Report furnished by the Ministry it was pointed
 out that the pilot project of Modem Forest Fire Control (1984-1991), which was launched with UNDP assistance, clearly demonstrated that
 the modem forest fire control techniques could be successfully implemented in India and dramatically reduce the number of fires, and reverse
 the trend in forest resources damaged and destroyed by wild fire. This was followed by a centrally sponsored scheme 'Modern Forest Fire
 Control Methods' introduced during the year 1992-93, with 100% central assistance to the States; the outlay for the scheme in the entire 8th
 Five Year Plan Period was Rs. 5 crores only. This outlay is proposed to be enhanced to Rs. 16 crores and the revised EFC Memo has been
 moved for approval of the competent authority. The Ministry is maintaining helicopters and aircrafts for the detection, prevention and control
 of forest fires. As regards the stringent punishment to the offenders, it was submitted that the deterrent penalties have already been provided
 in the Wildlife Protection Act. The Indian Forest Act 1927 is, however, in the process of being amended in consultation with the State
 Governments and the provision of penalties for causing damage to forests is proposed to be made more stringent. The Committee is happy to
 learn from the Ministry that the problem of forest fires is engaging the attention of the Government, and the aspects relating to prescribing
 deterrent punishment to the defaulters as well as raising allocations to fight these fires are proposed to be taken care of. But, in spite of all
 this; the Committee notes that the allocations under the head 'Introduction of Modem Forest Fire Control Methods in India' for the year
 1995­96 are a dismal Rs. 2 crores. This apart, past experience has been that efforts to control devastating fires in the forests through
 traditional or conventional methods have not met with great success; and the modem methods have yet not been applied at a level where they
 can substantially help in containing the fires. The Committee, therefore, recommends to the Government to adopt the multi-pronged strategy
 on this front which should include substantially raising allocations to purchase modem fire fighting equipment and to constitute task forces to
 keep a vigilant eye on the potential mischief makers.
12. The Committee has noted that the Budget Estimates for 'Forest Conservation, Development and Regeneration' during the year 1994-
95 were originally placed at Rs. 8.20 crores, but in the revised estimates, this figure was reduced to Rs. 5.70 crores; and that being the
 experience of recent past, the Committee wanted to know as to how the Ministry proposed to utilise the amount of Rs. 8.20 crores shown
 under this head for 1995-96. The Committee was informed that the lesser provision in the financial year 1994-95 compared to the Budget
 allocation was made because of certain technical and ceiling cost problems associated with 2 schemes viz. regeneration of degraded forests
 and beneficiary oriented scheme for. tribal  development. The ceiling cost of per family entitlement with respect to beneficiary oriented
 scheme for tribal development has since been increased and it is expected that  the scheme would be attractive now and the Ministry would be

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/22nd%20Report%20for%20net.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
 able to achieve a higher level of expenditure during 1995-96. The scheme for regeneration of degraded forests was launched towards the end
 of the year 1992-93 only, and it took some time for the States to understand the scheme and adjust themselves to the process and procedure.
 The teething problems have how been overcome and the Ministry would be. in a position to utilise the funds properly as earmarked in the 8th
 Plan during the remaining period of 2 years of the Plan.
13. The Committee also wanted to know the reasons for reducing the allocations for aerial seeding from Rs 1.5 crores in 1994-95 to Rs. 0.50
 crores in the Budget Estimates for 1995­-96, and whether any techno-economic evaluation study to provide a comparative analysis of
 manual and aerial seeding techniques has been initiated. The information given to the Committee was that the State Governments had
 undertaken their own reviews of the success rates of aerial seeding and found them to be poor. Besides, they found the scheme unworkable on
 account of various reasons. States, therefore, declined to take the scheme in 1994-95. Pending the comparative analysis of manual and aerial
 seeding techniques and collection of information regarding availability of other technologies for aerial seeding, which' has been entrusted to
 the Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education (ICFRE), the scheme has· been kept in abeyance; this is the reason for reduced
 Budgetary Estimates in 1995-96.
14. The preservation of wildlife is another important area of activity of the Ministry of Environment and Forests. The Wildlife (Protection)
 Act, 1972, is the umbrella legislation . being administered by the Ministry. The Committee has taken note of the initiatives being taken by the
 Ministry as listed. in the Performance Budget for Wildlife preservation. The Project Tiger, which was launched in 1973, and Project
 Elephant, which was launched in 1991-92, are the two major initiatives of the Ministry for which outlays of Rs. 7.70 crores and Rs. 5 crores
 respectively have been provided in the Budget for the year 1995-96. The Committee feels that it is very important to find out whether the
 money spent on these Projects has yielded some tangible results. The reports from independent quarters, however, point to/ the contrary and
 suggest that the poaching of elephants and tigers continues unabated with menacing proportions. There have been reports of large scale
 seizure of tiger skins and tiger bones which have a very lucrative international market. As a result of projects of this magnitude, the
 population of tigers and elephants should have registered an increase, but it appears that the number of both these species has gone down
 tremendously and if the trend of their killing continues, there are apprehensions that they may face extinction. The Committee was concerned
 whether the Ministry has been alive to the magnitude of the problem, which calls for a determined approach, and stringent action. A direct
 question was posed to the Ministry as to what effective measures have been taken to control poaching and smuggling of wildlife products.
 The answer given was that the hunting of wild animals has been banned by law and financial assistance is being provided by the Government
 of India to the States for anti-poaching infrastructure; international trade in endangered species is regulated under the provisions of the
 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES) and regional and .sub­-regional offices have
 been established in this connection at the main export centres  to prevent smuggling. Raids are carried out by the State and Central Wildlife
 authorities whenever information of illegal trading is received. It is because of these successful raids that the issues are coming into the open.
 The Committee feels that these steps have not brought yet out any improvement in the situation, and today wildlife is in greater danger than
 even before. The Infrastructure created to check poaching, and the enforcement machinery set up to prevent smuggling of wildlife products
 still. seems to be unable to adequately grapple with the problem. The Ministry, therefore, needs to undertake a thorough review of the
 existing set up to improve the situation which is reaching alarming proportions. The Committee had, in its 9th Report, also gone into Project
 Tiger and recommended evaluation of the entire Project Tiger by a high-powered Committee to make it much more meaningful and result
 oriented. The Committee is happy to note that, as a follow-up or its recommendations, a Committee has been constituted to examine Project
 Tiger in its totality. The Committee hopes that the findings of this Committee, when made, would receive prompt attention.
15. An outlay of a fairly good order has been approved for the Ministry under the head 'C.5' which relates to the prevention of air and water
 pollution. A distinguishing feature of this outlay is that Non-Plan component (Rs. 29.60 crores) has exceeded the Plan component (Rs. 26.53
 crores). During the year 1994-95, the revised estimates for this scheme were Rs. 12.7S crores in the Plan sector and Rs. 25.50 crores in the
 Non-Plan sector. Because of rapid industrialisation ( with discharge of effluents into the air and water), increasing use of toxic and hazardous
 chemical and increased volume of vehicular traffic, the country's environment is getting rapidly and noticeably· polluted which places heavy
 responsibility on the Ministry of Environment and Forests. Instruments like Central Pollution Control Board and State Pollution Control
 Boards have been created not only to control pollution but also to prevent pollution at source (instead of treatment at the end of the pipe); the
 work done by them has no doubt been useful. But the menace of pollution in our environment has been assumed alarming proportions, which
 calls for far more integrated and co-ordinate approach in which the state Governments, NGOs and voluntary organisations have to be
 involved along with the Central Government on a war footing to tackle this national problem. The approach of the Ministry on this froot,
 however, appears to be lackadaisical, as during 1994-95 a substantial part of the funds allocated to meet the challenges in such a vital sector
 of environment as pollution could not be utilised inter-alia on account of non-procurement of equipments through DGS&D. The delay in
 procurement of this equipment on the part of DGS&D has, as a matter of fact, been there for the year 1993-94 and 1994-95. The Committee
 has noted that Plan allocations for this sector have been  13.70 crores, Rs. 17 .20 crores and Rs. 25.03 crores for 1992-93, 1993-94 and 1994-
95; whilst the actual expenditure for the rant two yeanhave been Rs. 10.52 crores and Rs. S.14 crores and anticipated (in 1994-95) is Rs. 10.18
 Crore. There have been massive surrenders not just in one year but over a succession of years. The attention of the Ministry was drawn in this
 context to the exemption which has been granted for scientific Ministries/Departments (of which it is one); and if that was so, why did the
 Ministry select DGS&D for procurement. The Ministry conceded that it has been exempted from making purchases through DGS&D but the
 reason for its approaching DGS&D was that it does not have the experience for making such huge purchases of spedalised laboratory
 equipment for the State Pollution Control Boards under the Control of Population Project of the World Bank, for which the World Bank
 procurement procedures. have to be followed. However, in view of the poor service rendered by DGS&D. The Ministry has decided to award
 the work to the Central Pollution Control Board which will utilise  the services of RITES for the purchase. The Committee feels that it is
 precisely on account of such situation that scientific Ministries/Departments had been exempted from DGS&D procedures. Again when
 DGS&D had failed to procure the required equipment in the year 1993-94, the Ministry should not have waited so long and taken action on
 the lines which is now proposed by it. The Committee is dissatisfied at this state of affairs and trusts that the SDS11 of this nature will not
 hamper the Ministry's efforts at pollution control during the year 1995-96 and there will be better utilisation of funds.
16. The Ministry was pointedly asked as to whether it was aware that a Report by the Indian Council of Medical Research had indicated
 high levels of DDT and BHC in the milk supplied in the country through various agencies including the public dairy system run by the
 Government. The reply given by the Ministry was that the use of DDT in agriculture is banned except that its use is restricted to plant
 protection, in very special circumstances and public health propammes . The application of DDT is required to be made under expert
 Government supervision. Similarly, BHC is banned for use on vegetables, fruits, oilseeds, crops and in preservation of food grains. The
 Committee is not satisfied with the answer &iven by the Ministry and feels that a detailed analysis of the ICMR Report be undertaken by the
 Ministry, eo-ordination with other concerned agency to find a solution of the problem which poses a serious health hazard.
17. Increasing pollution is not only posing serious health hazards to the populace, but is also affecting a large number of historical
 monuments which constitute our precious heritage, amongst these, the Taj Mahal is one which we can be proud of. The pollution around
 Agra is posing a serious threat to the safety and beauty of this monument. The Committee-had, in its 3rd Report, examined this aspect in
 some detail and expressed its displeasure over the situation which had come to such a pass. The Committee had also recommended that

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/22nd%20Report%20for%20net.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
 concerted efforts should be made to protect the Taj Mahal from environmental pollution, and a time-bound action plan for its protection and
 restoration should be prepared. In the Action Taken Report submitted to the Committee by the Ministry it was state that, in compliance with
 the orders of the Supreme Court on the 21st and 29th April, 1994, a Special Cell for implementation of the Green Belt Development Plan
 headed by a Joint Secretary of the Ministry, and a separate expert Committee under the chairmanship of Dr. S. Varadarajan  to make
 investigations/report on the sources of pollution in the Agra-Mathura Trapezium and suggest measures to be adopted to control the same have
 been created. Further, as a follow-up action to the said orders of the Supreme Court to create a green belt upto a width of 500 metres around
 the Taj Mahal, necessary funds were sanctioned by the National Afforestation  and Eco-Development Board. One lakh and fifty thousand
 saplings were planted in 1994 in the planting season in fallow land available in the vicinity of Taj  Mahal. The Committee is firmly of the
 view that it should be our national Commitment to preserve the glory of TaJ Mahal and it has to be ensured that all the causes of pollution as
 threaten the preservation of this glory are expeditiously removed. The media, non-governmental organisations in the environmental sector
 and above all the judicial organs have played a pivotal role in building up necessary consciousness about the threat to this great monument.
18. The Committee notes that initially the development .of foundries in Agra in the Small Scale Sector, the thermal power station, the
 Mathura Refinery, coal shunting yard were identified as the· causes of pollution in and around Mathura-Agra Trapezium. Two of these
 namely the thermal power station and the coal shunting yard were removed as problems a decade and half ago. The remaining two have
 continued to remain problems. Now in addition heavy vehicular traffic is going to constitute a new problem. It is, therefore, essential that the
 Ministry of Environment and Forests should in co-ordination with the Ministries agencies concerned such as Petroleum, (for distribution of
 LPG/CNG and its fullest use in foundries and in regard to control of pollution from the Mathura Refinery) Industry, (for centralized foundry
 facilities) Surface Transport (with regard to vehicular traffic) prepare a long-term strategy to ensure a healthy environment conducive to the
 protection of world famous ancient monument.
19. The Committee wanted to know the extent of involvement of the Ministry in the area of Coastal Zone Management and the priority
 being accorded to this sector. In this context the Committee mentioned to the Ministry that it had raised the matter relating to the management
 of our coastal zone with the Department of Ocean Development emphasising that this area was going to assume an increasing importance in
 the decades ahead when a very large part of our population will be living in this zone. That Department had indicated to the Committee that
 its responsibilities were largely related to providing information such as on pollution, shorelines, erosion etc. The Ministry of Environment
 and Forests informed the Committee that under the Environment (Protection) Act. 19S6, the coastal States are required to prepare coastal
 zone management plans which are implemented after approval by the Ministry of Environment and Forests. Deviations from these plans are
 punishable under the Act for which necessary powers have been delegated to the State 9overnments. Action is also taken by the Ministry
 wherever it is necessary.
20. The Committee feels that at present there is DO integrated and coordinated approach to the Costal Zone Management. Different
 aspects of this are dealt with by the Central Government In the Ministries of Urban Development, Ocean Development and by the various
 State Governments. The Committee recommends that a suitable centralized co-ordinating  mechanism be evolved to bring all these aspects
 together.
21. The Committee in its 3rd Report, had dealt with Agenda 21 adopted in 1992 at the Rio Summit (UNCED). This is a potential tool for
 bringing about sustainable development, and addresses itself to major environment and development priorities. In that report, the Committee
 had emphasised the need to accord priority to the implementation of the programmes  outlined in Agenda 21 and impressed upon the Ministry
 to assume a more active role in this regard so that all other concerned Ministries/agencies would take needed action in these areas. In the
 Action 1/aken Report submitted to the Committee, the Ministry gave the details of the steps initiated by it towards implementation of Agenda
 21. In terms of orders issued on July 9, 1993, nodal responsibility for each of the chapters has been determined; each nodal
 Ministry/Department has been requested to identify the policy, programme  and project changes that could be required to effect increasing
 implementation of Agenda 21; the matter has also been raised with the Planning Commission and individual Ministries have been requested
 to specifically provide for their additional. commitments as items under Agenda 21; the Ministry of Environment and Forests would be
 Submitting a National Report to the Commission on certain aspects of Agenda 21 Sustainable Development of the UN, and its
 Implementation in the country; several steps have been initiated,' notable among them being the country-wide study on climate change with
 ADB assistance. The Committee, while considering the Demands for Grants of the Ministry for the year 1995-96, asked the Secretary as to
 what had been the follow up of the orders dated July 9, 1993 where under the nodal responsibility in the basis of each chapter of Agenda 21
 has been assigned to various Ministries and Departments of the Government. The answer given was that the intention behind these orders was
 not merely to draw the attention to the recommendations of Agenda 21 but to bring about a greater awareness of the need to bring aspects of
 sustainable development into the policy making relating to development in different wings of the Government. There has been some response
 but it is not as encouraging as it was expected to be. The Ministry now proposes to address the Planning Commission in this matter,
 suggesting that the constitution of the working Groups and their terms of reference on the spectral inputs to the 9th Plan should reflect
 concerns of Agenda 21. The Ministry's expectation is that if this is intemalised  into the planning process and is reflected in the 9th Plan
 allocations, it would lead to a wider understanding and appreciation of Agenda 21. The Committee was also informed that the Ministry had
 prepared an Environmental Action Programme in December 1993 keeping in view Agenda 21, and the Ministry is working in accordance
 with the priorities indicated therein. The Committee asked the Ministry to submit a Report on this. The Committee has noted that
 considerable time has elapsed since the Rio de Janeiro Conference In June 1992 and as admitted by the Ministry itself, the progress In the
 implementation of the recommendations under Agenda 21 by the concerned Ministries has not been encouraging enough. The Committee
 therefore, feels that the process of follow up action needs to be speeded up to realise the objectives of Agenda.
22. The Committee would like the Ministry to submit to it a comprehensive document indicating the state of development under Agenda
 21 highlighting in particular the areas where there have been serious gaps or imbalances.
 
NEW DELHI SYED SIBTEY RAZI
May 4, 1995 Chairman, Committee on Science & Technology,
 Environment and Forests.
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/22nd%20Report%20for%20net.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
MINUTES
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT­RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
XXXI
THIRTY FIRST MEETING
The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 1.34 p.m. on Thursday, the 6th April, 1995 in Room No. 139, Parliament House Annexe, New
 Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi --Chairman RAJYA SABHA
2.
    Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
3.    Prof. M.G.K. Menon
4.    Shri Suresh Pachouri
5.Shri Satchidananda 6. Dr. Ranbir Singh
LOK SABHA
7.    Shri E. Ahamed
8.    Shri Sharad Dighe
9.    Shri Oscar Fernandes
10.   Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
11.   Shri Rama Chandra Rath
12.   Shri Marchand Singh
13.   Shri Ram Prasad Singh
14.Shri Bapusaheb Thite 15. Kumari Frida Topno
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, .Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forests
Shri N .R. Krishnan, Secretary
Shri Vinay Shankar, Additional Secretary
Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary
Shri B.P. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri S.C. Dey, Additional Inspector General of Forests
Shri J.C. Kala, Joint Secretary
Shri O.K. Biswas, Chairman, CPCB
Shri G.S. Rajamani, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Shri Sarweshwar Jha, Joint Secretary
 Shri Alok Jain, Joint Secretary
Miss A.K. Ahuja, Joint Secretary (NAEB)
Shri Arin Ghosh, Director (Project Tiger)
Dr. S.C. Maudgal, Adviser (M)
Shri Harjeet Singh, Adviser (H)
Shri N. Bagcbi, Adviser (B)
Shri RP. Sharma, Adviser (GPD) Shri K. Mohan, Adviser (GPD)
Shri S.S. Mohanty, Director (IFD)
Shri K. Desiraju, otrector (IC)
Shri R.S. Ahlawat, Director (PC)
Shri RK. Tandon, Director (Parl.)
Shri S.P. O1akrabarti, Member-Secretary (CPCB) Shri D. Bandhopadhyay, Additional Director
Shri R Mehta, Additional Director
Dr. G.K. Pandey, Additional Director
Shri Lakhwinder Singh, DIG (FF)
Shri Dinesh Mishra, DIG (FC)
Shri K.K. Pandey, Director (NAEB)       
Shri K. Sathuraman, Director (CS)
  Shri RK. Rai, Joint Director
Shri K.E. Ayyar, Supdt. Engineer (CCU)
2. The Committee took up for consideration the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests. At the
 outset, the Secretary of the Ministry assisted by other officials, briefly explained for the benefit of the Members the allocations on different
 activities/projects  of the Ministry as proposed in its Demands for Grants. The Members then sought clarifications from him and other
 representatives of the Ministry on various points relating' to the Demands for Grants.
3. The discussion on the Demands ·for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Environment and· Forests remained inconclusive.
4.
    A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5.    The Committee then adjourned at 1.34 p.m.
 
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 1.35 p.m. and again from 3.00 p.m. to 6.07 p.m. on Thursday, the 20th April, 1995 in Committee
 Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/22nd%20Report%20for%20net.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
PRESENT
1.      Syed Sibtey Razi --Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.    Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
3.    Prof. M.G.K. Menon
4.Shri Suresh Pachouri 5. Shri Satchidananda
LOK SABHA
6.    Shri P .C. Chacko
7.    Shri Balraj Pasi
8.    Shri Vijay Naval Patil
9.    Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
10. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
11. Kumari Frida Topno
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
Representative of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and some of the Scientific Organisations/Laboratories
Prof. S.K. Joshi, Secretary, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and Director General, Council of Scientific and Industrial
 Research
Shri A. Parthasarathi, Additional Secretary, DSIR
Shri S.D. Garg, Advisor, CSIR
Dr. V.V. Subba Rao, Joint Advisor, DSIR
Shri K.V. Srinivasan, Joint Advisor, DSIR
Dr. A. Lahiri, Joint Advisor, DSIR
Shri S.B. Krishnan, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor
Shri Dilip Kumar, Joint Secretary (A), CSIR
Shri N.C. Aggarwal, Financial Advisor, CSIR
Shri B.C. Joshi, Deputy Financial Advisor, CSIR
Shri R.R. Abbyankar, Principal Scientific Officer, DSIR
Shri Ash_ni Gupta, Principal Scientific Officer, DSIR
Shri D.V. Gupta, Chairman-com-Managing Director, CEL
Shri N.K. Sharma, Chairman and Managing Director, NRDC, New Delhi
                                                                                                           Shri V. Natarajan, Senior General Manager, CEL
                                                                                                            .
Dr. D. Madhavan, Joint General Manager, CEL
Shri R. Dayal, Chief Engineer, NRDC, New Delhi
Shri J.P. Gupta, Chief Engineer, NRDC, New Delhi
Dr. V.P. Kamboj, Director, CDRI, Lucknow
Dr. R.N. Iyengar, Director, CBRI, Roorkee
Dr. T.C. Rao, Director, RRL, Bhopal
Dr. V. Prakash, Director, CFfRI, Mysore
Dr. K.V. Raghavan, Director, CLRI, Madras
Dr. P.V. Sane, Director, NBRI, Lucknow
Shri N.D. Seth, Scientist, CSIR
Shri S.K. Cbakladar ,Scientist, CSIR Dr. O.P. Aggarwal, Scientist, CSIR Shri M.B. Goswami,
 Scientist, CSIR Shri O.P. Rao, Scientist, CSIR
Shri S. Chandrasekbran, Scientist, CSIR Shri A.K. Verma, Scientist, CSIR
Kumari N.R. Vimala, Scientist, CSIR
Shri R.P. Sharma, Under Secretary, CSIR
Representatives of the Planning Commission
Shri Bhaskar Baruab, Principal Adviser (Agrl. & E&F)
Shri B.D. Jetbra, Additional Adviser (I&M)
Shri P .K. Biswas, Deputy Adviser (S&T)
Representatives of Ministry of Environment and Forests
Shri M.F. Ahmed, Inspector General of Forests
Shri Vinay Shankar, Additional Secretary
Shri K.K. Baksi, Additional Secretary
Shri B.P. Singh, Additional Secretary
Shri S.C. Dey, Additional Inspector General of Forests
Shri D.K. Biswas, Chairman, CPCB
Dr. S.C. Maudgal, Advisor
Shri Harjeet Singh, Advisor
Shri N. Bagcbi, Advisor
Shri K. Mohan, Advisor (GPD)
Shri R.P. Sharma, Advisor (GPD)
Ms. A.K. Ahuja, Joint, Secretary, NAEB
Shri A1ok Jain, Joint Secretary
Shri J.C. Kala, Joint Secretary (GPO)
Shri G.S. Rajamani, JS&FA

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/22nd%20Report%20for%20net.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
Shri Sarwesbwar Jha, Joint Secretary
Shri K.S. Narayanan, Chief Engineer
Shri Arin Ghosh, Director (Project Tiger)
Shri P.K. Hazra, Director BSI, Calcutta
Shri A.K. Ghosh, Director ZSI, Calcutta
Shri K.K. Pandey, Director (NAEB)
Shri R.K. Tandon, Director
Shri. R.S. Ahalawat, Director
Shri S.S. Mohanty, Director Shri A. Khan, DIG" NAEB
Shri Dinesh Mishra, DIG .
Shri Lakhwinder Singh, DIG
Shri G.K. Pandey, Additional Director Shri R. Mehta, Additional Director
Shri S.K. Sharma, Additional Director Shri R.K. Rai, Joint Director
Shri K.S. Narayanan, Chief Engineer
2. In the forenoon session, the Committee took up consideration of the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Department of Scientific and
 Industrial Research. First of all, the Principal Advisor in the Planning Commission, while responding to a query from the Committee, gave
 clarifications on certain aspects relating to the allocations from some of the areas as proposed in the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the
 Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. The Secretary of the Department thereafter gave an overview of the activities/ programmes
 being pursued by the Department and explained how the allocations proposed during the year 1995-96 would be utilised . The Members then
 sought clarifications on various points relating to the Demands for grants which were given by the Secretary and other representatives of the
 Department.
3. In the afternoon session, the Committee further considered the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of Environment and
 Forests. The Inspector-General of Forests in the Ministry of Environment and Forests, assisted by other officials, supplemented some of the
 points earlier made before the Committee in its meeting held on the 6th April, 1995 and replied to the clarifications sought by the Members.
4. The discussion on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research and Ministry of
 Environment and Forests was concluded.
5.
    A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6.    The Committee then adjourned. at 6.07 p.m.
 
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 4th May, 1995 in. Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi ..
PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi -- Chairman RAJYA SABHA
2.
    Shri Suresh Pachouri
3.Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh 4. Dr. Ranbir Singh
LOK SABHA
5.    Shri Jitendra Nath Das
6.    Shri Oscar Fernandes
7. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee S.Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy
9. Shri. Balraj Pasi
10 Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
11.   Smt. Vasundhara Raje
12.   Shri Harchand Singh
13.   Shri Ram Prasad Singh
14.Shri Bapusaheb Thite 15. Kumari Frida Topno
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
2. The Committee took up consideration of its draft Twenty-second Report on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Ministry of
 Environment and Forests and after some . discussion, adopted the same unanimously.
3. The Committee decided to present this Report to both. the Houses of Parliament on the 8th May, 1995. The Committee authorised its
 Chairman and in his absence, Dr. Ranbir  Singh to present this Report to the Rajya Sabha and Kumari Frida Topno and in her absence, Prof.
 Radhika Ranjan Pramanik to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.35 a.m.
 