 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
R A J Y A  S A B H A        219 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED NINETEENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWO HUNDRED TENTH REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS ON THE DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS (2010-2011) OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 13TH DECEMBER, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 13TH DECEMBER, 2010) 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2010/AGRAHAYANA, 1932 (SAKA) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
 
 
  
TWO HUNDRED NINETEENTH REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS 
CONTAINED IN THE TWO HUNDRED TENTH REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND 
TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS  
(2010-2011) OF THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 13TH DECEMBER, 2010) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK  SABHA ON 13TH DECEMBER, 2010) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
DECEMBER, 2010/AGRAHAYANA, 1932 (SAKA) 
 
 
 
 

 
 
CONTENTS 
  PAGES 
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. P REFACE .......................................................................................................................... (iii ) 
3. R EPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ................................................................................................ 1-16 
4. M INUTES OF THE MEETINGS ................................................................................................. 17-21 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
MEMBERS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS (2010-11) 
 1.  Dr.T. Subbarami Reddy   ––   Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2.  Shri Janardan Dwivedi  
 3. Shri Anil H. Lad 
 4.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
 5.  Dr. Chandan Mitra  
 6.  Shri Saman Pathak 
 *7.  Shri Paul Manoj Pandian  
 *8.  Shri Jabir Husain 
 *9.  Dr. Barun Mukherji 
 *10.  Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
  LOK  SABHA  
 11.  Shri K.C. Singh Baba 
 12.  Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg 
 13.  Shri Udayanraje Bhonsale  
 14.  Shri P.C. Chacko 
 15.  Shri Ninong Ering 
 16.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi 
 17.  Shri D.V. Sadananda Gowda  
 18.  Shrimati Kaisar Jahan 
 19.  Dr. Charan Das Mahant 
 20.  Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal  
 21.  Shri Jayaram Pangi 
 22.  Shri Gajendra Singh Rajukhedi  
 23.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
 24.  Shri Francisco Sardinha 
 25.  Shri Balakrishna K. Shukla  
 26.  Dr. Rajan Sushant 
 27.  Shri Pradeep Tamta 
 28.  Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai 
 29.  Shri Mansukhbhai D. Vasava  
 30.  Shri Akhilesh Yadav 
 31.  Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. D.B. Singh, Joint Secretary 
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director 
Shri V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
 

 
PREFACE 
  I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment 
and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Two Hundred Nineteenth 
Report on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the recommendations contained in Two Hundred 
Tenth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Environment & Forests. 
2.  The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on the 
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Tenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Environment & 
Forests which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 30th April, 2010. 
3.  There were eighteen recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Tenth Report of the Committee. Action Taken 
Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were received from the Ministry on 10th August, 2010. 
4.   In the meeting held on 8th December, 2010 the Committee considered the draft Action Taken Report and adopted the 
same. 
 
 
 
DR. T. SUBBARAMI REDDY
 
NEW DELHI; Chairman, 
December 8, 2010 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
  Science and Technology, Environment and Forests. 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
REPORT
 
  The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests on the 
recommendations contained in the Two Hundred Tenth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science & Technology, Environment & Forests on the Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Environment & 
Forests, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament  on 30th April, 2010. There were eighteen recommendations in 
the Report of the Committee. Action Taken notes on the recomm endations of the Committee were received from the Ministry 
on 10th August, 2010. 
 The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee on the Action Taken by the 
Ministry of Environment & Forests are set out in the succeeding paragraphs:- 
ELEVENTH FIVE YEAR PLAN (2007-12) OUTLAYS AND PROPOSALS 
Recommendation (Para 4.3) 
 Since the Ministry could not fully ut ilize the approved outlay for the Tenth Five Year Plan, the Committee recommends 
that the Ministry should make allout efforts to ensure that the Eleventh Five Year Plan allocation is fully utilized. 
Action Taken by Government 
 The Ministry of Environment & Forests has an approved outl ay of Rs.10,000 crores for its  Eleventh Five Year Plan, 
2007-12. During the first two years 2007-08 and 2008-09, expendi ture of Rs.1350 crores and Rs .1483 crores respectively was 
incurred against allocated outlays of Rs.1351 crores and Rs.15 00 crores for these years implying a utilization ratio of 99.4%. 
The plan outlay for 2009-10, which was approved at Rs. 1880 cror es at BE stage, was reduced by the Finance Ministry at R.E. 
stage to Rs. 1650 crores. For the year 2010-11, an outlay of Rs. 2200 crores has been approved by the Planning Commission. 
 Given the above position, the recommendation of the Committee is noted and the Ministry will make all out efforts to 
utilize fully the funds allocated to it by the Planning Commission during the Eleventh Five Year Plan. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply and is of the view that in future the Ministry should ensure that the Ministry of 
Finance may not reduce the allocated funds  at R.E. stage unless it is too nece ssary. The Committee opines that if the 
projects are well planned and running as per their time sche dule, there would not be any substantial reason left for 
reduction of funds at R.E. stage. 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2010-2011 
Recommendation (Para 5.4) 
 The Committee notes the drastic cut in the budgetary pr ovisions of the Ministry and recommends that Planning 
Commission should give top priority to Ministry’s proposal and projected demands for various schemes and allocate adequate 
funds so that the programmes under various schemes are not adversely affected. 
Action Taken by Government 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to  Planning Commission for their consideration and necessary 
action on fund requirements/demand of various schemes/programmes of the Ministry. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply and is of the view that with meticulous planni ng and strict monitoring at regular 
interval of its projects, Ministry shou ld persuade the Planning Commission to release the n ecessary funds for smooth 
running of its various schemes/programmes on schedule. 
 

SCHEMES WITH INCREASES IN OUTLAYS 
Recommendation (Para 6.3) 
 The Committee, however, recommends that Ministry while work ing towards utilizing the allocated funds in productive 
manner must ask for additional resources if so required at R.E. stage. 
Action Taken by Government 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The Ministry would strive towards an efficient utilization of plan 
funds allocated to it and towards ensuring adequate availability of funds for its various schemes/programmes. Depending upon 
their actual performance in the first half of the year, and revi sed fund requirements of these schemes/programmes, the issue of  
more funds allocation at RE stage will be taken up with the Planning Commission/Finance Ministry, if necessary. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply and wo uld like to know the details of the measure taken by the Ministry for 
efficient utilization of planne d funds. The Committee desires that Ministry should pursue its projects in a time bound 
manner and strive for successful perfor mance of its various schemes so that Planning Commission releases necessary 
additional funds as per requirement and on time. 
NEW SCHEMES 
Recommendation (Para 7.2) 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry mu st ensure that Planning Commission releases necessary 
additional budgetary support to meet the revised fund requirements of the projects at R.E. stage, so that their progress is not  
adversely affected due to shortage of funds. 
Action Taken by Government 
 Allocation of funds for new schemes has been largely dictated by overall availability of resources made available to the 
Ministry by the Planning Commission, priority to be provided to completion of ongoing schemes/components and the status of 
formulation/approval of new schemes. 
 The recommendation of the Committee has been forwarded to  Planning Commission for their consideration and necessary 
action on fund requirements for these new schemes/programmes of the Ministry at R.E. stage. 
 As recommended by the Committee, Planning Commission has been requested for releasing additional fund for the 
strengthening of Wildlife Crime Control Bureau at R.E. stage. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
NATIONAL  AFFORESTATION AND ECO-DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME 
Recommendation (Para 9.3) 
 When the Committee asked about the current position of the forest and tree cover in the country, the Ministry replied that 
it is 23.84 per cent of the total geographical area of the countr y as per the India State of Forest Report, 2009 which includes  
21.02 per cent forest cover and 2.82 per cent tree cover. When the Committee enquired from the Ministry as to whether the 
present forest cover of 23.84 is inclusive or exclusive of the forest land diverted during the year 2009, it was informed that the 
position of forest cover given is as in December, 2007, so it do es not include the area which is lost or going to be lost by wa y of 
diversion. The Committee is of the opinion that two years time lag in working out the state of forest report is too long a peri od. 
On a query that whether it is possible to re duce this two years period to one year, the Ministry agreed to reduce this period t o 
one year. 
 

Action Taken by the Government 
 Forest Cover Assessment is done by interpretation of Satellites imageries and extensive field survey. This requires about 
two years. Justification and constraints in this respect were informed in the subsequent meeting of Parliamentary Standing 
Committee. 
Comments 
 The Committee while taking note of the reply of the Ministry  is of the view that it should try to reduce the two 
years period as it is quite a long time period and may collaborate with Department of  Space for quick retrieval of 
satellite data for extensive field survey. 
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY 
Recommendation (Para 10.1) 
 The Committee feels that massive afforestation is very impor tant. Every year, the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
should have a target of increasing the forest cover. But for th is massive afforestation, the huge financial resources are requi red 
and the Ministry cannot afford to undertake afforestation on a large scale in the absence of funds/resources. The Committee 
finds that in our country, Banks, Public Sector Undertakings, ma jor industries in public and private sectors have the corporate  
social responsibility as an obligation to spend certain resource s out of their profits as Corporate Social Responsibility towar ds 
the welfare of the society. The Committee feels that if the Gove rnment makes it mandatory that 50 per cent of the money being 
spent towards corporate social responsibil ity, for the massive afforestation under the guidance of the Ministry of Environment 
and Forests, the millions of hectares ofland will be covered by forests. At the same time, the Government need not worry for 
any resources and the Ministry of Enviro nment and Forests also not to worry about the funds si nce the Corporate world is 
already spending by way of corporate social responsibility towards welfare activities. Therefore, the Committee strongly 
recommends to the Government of India through the Parliament that they must make it mandatory to spend 50 per cent of their 
profit on the afforestation under the control of the Ministry of Environment and Forests. 
Action taken by the Government 
 The matter has been referred to the Ministry of Corporate Affairs to look into the recommendations of the Committee for 
making provisions for mandatory investment of about 50% of th e profits of the banks, PSUs, major industries in public and 
private sector for afforestation through Ministry of Environmen t & Forests as part of their co rporate social responsibility 
towards the welfare of society. 
Comments 
 The Committee appreciates the ambitious programme of Ministry of Environment & Forests to undertake massive 
afforestation in the country. The Committ ee, however, felt that sufficient funds may not be available with the Ministry, 
for financing this massive programme. The Committee took note of the guidelines issued by the Department of Public 
Enterprises, which make it mandatory fo r public and private Corporates to spe nd certain percentage of their profit on 
Corporate Social Responsibility. Therefore,  with a view to strengthen the hands of  Ministry of Environment & Forests, 
the Committee recommended that it should be made mandatory for private & public Corporates to spend 50 per cent of 
the money being spent toward Corporat e Social Responsibility for massive a fforestation under the guidance of the 
Ministry of Environment & Forests. 
 The Committee, however, is dismayed to note that the Ministry of Environment & Fo rest has merely referred the 
matter to the Ministry of Corporate Affa irs even though Department of Public Enterprises is concerned with the matter 
and no other action whatsoever has been taken by the Ministry even though more than 6 months have lapsed since the 
Committee made its recommendations. 
 To make it mandatory for public and private Corporates to spend 50% of fund available for Corporate Social 
Responsibility for the massive afforest ation in the country, is the policy matter of the Gov ernment. Therefore, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee directs that in the interest to achieve massi ve afforestation in the country, the 
Ministry of Environment & Forests shou ld approach the competent authority in Government to formulate the policy. 

The policy perhaps could be finalized/agreed at the level of  Prime Minister/Cabinet and th erefore, the Ministry should 
approach this competent authority to formulate the policy. The Committee furth er desires that this should be done 
expeditiously. 
PANCHAYAT  VAN  YOJANA 
Recommendation (Para 11.1) 
 As regards peoples’ participation in a fforestation, the Committee finds that Panchayat Van Yojana (social forestry with 
communities), which was originally conceived in the very first y ear of the Eleventh Five Year Plan and an outlay of Rs. 900 
crores was earmarked for the entire Five Year Plan period, this  programme is yet to take off. The Committee feels that under 
this programme, a component of the National Afforestation and Eco-Development Programme, it had been envisaged that funds 
would be released directly to the Panchayats. The Committee is of the opinion that such a good programme which has enough 
scope to add to the forest cover of the country is suffering due to administrative laxity. The Committee finds that even after the 
lapse of three long years, the Ministry of Environment & Fore sts has not been successful in launching the programme as it is 
still awaiting the approval of the Cabinet Committee on Eco nomic Affairs (CCEA). The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that this programme should be made operational at the earliest and the obstacles coming in the way must be expeditiously 
removed. 
Action Taken by Government 
 The scheme is under process for submission to the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs for approval. 
Comments 
 The Committee takes serious view of the fact that the Panchayat Van Yojana scheme is st ill under the process for 
submission to the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA). The Committee would like to know the action taken 
by the Ministry to expedite the process. The Committee, therefore, reite rates that the programme should be made 
operational at the earliest and the obst acles coming in the way must be expedi tiously removed. A detailed note on the 
issue may also be drafted to keep the same before CCEA so that approval of CCEA in the matter could be taken without 
further delay. 
AFFORESTATION IN CHINA VIS-A-VIS INDIA 
Recommendation (para 12.3) 
 The Committee feels that in order to achieve a task of gigantic proportions, i.e., massive afforestat ion some bold and 
dynamic decisions are required. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry may also workout some m odalities to ensure 
voluntary participation of citizens in the Afforestation programme. The Ministry may also think in terms of making it a 
fundamental duty of every citizen of the country over the age of 18, to plant one tree every year. Massive awareness programme 
particularly among the children to make them understand the im peratives of planting and protecting trees would also go a long 
way in realizing the national goal of bringing one third of the area under forest and tree cover. 
Action Taken by Government 
 Opportunities for voluntary participation of citizens in afforestation/tree planting are already available through various 
initiatives of State and Central Governments. For example Van Mahotsav programme is organized throughout the country 
during the month of July every year. As far as making the planting of trees a fundamental duty of the citizen over the age of 1 8 
years is concerned, Article 51 A(g) of the Constitution of Indi a, states the fundamental duty of every citizen to protect and 
improve the natural environment including forests etc. Further, massive awareness programme is taken up by the State Forest 
Departments and Ministry of Environment and Forests from time to time. 
 
 
 

Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply and wo uld like the Ministry to provide details regarding awareness programme 
taken up by the Ministry and St ate Forest Departments for afforestation on St ate-wise basis. The Committee is of the 
view that Ministry should take more effective action for popularizing tree plantation throughout the country. 
WILDLIFE PRESERVATION 
Recommendation (Para 13.3) 
 The Committee fails to understand that at a time when wildli fe related crimes are on the rise, wildlife animals are coming 
out of the protected areas and mercilessly killed, the number of endangered species is on the rise, reduction in budgetary 
allocations does not augur well. The Committee, therefore, recommends that this programme may not be allowed to suffer due 
to shortage of funds and the Ministry of Environment and Fore sts should vigorously take up this matter with Ministry of 
Finance to increase allocation under this head appropriately at the R.E. stage. 
Action Taken by Government 
 As recommended by the Committee, Ministry of Finance has been requested for enhancing the allocation under the CSS 
‘Integrated Development of Wildlife Habitats’ at R.E. Stage. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply and is of the view that wi th efficient planning and e ffective initiatives Ministry 
could convince the Ministry of Finance for enhancing the funds for wildlife preservation schemes in the future years to 
come. 
Recommendation (13.9) 
 The Committee is surprised to note the way the budgetary a llocation has been made in respect of Project Tiger for the 
current financial year. The projected demand of Rs. 609.30 cror es has been reduced by the Planning Commission to just Rs. 
154.20 crores. The Committee recommends that Planning Commission should agree to the Ministry’s demand for more funds at 
R.E. stage under the scheme as the same is extremely important to deal effectively with the depleting number of Asian cats in 
the country. 
Action Taken by Government 
 The Committee has recommended that the Planning Commission should agree to the Ministry’s demand for 609.30 crore 
at R.E. stage. The Ministry of Environment and Forests has addressed the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission in this 
regard for enhancement of allocation under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Project Tiger. 
Comments 
 The Committe notes the repl y and desires that Ministry must pursue this matter with the Planning Commission 
and ensure that required funds are release d for the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of  Project Tiger at R.E. stage without 
any hindrance. 
Recommendation (Para 13.10) 
 The Committee further recommends that since it is centra lly sponsored programme, it is necessary to have a strong 
monitoring mechanism to ensure proper utilisation of funds. The Committee also recommends that achievement of physical 
targets must be carefully and clearly reflec ted by the Ministry in future so that the Committee could get an objective picture of 
Ministry’s performance. 
Action Taken by Government 
 The Committee has desired that there should be a strong monitoring mechanism to ensure proper utilization of funds and 
the physical targets/achievements must be clearly and carefully  reflected in future to show  Ministry’s performance. For 

Independent Monitoring and Evaluation, five Committees have been constituted and the assessment report would be placed in 
the Parliament. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes that the Minist ry has constituted five  committees for indepe ndent monitoring of 
programmes and evaluation of funds ut ilization and would like to know how thes e committees would be different from 
earlier monitoring mechanism and whether they have found any laxity in functioning of project/schemes of the Ministry. 
Recommendation (Para 13.11) 
 The Committee notes that around 35% of sanctioned staff strengt h is vacant in the Similipal Tiger Reserve despite the fact 
that the Reserve is afflicted with naxal extremism. The Committ ee acknowledges the fact that th e Ministry has taken action in 
this regard and has requested the Chief Mi nister of the concerned State to take a ppropriate action, however it feels that the 
Ministry being the nodal agency for the protection and preservati on of wildlife, it should vigorously pursue the matter of fill ing 
up of the vacant posts with the State Government and ensure that the sufficient CRPF or paramilitary staff is posted in the 
Reserve to tackle the menace of naxalism. 
Action Taken by Government 
 State Governments has been requested for filling up of the vacant posts in Protected Areas including Similipal Tiger 
Reserve. The Committee has desired that the Ministry should vi gorously pursue the matter of filling up of the vacant posts with  
the State Government of Orissa and ensure that sufficient CRPF or  paramilitary forces are posted in the Similipal Tiger Reserve 
to tackle the menace of naxalism. The Ministry of Environment and Forests has requested the Chief Minister, Orissa to expedite 
filling up of vacancies in the Similipal Tiger Reserve and deploy the CRPF battalion already available with the State. 
Comments 
 The Committee while taking note of the rep ly is of the view that the Ministry has not done enough in this regard. It 
still stick to its earlier stand that it has requested the Ch ief Minister of the concerned St ate to expedite filling up of 
vacancies in the Similipal Tiger Reserve and deploy the CRPF battalion already available with the State. The Committee 
would like the Ministry to take immediat e action in this regard for protecting  this Tiger Reserve from menace of 
naxalism. 
PREVENTION OF POLLUTION OF NATIONAL RIVERS 
Recommendation (Para - 14.6) 
 The Committee feels that despite a huge amount of money spent and whatever efforts made thus far under Ganga Action 
Plan I & II to clean the river Ganga, there has not been any considerable improvement in the water quality of the river Ganga. 
The Committee is happy to note that the Government has initiated a new action to clean the river Ganga and allocated a 
substantial amount for this purpose. It is, however, of the opinion that only money is not going to matter much unless and unti l, 
there is a major change in the strategy. So far the Ministry’s main focus had been on setting up of sewerage treatment plants, 
common effluent plants, but the Committee feels that this strategy has not worked to the desired level. Flowing of untreated 
sewage and sewerage, open drains and industrial effluent are sti ll continuing on a large-scale. Sewage treatment plants are not  
working to their optimum capacity due to one reason or the othe r. With the ever increasing load of population on urban areas, 
this problem would further aggravate. The Committee, therefor e, recommends that the Ministry must work mainly on the 
principal that river must flow. The Committee, therefore, further recommends that besides taking remedial measures like setting 
up of sewage treatment plants, common effluent treatment plants, etc., it must also ensure that the flow of the river Ganga is 
maintained on the level of the flow that was there 10 or 20 years back. 
Action Taken by Government 
 Water quality monitoring carried out by reputed institutions such as, IIT, Kanpur, BHEL, Patna University, etc. indicates 
that, water quality of the river Ganga conforms to the prescribed  standards in terms of key indicators, namely, Bio-chemical 
Oxygen Demand (BOD) and Dissolved Oxygen (DO) at most of the locations, except in the stretch between Kannauj and 

Varanasi in Uttar Pradesh. The situation would have been wo rse without the sewage treatmen t infrastructure created under 
GAP. 
 A holistic river basin approach has been adopted for conservation of the Ganga river with the constitution of NGRBA. 
The functions of the authority include maintenance of minimum ecological flows in the Ganga River with the aim of ensuring 
water quality and environmentally sustainable development. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes that after the constitution of Nati onal Ganga River Basin Authority (NGRBA), the Ministry 
has competent authority as well as re quired resources to undertake the conservation work of river Ganga and desires 
that the services of the Authority must be used to the best of its ability. 
YAMUNA  ACTION  PLAN (YAP) 
Recommendation (Para 15.2) 
 The Committee is of the view that a steady supply of fresh water in the river is urgently required. The Committee in its 
188
th Report on Demands for Grants, 2008-09 of the Ministry ha d recommended that a proper system should be setup for 
recharging the river by creating manmade water bodies like re servoir and catchment areas which can store the monsoon water 
which usually goes into drains and the stored water can be rele ased into the river during the lean season. The Committee also 
notes that most of the catchment area of the river Yamuna has been diverted for purposes other than creating reservoirs. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that a resu lt oriented time bound approach should be adopted with regard to the cleaning of 
river Yamuna. 
Action Taken by Government 
 Implementation of river pollution abatement works is an ongoing and collective effort of the Central and State 
Governments under which various schemes of pollution abatement are implemented by the Government. 
 To ensure that only treated effluent is discharged into the river Yamuna in its Delhi stretch which contributes maximum 
pollution load to the river, Delhi Jal Board (DJB) has prepared schemes for laying of interceptor sewers along three major 
drains namely Najafgarh, Shahdara and Supplementary, augm entation of sewage treatment capacity, interception of drains, 
rehabilitation of trunk sewers, laying of sewerage system  in unsewered colonies and rural areas and de-silting of 
peripheral/internal sewers. The interceptor sewer proiect has recently been approved by CCEA under Jawaharlal Nehru National 
Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM) at a cost of Rs.1357 crore. 
 To supplement the efforts of State Governments in addressing the problem of pollution of river Yamuna, Government of 
lndia is implementing Yamuna Action Plan (YAP) with assistance from Japan International Cooperation Agency, Government 
of Japan in a phased manner. The works taken up under YAP include interception and diversion of raw sewage, setting up of 
Sewage Treatment Plants, creation of low cost sanitation faci lities, setting up of electric/improved wood crematoria and river 
front development. A total of 276 schemes have been completed in 21 towns of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Delhi and 753.25 
million litres per day of sewage treatment capacity has been created so far under YAP. 
 The issue of constructing storage structures in the upper r eaches of river Yamuna, in orde r to augment the lean season 
flow in the river is being dealt with by the High Powered Committee for Yamuna River Development under the chairmanship of 
Lt. Governor, Delhi. The measures recommended by the High Powered Committee in its draft report circulated recently include: 
 Construction of upstream storages/dams namely Renuka, Kishau and Lakhwar Vyasi. 
 Interceptor sewer project along Najafgarh, Supplementary and Shahdara drains in Delhi. 
 Expansion of existing sewage treatment capacity and sewerage network. 
 Yamuna river front development by DDA. 
 

Comments 
 The Committee notes that the actions h ave been initiated to augment the lean season flow in the river Yamuna and 
is of the view that such actions woul d not have much impact unless and until it  is pursued in a time bound manner. The 
Committee opines that the Ministry shou ld fix time frame for carrying out the measures recommended by the High 
Powered Committee for Yamuna river deve lopment and would like to see better implementation and accountability at 
all levels. 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
Recommendation (Para 16.1) 
 The Committee observes that recently Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Report on projected loss of 
Himalayan glaciers by 2035 had created a lot of confusion and finally it was settled that the projection made by IPCC in its 
Report cannot be corroborated by scientific evidences. But the Committee finds that the Department of Space has in its Annual 
Report 2009-10 mentioned that investigations on glacial retreat were estimated for 1317 glaciers in 10 sub-basins from 1962 
and this has shown an overall reduction in glacial area from 5866 Sq. Kms. to 4921 Sq. Kms. showing an overall decrease of 16 
per cent. When the Committee enquired in what manner the Ministry  would be able to handle the climate change project with a 
paltry allocation of Rs. 7.00 crores, it was informed that this  project is meant to protect India’s interests on climate change  
issues in various international fora and facilitate India’s participation in various international negotiations. Thus, the Comm ittee 
finds that there is no specific and exclusive programme on climate change with the Ministry which is dealing with environment. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that since the Ministry of Environment and Forests is the nodal Ministry, it must have a 
programme on climate change with sufficient budgetary allocations. 
Action Taken by Government 
 Government of India has taken a number of policy initiatives in order to address the concerns. arising out of adverse 
impacts of climate change in various sectors. Amongst the specif ic measures/actions taken in this regard, the following are 
noteworthy:- 
1.  Himalayan Glaciers constitute a special focus area of clim ate change. Available scientific studies indicate that Himalayan 
Glaciers have advanced/retreated throughout history as part of a natural cyclical phenomenon. There is no conclusive 
scientific evidence as yet to suggest that the retreat of Himala yan glaciers is being caused by climate change. However, in 
this regard the following steps have been taken:- 
 MoEF has developed Guidelines and best practices for Sustaining Himalayan Eco-system (G-She), which has been 
shared with all State Governments in the Himalayan Region. 
 Ministry has published a discussion paper titled “Himalay an Glaciers: A state –of Art Review of Glacial Studies, 
Glacial Retreat and Climate Change authored by Shri V.K. Raina, Ex. Deputy Director General, Geological Survey 
of India. 
 A meeting was convened, by the Ministry to ascertain the cu rrent scientific evidences on the question of the retreat 
of Himalayan Glaciers inviting all institutions connected with research on the Himalayan Glaciers on 10th July 
2009. 
2. The Prime Minister’s Council on Climate Change was set up in June, 2007 to coordinate and advance climate change 
related programmes/actions and provide guidance on India’s approach to climate change at domestic and global level. 
3. Government of India has prepared a comprehensive National Action Plan on Climate Change (NAPCC) with a view to 
achieve sustainable development with co benefit in terms of clim ate change. Eight national missions in the area of solar energy , 
enhanced energy efficiency, sustainable agriculture, sustainabl e habitat, water, Himalayan eco-system, increasing the forest 
cover, and strategic knowledge for climate change form the core  of National Action Plan. Besides, there are several initiatives  
envisaged in the sectors pertaining to energy generation, transport, renewable, disaster management and capacity building that 
are to be integrated with the developmen t plans of the Ministries. The Prime Minist er’s Council on Climate Change, set up in 

June, 2007 monitors the preparation of the national Missions an d coordination and implementation of climate change related 
actions in India. 
4. An Expert committee was appointed by the Ministry in 20 08 to study the impact of anthropogenic climate change on 
India and recommend specific measures to advance the research agenda that the Mini stries need to follow and implement in 
order to address India’s vulnerability to anthropogenic climat e change impacts. The Committee has prepared its Report which 
has been shared with all concerned Ministries. 
5. Ministry supports and facilitates a major research agenda to assess various climate change related issues. As a part of its 
international obligations unde r the UNFCCC, India prepares periodically the National Communication (NATCOM) that gives 
an inventory of the Green House Gases (GHG) emissions in In dia, and assesses the vulnerability and impacts and makes 
appropriate recommendations regarding social, economic and technological measures for addressing climate change. First 
NATCOM was presented in 2004. The Government is engaged in preparing NATCOM II, which will be presented to the 
UNFCCC in 2011. Preparation of NATCOM II is  an exercise based on an extensive network of research and scientific 
institutions in India and draws upon expertise and excellence from different institutions. 
6.  A range of studies have been coordinated by the Ministry  recently (2009) with a view to  compile the estimates of the 
GHG emissions profile of India for the next two-three decades. Th ese studies indicate that the em issions trajectory of India is  
likely to remain conservative due to declining energy intensity of production and autonomous changes in technology and 
productivity. 
7. An Expert Panel has been constituted to recommend a low carbon strategy for inclusive growth. The Panel will suggest 
specific actions that will need to be undertaken to reduce emission intensity with necessary provisions of financial and 
technological resources including the domestic and international support for achieving low carbon sustainable development. 
8. Ministry acts as the nodal agency for coordination of th e approval of Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) projects 
which are a financing instrument available under the Kyoto Protocol to support sustainable development while achieving co-
benefits for climate change. Today, India’s CDM potential represents a significant component of the global CDM market. As on 
July 2007, 517 out of total 2287 projects registered by the CDM Executive Board are from India which is the 2nd highest in the 
world for any country. The Designated National Authority for CDM in our country has already approved over 1662 projects 
which are in the sectors of energy effici ency, fuel switching, industrial processes, municipal solid waste and renewable energy . 
If all these projects get registered by the CDM Executive Board, they have the potential to generate 639 million Certified 
Emission Reduction (CER) by the year 2012 and almost 10% of India’s total emissions per year. This corresponds to an overall 
financial inflow of approximately 6.39 billion US $ in the country by 2012 assuming a conservative price of US $ 10 per CER. 
9. Steps taken under the Environment Protection Act, Forest Conservation Act, and other initiatives aimed at 
afforestation/reforestation have arrested the rate of deforestation, and afforestation is adding forest cover to about 0.25% of  
India’s land area every year. More than a fifth of India’s land area is under forest cover and this serves as a major carbon si nk, 
with almost 11 % of India’s annual emissions being absorbed by the forests. The cover is increasing every year @ almost 0.8 
mn hectares every year (proposed to be raised to 2.3 mn hectares p.a. through the new afforestation initiatives). 
10.  The Ministry has launched a network based programme, namely Indian Network of Climate Change Assessment 
(INCCA) on 14th October, 2009 with a view to undertake more ambitious programme of climate change assessment. The 
programme brings together Institutions and Scientists from acr oss the country to enhance understanding of the phenomenon of 
climate change and its impact on various sectors of the Indian  economy and society. The major elements of the programmes on 
Sectoral Assessment include (i) Climate Change scenarios for 2030; (ii) Impact assessment at national level on water resources,  
agriculture, forests, energy, coastal zone and human health, ( iii) Integrated impacts and vulnerability assessment, and (iv) 
Developing adaptation frameworks. Under the programme, MoEF will undertake studies for four major regions of the country, 
viz., Himalayan Region, Western Ghats, North Eastern Region and Coastal areas. The result of the study will be made available 
in the public domain for peer review, discussion and debate. Fu rther, this programme will provide capacity building to create 
and nurture the next generation of climate change scientists and experts. The programme also envisages preparing a 
comprehensive GHG emission inventory profile by sources and re movals by sinks for India which has been launched in 11th 
May 2010. 

11.  Pursuant to recommendations of Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, 
Environment & Forests on Demands for Grants (2010-11) in paragraph 16.1 of its 210th Report, the Ministry has, under the 
aegis of INCCA, taken the initiative of advancing the science pr ogramme on climate change. As a part of this initiative, it is 
proposed to establish appropriate institutional set up and scientific/ technical programs in addition to the existing activitie s in 
the Ministry. 
 The scientific program on climate change will encompass the basic, applied and analytical research activities to generate 
information and data. This will include various modeling studies as well as collection and collation of data/scientific 
information with a view to help the Government evolve appropriate policy measures to prevent/combat impact of Climate 
Change. The research activities will be carried out throu gh National, Scientific, Academic and Autonomous research 
organizations. The research will be undertaken in a project m ode on various sectors eg., Water, Agriculture, Forest, Energy, 
Coastal zone and Human Health. An analytical study will identify vulnerability and risk and develop adaptive options. 
 A dedicated institutional structure needs to be created in the Ministry suitably to support the implementation of above 
programme including research/policy analysis in relation to clim ate change science and policy, act as the nodal point for polic y 
and impact analysis including INCCA, coordinating the work of  preparing inventories of Greenhouse Gases of anthropogenic 
origin and also advising/implementing the programmes of adaptation/mitigation at national and State level. 
 In view of the above, a suitable plan scheme having budgetary provision for creation of institutional set up and for 
undertaking the research activities in future years on long term basis is contemplated. Details are being worked out and would 
be included in the proposals for the remaining period of 11
th Plan and the subsequent Plan period. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply and appreciates the policy in itiatives taken by the Ministry to address the concerns 
arising out of adverse impacts of climate change in various sectors. 
HAZARDOUS  SUBSTANCE  MANAGEMENT 
Recommendation (Para 18.4) 
 For maintaining the eco-system and keeping in view the climate changes and protection of environment and also 
conservation of forests, the Ministry must emphasise and make all efforts to collect full informations and clarifications by th e 
concerned Departments and Ministries and if necessary, hold regular meetings with the stakeholders in the interest of the India n 
economy. In solving the various issues pending with the Ministry, better coordination and cooperation is need of the hour and at 
the same time the Ministry must take final decisions as early  as possible while giving permissions for the proposals/projects o r 
rejecting the same. While doing so the Ministry must take pains to minimise the delays in giving the clearances to other 
Ministries as quickly as possible. 
Action Taken by the Government 
 The process of forest clearance may be summarized as below:- 
i.  The proposal is recommended by the concerned State / Union Territory Government for prior approval of the 
Central Government (Ministry of Environment and Forests). 
ii.  Proposals involving more than 40 ha of forest land are sent to the Ministry of Environment and Forests at New 
Delhi. 
iii.  Proposals involving forest land up to 40 ha are sent to the concerned Regional Offices of the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests. These offices are situated at Shillong, Lucknow, Chandigarh, Bhopal, Bhubaneswar and 
Bangalore. 
iv. In the Ministry of Environment and Forests at New Delhi, the proposal is examined by the Forest Advisory 
Committee constituted under Section-3 of the Forest (C onservation) Act, 1980. The decision is taken by the 
Competent Authority on the basis of the recommendations of the Forest Advisory Committee. 

v.  In the Regional Offices of the Ministry, the proposals are examined by the State Advisory Group pertaining to the 
concerned State / Union Territory. The decision is taken by the Competent Authority in the Ministry of 
Environment and Forests at New Delhi on the basis of the recommendations of the State Advisory Group. 
vi.  The Regional Chief Conservator of Forests, who heads the Regional Office, has been empowered to take decision 
for the proposals involving forest land up to 5.00 (five) ha except the proposals related to mining and regularization 
of encroachment. 
vii. All proposals for regularization of encroachment are dealt with in the Ministry of Environment and Forests at New 
Delhi irrespective of the area involved. 
 According to the Forest (Conservation) Rules, 2003 which is  currently in force, the time limits prescribed for different 
levels are as follows – 
i. After receipt of renewal proposals, in  the prescribed format and complete in  all respects, from the User Agency, 60 
(sixty) days for State / Union Territory Government. 
ii. After receipt of fresh proposals, in the prescribed form at and complete in all respects, from the User Agency, 90 
(ninety) days for State / Union Territory Government. 
iii. After receipt of the proposals reco mmended for approval from the State / Un ion Territory Government, 60 (sixty) 
days for the Central Government to take a decision. 
 The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) is a tool to identify the environmental impacts associated with 
developmental activity and to provide for necessary mitigation m easures to ensure sustainable development. The EIA process 
was initiated in 1978-79 for appraisal of developmental projects from environmental angle. The first notification on EIA was 
issued in January, 1994 under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 making it mandatory for certain category of projects to 
obtain prior environmental clearance. During the implementation of this notification some deficiencies and limitations were 
observed. These shortcomings were overcome by amending the no tification from time to time relating to provision of public 
hearing, time frame for its completion, availability of EIA report for public consultation and delegation of powers etc. 
 Ministry conducted a comprehensive review of the environmental clearance process. Based on the experience and the 
international practices, the EIA notification has been reviewed and a new EIA Notification was put in place on 14th September, 
2006. The new Notification envisages transparent, decentrali zed and efficient regulatory mechanism to, (i) incorporate 
necessary environmental safeguards at planning stage, (ii) involves stakeholders in public consultation process and (iii) identify 
developmental projects based on impact potential instead of investment criteria. 
 The appraisal is undertaken in four steps as following:- 
a.  Screening (for category ‘B’ projects and activities)  
b.  Scoping for issuing TORs (Terms of reference)  
c.  Public consultation and 
d.  Appraisal 
 The notification stipulates a time period of 210 days for en vironmental appraisal, Break up of which is as following:- 
Screening/Scoping for TOR -  60 days 
Public Consultation -  45 days 
Appraisal by EAC/SEAC  -  60 days 
Acceptance/rejection of -  45 days 
recommendation by MoEF/SEIAA 
 Total -  210 days 

 Based on the experience of implementation of the EIA Notification, 2006 and the inputs received from the SEIAAs, the 
EIA Notification has been amended in December, 2009 for further streamlining the procedure. 
 For liquidating the pendency, regular review of pending projects is undertaken, longer duration and regular meetings of 
the Expert Committees are organized, model Terms of References and Manuals have been put on Ministry’s website for benefit 
of all stakeholders and the website for environmental clearance has been redesigned for making it user friendly. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply. 
Recommendation (para - 18.5) 
 The Committee observes that the rapid industrial developments have led to the generation of huge quantities of hazardous 
wastes which have further aggravated the environmental problem s in the country by depleting and polluting natural resources. 
Rational and sustainable utilization of natural resources and its protection from toxic releases is vital for sustainable 
socioeconomic development. Hazardous substance management involves planning and overse eing the implementation of the 
policies and programmes. The Committee recommends that to attain success under this programme Ministry should ensure 
implementation of efficient plans for management of hazar dous wastes, environmentally sound management and active 
promotion of cleaner technologies. 
Action Taken by Government 
 It is submitted that the Ministry of Environment and Fore sts has notified the Hazardous Wastes (Management, Handling 
and Transboundary Movement) Rules, 2008 for proper management and handling of hazardous wastes. As per these Rules, 
waste generated is required to be sent or sold to a register ed or authorized recycler or reprocessor or re-user having 
environmentally sound facilities. The Government encourages setting up of integrated Treatment, Storage and Disposal 
Facilities (TSDFs) for hazardous waste management on public private partnership mode. On the basis of proposals received 
from the State, the Government of India provides financial assistance to the State Pollution Control Boards for setting up of 
TSDFs. 
Comments 
 The Committee while appreciating the in itiatives taken by the Ministry fo r proper management and handling of 
hazardous wastes, is of the view that the Ministry must ensure th at the rules are strictly followed and any hazardous 
substance/material should not be dealt/recycled without proper environmentally sound facilities. 
Recommendation (para 18.6) 
 The Committee is of the view that increasing population, rapid industrialization, growing urbanization, etc. over the years 
has made tremendous impact on environment. The prevention and control of pollution measures have not been commensurate 
with the pace of adverse impact on environment. The responsibility and workload of the Ministry of Environment and Forests 
whose primary concern is the implementation of policies and programmes relating to conservation of the country’s natural 
resources, biodiversity, forests and wildlife, the welfare of animals and prevention and abatement of pollution has also increased 
accordingly manifold. Hence, there is a need  to correspondingly enhance the manpower, scientific cap abilities and expertise of 
the Ministry. The Committee is of the view that these issues need to be urgently addressed. Therefore, it is of the view that t he 
Ministry’s manpower and infrastructure must be strengthened and augmented. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends 
that the Ministry of Environment and Forests should be properly and adequately funded. 
Action Taken by Government 
 The Ministry of Environment and Forests is primarily c oncerned with the implementation of policies and programme 
relating to conservation of the country’s natural resources in cluding lakes and rivers, its bio-diversity, forests and wildlife , 
ensuring the welfare of animals and preven tion and abatement of pollution. These ob jectives are well supported by a set of 
legislative and regulatory measures, aime d at the preservation, conservation and protection of the environment. Besides the 
legislative measures, a National Conservation Strategy an d Policy Statement on Envi ronment and Development and 

Development, 1992, National Forests Policy, 1988, a Policy Statement on Abatement of Pollution, 1992 and a National 
Environment Policy, 2006 have also been evolved. 
 An expert group has been setup by the Ministry to give recommendation for strengthening the scientific and technology 
base. In addition, action is also being taken to strengthen Forestry Wing of the Ministry. 
 The overall budgetary allocations of the Ministry have be en raised from Rs. 2129.00 crores in 2009-10 (BE) to Rs. 
2601.16 crores in 2010-11 (BE), implying an ov erall increase of 22.2 per cen t. At this level, while non - plan budget ts higher  
by 61.1 per cent, plan budget of the Mi nistry, which accounts for arou nd 85 per cent of its total budgetary allocations, has 
increased by 17 per cent in 2010-11. 
 However, Planning Commission is being requested to allocate more funds to this Ministry so that schemes/programmes 
pertaining to this Ministry are implemented more effectively. 
Comments 
 The Committee notes the reply.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
VI  
SIXTH MEETING 
  The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 8th December, 2010 in Room No. '63', First Floor, Parliament House, 
New Delhi. 
  PRESENT 
 1. Dr. T. Subbarami Reddy     -------       Chairman 
  RAJYA  SABHA 
 2. Dr. Chandan Mitra 
 3. Shri Saman Pathak 
 4. Shri Paul Manoj Pandian 
 5. Shri Jabir Husain 
 6.  Dr. Barun Mukherji 
 7.  Prof. M.S. Swaminathan 
  LOK  SABHA 
 8.  Dr. Mirza Mehboob Beg  
 9.  Shri P. C. Chacko 
 10.  Shri Ninong Ering 
 11.  Shri A. Ganeshamurthi  
 12.  Shri S.S. Ramasubbu 
 13.  Shri Bibhu Prasad Tarai  
 14.  Prof. Ranjan Prasad Yadav 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. D.B. Singh, Joint Secretary  
Shri Alok Chatterjee, Director  
Shri V.S.P. Singh, Joint Director 
Shri Girija Shankar Prasad, Assistant Director 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to  the meeting of the Committee and apprised them that the 
Committee would consider and adopt its draft 213th to 219th reports on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
recommendations contained in the 204th to 210th reports on Demands for Grants (2010-11), pertaining to the 
Ministries/Departments of the ***, ***, ***, ***, Environment & Forests respectively. *** *** *** 
3.  * * *  
4.  * * *  
5.  * * *  
6.  * * *  
7. With regard to the 219th Report, the Chairman reminded that while considering its 210th report on the Demands for 
Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Environment & Forest s, the Committee had discussed th at massive affo restation was 
very important and, therefore, the Ministry should have a target of increasing the forest cover. But for massive afforestation 
huge financial resources were required which the Ministry could not afford. So, the Committee had recommended that 
corporates, both public and private, must co me forward and help the Ministry to do afforestation. But nothing has been done. 
The matter has been simply referred to the Ministry of Corporate Affa irs. The Committee, therefore, needs to reaffirm and 

reiterate its recommendation and the commen ts of the Committee have accordingly been drafted---the Chairman added. 
Thereafter, he read out the comments as follows: 
 “The Committee appreciates the ambitious programme of Ministry of Environment & Forests to undertake massive 
afforestation in the country. The Committee, however, felt that sufficient funds may not be available with the Ministry for 
financing this massive programme. The Committee took note of the guidelines issued by the Department of Public 
Enterprises, which make it mandatory for public and private Corporates to spend certain percentage of their profit on 
Corporate Social Responsibility. Therefore, with a view to st rengthen the hands of Ministry of Environment & Forests, 
the Committee recommended that it should be made mandatory for private & public Corporates to spend 50 per cent of 
the money being spent toward Corporate Social Responsibility for massive afforestation under the guidance of the 
Ministry of Environment & Forests. 
 The Committee, however, is dismayed to note that the Ministry of Environment & Forests has merely referred the 
matter to the Ministry of Corporate Affa irs even though Department of Public Enterprises is concerned with the matter 
and no other action whatsoever has been taken by the Ministry even though more than 6 months have lapsed since the 
Committee made its recommendations.  
 To make it mandatory for public and private Corporates to spend 50% of fund available for Corporate Social 
Responsibility for the massive afforestation in the country, is the policy matter of the Government. Therefore, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee directs that in the interest to achieve massive afforestation in the country, the Ministry 
of Environment & Forests should approach the competent authority in Government to formulate the policy. The policy 
perhaps could be finalized / agreed at the level of Prime Minister / Cabinet and, therefore, the Ministry should approach 
this competent authority to formulate the policy. The Committee further desires that this should be done expeditiously.” 
8. After some deliberations, the Committee agreed to  the aforesaid comments and adopted the Report. 
9.  * * *  
10.  * * *  
11.  * * *  
12.   The Committee, thereafter, decided to present its 213th to  220th Report to both the Houses of the Parliament on 13th 
December, 2010. The Committee authorised its Chairman and in hi s absence Shri Jabir Husain to  present the Report in Rajya 
Sabha and Shri Francisco Sardinha and in his absence Shri P.C. Chacko to lay the copy of the report on the table of Lok Sabha. 
13.  The Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 