PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/21st%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
 ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1995-96)
TWENTY -FIRST REPORT ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (1995-96) OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY (MINISTRY OF SCIENCE AND
 TECHNOLOGY)
(DEMAND NO. 74)
(Presented on May 4, 1995)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
May, 1995/Vaisakha, 1917 (Saka)
CONTENTS
1.    COMPOSITION OF THE COMMI1TEE ................................................................                                                                               
2.    INTRODUCTION................................................................................
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITI'EE ..........................................................................
4.  MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITIEE ..........................................
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMIITEE ON SCIENCE
 AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1995-96)
1. Syed Sibtey Razi-Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2.    Dr. M. Aram
3.    Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
4.    Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
5.    Shri K. Rahman Khan
6.    Prof. M.G.K. Menon
7.    Shri Suresh Pachouri
8.    Shri N. Giri Prasad
9.    Shri Satchidananda
10.    Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
11.    Dr. Ranbir Singh
12. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
LOK SABRA
13.
   Shir E. Ahamed
14.    Shri P.C. Chacko
15.    Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
16.    Shri Jitendra Nath Das
17.    Shri Sharad Dighe
18.    Shrimati Saroj Dubey
19.    Shri Oscar Fernandes .
20.    Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
21.    Shri P. Kumarasamy
22.    Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
23.    Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
24.    Shri M. V. V.S. Murthy
25.    Shri Harpal Panwar
26.    Shri Balraj Pasi
27.    Shri BhiIil Singh Patel
28.    Shri Chandresh Patel
29.    Shri Vijay Naval PatH
30.    Prof. Radliika RanjanPramanik
31.    Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
32.    Shri Rama Chandra Rath

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/21st%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
33.    Shri M.G. Reddy
34.    Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
35.    Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
36.    Shri Harchand Singh
(i)
37.    Shri Ram Prasad Singh
38.Shri K. G. Shivappa
39.Shri Bapusaheb Thite  
40.Kumari Sushila Tiriya
41.Kumari Fridll Topno
42. Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
Shri, N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to
 submit the Report on its behalf, present the Twenty first Report, on the Demands for Grants pertaining to the Department of Biotechnology
 (Ministry of Science and Technology) for the year 1995-96 (Demand No. 74).
2. In its meetings held on April 17-18, 1995 the Committee considered the Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology on the
 basis of the documents made available to it and the submission made before it by the Secretary and the other representatives of the
 Department.
3. The Committee thanks the officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the Hon'ble Members and placing
 before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on May 2, 1995.
New Delhi;
May 2, 1995.
        SYED SIBTEY RAZI
               Chairman,
Committee on Science and Technology,
   Environment and Forests.
 
                                                                                  
                                                                      
                                                                                                 
REPORT
The Department of Biotechnology (DBT) was set up in 1986. Earlier, the National Biotechnology Board, which was set up by the
 Department of Science and Technology in 1982 coordinated activities in the field of biotechnology. During the last 9 years of its existence
 DBT has been able: to create 16 major infrastructural facilities which serves the large life sciences community in the country; set up 6 centres
 for plant molecular biology-an area of great importance in the future;. initiate and support 32' programmes for teaching and training in
 biotechnology; promote significant research over a broad spectrum of areas in the life sciences; manage two autonomous institutions the
 National Institute of Immunology (NIl), New Delhi and the National Facility for Animal Tissue and Cell Culture (NF A TCC), Pone; setup a
 new institution on DNA Finger Printing; arrange for a network of bioinformatic centres based on computer communications; conduct a
 number of important programmes for demonstration and technology transfer in the areas of oil palm, tissue culture, biofertisers, biopesticides,
 aquaculture, and initiate vaccine research and production. Initially, the Department concentrated on creating several essential infrastructural
 facilities and initiating programmes for Human Resource Development, as well as creating centres of excellence. During the coming two
 years, the last part of the Eighth Plan, the Department plans to focus its attention on supporting large inter ­institutional multi-disciplinary
 projects and those leading to tangible results; rather than creating more new infrastructural facilities which would call for large investments.
2. The Secretary, DBT and the representatives of the Department in their presentation before the Committee gave an account of some of
 the achievements of the Department during the year 1994-95.. The Department has been fulfilling responsibilities towards the National
 Institute of Immunology (NIl), National Facility for Animal Tissue and Cell Culture (NFATCC), International Centre for Genetic Engineering
 and Biotechnology (ICGEB), Bharat Immunologists and Biologicals Corporation Limited (BIBCOL) and Indian Vaccine Corporation Limited
 (IVCOL). The progress of the various programmes of the Department is regularly monitored by experts; in particular the Department has a
 Scientific Advisory Committee and Standing Advisory Committee (Overseas) as also 16 Task Forces. Significant achievements have resulted

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/21st%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
 in some of the areas which were explained in detail by the Secretary, DBT. During last year DBT has made special efforts to focus on selective
 programmes for product development and validation of results available through R&D. The Department has also identified new areas and
 institutions for initiating biotechnology-based activities. Some research programmes of the Department were directed towards. the generation
 of environmentally friendly and sustainable technologies. The Committee was informed that some of the ongoing projects of the Department
 in the areas of Embryo Transfer Technology (EIT), aquaculture, oil palm, cardamom, etc. have been completed.
3. As regards programmes for the year 1995.-96, the Committee was informed that the Department would be taking up research projects on
 wheat, Seri biotechnology, new medicinal plants, vanilla, human genetics, food biotechnology and biodiversity conservation, proarammes for
 the development of immunodiagnostic kits for various communicable diseases, new drug delivery systems, immunomodulators, etc. Regarding
 new areas, the Committee was informed about protein engineering, molecular modeling, and refinement of protocols relating to tissue culture,
 validation of protocols for large scale field trials and transfer to industry, and strengthening of microbiology research. Other important areas
 which, would receive support from the Department are DNA sequencing, X-ray Crystallography and NMR spectroscopy for structural biology
 studies. The Department al intends to take up i:e Jnonstrations programmes of proven technologies for reclamation mine dumps and
 biohydrometallurgy for enhanced gold recovery from low grade ores. Nt Universities and Institutions would be identified for Human Resource
 Development. T Department also wishes to intensify its work on hatchery development, and feed for prawn, and fish aquaculture. A major
 focus of the Department would be on studies and assess of the environmental impact of aquaculture in different ecological regions.
 Development diagnostic kits and, facilities for diagnosis of shrimp diseases would also be taken up. T Committee was informed about the
 work being done at NII, NF A TCC, and the programm of BIBCOL to product oral polio vaccine. The Centre for DNA Finger Printing to be-
 set at Hyderabad (A.P.) will be jointly implemented by the DBT, Council of Scientific a: Industrial Research (CSIR) and the Ministry of Home
 Affairs (MHA). Regarding ICGE the Committee was informed that the research on diagnostics, plant molecular biology a: vaccine
 development would continue in addition to the training of manpower.
4. After listening to the presentation made by the Secretary DBT and the representation of the Department, the Committee examined the
 budgetary allocation of the Department f the year 1995-96.- While considering the Demands for Grants of the Department, ti Committee also
 got an opportunity to review the work relating to various projects al programmes which fall within the mandate of the Department.
5. The Committee was told that the Department of Biotechnology' had projected demand of Rs, 650 crores for the entire Eighth Five Year Plan
 period. This was lat reduced by the Department itself to Rs. 550 crores. The Planning Commission, during to finalisation of the Eighth Five
 Year Plan, however, indicated an outlay of only Rs. 21 crores for the Department for the period 1992-97. The Department had already spent
 sum of Rs. 244 crores during the first three years of the Eighth Plan thus leaving only Rs. : crores in terms of the initial allocations. Taking
 note of this, a specific question was, askc about the demand projected by DBT for the remaining two years of the Eight Five Ye Plan, during
 the mid-term appraisal of the Eighth Plan. The representative of t) Department informed the Committee that, during the mid-term review, the
 Planning Commission agreed that, based on the progress and the performance of the Department adequate outlays would be provided to the
 Department every year during the Annual Ph discussion. for the year 1995-96 the Department had projected a demand of Rs. 100 crore on the
 Plan side, but a sum of Rs. 90 crores was approved as Plan outlay for to Department. The Committee particularly wanted to know whether this
 reduced plan out would not affect adversely the ongoing programmes of the Department. The Committee w: told that the Department would
 make efforts to use the facilities already created are develop programmes around those facilities. However, for the year 1996-97 the
 Department would be requiring a sum of Rs. 120 crores as it intends to initiate a number of the activities which would culminate ,into large
 projects.
5.1 Analysing the demands of the Department for the entire Eighth Five Year Plan period this Committee had already recommended' in its
 Eighth Report that a sum of Rs. 450 crore may be agreed to for DUT. The Committee, therefore, feels that an outlay of Rs. 450 crore will be
 needed by DUT for the entire Eighth Plan period to implement its ongoing proJec and also generate new projects In important areas. The
 Committee is convened of the need to this after examination the progress made and the importance of the areas concerned.
6. The Committee evinced keen interest in the programmes of the- Department which intend to benefit 'weaker sections.
-For summary of the Demands for Grants see Schedule.
The Committee was informed that DBT had constituted an expert committee in 1990-91 to generate biotechnology based programmes for the
 benefit of the Scheduled Castes Scheduled Tribes, weaker sections and rural people. Non­governmental organisations, voluntary agencies and
 field level research institutions are actively involved in these programmes. So far 16 projects have been supported, which include programmes
 like fallen carcass utilisation, vermicomposting, mushroom cultivation, biofertilisers, medicinal and aromatic plants, sericulture, etc. As
 regards allocations for various programmes meant to benefit weaker sections, for the year 1995-96, the Committee was told that the allocations
 are adequate. The Department also follows a flexible procedure to adjust and reappropriate if some priority areas emerge.
6.1 The Committee expresses its satisfaction over the fact that the allocation made for the programmes for the weaker sections and rural areas
 in the budget for the year 1995-96 are adequate. It would, however, like to stress that the extension activities which regard to the
 implementation of biotechnology-based programmes for the benefit of SCIST and other weaker sections of society should be strengthened. In
 this regard, DBT has a responsibility to fully demonstrate the potential of biotechnology-based programmes in generating employment and
 income, and also improving the health status of the poor people. DBT will need to coordinate its endeavours with the socio-economic
 ministries and departments in the Central and the State governments in order to increase the acceptance of· its biotechnology-based
 programmes which have a potential of generating income and providing better quality health to the poor.
7. Bharat Immunologicals and Biologicals Corporation Limited (BIBCOL) was incorporated in March 1989 as a Public Sector Company to
 manufacture oral polio vaccine (OPV) and other immunobiologicals. The Committee was told that during the year 1995-96 the target set for

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/21st%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
 BIBCOL is production of 100 million doses of oral polio vaccine which would be supplied for use in the national Immunication Programme.
 The Committee was told that BIBCOL has become operational, and by August 1995 ten million doses would be produced from imported bulk.
 Already six batches have been bottled and are being tested at the Central Research Institute, Kasauli, By the end of December 1995. 80 million
 doses are expected to the supplied for the National Immunisation Programme.'
7.1 The Committee expresses., its satisfaction over the fact that BIBCOL has started trial runs for the production of vaccine from bulk. This
 will build up to a 100 million doses during 1995-96. But the real efforts would have to be directed towards manufacture of the vaccine
 preferably by a route not involving monkeys. OPV has an important role to play in the national Immunisation Programme.
8. The Indian Vaccine Corporation Limited (IVCOL) was incorporated as a joint venture company in March 1989 to produce Injectable Polio
 Vaccine (IPV), measles and rabies vaccine using an advanced vero-cell technology, The company has been promoted by DBT, Indian
 Petrochemicals Corporation Limited (IPCL) and Pasteur Merieux Serums and Vaccines (PMSV) , a French Company. The Committee noted
 that the progress of the project relating to IVCOL was rather tardy and wanted to know the reasons for this. The Committee was told that due
 to a basic policy decision taken by Government, IPV would not be introduced into the National Immunisation programme at present; the need
 for large scale production of this through vero-cell technology was not there; hence the project was kept on hold during 1992-93. A negotiating
 committee of the three promoters reviewed the situation and a new product mix was suggested which would still bring in vero-cell technology
 into the country. In January- 1995, the Cabinet had directed that suitable Indian partners bated who will invest in the company and take over
 its management. During the interim period, the French company, (In which the involvement of the French Government was no longer there),
 lost its interest in the project and the transfer of this advanced technology. The progress of the IVCOL project largely depends on the
 finalisation of negotiations which IPCL and PMSV on the vero cell technology transfer and related issues of product mix which can use this
 technology. Already a sum of Rs. 23.47 croreshas been spent on this project which includes the cost of land, site development, indigenous
 equipment and training of personnel, etc.
8.1 The Committee feels that concerted efforts should be made to find suitable Indian partners who are ready to invest in the Company and take
 over its management. Based on the technology transfer from PMSV, the new management should also attempt to· produce OPV with this new
 technology.
9. The Committee was told that the Department was according high priority to the area of immunodiagnostic kits considering the serious
 disease burden, particularly among weaker sections of the society of TB, AIDS, filariasis, hepatitis and several other communicable diseases.
 Naturally, this requires low cost, simple, diagnostic methods. This Department has contacted the institutions which have basic expertise in this
 area to formulate contract- mode projects for development of diagnostic kits. Some of the programmes in this area which were mentioned are:
 Rota Viral diarrhoeal infection; DNA probe for tuberculosis; Monoclonal antibody based antigen detection test for Kalaazar; lmmunodot
 enzyme staining test for malaria based on detection of parasitic enzyme, studies on Lipoprotein; Immunodiagnostic test for filariasis based on
 detection of circulating antigen. The development of AIDS diagnostic kits at NIl, Delhi University (South Campus) and Cancer Research
 Institute (CRI), Bombay, is in fairly advanced stages. By July 1995 the synthetic Peptide test kit based on work at NII would be tested on more
 that 500 patients. Wester blot strips, developed by CRI, Bombay are being independently evaluated by clinical laboratories; they had a
 sensitivity comparable to those manufactured by Abott of USA. Explaining' the reasons for the increase of Rs. 2 crores for the year 1995-96 in
 the budgetary allocation of NII, the Committee was given the details about the new projects and the programmes that are to be undertaken by
 the Institute. The research at NII is focused on immunological projects to deal with a broad range of health problems, specially contraception
 and communicable diseases. The Committee was also given an account of the pioneering work done at the Institute.
9.1 The Committee appreciates the approach of the Department with regard to the development of immunodiagnostic methods. The Committee
 would, however, like the Department to deal with a variety of communicable and tropical diseases while are common to India and other parts
 of Asia and Africa. If the Department achieve utilize developing low-cost, simple diagnostic methods for detecting various tropical and
 communicable diseases,  one can explore the possibility, of finding a market for these in other countries well there disease burden particularly
 is also very high and of similar nature. One can also explore the possibility of getting these diapostic kits accepted by the World Health
 Organization (WHO) for its various programmes relating to tropical and communicable disease.   In the developing world. This is an area of
 challenge and of opportunity and since the products are mend to be of low cost and large scale use in Public health delivery systems, they are
 unlikely to be of great interest to the multi-national pharmaceutical companies.
10. For the demonstration and transfer of technology, and manufacturing activities, a sum of Rs. 11.5 crores has been provided for the year
 199'5-96 thought D!pu1l11ent had actually demanded a sum of Rs. 13.5 crores. The Committee Wanted to know whether' the shortfall of Rs. 2
 crores between the demand made and demand approved would not affect the activities of the Department in this important area. The
 representative of the Ministry informed the Committee that some major activities like mission-mod projects required a lesser grant during this
 year as most of the non-recurring grants have already been provided for. On a specific query whether the Department could become
 self-.supporting in this area, the Committee was told that this would not be possible. Financial support would certainly be necessary for large
 scale demonstrations. As regards interaction with industry in some specific programmes, where R&D leads have emerged, DBT has been
 collaborating with the industry and involves them at the initial stage itself for validation and field testing. For example, the Department is
 collaborating in regard to programmes for Poultry Development with Godrej; Biofertilizers with SPIC Science Foundation; Diagnostic
 Development with SPAN, cadila, Lupin and Ranbaxy; Vaccine Development for Animals and ,Poultry with BAIF, etc. Industries contribute
 specially for proto-type development and validation of research results.
10.1 The Committee Is of the view that the Department should continue to give higher priority to the area of demonstration and transfer of
 technology; and there should be intense interaction with the industry. In this regard the Committee would like to mention about the projects
 indicated by the Department like desulphurisation of coal, bio-reclamation of mine dumps and biohydrometallurgy for enhanced gold recovery
 from low grade ores, which have a great potential, and industries should be involved in these projects in a more intense manner.

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/21st%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
11. In the budget estimates for the year 1994-95, in the area of basic and project-based R&D projects a sum of Rs. 40.60 crores was allocated.
 In the revised estimates the allocation was brought down to Rs. 39.75 crores. Last year the Department had projected a demand of Rs. 50.43
 crores under this head, but this year only a sum of Rs. 43 crores was demanded and the Department could get only Rs. 42 crores. The
 Committee wanted to know whether this area is receding in the priorities of the Department. The Committee was told that, last year, a higher
 allocation was demanded because the Department wanted to set up some major facilities like X-ray crystallography, FTNMR, etc. In the
 projected  demand for this year no such new major facility is included. The outlay earmarked for the year 1995­96 would be used for
 supporting R&D projects in identified areas. DBT has already set up with DST and CSIR certain joint facilities and there are some other
 proposals in the pipeline. The Department is encouraging joint proposals. The Committee was told of the example of the Food Biotechnology
 Programme of the Department which has been supported with 50% contribution from the Ministry of Food Processing Industries.
11.1 The Committee is happy to note that the Department Is making efforts to generate more joint projects with ICMR, ICAR, various other
 Ministries of Government and industry. The NMR faculty has been set up jointly by the Department with SPIC Science Foundation, with 50%
 contribution from SPIC. The Committee rmds that the concept of joint facilities, particularly in areas which involve very large outlays is
 praiseworthy. The Committee also appreciates the efforts made by the Department in generating certain joint projects. The Department should,
 however, see that the joint facilities which are set up in high-tech areas should be optimally utilised by the scientific· institutions.
12. During the course of its examination, the Committee mentioned to the Department that Issue Culture Technology has a great potential. At
 present, tissue culture material that is made available to fanners and entrepreneurs is costly. The Committee, therefore, wanted to know about
 the steps the Department proposes to take to reduce the costs. The Committee was told that the main advantage of using tissue culture
 technology for large scale production of biomass is to have high quality planting materials with desirable traits.
The Department admitted that the cost of Tissue Culture Technology is relatively high. The representatives of the Department, however,
 mentioned that special studies have been initiated at the pilot plants in Tata Energy Research Institute (TERI) and the National Chemical
 Laboratories (NCL) to reduce the cost.
12.1 The Committee appreciates the studies being carried out for reducing the cost of high quality planting material obtained through Tissue
 Culture Technology; it would like the Department to make more vigorous efforts in this direction. Because of the high cost of the material,
 small farmers are not able to use it. If the cost of planting material, obtained through Tissue Culture Technology, is reduced, it would help in a
 big way .in the afforestation programme of the Government also.
13. Aquaculture is becoming very popular in the coastal areas. The Committee evinced keen interest in the aquaculture programme of the
 Department. Under the programme 'Basic and Product-based R&D Projects', the Committee noted that for aquaculture and marine
 biotechnology an outlay of Rs. 1.5 crores has been made in this year's budget. But under the programme Demonstration/transfer of Technology
 and Manufacturing Activities' in this year's budget the allocation for aquaculture has been reduced to Rs. 2 crores from the earlier year's Rs.
 3.15 crores, though this programme is in the mission mode. The Committee wanted to know as to how the Department proposes to promote
 prawn culture in the coastal region with the reduced allocation, particularly when the feed and the seed has to be made available to fish farmers
 at a reasonable price. The Committee also wanted to know the efforts being made by the Department to develop indigenous feed and help in
 installing hatcheries.
13.1 The Committee was informed that under aquaculture and marine biotechnology, two broad categories of programmes are supported,
 namely, R&D as well as the mission­ mode demonstration projects. For 1995-96, for R&D component, Rs. 1.5 crores have been· provided,
 and for the mission-mode project, Rs. 2 crores have been provided, which is as per the EFC provision. Generally, in the first year of the
 project, 60% of the grant for non­recurring purposes is released. Therefore, in the second year, the expenditure becomes less. The mission-
mode project has been formulated in consultation with the Ministries of Agriculture and Commerce. The total cost is Rs. 9.9 crores for 7 sites;
 the sites in the coastal regions are A&N Islands, West Bengal, Gujarat and Pondicherry. The research results from the R&D component would
 be incorporated. into the mission-mode project. For example, the indigenous feed development under R&D world be tried out in the mission-
mode programme. The total provision for aquaculture during 1995-96 is Rs. 3.5 crores.
13.2 The Committee is of the view that. there is an immense possibility for brackish water prawn culture in the coastal areas of India. To
 achieve the goal, feed and seed at reasonable price have to be made available easily to the prospective fish farmers at their door-steps. To do
 the DBT must take necessary measures to develop the indigenous feed arad to help install hatcheries in required areas.
14. Patenting in the area of life sciences is a very complex problem. It is very different from what obtains in the other fields of science and
 technology. The developments calling for patenting are relatively new, involve many ethical issues and are highly uncertain in interpretation.
 The Committee wanted to know the specific steps that are being taken by the Department on Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) related matters
 in its area of mandate.
14.1 The Committee was told that DBT would provide necessary support to strengthen the Patenting Cell in the Council of Scientific and
 Industrial Research (CSIR) which would help Indian scientists in obtaining patents in the area of biotechnology. The Industry Division in DBT
 has been designated to deal with all patent issues. Support would be provided by DBT for filing patents nationally and internationally; and the
 contingency grant for research projects that can lead to patents would be enhanced suitably. Efforts have also been made, and would be further
 strengthened, to build awareness, disseminate information and organise training programmes for patent-related matters as applicable to
 biological research. The Department is also closely working with the Ministry of Industry on patent related issues.
14.2 While the Committee appreciates the efforts being made by the Department in the area of IPR, it would, however, like to reiterate the
 recommendation made in its Seventeenth Report the DBT should have a group of its own to suggest how India should develop its strength and
 expertise in the area of IPR in biological sciences. The Department should earmark necessary funds to support this activity, including for filing
 of patents and intensive activity relating to awareness building and training on IPR related matters.
15. Biotechnology is a frontier area of science. The work presented by the Department clearly brings out the highly scientific and technical

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/21st%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
 nature of the field. The Committee would like to ensure that the Department has high quality, motivated scientific staff. For this, appropriate
 recruitment and promotion policies are needed so that the Department is able to attract and keep talent. To a specific question about the
 vacancies existing in the Department, the Committee was told that at present three positions are vacant in group 'A' and five technical positions
 in group 'B' are lying vacant; and to another question on promotions it was indicated that these have been held up for considerable time on
 administrative grounds.
15.1 The Committee is of the view that the existing vacancies in the Department should be filled up. The Department should also resolve
 matters relating to appointments and promotions and provide adequate. promotional avenues to the scientists. In this regard framing of
 recruitment and promotion rules may be accorded priority as has been indicated by the Committee in its Eighth Report. The Government
 should see that all bottlenecks in regard to these matters are removed urgently. The Committee had earlier noted in its Eighth Report that: ''The
 Committee is firmly of the view that no time should be wasted on bureaucratic aspects in this regard. The Department was created out of the
 Department of Science and Technology and is part of the Ministry of Science and Technology. Personnel policies, recruitment rules, etc.
 already exist in the Department of Science and Technology and can be made use of without delay; the Department has also exemption from
 UPSC which should continue." There is no reason why the totality of rules that apply in the Department of Science and Technology should not
 be made applicable to DBT. These have after, all been cleared from personnel, legal add other angles and DBT derived from the earlier DST.
 Unless the scientists are provided proper, facilities in terms of recruitment, production, accommodation, etc., it would .,e difficult for tile
 Department to retain really talented, people.
16. The Committee would like DBT to consider that possibility of major trusts in: (i) training on, industrial aspects of biotechnology; and (Ii)
 the assessment, production and supply of chemicals and biologicals deeded ill modern biotechnology work.
17. After making a detailed scrutiny of the Demands for Grants of the Department of Biotechnology and assessing the progress of various
 important programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs. 96.52 crores, as sought
 by the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1995-96, under Demand No. 74, are in .order and may be approved.
 
New Delhi;
May 2,1995
SYED'SIBTEY RAZI
                                                                                             Chairman,
Committee on Science &Technology,
Environment & Forests        
 
.
 
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT - RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met from 11.00 a.m. to 12.34 p.m. and again from 3.00 p.m. to 5.32 p.m. on Monday, the 17th April, 1995 in Committee
 Room 'A', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1.
      Shri Oscar Fernandes-in the Chair·
RAJYA SABHA
2.
    Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
3.    Shri K. Rahman Khan
4.    Prof. M.G.K. Menon
5.    Shri Suresh Pachouri
6.    Shri Satchidananda
7. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
8. Dr. Ranbir Singh
LOK SABRA
9. Shri E. Ahamed
10.   Shri P.C. Chacko
11.   Shri Harpal Panwar
12.   Shri Vijay Naval Patil
13.   Shri Harchand Singh
14.   Shri Ram Prasad Singh
15.Shri Bapusaheb Thite
16. Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
        SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Department of Space
Dr. K. Kasturirangan, Secretary
Shri P.P. Prabhu, Additional Secretary Shri A. Sengupta, Joint Secretary

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/21st%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
Shri K. Narayanan, Progamme Director
Shri M.G. Chandrasekhar, Scientific Secretary
Shri K. Radhakrishnan, Director
Shri V. Sundararamaiah, Deputy Director Shri S. Krishnamurthy, Director
Shri E.K. Kutty,· Deputy Director
Shri K.S. Krishnan, OSD
Shri T.S. Venkataramani, Administrative Officer Shri Rattan Lal, Under Secretary
·In the afternoon session, Prof. M.G.K. Menon was in the Chair.
Representatives of the Department of Biotechnology
Dr. C.R. Bhatia, Secretary
Dr. (Mrs.) Manju Sharma, Advisor
Dr. V.K. Vinayak, Advisor
Shri S.B. Krishnan, JS & FA
Dr. P. K. Ghosh, Director
Shri Krishan Lal, Deputy Secretary (Finance)
Shri S. Sinha, Principal Scientific Officer
  Dr.  (Ms) Renu Swarup, Senior Scientific Officer-l
2. At the outset, the Chairman made a reference to the passing away of Shri Morarji Desai, formar Prime Minister of India. The Members of
 the Committee observed  two minutes silence with all of them standing as a mark of respect to the memory of the departed leader.
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up for consideration the Demand for Grants (1995-96) of the Department of Space. The Secretary of the
 Department barfly explained for the benefit of the Members the allocations on different activities / project of the Department as proposed in its
 Demands for Grants. The Members then sought clarifications from him and other representatives of the Department on various points relating
 to the Demands for Grants.
4. In the afternoon session, the Committee took up for consideration the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Department of Biotechnology.
 The Secretary of the Department assisted by other officials gave an overview of the allocation as proposed for its different activities / projects
 in the Demands for Grants and the Members sought necessary clarifications relating thereto.
5. The discussion on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Department of Space and Biotechnology remained inconclusive.
6.A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7.The Committee then adjourned at 5.32 p.m. to meet again at 11.00 a.m. oil Tuesday, the 18th April, 1995.
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met from 11.()() a.m. to 1.10 p.m. and again from 2.30 p.m. to 3.48 p.m. on Tuesday, the 18th April, 1995 in Room No.
 139, Parliament House Annexe. New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Prof. M.G.K. Menon - in the Chair
RAJYA SABHA
2.
    Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
3.    Shri K. Rahman Khan
4.    Shri Suresh Pachouri
5.    Shri Satchidananda
6. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh 7. Dr. Ranbir Singh
LOK SABHA
8.    Shri Sharad Dighe
9.    Shri Oscar Fernandes
10.   Shri Balraj Pasi
11.   Shri Harchand Singh
12.   Shri Ram Prasad Singh
13.   Shri K.G. Shivappa
14.   Shri Bapusaheb Thite
15.   Kumari Frida Topno
       16. Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
Representatives of the Department of Space
Pro K. Kasturirangan, Secretary
Shrl P.P. Prabhu, Additional Secretary
Shri A. Sengupla, Joint Secretary
Shri K. Narayanan, Progamme Director
Shri M.G. Chandrasekhar, Scientific Secretary
Shri K. Radhakrishnan, Director

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/21st%20Report.htm[29-08-2018 16:10:00]
Shri V Sundararamaiah, Deputy Director
Shri S. Krishnamurthy, Director
Shri E.K. Kutty, Deputy Director
              Shri K.S. Krishnan, OSD
Sftri T.S. Venkataramani, Administrative Officer
Shri Rattan Lal, Under Secretary
Representatives of the Department of Biotechnology
Dr. C.R. Bhatia Secretary
Dr. (Mrs.) Manju Sharma, Advisor
Dr. V.K. Vinayak, Advisor
Shri S.B. Krishnan, JS & FA Dr. P.K. Ghosh, Director
Dr. (Mrs.) Amita Biswas, Director
Dr. S.K. Basu, Director NII
Qr. K.C. Shrivastava, Deputy Secretary (Admn.)
Shri Krishan Lal, . Deputy Secretary (Finance)
Shri S. Sinha, Principal Scientific Officer
Dr. (Ms) Renu Swarup, Senior Scientific Officer-I
2. In the forenoon session, the Committee took up further consideration of the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Department of Space.
 The Secretary of the Department, assisted by other officials, supplemented some of the points earlier made before the Committee on the
 subject in its meeting held on the 17th April, 1995 and replied to the clarifications sought by the Members.
3. In the afternoon session, the Committee took up for further consideration the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the Department of
 Biotechnology. The Secretary of the Department, assisted by other officials, replied to the clarifications sought by the Members on various
 aspects relating to the Demands for Grants.
4. The discussion on the Demands for Grants (1995-96) of the DepartP1~nt of Space and Biotechnology was concluded ..
5.
    A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6.    The Committee then adjoined at 3.48 p.m.
VII SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. on Tuesday, the 2nd May, 1995 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
1. Syed Sibtey Razi-Chairman
RAJYA SABRA
2.    Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
3.    Shri K. Rahman Khan
4.    Prof. M.G.K. Menon
5.    Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
6.    Dr. Ranbir Singh
7. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
LOK SABRA
8.    Shri E. Ahamed
9.    Shri J. C. Chacko
10.   Shrimati Saroj Dubey
11.   Shri Oscar Fernandes
12.   Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
13.   Shri Harchand Singh
14.Shri Bapusaheb Thite
15. Kumari Frida Topno
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
2. The Committee took up consideration of its draft Twenty-first Report on the Demands for Grands (1995-96) of the Department of
 Biotechnology (Ministry of Science and Technology) and after some discussion, adopted the same, with minor amendments.
3. The Committee decided to present this Report to both the Houses of Parliament on the 4th May, 1995. The Committee authorised its
 Chairman and in his absence, Shri K. Rahman Khan to, present this Report to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Oscar Fernandes and in his absence,
 Shri Shankarrao D. Kale to lay the Report on the Table of the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.46 a.m.
 