R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
Parliament of India
 Rajya Sabha
DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
 ON
SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS
88th REPORT
 ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2001-2002)  OF THE  DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT  (DEMAND NO.
 89) 
(presented to the Rajya Sabha on 18th April, 2001)
 (laid in the Lok Sabha on 20th April, 2001)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 April, 2001/Visakha, 1923  (Saka)
     C O N T E N T S 
1.     COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
2.     INTRODUCTION
3.     REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.     SUMMARY OF  THE RECOMMENDATIONS
5.     ANNEXURES                                                                                                                                               
(i)                  Budget Estimates for the year 2001-2002
(ii)                 Replies to the questionnaire                                                                                        
 6.      MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMITTEE    
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (YEAR 2001)
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah — Chairman
            RAJYA SABHA 

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
2. Shri Debabrata Biswas
3.   Shri Yusuf Sarwar Khan alias Dilip Kumar
4. Shri K. C. Kondaiah
5.   Smt. Chandresh Kumari
6.   Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra                      
7.   Dr. D. Masthan                                    
8.   Shri Lalitbhai Mehta                             
9.   Prof.(Smt.) Bharati Ray            
10.  Smt. Savita Sharda
11.  Shri Birabhadra Singh                           
12.  Shri Lachhman Singh                            
13.  Shri B.P. Singhal                                              
14.  Shri Prakanta Warisa                            
15.  Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav
               LOK  SABHA
       16.  Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura
17.  Shri Nihal Chand Chauhan                    
18.  Shri Vishwendra Singh Chauhan
19.  Smt. Bhavana Chikhaliya                      
20.  Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza                 
21.  Shri Laxman Giluwa                             
22.  Shri Gordhanbhai Javiya
23. Shri Bali Ram Kashyap
24.  Shri Hassan Khan
25.  Dr. Charan Das Mahant
26.  Shri S. Murugesan                                
27.  Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
28.  Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                              
29.  Shri A. Venkatesh Naik            
30.  Shri B.K. Parthasarathi             
31.  Shri Suresh Pasi                                               
32.  Dr. Ashok Patel                                               

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
33.  Shri Prahlad Patel                                 
34.  Prof. R.R. Pramanik                             
35.  Shri Naresh Puglia                                
36.  Shri Ramsagar Rawat                           
37.  Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy 
38.  Prof. I.G. Sanadi                                              
39.  Shri Lakshman Seth                              
40.  Shri Ram Prasad Singh             
41.  Shri V.S. Sivakumar     
42.  Shri Vaiko
43.  Shri V. Vetriselvan                               
44.  Dr. (Smt.) Rajeswaramma Vukkala
45.  Shri Balram Singh Yadav
         SECRETARIAT
 
      Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
      Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
      Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
      Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
            Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
 INTRODUCTION
       I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment &
 Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on its behalf, present this Eighty-Eighth Report of the
 Committee.  This Report deals with the detailed Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the Department of Ocean Development
 (Demand No.89). 
2.  In the meeting of the Committee held on the 29 th  March, 2001 the Secretary and other Officers of the Department of Ocean
 Development gave an overview of the various activities of the Department and the Members sought clarifications on various aspects
 of the performance of the Department to enable it to scrutinise the Demands for Grants.
 3.  The Committee expresses its thanks to the Officers of the Department for replying to the clarifications sought by the
 Members and placing before it the required material to enable the Committee to scrutinise the Demands for Grants of the
 Department of Ocean Development. 
4.         The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on  18th April, 2001.
 
NEW DELHI;                                                                                                                               C. RAMACHANDRAIAH,

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
April 18th,2001                                                                                                                             Chairman,
Committee On Science & Technology,
Environment & Forests.
R E P O R T
      The Department of Ocean Development was created in July, 1981 within the Cabinet Secretariat directly under the charge of the
 Prime Minister. In March, 1982 it became a separate Department and has since been functioning as a nodal Department for
 organizing, coordinating and promoting ocean development activities in the country, in line with the Ocean Policy Statement of 1982.
 The programmes pursued by the Department over the years have also kept pace with developments World over and addressed
 National needs and issues.
     The activities of the Department are directed towards:
(i)        Technology Development Programmes for future applications with strategic, industrial and economic significance.
(ii)        Societal Programmes with direct/indirect benefit for the community by technology applications and pilot project
 demonstration with the participation of the community for their socio-economic prosperity, and for coastal area
 development.
(iii)       Marine Resources Programmes for exploration of marine living and non-living resources, techno-economic studies to
 evolve strategies for sustainable exploration and utilisation, and resource enhancement.
(iv)       Multi-institutional and multi-disciplinary Polar Science Programmes and Antarctic Expeditions with scientific and
 geo-political significance.
(v)       Capacity Building Programme towards self-reliance through basic scientific research in ocean sector, human resource
 development and establishing Centres of Excellence in academic institutions.
(vi)                 Creation of public awareness on the potential and uses of ocean.
 
BUDGETARY ALLOCATIONS FOR 2001-02
2.   The   Secretary informed the Committee that the total budgetary  demand for the year 2001-02 is as follows:
                    Plan          - Rs.142.00 crores
                    Non-Plan  - Rs.26.80 crores
                    Total       - Rs.168.80 crores
2.1The plan outlay for 2001-02 has been fixed at Rs.142.00 crores, which is Rs. 07.00 crore more than that of  2000-01 level, of which
 Rs.43.00 crore is meant for the delineation of outer limits of Continental Shelf and the remaining Rs.99.00 crore for the other Plan
 schemes.
3.   The Committee was apprised that the approved outlay for the Antarctic Research was Rs.20.00 crores,  which  would be given as
 Grants-in-aid to National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research (NCAOR) for launching the 21
st  Scientific Expedition to
 Antarctica, carrying out scientific experiments, maintenance of the permanent research station “Maitri” at Antarctica and operation
 and manning of the NCAOR. 
4.   In the case of Poly Metallic Nodules (PMN) programme, an outlay of Rs.17.30crore has been provided. This includes Rs.0.05 crore
 for survey and exploration, Rs.0.25 crore for the Environmental Impact Assessment (both under the S&T component), Rs.1.00 crore
 for mining and research and development, Rs.5.00 crore for wet leasing of Sidorenko (Russian vessel), Rs.5.00 crore for development
 of Unmanned Submersibles under a joint programme with the Institute of Russian Academy of Sciences and Rs.6.00 crore for
 metallurgy technology development. The Secretary informed the Committee that the Technology Demonstration pilot plant for
 extraction of metals from Poly Metallic Nodules at Hindustan Zinc Limited (HZL), which was initially to be commissioned by
 October, 2000 will now be commissioned by May, 2001.
5.   In the mission mode programmes of National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) including Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion
 (OTEC), an outlay of Rs.13.30 crores has been provided. The Expenditure Finance Committee has approved an outlay of Rs.35.25
 crore for OTEC programme to be implemented during the Ninth Five year Plan. The pilot plant which was expected to be
 commissioned off Tuticorin coast in September-October, 2000, is now expected to be commissioned during the current financial year,
 for which a sum of Rs.4.21 crore has been provided. The provision includes Rs.2.96 crore for meeting the increase in the cost estimate
 for evaporator and condenser for OTEC plant, owing to increase in the area  by almost 50% of the original area of the heat exchanger. 
 NIOT is also exploring the possibility of having a tie-up with some of the agencies involved in the power sector for technical and
 financial collaboration, for commercial operation once the pilot plant operation becomes successful.
6.   The Secretary informed the Committee that an outlay of Rs.43 crores has been provided for the Delineation of Continental Shelf in

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
 2001-02. Since India ratified the UN convention on the Law of the Sea in 1995, the claim for extending the outer limits of our
 continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles Exclusive Economic Zone has to be made before 2005. The time frame for carrying out
 the bathymetric and seismic surveys and preparing necessary documents to submit to the Commission on the Limits of Continental
 Shelf is 5 years.
6.1Considering this, the Government approved the scheme with an outlay of Rs.47.46 crore for implementation over a period of three
 years ending 2000-01.  The outlay was augmented to Rs.4.00 crore at RE level from Rs.0.50 crore at BE stage for 1999-2000.  The
 remaining amount of Rs.43 crore has been provided in 2000-01 budget. However, the contract for carrying out the bathymetric and
 seismic surveys couldn’t be finalised during 2000-01 and hence at the RE stage, the provision of Rs.43.00 crore was surrendered. This
 amount has now been provided for in 2001-2002. The National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research (NCAOR), Goa is
 coordinating the implementation of this programme.
7.   An outlay of Rs.2.96 crore is proposed for  Marine Living Resources Programme.  Besides, an amount of Rs.2.20 crore is proposed
 to be allocated for the ongoing Drugs from Sea programme. During the year 2001-2002, a provision of Rs.1.15 crore has been made
 for Marine Non-Living Resources such as Bengal and Nicobar Fan (BENFAN). The Committee was also informed that an outlay of
 Rs.19.70 crores has been provided for the Ocean Observation & Information Services. Out of this, the provision for the Indian
 National Centre for Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) at Hyderabad is Rs.7.25 crore and for the National Data Buoy programme
 and the other Ocean Observing System programmes, a sum of Rs.9.25 crore has been provided.
 
8.   An outlay of Rs.4.05 crore and Rs.3.94 crore has been made for Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction Systems (COMAPS)
 and Coastal Research Vessel (CRV) respectively during the Annual Plan 2001-02. An outlay of Rs.6.50 crore has been provided for
 2000-2001 for the Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management (ICMAM) Programme. 
9.   In line with the guidelines provided by the Island Development Authority the Department of Ocean Development have made a
 provision of Rs.0.75 crore for Island Development.  This is a coastal community programme implemented through National Institute
 of Ocean Technology (NIOT), by which viable technologies for enhancement of marine living resources would be developed and
 disseminated to the island community for their benefit.
10.The Department projected an outlay of Rs.157.21 crore for Annual Plan 2001-02 to the Planning commission.  However, the
 Planning Commission has restricted the outlay to Rs.142.00 crore.  Consequently the Department has rescheduled some of the
 initiatives, particularly the unmanned submersibles programme to 2001-2002.
12.The Details of budgetary projections for the programmes of the Department of Ocean Development during the year 2001-02 are
 given at Annexure-I and comparative figures in terms of provision actually made/ approved and actually utilised during 1998-99,
 1999-2000 and 2000-2001 are given at Annexure-II.
13.Asked whether the total financial outlay (plan as well as non-plan) of Rs.168.80 crores would suffice against Rs.158 crores in the
 BE of the last year, the Department has stated that it had prepared plan proposed for Rs.157.21 crores but after discussion with the
 Planning Commission, the plan outlay was fixed at Rs.142 crores which has forced the Department to reduce the outlay for the
 “Antarctic Expedition & Polar Science”, “Poly Metallic Nodules” , “Coastal and Marine Area Management”, Ocean Observation &
 Information Services”, and “Marine Research and Capacity Building” programmes.
14. The Committee observes that in view of considerable reduction in the Budgetary support at RE level last year, it should be possible
 for the Department to manage with the reduced budgetary support this year.  To that end the Committee brings on record the
 assurance given by the Department in reply to Question 1 of the Questionnaire  (See Appendix) that the present outlay will not hold
 up the execution of any programme”.
15.  In the context of delay in the Commissioning the Technology Demonstration Pilot Plant for extraction of metals from Poly
 Metallic Nodules at Hindustan Zinc Ltd., at Udaipur, which was to be commissioned in October, 2000 and the Pilot Plant which was
 expected to be commissioned off Tuticorin coast in September-October, 2000, the Committee observes that such delays result in cost
 escalations.  Besides, they reflect on the Departments’ efficiency to plan things meticulously.   Such delays need to be avoided.
MAJOR DISPROPORTIONATE VARIATIONS AND REASONS
16.The Committee was informed about the details of major disproportionate variations during the years 1998-99,1999-2000 and 2000-
2001 as follows:       
 
A.     1998-99
16.1          Antartic Research :
          B.E          -          Rs.18.50 Crore                     Actual          -          Rs.19.61 Crore
 
     The variation in expenditure was mainly due to additional requirement of funds for the Antartic Study Centre which was converted
 into an autonomous Institute and for meeting the expenditure on chartering of ice-breaker (ship) for launching of expedition as also for
 import of certain items connected with the expedition, kit clothing items, spares for equipment etc.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
16.2     Poly Metallic Nodules Programme (PMN):
          B.E          -          Rs.18.95 Crore                     Actual          -          Rs.20.31 Crore
     An additional expenditure of Rs.98 lakh was incurred for payment towards chartering of Russian Vessel RV AA Sidorenko for
 mining nodules from Central Indian Ocean Basin and related activities.
16.3          Integrated Coastal & Marine Area Management Programme (ICMAM):
          BE          -          Rs.9.00 Crore                       Actual          -          Rs.5.82 Crore
The variation in the expenditure is mainly due to certain procedural delays in finalizing the foreign consultants, reduction in
 expenditure towards foreign consultants,  reduction in the scope of the infrastructure component of the programme planned for 1998-
99, etc.
16.4          National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT):
          BE          -          Rs.13.50 Crore          Actual          -          Rs.14.49 Crore
The  Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) approved an amount of Rs.16.10 crore for   1998-99, for Ocean Thermal Energy
 Conversion (OTEC) Programme under Ocean Energy Mission of NIOT against which Rs.5.00 crore only was provided at BE level,
 owing to resource crunch.  Since, the demonstration of the technology has to be completed in two years, as approved by EFC, an
 additional expenditure of Rs.0.99 crore was provided at RE stage for this programme and hence the variation.
16.5     Island Development Programme:
          BE          -          Rs.0.25 Crore              Actual          -          Rs.1.24 Crore
The EFC approved cost  was of Rs.1.24 crore for this project during 1998-99.  The achievement of targets prescribed under this
 project was progressing as per schedule, requiring an expenditure of Rs.1.24 crore to be incurred during the current financial year
 itself and hence the variation.
B.     1999-2000
16.6     Continental Shelf:
BE          -         Rs.0.50 Crore              Actual          -          Rs.3.98 Crore
     Government has given a major thrust to this programme, which is aimed at staking a claim with United Nations Convention on Law
 of the Sea (UNCLOS) on the continental margin beyond the Exclusive Economic Zone(EEZ) of 200 nautical miles by acquiring the
 seismic data in accordance with the stipulations of the UNCLOS and submit the claims to the UN Commission on Limits of
 Continental Shelf by 2002.  Hence, an outlay of Rs.4.00 Crores was provided at RE stage during 1999-2000, out of which Rs.3.98
 crore was spent.
16.7     Poly Metallic Nodules Programme:
BE           -          Rs.14.05 Crore           Actual          -          Rs.10.88 Crore
 
 
 
A sum of Rs.3.00 Crores was diverted from the Mining Technology Development component to Delineation of Continental Shelf
 programme and hence the RE was kept at Rs.11.03 crore, of which the expenditure was Rs.10.88 crore.
16.8          Integrated Coastal & Marine Area Management Programme
BE          -          Rs.6.00 Crore              Actual          -          Rs.3.90 Crore 
The variation was mainly due to delay in Government approval for engagement of foreign consultant, under the component
 Professional Services.
16.9     Ocean Observation & Information Services
BE          -          Rs.11.50 Crore           Actual           -          Rs.9.20   Crore
     The variation was mainly due to reallocation of priorities among the programmes and reduction of the BE by Rs.2.30 Crores at RE
 stage, necessitating deferment of certain activities to the next financial year.
C.        2000-2001
16.10          Continental Shelf
BE          -          Rs.3.00 Crore              RE           -          Rs. -NIL
A sum of Rs.43.00 crore provided for the work of bathymetric and seismic survey of the continental shelf in the BE has been
 surrendered at the RE level, owing to delay in finalizing the contract for award of work.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
16.11   Poly Metallic Nodules Programme
BE          -          Rs.19.31 Crore           RE/anticipated    -          Rs.13.83 Crore
     The major reason for the variation in the anticipated expenditure is owing to delay in the finalisation of the contract/agreement
 between NIOT and Russian Academy of Sciences for development of an unmanned submersible for operation up to 6000 m depth.
17.      As regards the reasons advanced for non-utilisation of the budgetary support in respect of continental shelf and Poly Metallic
 Nodules programme, the Committee expresses its concern on the delays in finalizing the contracts and observes such delays could
 have been avoided.
NON- PLAN  PROGRAMMES
18.The Non-Plan expenditure broadly falls under four heads, namely (a)  Oceanographic Research Vessel (ORV) Sagar Kanya (b) 
 Fishery and Oceanographic Research Vessel (FORV) Sagar Sampada, a multi–purpose fisheries and oceanographic research vessel
 which has been carrying out survey of the Indian Exclusive Economic Zone(EEZ) ever since 1984 (c) Secretariat and Economic
 Services and (d) Administrative infrastructure. The Committee was informed about the exploration of  Living and Non-Living
 resources using   FORV Sagar Sampada and  ORV Sagar Kanya.
18.1 The Committee was informed that during the year 2000-2001 FORV Sagar Sampada conducted 14 scientific cruises in the Indian
 Exclusive Economic Zone and 4 trial cruises for field testing of Autotrawl system and calibration of acoustic equipment. Samples
 from over 180 stations were collected and 139 Scientists/ Research Staff from 14 Organisations including the Department of Ocean
 Development participated.
18.2 The Committee was informed that during the year 2000-2001 Oceanographic Research Vessel (ORV) Sagar Kanya conducted 14
 cruises for a number of programmes such as demonstration of shallow sea-bed mining by deploying the crawler, National Data Buoy
 (NDBP) programme and IRS-P4 Validation, Bay of Bengal Studies (BOBPS), Land-Ocean Intraction on the Coastal Zone (LOICZ),
 Ocean Observation Systems(OOS) in the Equatorial Indian Ocean, Poly Metallic Nodules Programme(PMN) and geological surveys
 for the Legal Continental Shelf (LCF) programme and two more cruises were expected to be completed by the end of the financial
 year 2000-2001.
18.3 The Secretary informed the Committee that the Department of Ocean Development was facing serious resource difficulties on the
 Non-Plan side specifically regarding payments to the Shipping Corporation of India for the operation of the Research vessels "Sagar
 Kanya" and 'Sagar Sampada" wherein there exists a backlog of payments of about Rs.7 crore. During 2000-01 the outlay was reduced
 from Rs.23 crore at the BE stage to Rs.19.99 crore at the RE stage. This reduction has led to serious difficulties in making payments to
 the Shipping Corporation of India.
19.  As regards the difficulties being faced by the Department on the non-plan side with regard to the payments to the Shipping
 Corporation of India for the operation of the Research Vessels “Sagar Kanya” and “Sagar Sampada”, while the Committee is
 all out for reduction of non-plan expenditure, but in view of the seriousness of the expenditure for Research Vessels, the
 Committee feels that it is a kind of committed expenditure and the Department should not be compelled to dither on it
 commitments, the Committee recommends that the budgetary support on this count be suitably augmented now or at least at
 RE stage on else the research vessels may remain idle and consequently the research effort may suffer which would not be
 healthy development.
POLAR SCIENCES
Antarctic Expedition:
20.The Secretary informed the Committee that the XX
th Indian Scientific expedition to Antarctica was flagged off onboard a German
 Vessel Magdalena Oldendorff  from Cape Town, South Africa, on 30 th  December 2000, keeping in view the likely scientific and
 economic benefits and future international cooperation in the field of polar science between India and other countries. The XX th
 Scientific  Expedition reached  Antarctica on 9 th January,2001 and consisted of a 54 member team including 39 scientists and 15
 logistic personnel drawn from 19 scientific institutions, under the leadership of Mr. Mervin D’ Souza a geologist from  Geological
 Survey of India, Faridabad.  This included a contingent of 24 members who would winter-over in Antarctica for 16 months’ duration
 in pursuit of science.  The logistic and medical support for the Expedition had been provided by a contingent of Indian Army and
 doctors from ITBP. A salient feature of this expedition was the participation of two scientists from Germany to collaborate with the
 Indian scientists in the ongoing Planetary Geodetic studies for accurate measurement of the vertical and lateral movement of the
 Antarctic plate on a millimeter scale.  As many as ten experiments were to be conducted during the course of the expedition that
 would directly contribute to the international scientific campaigns under the aegis of Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research
 (SACR).
 
21.In addition to the ongoing programmes several new experiments have been initiated during the course of this expedition, which
 include:
(i)                    Measurement of the ice thickness in order to understand the sub ice stratigraphy by ground probe radar profiling.
(ii)        Studies on human biology with a view to understand the practical problems in the stress survival mechanism in adverse

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
 Antarctic conditions.
(iii)       Influence of aerosol on the atmospheric radiation budget and climate over Antarctica.
(iv)       Plankton distribution and their energy pattern in fresh water lakes.
22.The Secretary informed the Committee that the National Centre for Antarctic & Ocean Research (NCAOR), Goa which has the
 responsibility for coordinating and supervising  the Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctica was formally dedicated to the Nation by
 the Minister for Ocean Development on 5 th April,2000 and as a part of ongoing efforts to develop the Centre into a research institute
 of international standards, NCAOR, has initiated action to develop and strengthen its core competence in such scientific disciplines as
 Polar Remote Sensing, Southern Ocean Oceanography & Paleoclimatology and Antarctic Global Change Research.
23.NCAOR initiated a comprehensive desktop study of the data sources available to determine the  scope of the programme on
 Delineation of the Continental Shelf project, the type of the data to be collected and development of a data acquisition programme
 designed to maximize and sustain India’s legal claim to Continental shelf. India has to submit claim to the Commission on the Limits
 of Continental Shelf (CLCS) by June 2005. If delineation is properly undertaken, India would be in a position to make exclusive claim
 on the continental shelf. This could provide India with an area of more than 1 million sq. km of continental shelf beyond the EEZ. In
 case India does not submit claim before the CLCS, the continental shelf beyond 200 nautical miles would lie in international waters
 and India would have the same claim to it as other members of the international community.
24.The class of work envisaged in establishing the claim is new for India. The Technical & Scientific Guidelines were issued in May
 1999 about a year behind schedule. The Guidelines as formulated need careful interpretation. The terms used in the Guidelines often
 have a legal interpretation different from the normal technical usage. The meaning of the terms has to be jointly decided by legal and
 technical experts to ensure that India does not lose available opportunity.
25.The United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea provides two means of delineating the Shelf to India and Sri Lanka. The two
 countries can either choose to use Article 76 which applies to all countries signatory to the Convention or Annex 11 to the Final Act to
 the Third United Nations Conference on Law of the Sea which applies to just the two countries. There are advantages and
 disadvantages in using either of the provisions and it is necessary to put in place a carefully thought out strategy that best serves
 India's interests. This work is close to completion.
26. Substantial progress has been achieved in collating the available seismic and bathymetric data to define with greater precision than
 before the likely area of claim. The Indian baselines are also in the final stages of promulgation by the Ministry of External Affairs. It
 is hoped that during the year 2001-02 significant progress would be achieved through dialogue with Sri Lanka and through physical
 surveys.
 
 
27.The Committee notes that in pursuance of its, recommendation made in paragraph 18.1 of last year’s report NCAOR Goa
 designated as the nodal agency of the Department for the XX Indian Scientific Expedition to Antarctic for continuation of the
 scientific/research programmes.  The Committee earnestly hopes that the launching of expedition from Cape Town would lead to the
 initiation of the state-of-the-art research programme in Polar Sciences.
28.The Committee feels that the baseline data collected by National Hydrographic Office (NHO) should be analysed in
 consultation with National Institutions like Geological Survey of India, National Institute of  Oceanography, National
 Geophysical Research Institute etc., for estimating the foot of the slope and 2500 m isobaths in accordance with the format
 specified in the guidelines of the Commission.
29. The Committee also observes that the XX
th Antarctic expedition heralds another scientific feat in the realms of polar
 science at the end of this millennium and demonstrates the capabilities and interest of the country to pursue a well-focussed
 scientific campaign from a pristine scientific platform provided by Antarctica. The Department of Ocean Development should
 initiate meaningful logistic cooperation with other countries which may lead to operational and financial advantages for
 developing nations as a whole.
30. The Committee recommends that  the National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research(NCAOR) Goa, should be
 strengthened by developing the Centre into a research institute of international standards. The communication network with
 Antarctica and other participating laboratories should be taken on priority basis through the establishment of the National
 Antarctica Data Centre.
MARINE LIVING RESOURCES
Assessment of Marine Living Resources
31.The Committee was apprised about the general trend in the results of primary productivity measurements in the Arabian Sea, Bay
 of Bengal and Andaman Sea during different seasons   by the Marine Living Resources (MLR) cruises which indicated that the
 average surface primary production and chlorophyll-a values were high in Arabian Sea.(17.08 mg per C m3 d and 0.64 mg m3) and in
 Bay of Bengal(14.51 mg C m3 d 1 and 0.33 mg m3).
31.1 The Secretary informed the Committee that four cruises of FORV Sagar Sampada dedicated to the project were carried out in the

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
 Indian EEZ. Secondary productivity studies conducted in the India EEZ showed maximum variations in the biomass of the
 zooplankton in the mixed layer depth.  Along the west coast the average biomass during day time was nearly double of that recorded
 during the night during north-east monsoon.  The East coast and Andaman Sea showed lower biomass with typical night abundance
 during south-west monsoon and high biomass during north-east monsoon.  There was marked increase of mesozooplankton (nearly
 ten fold) in night collections in the Arabian Sea during south-west monsoon.  In general, highest biomass for the entire area studied
 was  observed along west coast during south-west monsoon.  There was appreciable difference in the standing stock between day
 (average 255.5 ml/1000 m3) and night (average 1862.5 ml/1000m3)
31.2 Assessment for demersal fishery resources of the Indian continental slope (200 to 1000m depth) by acoustic survey and trawling
 operations was undertaken through dedicated cruises of FORV Sagar Sampada.  Good catches of the deep sea prawn Heterocarpus
 gibbosus were obtained in the High Speed Demersal Trawl (HSDT) – crustacean version – off Ponnani at 320m depth  in  April. 
 Other  deep-sea  species  namely  Aristius  doochl, Trichiurus auriga,  cusk-eels,
 
 
 
Chloropthalmus sp., Priacanthus sp., Centroloous sp., spider crabs, etc., were also recorded in the catches.
31.3 Bottom trawling operations at depths of 300-900 m along the slope area of the Bay of Bengal showed the availability of
 commercially exploitable stocks of the deep-sea prawns at 820-850 m deph.  Demersal surveys in the 200-400 m depth zone along the
 Andaman & Nicobar slope yielded a catch per unit efforts of 256 kg/hr, in which Cubicips was the dominant species.  Four new
 grounds suitable for bottom trawling were identified in this area off 400 m depth.
31.4 The project Studies on the Deep Scattering Layer (DSL) envisage detailed studies on the bio-composition, abundance and
 distribution of the DSL resources in the Indian Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ).  DSL samples were collected from 39 stations along
 the west coast covering the pre-monsoon and the south-west monsoon periods.  The thickness of DSL layer varied from 20 to 100 m
 during the pre-monsoon and between 10 and 260 m during the south-west monsoon period.  An unique observation of appearance of a
 60 m thick layer below 350 m during night at 6
° 40¢ N and 77 °30¢ E was made, implying the lack of vertical migration of this 
 layer, characteristic of  the DSL in general, DSL biomass for the west coast varied between 0.17 gm/1000 m3 and 30.53 gm/1000 m3. 
 Though the pelagic shrimps and myctophids appear the dominant groups, other mesopelagics like gonostomatidae, sternophthycdae,
 astronesthidae, stomilidae, chaullodontidae, etc., made significant contribution to the species composition of the DSL nektons.
31.5 Along the east coast DSL samples were collected from 20 stations between 10 ° – 20 ° N and 80 °- 87° E and from 17 stations
 between 10° – 14° N and 90° – 94° E during the south-west monsoon period.  DSL was found between 40m and 400 m depth.  The
 dominant groups were pelagic shrimps, myctophids, leptocephalus, crabs, cephalopods, euphsides and siphonophores.
31.6. Studies on Toxic algal Blooms are designed to foster the effective management of, and scientific research on toxic algal blooms,
 in order to understand their causes, predict their occurrence and mitigate their effects. Samples collected from 151 stations in 6 cruises
 of FORV were analysed for toxic algal presence.  Samples of Trichodesmium species extending an area of 250m were observed and
 have been collected for further analyses.
31.7  Benthic Productivity studies envisage a comprehensive study of the productivity, nature of the resources, conversion of organic
 matters, process of mineralisation, taxonomy and community structure of the benthic fauna in the continental shelf of the Indian
 Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ).  Data indicate a rough production of marine benthos to the tune of 3.6 million tones from an area of
 about 2,51,631.36 sq.km (the assumption made here is that most of the macro bethos have got a life span of one year and meiobenthos
 of about three months). The present study indicates rapid decline in benthic biomass with increase in depth.
32.The Committee observes that under Marine Living Resources programme the Department of Ocean Development should
 emphasise on the coverage of entire Indian Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) for the Winter, Summer and Inter Monsoon
 periods and strengthen its’ research with the use of “Hydro acoustic techniques” for estimation of Deep Scattering
 Layer(DSL) and fish biomass, studies on column productivity and inventorying of marine bioresources of the continental slope
 area.
DRUGS FROM SEA
33.  The Committee was apprised about the Programme  "Drugs from Sea" which was reviewed during  the  current  financial year  and
 the programme  extended  to the end  of the  current  plan
 
 
period. The estimated outlay on the extension is Rs.420 lakhs with Rs.200 lakhs proposed to be provided in the current financial year
 and Rs.220 lakhs in the next financial year. The major objectives of the programme include:-
Ø
      Systematic exploration of the entire coastline and collections made from deep sea as well for identification of more
 flora and fauna having potential for extraction of drugs and chemicals.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
Ø      Collection, extraction and biological evaluation of 150 species, and evaluation of biologically potential organisms,
 leading to possible development of new drug(s).
Ø      Isolation of bioactive constituents and development as possible drugs.
Ø      Development of suitable models for biological activity in certain priority areas.
Ø      Undertaking regulatory pharmacology and toxicology of 2-3 extracts.
Ø      Initiation and completion of clinical trials for at least two drugs.
Ø      Development of at least 2 herbal drugs from the samples and marketing.
Ø      Industrial participation in drug development and marketing.
33.1  The Committee was also informed that detailed work on the following marine organisms would be undertaken by various
 laboratories with a view to narrowing down on producing and marketing of two drugs with the possible involvement of industry:
Ø      Code CDR-1 34 for antidiarrhoeal and antidiabetic activities by CDRI.
Ø      Code CUI-002/004 for antihyperlipidaemic activity by CUl and  CDR.
Ø      Code NIO-450 for antianxiety activity by NIO and CDRI.
Ø      Code AU2-106 antioxidant/ hypolipidaemic/ hypoglycaemic activity by AU2 and
             CDRI. 
Ø      Code CSM-089 for antibacterial/antifungall larvicidal activity by AU1, CDRI   
             and IIC
Ø      Code IIC-276 for larvicidal activity by IIC.
33.2. The Department also proposes to develop two herbal drugs using modified developmental procedures and initiate clinical trials
 on the identified samples. In exploratory work, anti-diabetic and anti-hyperlipidaemic activities are proposed to be given top priority,
 while anti-mycobacterial and anti-fungal activities are proposed to be accorded second and third priority. Permission for use of non-
human primates (Rhesus monkeys) for experimentation to undertake pre-clinical trials of two fractions of CDR 134 has been recently
 granted by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
33.3 The CDRI has made significant progress in establishing Code AU2-106 as an anti-cholesterol drug. It is expected that the drug
 would be put to pre-clinical trials by December 2001 and clinical trials would be taken up by 2002 end. Permission to test CDR-134
 for antidiarrhoeal and antidiabetic activity on non-human primates has been received and tests would begin shortly. This would then
 be followed up by limited clinical trials in human subjects after regulatory clearance. The commercialisation of the drugs would
 follow the success of the clinical trials.
 
 
34.The Committee observes that the programme regarding development of six marine organisms showing anti-diabetic/antidiarrahoeal;
 anti-hyperlipidaelmic, anti-anxiety, anti-cholesterol cum anti-oxidant; anti-bacterial cum anti-fungal and larvicidal activities is more
 or less at the same stage as was at the last year with no signs of the end product coming to market in the near future.  In these
 circumstances the Committee does not find any justification in the new projects on herbal drugs being undertaken.   Unless the drugs
 are developed expeditiously and brought into markets, the market forces could defeat the purpose of developing the drugs and render
 the whole project infructuous and futile.
MARINE NON-LIVING RESOURCES
Poly Metallic Nodules Programme
35. The Secretary informed the Committee that India has been at the forefront of the Poly Metallic Nodules Programme since the early
 eighties. In 1987, India was accorded the status of Registered Pioneer Investor and allotted 1,50,000 sq. km. of mining site in the
 Central Indian Ocean Basin (CIOB). India was the first country to be so registered. India's achievement is a matter of pride not only
 for the country but also for the developing world. As a 'Pioneer Investor', India has the following major obligations:
(a)       India shall incur expenditure annually in the development of technologies for  exploration of pioneer areas and
 exploitation of the manganese nodules;
(b)       India shall provide training to UN nominated technical personnel from developing    countries and
(c)       India shall arrange for transfer of technology to the International Seabed Authority   whenever the necessity arises;
35.1 The Committee was informed that when India first undertook the programme it was clear that there would be no immediate
 commercial benefits. It was however decided to go in for the programme in consideration of the long-term strategic and geopolitical
 factors and the need for the country to develop cutting edge in underwater technologies. With continued commitment to the

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
 programme India would be in position to transform the technical skills acquired into commercial opportunity. It would not have to
 seek technology from the advanced countries or be subject to technology denial regimes.
35.2.  During 2000-01 the programme was executed with the following components:
(a)              Survey and exploration for assessing abundance and quality of nodules;
(b)      Mining from deep seabed at depths of about 5000 m and transportation to process  site;
(c)              Extraction of metals from the nodules and Environmental impact assessment.
35.3 In relation to "survey and exploration" considerable progress has been made in identifying blocks that could be relinquished to the
 International Seabed Authority in accordance with the commitment. The survey work for the purpose is likely to be completed during
 2001-02. In relation to "mining" the following objectives of the programme were achieved:
(a)     Demonstration of the shallow bed mining system for manoeuverability of the crawler system was done in October, 2000.
 Tests for sampling of slurry through a riser hose from 410 m water depth were done earlier;
 
 
 
 (b)     Detailed engineering and specification of a mining complex module of 25,000 tones/year capacity for 6000 m depth has been carried out jointly by NIOT,
 Chennai and IKS, University of Seigen, Germany and
(c)      Upgraded version of Remotely Operated Vehichle (ROV) developed by Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute,
 Durgapur was ready for a test in open sea up to a depth of 250m. 
35.4. The Committee was informed that in relation to "extraction" the processing plant being constructed by the Hindustan Zinc Ltd. at
 Udaipur was in the final phase of completion. The nodules required for processing have been collected. The R&D activities to
 optimise extraction efficiencies were progressing well. The cruise to the Central Indian Ocean Basin to study the progress of re-
 colonisation of benthic organisms, disturbed in an earlier experiment, has been planned and would be shortly undertaken under the
 "environmental" component.
36.The Committee observes that the Poly Metallic Nodules Programme commenced in 1987.  The Department claims to have made
 considerable progress for exploration and exploitation of Poly Metallic Nodules ever since the country attained this status in the field
 of survey and exploration.  While a proposal for developing an unmanned submersible capable of operation upto 6000 m depth has
 been approved for which NIOT has been identified as the nodal agency.  So far we have only been able to achieve upgraded version of
 ROV developed by Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur is ready for a test in open sea up to a depth of 250 m
 only.  Besides, a test for a sampling of slurry through a rise hose from 410 m water depth were done earlier.  If the depths of 250 to
 410 m are any indication it would be a long journey to reach the test level of 6000 m. 
36.1 The Department is also of the view (please see reply to Question 4 in the Questionnaire at Annexure) that current state of
 technology, land based resource availability and market demand is not economical to go in  for exploitation of minerals from deep sea.
36.2 While the Committee does not stand in the way of pursuing the project “in consideration of the long-term strategic and
 geopolitical factors and the need for the country to develop cutting edge underwater technologies” and meeting the international
 obligations, the Committee, however, feels that it is time the Department took stock of the situation to assess whether in view of the
 fast changing technologies the Poly Metallic Nodules Programme would really be viable in view of long gestation period, cost of
 production and economics of production.
MARINE ENVIRONMENT AND COASTAL ZONE
Coastal Ocean Monitoring & Prediction  Systems (COMAPS) Programme
37. The Secretary informed the Committee that under the Coastal Ocean Monitoring & Prediction Systems (COMAPS) programme the
 Department of Ocean Development takes up scientific monitoring of pollution at different locations. The responsibility to control
 pollution in the hotspots rests with the State Governments through the State Pollution Control Boards. The data collected was
 routinely made available to the Pollution Control Boards and periodically discussed with them. Any significant increase in pollutants
 at a particular location was brought to the notice of the Central Pollution Control Board and the concerned State Pollution Control
 Board for control as well as remedial actions.
 
INTEGRATED COASTAL AND MARINE AREA MANAGEMENT (ICMAM)
38. The ICMAM programme implemented from 1998-99 onwards, has 2 major components namely- Capacity Building and
 Development of Infrastructure for R&D and training. The Capacity Building component funded  by the International  Development
 Association  containing the activities of Development of GIS based information system for critical habitats, Determination of Waste
 Assimilation Capacity in selected estuaries and coastal waters, Development of guidelines to conduct EIA for coast related activities
 and Development of Model ICMAM  Plan for selected areas. While the infrastructure component, was funded by the DOD, provision
 of facilities for imparting training to coastal states on ICMAM related activities and R&D activities on zonation of coastal waters

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
 using the methods of use classification etc., were also being undertaken by the Department of Ocean Development. 
DEVELOPMENT OF GIS SYSTEM FOR CRITICAL HABITATS 
39.  The Geographic Information System (GIS)  containing COMAPS data was under development by the National Institute of
 Oceanography, Goa. The Integrated Coastal and Marine Areas Management programme of this Department aims inter-alia to develop
 an information system using Geographic Information System (GIS) for I I critical habitats namely, Gulf of Kachchh, Gulf of
 Khambat, Malvan, Kadmat, Karwar islands, Cochin islands, Gulf of Mannar, Pitchavaram, Coringa, Gahirmatha and Suderbans. The
 tasks involved in the development of such an information system were as follows:
·         Review of data on the habitats available with various institutions.
·         Preparation of methodology manual and conducting a workshop on methodology.
·         Field-data collection on physico-chemical and biological parameters for eleven sites by   eleven institutions.
·         Creation of GIS database using remotely sensed data and other conventional data.
·         Designing of a GIS module and integration of database.
·         Development of Management Plans using GIS for 3 habitats, each representing an       
                  island marine ecosystem, a coral reef and a mangrove.
39.1 The Secretary informed the Committee that after  collection of field data and development of database, a GIS based information
 system for Pitchavaram mangrove, namely Critical Habitat Information System (CHIS) has been completed and a Compact Disc has
 been produced and released. Use of GIS in the CHIS helped detection of the areas of degradation of mangrove and areas of recovery.
 The CHIS for Kadmat Island of Lakshadweep, 7 islands off Karwar and 21 islands of Gulf of Mannar are nearing completion.
 Development of GIS for the other 7 habitats is in advanced stages and will be completed by the end of the year. NIO, Goa has
 collected data on biological, hydrological and socio-economical aspects relevant to coastal regions of  Malvan along the Central West
 Coast of India under this programme. The data generated by NIO, Goa was an important component of the GIS based Information
 System under development. The Secretary, Department of Ocean Development also informed that given the fact that responsibility for
 marine pollution management was shared between the State and Central Governments and various agencies under the Government,
 there was no single coordinating mechanism.
40. The Committee recommends that Geographic Information System (GIS)  containing COMAPS  data  should  be 
 developed  by  the  Department in  coordination  with  National
 
 
Institute of Oceanography, Goa at the earliest and the data so generated should be used/shared by all the coastal States to
 check and monitor the marine pollution. At the national level too the Department of Ocean Development should coordinate
 with all apex level institutions such as Ministry of Environment & Forests, Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Petroleum &
 Natural Gas and Ministry of Defence etc. to tackle  the problem of marine pollution.
COASTAL RESEARCH VESSELS - (CRV)
41.The two coastal research vessels viz. Sagar Purvi and Sagar Paschimi were being managed by the Vessel Management Cell (VMC)
 of NIOT.  VMC has been focusing on effective utilization of ship time and trouble free functioning of onboard equipment and
 machinery.  During 2000-2001, both the vessels have completed 45 cruises for 17 Institutions along the west and east coasts of India
 for pollution monitoring under COMAPS and Integrated Coastal and Marine Area Management programmes.
·
         Videographic observations of coral reef in Lakshadweep Islands using Remotely Operable Vehicle along with ICMAM-PD
 Chennai.
For the first time detailed study on sea turties and oceanographic data collection were conducted in association with the Forests
 Department, Orissa at Marine Wildlife Park, Bitrakanika.
Environmental data collection studies in Mumbai high region for IPSEM, ONGC, Goa
Sagar Paschimi undertook an oceanographic data collection cruise to Lakshadweep Islands for NIO.
42.   The scientific cruise programmes executed by both the Coastal Research  Vessels during the period under report were as under:-
 
Locations Sagar Paschimi Sagar Purvi
CTD observations 730 371

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
Water Samples 730 371
Grabs 730 371
Plankton net operation 670 341
ADCP measurements 25 7
Current measurements 6 4
Correr samples 45 71
Trawl net operation 17 7
 
43.The Scientific activities carried out by Sagar Sampada and Sagar Kanya during the year include:-
    
 
 
 
     Sagar Sampada
Collection of environment and productivity data from Indian EEZ for the summer, winter and inter monsoon period of 2000-01.
Survey of demersal fishery resources along the Indian continental slope area in the depth range 200 to 1000 m.
Estimates of the Benthic standing crop along the shelf waters of both the east and west coasts.
Locating the Deep Scattering Layers (DSL) and studies on DSL biocomposition.
Investigations to toxic algal blooms in the Indian Exclusive Economic Zone and
Harvest technology studies to establish gear selectivity.
Sagar Kanya
Data Buoy-retrieval, assembly, maintenance and deployment in Arabian Sea and Bay of Bengal.  Collection of meteorological data
 by use of AWS for validation of data from Data Buoys.
Study of relation between ridge segmentation and petrology, mantle kinematics and tracing the hydrothermal activities on Carlsberg
 Ridge.
Paleo-Ocenographic studies of Bengal Fan-site selection by multi-beam mapping of the study area and sediment core collection.
Studies of Late Quaternary Paleo-Oceanography of Northern Indian Ocean.
In-situ geo-technical properties measurement of sediments as part of Stand Mining Demonstration off Tuticorin.
Sinking particulate matter and its dispersal in Coastal Zone (LOICZ).
OOS current meter array moorings along equator and sediment traps retrieval.
Trace constituents and aerosol studies in the marine boundary layer of the Bat of Bengal and Arabian Sea.
OTEC site determination, measurement of currents and seabed surveys; towing and deployment of pipe at a specific pre-determined
 site for demonstration.
Sea-truth validation of Multi-channel Scanning Microwave Radiometer (MSMR) and Ocean Colour Monitor (OCM) on Oceansat-1
 (IRS-P4).
Satlantic Radiometer calibration and testing at sea and training of users.
Amino acid dating bio-marks of sediments in Bay of Bengal.
Reconnaissance for Gas Hydrates off West Continental Margin seabed sampling of East Coasts deltas in Bay of Bengal.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
Measurement of dielectric properties of seawater.
44.  While the Committee has made its observation about the Committed liabilities towards the Shipping Corporation of India, the
 Committee would like the Department to assess whether it was time to go in for any new ships of this kind keeping in view the state of its
 requirements, the
 
 
life span left for both the ships, costs involved in acquiring new ships and the time involved in the exercise of such new ships etc.
OCEAN OBSERVATIONS AND INFORMATION SERVICES (OOIS)
45. The Committee was informed that in order to generate user-oriented data products and provide services to cater to the needs of the
 coastal and ocean sectors, an integrated programme called “Ocean Observations & Information Services” (OOIS) was being implemented
 by the Department. The OOIS envisages generation and dissemination of reliable coastal and ocean data products such as waves, winds,
 temperature, current, salinity, upwelling, potential fishing zone information, coastal maps, etc., to support coastal and off-shore
 developmental activities and for furthering quality oceanographic research. The OOIS was aimed at development of a system for Ocean
 State Forecast, on experimental basis by 2001-02.
45.1 The programme consists of four major components viz. Ocean Observing Systems, Ocean Information Services, Ocean Dynamics and
 Modelling and Satellite Coastal and Oceanographic Research.  
45.2  The  project consists of three sub-projects viz., National Data Buoy Programme(NDBP), Sea Level observation and Drifting buoy
 and other Observing systems.
46.The National Data Buoy Programme was being implemented by National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT), Chennai.  The
 programme envisages assembly, deployment, operation and maintenance of state-of-the-art technology data buoys.  Under this
 programme, a set of 12 met-ocean data buoys have been deployed in the coastal and offshore of India for acquiring, surface
 meteorological and upper ocean parameters.  The buoys were equipped with state-of-the-art sensors for accurate measurement of winds,
 waves, currents, atmospheric pressure, atmospheric temperature, sea surface temperature, dissolved oxygen, chlorophyll, radioactivity,
 hydrocarbon and turbidity.
46.1 The Secretary informed the Committee that NDBP carried out regular and emergency maintenance of data buoys whenever required.
 During the year under report, NDBP has accomplished 18 deployments, 9 retrievals and 1 in-situ servicing of buoys.  The features for
 buoys have been improved to be tamper proof.  A shore station was commissioned at NIOT for retrieval, processing, analysis and storage
 of the data from the buoys.  The data was being disseminated daily at 3 GMT to India Meteorological Department and Coast Guard has
 contributed to the process of the forecast of cyclones in the Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea.
47.The programme under Drifting Buoys Programme envisages deployment of a series of drifting buoys, expendable bathythermographs
 (XBTs) and current  meter arrays for augmentation of in situ oceanographic measurements.  During the IX plan period, about 50 drifting
 buoys, 3 current meter arrays, and 900 XBTs would  be deployed under the programme.  The data from the buoys is transmitted online
 using CLS-ARGOS satellite primarily for validation of satellite sensors besides its contribution towards understanding the oceanographic
 processes around India.
48.The Committee was informed that under the Sea Level Observation project, 10 modern tide gauge stations were established at Mumbai,
 Porbandar, Goa, Kochi, Chennai, Visakhapatnam, Paradip, Kavaratti, Machlipatnam and Tuticorin for systematic and accurate monitoring
 of the tide levels to assess the long-term variations in the mean sea levels.  The data from those tide gauges are collected regularly and
 archived at National Tide Data Centre at Survey of India, Dehradun. Based on the sea level data collected along the Indian coast, a
 numerical model has been constructed to simulate circulation in the Northern Indian Ocean.
 
 
 
49.While the Committee notes with satisfaction that the programmes under the Ocean Observation Information Service  have been
 successful, it observes that  the indigenisation of Data buoy technology and Operation and maintenance of 12 data buoy system by
 National Data Buoy Programme is yet to be achieved. The Committee observes that the upgradation of existing tide gauge network both in
 terms of software and sensors redeployment of existing current meter and deployment of new current meter array along the equator would
 take place during this financial year. Similarly the Committee would  appreciate if  under the  programme Ocean Dynamics and Modelling
 (INDOMOD), validation of Coupled Atmospheric Ocean Model (CAOM) to provide forcing parameter for ocean general circulation
 model and sensitivity test for CAOM for prediction of storm surges associated with tropical cyclone along the Indian coast would be
 conducted and validated. The experiments to determine the sensitivity for development of hybrid coupled model for prediction of Indian
 monsoon regions have  also to be achieved
COASTAL COMMUNITY PROGRAMMES
Marine Instrumentation (Shore to Fishing Vessel Communication System)

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
50. The Committee was informed that the Shore to Fishing Vessel Communication System implemented by the Department of Ocean
 Development was only to demonstrate the technology of communication to the coastal fishermen for ensuring their safety at sea. The
 Fisheries Division under the Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairy Development was the nodal Ministry for this purpose. The
 Ministry of Agriculture was believed to be initiating programmes for upgrading the mechanised fishing sector in the country by
 providing them with sophisticated navigation and communication equipment. Further expansion of the Shore to Fishing Vessel
 Communication System covering the entire coastline of the country including the islands would be considered by the Ministry of
 Agriculture.
51.The Committee recommends that the Department of Ocean Development should ensure the development of the shore to vessel
 communication system  and their transfer and installation in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture which would be helpful for
 fishermen going for fishing in high seas.
ISLAND DEVELOPMENT
52.  National Institute of Ocean Technology(NIOT), Chennai has taken up new initiatives towards helping island communities in their
 needs relating to Ocean Science and Technology as well as marine resource enhancement. The Secretary informed the Committee that the
 major activity under the Island Development programme was essentially lobster resource enhancement and transfer of this technology to
 island and coastal communities so that they benefit economically. The activity involved technology for fattening of lobsters, biochemical
 analysis of lobsters and live feeds, breeding larval rearing and sea ranching of lobsters.  A seafront laboratory and a marine animal grow
 out system have been developed near Chennai in order to give a head start  to the overall programme on “Ocean Science and Technology
 for Islands”.  Besides, various experimental programmes related to the development of fattening and level rearing technology were
 underway.  A complementary seawater recirculatory wet-lab facility was under construction at NIOT campus, Pallikaranai, in order to
 carry out experiments on larval rearing under controlled environmental conditions.  R&D laboratory has been set up at NIOT campus with
 a view  to elucidate the various biochemical processes involved during the growth and reproduction of economically important marine
 organisms.  A comprehensive analytical programme on nutritional and reproductive aspects of the Indian spiny lobster Panulirus
 homarus  had been  undertaken.  A laboratory  has  also  been  set up  recently at Port Blair under  the
 
 
Andaman & Nicobar Centre for Ocean Science & Technology (ANCOST), to carry out studies on marine living resources, coastal
 environment, ocean observation and related areas in Ocean Science and Technology. The immediate thrust of the programme was on
 development of technology for:
a.
       Fattening of juvenile Indian spiny lobsters to cater to the needs of live lobster export trade, and
b.       Breeding, larval rearing and sea ranching of lobsters.
53. The Committee is of the view that the Department should carry out further research on formulation of appropriate feeds for the
 enhancement of juvenile lobsters and develop the  larval rearing technology in Indian spiny lobster which was taken up during 1999-2000.
 The Department should also initiate research in the area of identification of pathogenic organisms and development of methodology for
 eradication of these pathogens using chemotherapeutents.  The technology for fattening of lobsters and mud-crab at Andaman & Nicobar
 Islands and lobsters in the main land should also be disseminated to the coastal community and selected entrepreneurs.
54. After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development and assessing the progress of various programmes
 and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs.168.80 crores as sought by the Department
 of Ocean Development for the year 2000-2001, under Demand No. 89  may be approved.
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS AT GLANCE
 
1.   The Committee observes that in view of considerable reduction in the Budgetary support at RE level last year, it should be
 possible for the Department to manage with the reduced budgetary support this year.  To that end the Committee brings on
 record the assurance given by the Department in reply to Question 1 of the Questionnaire  (See Appendix) that the present
 outlay will not hold up the execution of any programme”.
(Para 14)
2.   In the context of delay in the Commissioning the Technology Demonstration Pilot Plant for extraction of metals from Poly
 Metallic Nodules at Hindustan Zinc Ltd., at Udaipur, which was to be commissioned in October, 2000 and the Pilot Plant
 which was expected to be commissioned off Tuticorin coast in September-October, 2000, the Committee observes that such
 delays result in cost escalations.  Besides, they reflect on the Departments’ efficiency to plan things meticulously.   Such delays
 need to be avoided.
 (Para 15)
3.   As regards the reasons advanced for non-utilisation of the budgetary support in respect of continental shelf and Poly

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
 Metallic Nodules programme, the Committee feels concerned with the delays in finalizing the contracts and observes such
 delays could have been avoided.
 (Para 17)
4.   As regards the difficulties being faced by the Department on the non-plan side with regard to the payments to the Shipping
 Corporation of India for the operation of the Research Vessels “Sagar Kanya” and “Sagar Sampada”, while the Committee is
 all out for reduction of non-plan expenditure, but in view of the seriousness of the expenditure for Research Vessels, the
 Committee feels that it is a kind of committed expenditure and the Department should not be compelled to dither on it
 commitments, the Committee recommends that the budgetary support on this count be suitably augmented now or at least at
 RE stage on else the research vessels may remain idle and consequently the research effort may suffer which would not be
 healthy development.
 (Para 19)
5.   The Committee feels that the baseline data collected by National Hydrographic Office (NHO) should be analysed in
 consultation with National Institutions like Geological Survey of India, National Institute of  Oceanography, National
 Geophysical Research Institute etc., for estimating the foot of the slope and 2500 m isobath in accordance with the format
 specified in the guidelines of the Commission.
(Para 28)
6.  The Committee also observes that the XX
th Antarctic expedition heralds another scientific feat in the realms of polar
 science at the end of this millennium and demonstrates the capabilities and interest of the country to pursue a well-focussed
 scientific campaign from a pristine scientific platform provided by Antarctica. The Department of Ocean Development should
 initiate meaningful logistic cooperation with other countries which may lead to operational and financial advantages for
 developing nations as a whole.
(Para 29)
7.   The Committee recommends that the National Centre for Antarctic and Ocean Research(NCAOR) Goa, should be
 strengthened by developing the Centre into a research institute of international standards. The communication network with
 Antarctica and other participating laboratories should be taken on priority basis through the establishment of the National
 Antarctica Data Centre.
(Para 30)
8.   The Committee observes that under Marine Living Resources programme the Department of Ocean Development should
 emphasise on the coverage of entire Indian Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) for the Winter, Summer and Inter Monsoon
 periods and strengthen its’ research with the use of “Hydro acoustic techniques” for estimation of Deep Scattering
 Layer(DSL) and fish biomass, studies on column productivity and inventorying of marine bioresources of the continental slope
 area.
(Para 32)
9.   The Committee observes that the programme regarding development of six marine organisms showing anti-
diabetic/antidiarrahoeal; anti-hyperlipidaelmic, anti-anxiety, anti-cholesterol cum anti-oxidant; anti-bacterial cum anti-fungal
 and larvicidal activities is more or less at the same stage as was at the last year with no signs of the end product coming to
 market in the near future.  In these circumstances the Committee does not find any justification in the new projects on herbal
 drugs being undertaken.   Unless the drugs are developed expeditiously and brought into markets, the market forces could
 defeat the purpose of developing the drugs and render the whole project infructuous and futile.
(Para 34)
10.The Committee observes that the Poly Metallic Nodules Programme commenced in 1987.  The Department claims to have
 made considerable progress for exploration and exploitation of Poly Metallic nodules ever since the country attained this
 status in the field of survey and exploration.  While a proposal for developing an unmanned submersible capable of operation
 upto 6000 m depth has been approved for which NIOT has been identified as the nodal agency.  So far we have only been able
 to achieve upgraded version of ROV developed by Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute, Durgapur is ready for
 a test in open sea up to a depth of 250 m only.  Besides, a test for a sampling of slurry through a rise hose from 410 m water
 depth were done earlier.  If the depths of 250 to 410 m are any indication it would be a long journey to reach the test level of
 6000 m. 
(Para 36)
11.The Department is also of the view (please see reply to Question 4 in the Questionnaire at Annexure) that current state of
 technology, land based resource availability and market demand is not economical to go in  for exploitation of minerals from
 deep sea.
(Para 36.1)
12.While the Committee does not stand in the way of pursuing the project “in consideration of the long-term strategic and

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
 geopolitical factors and the need for the country to develop cutting edge underwater technologies” and meeting the
 international obligations, the Committee, however, feels that it is time the Department took stock of the situation to  assess 
 whether  in  view  of  the  fast  changing  technologies the  Poly  Metallic
 
 
 
Nodules Programme would really be viable in view of long gestation period, cost of production and economics of production.
(Para 36.2)
13.The Committee recommends that Geographic Information System (GIS)  containing COMAPS data should be developed by
 the Department in coordination with National Institute of Oceanography, Goa at the earliest and the data so generated should
 be used/shared by all the coastal States to check and monitor the marine pollution. At the national level too the Department of
 Ocean Development should coordinate with all apex level institutions such as Ministry of Environment & Forests, Ministry of
 Shipping, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and Ministry of Defence etc. to tackle  the problem of marine pollution.
(Para 40)
14.While the Committee has made its observation about the Committed liabilities towards the shipping corporation of India,
 the Committee would like the Department to assess whether it was time to go in for any new ships of this kind keeping in view
 the state of its requirements, the life span left for both the ships, costs involved in acquiring new ships and the time involved in
 the exercise of such new ships etc.
(Para 44)
15.While the Committee notes with satisfaction that the programmes under the Ocean Observation Information Service  have
 been successful, it observes that  the indigenisation of Data buoy technology and Operation and maintenance of 12 data buoy
 system by National Data Buoy Programme is yet to be achieved  The Committee observes that the upgradation of existing tide
 gauge network both in terms of software and sensors redeployment of existing current meter and deployment of new current
 meter array along the equator would take place during this financial year. Similarly the Committee would appreciate if under
 the programme Ocean Dynamics and Modelling (INDOMOD), validation of Coupled Atmospheric Ocean Model (CAOM) to
 provide forcing parameter for ocean general circulation model and sensitivity test for CAOM for prediction of storm surges
 associated with tropical cyclone along the Indian coast would be conducted and validated. The experiments to determine the
 sensitivity for development of hybrid coupled model for prediction of Indian monsoon regions have  also to be achieved.
(Para 49)
16.The Committee recommends that the Department of Ocean Development should ensure the development of the shore to
 vessel communication system  and their transfer and installation in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture which would
 be helpful for fishermen going for fishing in high seas.
(Para 51)
17.The Committee is of the view that the Department should carry out further research on formulation of appropriate feeds
 for the enhancement of juvenile lobsters and  develop the  larval rearing technology in Indian spiny lobster which was taken
 up during 1999-2000. The Department should also initiate research in the area of identification of pathogenic organisms and
 development of methodology for eradication of these pathogens using chemotherapeutents.  The technology for fattening of
 lobsters and mud-crab at Andaman &
 
 
 
 
Nicobar Islands and lobsters in the main land should also be disseminated to the coastal community and selected
 entrepreneurs.
 (Para 53)
18.   After considering the Demands for Grants of the Department of Ocean Development and assessing the progress of various
 programmes and projects administered by it, the Committee recommends that the Demands for Grants of Rs. 168.80 crores as
 sought by the Department of Ocean Development for the year 2000-2001, under Demand No. 89  may be approved.
(Para 54)
 
 

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
ANNEXURES
 
ANNEXURE-I
 
DETAILS OF BUDGETARY PROJECTIONS FOR THE YEAR 2000-2001
 
(Rs.in crores)
 
Sl.No. Schemes/Programmes B.E. (2000-01)
(1) (2) (3)
A. Plan   
1. Polar Science (Antarctic Research) 20.00
2. Marine Living Resources  
 Drugs from Sea 2.20
 Assessment of Marine Living Resources 2.96
3. Marine Non-living Resources  
 Polymetallic Nodules Programme 17.30
 BENFAN 1.15
4. Ocean Observation & Information Services  
 Ocean Observing Systems 9.25
 Ocean Information Services (INCOIS) 7.25
 Satellite & Coastal Oceanographic Research (SATCORE) 1.20
 Ocean Dynamics & Modelling (INDOMOD) 2.00
5. Marine & Coastal Area management  
 Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System (COMAPS) 4.05
 Coastal Research Vessels 3.94
 Integrated Coastal & Marine Area Management (ICMAM) 6.50
6. Marine Research & Capacity Building  
 Marine Research Programmes 3.50
 Fellowship/Training 0.60
7. Coastal Community Programmes  
 Marine Instrumentation (Shore to Fishing Vessel Communication System) 0.05
 Island Development 0.75
8. Ocean Awareness 0.80
9 National Institute of Ocean Technology  
 Mission Programmes & related activities 13.30
10 International Cooperation & Obligation 0.70
11 Delineation of Continental shelf 43.00
12 Direction and Administration 1.50
                                                        SUB-TOTAI (A) 142.00
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1)
B. Non-Plan
(2) (3)
1. ORV Sagar Kanya           13.77
2. FORV Sagar Sampada 10.31
3. Secretariat & Economic Services             1.74
4. Administrative Support & Infrastructure 0.98
                                                       SUB-TOTAL (B) 26.80
                                                       TOTAL (A+ B) 168.00
  
ANNEXURE-II
BUDGET DEMANDS MADE/APPROVED AND ACTUALLY UTILISED
DURING 1997-98,1998-99 and 1999-2000
Statement showing scheme wise actuals and budget estimates.
                                                                                      (Rs. In Crores)
S.No Schemes / Programmes 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000
  B.E R.E* Actual B.E R.E Actual BE R.E** Ant. Exp.
A. Plan           
1. Polar Science (Antarctic Research) 18.50 19.78 19.61 20.00 19.70 16.45 20.00 20.00 20.00
2. Marine Living Resources
         
 Drugs from Sea 2.50 2.71 2.71 1.60 1.64 1.63 2.00 2.03 2.03
 Assessment of Marine Living Resources 0.30 0.02 0.01 2.00 2.00 1.95 2.96 2.96 2.96
 Mariculture 0.10 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
3. Marine Non-living Resources          
 Polymetallic Nodules Programme 18.95 19.93 20.31 14.05 11.05 10.88 19.31 13.83 12.24
 BENFAN/Hydromas 0.10 0.01 0.10 0.50 -- -- --        --          --
4. Ocean Observation & Information
 Services
13.75 13.45 13.37 11.50 9.00 9.20 14.00 15.20 15.20
5. Marine & Coastal Area management          
 Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System
 (COMAPS)
1.50 1.50 150 1.50 1.63 1.63 2.05 2.25 2.25
 Coastal Research Vessels 2.50 2.50 2.50 2.50 2.20 2.16 2.50 2.88 2.88
 Integrated Coastal & Marine Area Management
 (ICMAM)
9.00 6.00 5.82 5.00 4.39 3.90 6.70 4.00 4.00
 Marine Biodiversity 0.10 -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --
6. Marine Research & Capacity Building          
 Marine Research Programmes 2.70 2.93 2.90 2.30 2.30 2.37 2.70 2.70 2.70
Fellowship/Training 0.20 0.22 0.22 0.20 0.20 0.20 0.30 0.30 0.30

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
 
7. Coastal Community Programmes          
 Marine Instrumentation 0.10 0.10 0.07 0.10 0.10 0.10 0.02 0.02 0.02
 Island Development 0.25 1.24 1.24 1.25 1.00 1.20 1.00 0.76 0.76
8. Ocean Awareness 0.30 0.22 0.23 0.50 0.40 0.45 0.70 0.78 0.78
9. National Institute of Ocean
 Technology
13.50 14.49 14.49 24.00 24.00 24.00 15.70 16.41 16.41
10. International Cooperation
         
 
Contribution to International Bodies, etc. 1.50 0.70 0.50 0.75 0.75 0.75 0.60 0.60 0.60
 
Continental Shelf 0.50 0.50 0.40 0.50 4.00 3.98 43.00 --- ---
11 Direction & Administration 1.65 1.70 1.52 1.75 1.59 1.43 1.46 1.46 1.46
 
SUB-TOTAL (A) 88.00 88.00 85.58 90.00 86.00 82.13 135.00 86.18 86.18
 
 
 NON-PLAN SCHEMES          
 
ORV Sagar Kanya 9.48 9.48 9.48 10.15 10.15 10.15 10.30 9.27 9.27
 
FORV Sagar Sampada 7.50 7.50 7.50 8.02 8.02 7.93 9.84 8.00 8.00
 
Secretariat & Economic Services 1.48 1.41 1.24 1.61 1.53 1.29 1.83 1.74 1.74
 
Administrative Support &
 Infrastructure
1.04 1.02 0.81 1.10 0.97 0.78 1.03 0.98 0.98
 
SUB-TOTAL (B) 19.50 19.41 19.03 20.88 20.67 20.15 23.00 19.99 19.99
 
TOTAL (A + B) 107.50 107.41 106.61 110.88 106.67 102.28 158.00 106.17 106.17
           
 
ANNEXURE-III
 
REPLY SUBMITTED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT TO QUESTIONNAIRE OF THE PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT & FORESTS RELATING
TO DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2001-2002)
 
QUESTION 1
The total financial outlay for the Department of Ocean Development (DOD) for the year 2001-2002 is Rs.168.80 crores as against Rs.158.00 crores in the previous
 year. The amount is Rs.62.63 crores more than the actual expenditure and Rs.10.80 crores more than the budget estimates for the year 2000-2001 (Rs. 1 58.00 crores).
 Will it help the Department to meet its requirements keeping in view the Programmes, Projects and Plans for the year under reference, if not, please elaborate?
ANSWER 1
The Department had prepared Plan proposals for Rs. 157.21 crores. After discussions with the Planning Commission the Plan outlay was fixed at Rs. 142 crores. As
 a result the outlay had to be reduced for the "Antarctic Expedition & Polar Science", "Polymetallic Nodules", "Coastal and Marine Area Management", "Ocean Observation
 & Information Services" and "Marine Research and Capacity Building" programmes. While the Department would have been able to advance the programmes more with
 additional funding, the present outlay will not hold up the execution of any programme.
The Department is facing more serious resource difficulties on the Non-Plan side. During 2000-01 the outlay was reduced from Rs. 23 crores at the BE stage to Rs.
 19.99 crores at the RE stage. This reduction has led to serious difficulties in making payments  to the Shipping Corporation of India for the operation of the Research
 vessels "Sagar Kanya" and "Sagar Sampada". There exists a backlog of payments of about Rs. 7 crores presently. The BE of Rs. 26.80 crores for 2001-02, even if not
 reduced later during the financial year, will be inadequate to meet the backlog and dues of next year.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
QUESTION 2
Over the years, the Department has been pleading for more funds and the Committee had taken into consideration the fact that for continuity of its long term
 programmes/schemes, the Department requires extra budgetary support but the actual expenditure in the year 2000-2001 being Rs.51.83 crores less than the budgetary
 allocation it is felt that the Department has not meticulously followed the programme to ensure full utilization of the funds. What are the comments of the Department?
ANSWER 2
The shortfall indicated above is on account of reduction in the Plan and Non- Plan outlays.
NON-PLAN
As indicated above, the Non-Plan outlay was reduced from Rs. 23 crores at the BE stage to Rs. 19.99 crores at RE stage as an economy measure. This was
 despite the Department's need for additional funds for the operation of its two research vessels- Sagar Kanya and Sagar Sampada.
 
PLAN
In relation to Plan, the outlay stands reduced from Rs. 135 crores at the BE level to Rs. 86.18 crores  at RE stage. Of the above reduction in Plan expenditure, the
 reduction of Rs. 43 crores was on account of the Department's inability to implement the programme on Delineation of the Continental Shelf. The remaining shortfall of
 Rs. 5.82 crores is on account of the general need for economy.
In relation to the programme to delineate the Continental shelf it would be noted that India has to submit claim to the Commission on the Limits of Continental Shelf
 by June 2005. If delineation is properly undertaken, India would be in a position to make exclusive claim on the continental shelf. This could provide
India with an area of more than I million sq. km of continental shelf beyond the EEZ. In case India does  not submit claim before the CLCS, the continental shelf
 beyond 200 nautical miles would lie in international waters and India would have the same claim to it as other members of the international community.
The class of work envisaged in establishing the claim is new for India. The Technical & Scientific Guidelines were issued in May 1999 about a year behind
 schedule. The Guidelines as formulated need careful interpretation. The terms used in the Guidelines  often have a legal interpretation different from the normal technical
 usage. The proper meaning of the terms has to be jointly decided by legal and technical experts to ensure that India does not lose available opportunity.
The United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea provides two means of delineating the Shelf to India and Sri Lanka. The two countries can either choose to use
 Article 76 which applies to all countries signatory to the Convention or Annex 11 to the Final Act to the Third United Nations Conference on Law of the Sea which
 applies to just the two countries. There are advantages and disadvantages in using either  of the provisions and it is necessary to put in place a carefully thought out
 strategy that best serves India's interests. This work is close to completion. Substantial progress has been achieved in collating the available seismic and bathymetric
 data to define with greater precision than before the likely area of  claim. The Indian baselines are also in the final stages of promulgation by the Ministry of External
 Affairs. It is hoped that during 2001-02 significant progress will be achieved through dialogue with Sri Lanka and through physical surveys.
QUESTION 3
What are the details of projects where funds have remained under utilised in 2000-2001 in view of  significant reduction in Budgetary allocation as reflected in
 Revised Estimates (2000-2001)?
ANSWER 3
The major under utilisation of funds was under the Continental Shelf programme where an amount of Rs. 43 crores was surrendered as explained in the reply to the
 question 2 above. The other major shortfall was in the Polymetallic Nodules Programme where the project to develop a remotely operated submersible could not be
 taken up since the required approvals were not received.
 
QUESTION 4
In the budget estimates for 2001-2002 a sum of Rs. 1 7.30 crores has been allocated for Poly Metallic Nodules Programme against Rs.13.83 crores in the Revised
 Estimates of 2000-2001. It is observed that the increase in budgetary allocation for the programme for 2001-2002 is only Rs.3.47 crores over Revised Estimates. The
 Poly Metallic Nodules Programme was started in 1987 and now the Department is of the view that the current state of technology, land based resource availability and
 market demand, is not economical to go in exploitation of minerals from deep sea. The international studies indicate a scope for such exploitation around 2010 or so
 then what was the justification for Department of Ocean Development in initiating such a programme with long gestation period? Please furnish j,-tails of the work
 actually done under the project last year (2000-2001).
ANSWER 4
India has been at the forefront of the Poly Metallic Nodules Programme since the early eighties. In 1987, India was accorded the status of Registered Pioneer
 Investor and allotted 1,50,000 sq. km. of mining site in the Central Indian Ocean. India was the first country to be so registered. India's achievement is a matter of pride
 not only for the country but also for the developing world.
     As 'Pioneer Investor', India has the following major obligations:
(a)       it shall incur expenditure annually in the development of technologies for exploration of pioneer areas and exploitation of the manganese nodules;
(b)       it shall provide training to UN nominated technical personnel from developing countries,
(c)       it shall arrange for transfer of technology to the International seabed Authority whenever the necessity arises;
When India first undertook the programme it was clear that there would be no immediate commercial benefits. It was however decided to go in for the programme in

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
 consideration of the long-term strategic and geopolitical factors and the need for the country to develop cutting edge underwater technologies. With continued commitment
 to the programme India will be in position to transform the technical skills acquired into commercial opportunity. It will not have to seek technology from the advanced
 countries or be subject to technology denial regimes.
During 2000-01 the programme was executed with the following components:
(a)           survey and exploration for assessing abundance and quality of nodules;
(b)       mining from deep seabed at depths of about 5000 m and transportation to process site;
(c)           extraction of metals from the nodules; and d. environmental impact assessment.
In relation to "survey and exploration" considerable progress has been made in identifying blocks that could be relinquished to the International Seabed Authority in
 accordance with the commitment. The survey work for the purpose is likely to be complete during 2001-02.
    
 
     In relation to "mining" the following were achieved:
(a)       demonstration of the shallow bed mining system for manoeuverability of the crawler system was done in October, 2000. Tests for sampling of slurry
 through a riser hose from 410 m water depth were done earlier.
(b)       detailed engineering and specification of a mining complex module of 25,000 tonnes/year capacity for 6000 m depth has been carried out jointly by
 NIOT, Chennai and IKS, University of Seigen, Germany.
(c)       upgraded version of ROV developed by Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute,Durgapur is ready for a test in open sea up to a depth of
 250 m.
In relation to "extraction" the processing plant being constructed by the Hindustan Zinc Ltd. at Udaipur is in the final phase of completion. The nodules required for
 processing have been collected. The R&D activities to optimise extraction efficiencies are progressing well.
     The cruise to the Central Indian Ocean Basin to study the progress of re- colonisation of benthic organisms, disturbed in an earlier experiment, has Laen planned
 and will be shortly undertaken under the "environmental" component.
QUESTION 5
The Department in coordination with National Institute of Ocean Technology, Chennai and Institute of Konstruction (IKS), University of Seigen, Germany has been
 able to develop shallow bed mining system at 410 mts. off Tuticorin Coast. The Committee would like to know the steps taken to ensure continuous operation,
 manoeuverability, etc. at a shallower depth of an integrated mining system for operation at 6000 mts.
ANSWER 5
A shallow bed mining system consisting of crawler, suction cutter pump and riser has been designed,  developed and tested jointly by National Institute of Ocean
 Technology, Chennai and Institute of Konstruction (IKS), University of Seigen, Germany. The present  system was designed for sand mining since no nodules are
 available in shallow depths. The technology developed is being spun off to permit sand dredging near river mouths and to exploit placer mineral deposits.
On the basis of expertise and experience gained, an integrated nodule mining system would be developed for 6000 m depth in two phases. The work would involve
 modification and re-design of some of the existing components to develop a mining system consisting of crawler, collector, crusher and riser.
As a first stage, the integrated system would be demonstrated at a water depth of 500 m. In the next stage after successful testing, the system would be proved at
 6000 metres water depth.
QUESTION 6
An amount of Rs. 13.30 crores has been allocated for 2001-2002 for the programme under National Institute of Ocean Technology (NIOT) as against Rs.15.70
 crores allocated in the budget estimates and Rs.16.41 crores in the revised estimates for the year 2000-2001. The amount is less by Rs.3.11 crores than what was
 sought in the revised estimates (Rs.16.41 crores) for 2000-2001. Whether the reduced allocation will affect any of the activities?
 
ANSWER 6
The grants-in-aid of Rs.13.30 crores proposed for NIOT during 2001-02 is less by Rs.3.11 crores as  compared to the RE of Rs.16.41 crores for 2000-01. The
 reduction was planned on the basis that the Ocean Thermal Energy Conversion (OTEC) project would be substantially complete during the current financial year. An
 outlay of Rs. 4 crores in 2001-02 was thus planned for the OTEC project as against the outlay of Rs. 10 crores during the current financial year.
Unfortunately there have been so i.e. set backs in advancing the OTEC project. The pipeline system for the project after deployment drifted. The loss of components
 is being assessed. Before the pipeline system is re-deployed the strategy earlier envisaged would have to be re-assessed. Further it may be necessary to acquire a
 vessel with heavy lifting and winching capability to ensure proper deployment. It is likely  that additional funds for the programme would have to be provided in the year
 2001-02. The exact quantum would be determined only after a full assessment exercise.
The outlay for the other mission projects of NIOT like Wave Energy, Mining Technology, Coastal Engineering, Marine Instrumentation have not been reduced.
 Similarly, schemes/projects of the department entrusted to NIOT such as Coastal Research Vessels, National Data Buoy Programme and Island Development Programme

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
 are being supported to the required level.
QUESTION 7
The budgetary allocation for the programme "Coastal Ocean Monitoring & Prediction System (COMAPS)" for 2001-2002 for Rs.4.05 crores which is almost twice the
 Budget Estimates for the year 2000-2001 (i.e. Rs.2.05 crores).   What are the details of the work carried out under the programme last year and what are the new
 areas proposed to be covered during the year for which an enhanced allocation is sought?
ANSWER7
During the year 2000-2001 for which the budget requirement of Rs.2.05 crores has been allocated, work carried out include monitoring pollution at 77 locations along
 with 25 hotspots database development and physical oceanographic studies to understand the diffusion and dispersion characteristics at 2 locations. During the year
 2001-2002, while the monitoring and database development programme will be continued, the hotspots will be more intensively monitored. The proposed locations for
 physical oceanographic studies will be increased to four. This leads to a financial requirement of Rs.4.05 crores.
QUESTION 8
Under the programme "Coastal Ocean Monitoring and Prediction System" (COMAPS) after monitoring level of various marine
 pollutants in the coastal and offshore waters, 32 locations have been identified as hot spots. What steps the Department to eliminate/check
 marine pollutants at these hot spots has initiated? What steps have been taken for evolving a coordination mechanism between Department
 of Ocean Development and respective State Pollution Control Boards for continued check on marine pollution levels and utilise the data
 generated through Geographical Information System (GIS) to achieve desired results?
 
ANSWER  8
The Department of Ocean Development takes up scientific monitoring of pollution at different locations. The responsibility to control pollution in the hotspots rests with
 the State Governments through the State Pollution Control Boards. The data collected is routinely made available to the Pollution Control Boards and periodically
 discussed with them. Any significant increase in pollutants at a particular location is brought to the notice of the Central Pollution Control Board and the concerned State
 Pollution Control Board for control as well as remedial actions.
The Department of Ocean Development have constituted a Steering Committee under the Chairmanship of Chairman, Central Pollution Control Board, New Delhi with
 members from all the coastal State Pollution Control Boards to facilitate coordination as. well as  analysis of results obtained under the COMAPS programme. The GIS
 based Information system containing COMAPS data is under development by the National Institute of Oceanography, Goa.
At the national level the Ministry of Environment & Forests, Department of Ocean Development, Ministry of Shipping, Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas and
 Ministry of Defence deal with marine pollution.
QUESTION 9
What steps have been taken for evolving coordination mechanism between Department of Ocean Development and other concerned Departments like Department of
 Animal Husbandry & Dairying or Biotechnology to achieve the objective of Marine Living Resources (MLR) Programme?
ANSWER 9
Assessment of Marine Living Resources is a programme' initiated by the Department during the IX Plan period. The programme was evolved after detailed
 consultations with the bodies of the Ministry of agriculture such as the ICAR (CMFRI Kochi, CIFT Kochi, CIFE Mumbai), the Fishery Survey of India, the National
 Institute of Oceanography and Maritime Universities (Cochin University of Science & Technology and Andhra University). The programme is being implemented with the
 active participation of the above Institutions. The progress/ achievements of the projects are monitored regularly by the Task Forces of each project constituted by the
 department and also by the department's Scientific Advisory Committee on MLR, which has representatives from various Ministries and Universities.
Secretary, DOD is also the Chairman of the Group on Marine Bioresources formed as per the recommendations  of the Steering Committee of the National Sio-
resources Board and coordinated by the Department of Biotechnology. This Department is also represented on the Expert Group set up by the Department of
 Biotechnology for establishment of a Marine Biotechnology Application Centre.
QUESTION 10
An amount of Rs.2.20 crores has been allocated for 2001-2002 for the programme "Drug from Sea" as  against Rs.2.00 crores allocated in the budget estimates for
 2000-2001. VVith an increase of Rs.20 lakhs only wi the Department be able to concentrate its efforts towards the transfer c technology for commercialization of drugs to
 the pharmaceuticz companies in near future and provide the drugs to the common people a cost effective price?
 
ANSWER 10
The "Drugs from Sea" programme was reviewed during the current financial yea and the programme extended to the end of the current plan period. The estimated
 outlay on the extension is Rs. 420 lakhs with Rs. 200 lakhs proposes to be provided in the current financial year and Rs. 220 lakhs in the next financial year. The
 major objectives of the programme include:-
Exploratory work:
·
         Systematic exploration of the entire coastline and collections made from deep sea as well for identification of more flora and fauna having potential for
 extraction of drugs and chemicals.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
·         Collection, extraction and biological evaluation of 150 species, and evaluation of biologically potential organisms, leading to possible development of new
 drug (s).
Product development.,
·                     Solation of bioactive constituents and development as possible drugs.
·                     Development of suitable models for biological activity in certain priority areas.
·                     Undertaking regulatory pharmacology and toxicology of 2-3 extracts.
·                     Initiation and completion of clinical trials for at least two drugs.
·                     Development of at least 2 herbal drugs from the samples and marketing.
·                     Industrial participation in drug development and marketing.
Detailed work on the following marine organisms shall be undertaken by various labs with a view to narrowing down on producing and marketing two drugs with the
 possible involvement of industry:
·                     Code CDR- 134 for antidiarrhoeal and antidiabetic activities by CDRI.
·                     Code CUl-002/004 for antihyperlipidaemic activity by CUl and CDRI.
·                     Code NIO-450 for antianxiety activity by NIO and CDRI.
·                     Code AU2-106 antioxidant/ hypolipidaemic/ hypoglycaemic activity by AU2 and CDRI.
·                     Code CSM-089 for antibacterial/antifungal/ larvicidal activity by AUI, CDRI and IIC.
·                     Code IIC-276 for larvicidal activity by IIC.
     It is also proposed to develop two herbal drugs using modified developmental Procedures and initiate clinical trials on the identified samples. In exploratory work,
 anti-diabetic and anti-hyperlipidaemic activities are to be given top priority, while anti-mycobacterial and anti-fungal activities are to be accorded second and third priority.
Permission for use Of non-human primates (Rhesus monkeys) for experimentation to undertake Pre-clinical trials Of two fractions of CDR 134 has been recently
 granted by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
 
The CDRI has made significant Progress in establishing Code AL)2-106 as an anti-cholesterol drug. It is expected that the drug would be Put to Pre-clinical trials by
 December 2001 and clinical trials would be taken up by 2002 end. Permission to test CDR-134 for antidiarrhoeal and antidiabetic activity on non-human Primates has
 been received and tests will begin shortly. This will then be followed up by limited clinical trials in human subjects after regulatory clearance.
The commercialisation of the drugs will follow the success of the clinical trials.
QUESTION 11
The budgetary allocation for 2001-2002 under Island Development Programme is Rs.0.75 crores as against Rs. 1.00 crores earmarked in the budget estimates for
 the year 2000-2001. With a reduced budgetary support for the Programme in the current year the Committee would like to know the progress of schemes for Providing
 Communication system in coastal areas from Shore to Fishing Vessel which was initially launched in 1991. What steps have been taken by the Department for extending
 such facilities to the fishermen living in all the coastal states and the island groups?
ANSWER 11
The allocation of Rs.75.00 lakhs under the Island Development Programme for 2001-2002 is for implementation of the Programme entitled "Ocean Science and
 Technology for Islands".
The major activity under the Island Development Programme is essentially lobster resource enhancement and transfer of this technology to island and coastal
 communities so that they may benefit economically. The activity involves technology for fattening of lobsters, biochemical analysis of lobsters and live feeds, breeding
 larval rearing and sea ranching of lobsters. The revised budgetary support of Rs-0.76 crores is adequate to meet the requirement of this Programme and no work will be
 affected. The Shore to Fishing Vessel Communication System implemented by  the DOD was only to demonstrate the technology Of communication to the coastal
 fishermen for ensuring their safety at sea. The Fisheries Division under the Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairy Development is the nodal Ministry for this
 purpose. The Ministry of Agriculture is believed to be initiating programmes for upgrading the mechanised fishing sector in the country by  providing them with
 sophisticated navigation and communication equipment. Further expansion of the Shore to Fishing Vessel Communication System covering the entire coastline of India
 including the islands would be considered by that Ministry.
QUESTION 12
What are the details of interface between the Department of Ocean Development and Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow, regarding the project relating to
 collection, identification and bioevaluation of marine flora and fauna from Indian coasts? What is the tentative schedule for completion/marketing of product development
 on anti-anxiety, anti- cholesterol cum antioxidant, anti-fungal/anti-bacterial organisms which have been taken under National Project, "Drugs from Sea", by the Department
 of Ocean Development? Whether the products like "Sea Power", "Purulina" and "Beta Carotene", already being sold in the market have not defeated the purpose of your
 drugs which are yet to appear in the market? Please comment in detail.

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
ANSWER12
The National Project on Development of Potential Drugs from Ocean was taken up for implementation from 1990-91 onwards with a view to harnessing  the 
 potential marine flora and
fauna for extraction of drugs for medicinal purposes. This project was implemented by involving 10 institutions viz. NIO Goa; CSMCRI, Bhavnagar; Indian Institute of
 Chemical Technology, Hyderabad; Department of' Chemistry, Andhra University, Waltair (2 Centres); Centre of Advanced Studies on Natural Products, College of Science,
 Calcutta; Regional Research Laboratory, Bhubaneshwar; Dr.        B.C. Roy Post Graduate Institute of  Basic Medical Sciences, Calcutta; Dr. A.L.M. Post Graduate
 Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Madras; Medical College, Goa; and the Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow. Presently Medical College, Goa is not
 involved with the programme and has been replaced by Bharatidasan University, Thiruchirapalli.
Till date about 800 different species of potential flora and fauna have been collected from the Indian coast including Island groups. Out of this, a total of 1102
 voucher specimens have been preserved in the National Repository at NIO, Goa and also at CDRI, Lucknow. Taxonomical identification of 133 specimens out of these
 has been completed and they were taken up for extraction of chemicals and biological evaluation. These specimens yielded 2000 samples which were subjected to a
 wide spectrum of biological screening. Spectral analysis of 929 samples was carried out for chemical analysis and structural elucidation of the compounds isolated.
Three hundred thirty seven (337) samples were found to possess varying degrees of activities through this  wide spectrum biological screening. Further screening of
 these 337 samples led to identification of 16 organisms for detailed follow-up studies in the disease areas pertaining to the identified activity (Antifungal-2, Antiviral-2,   
 Antimycobacterial-2,        Antigiardial-4,    Hypolipidaemic-3          and Hypoglycaemic-3). In all 31 potent bioactive marine organisms were subjected to a battery of
 further chemical and biological tests in order to localise the active constituents present.
The drugs discovery process is lengthy and expensive but pre-clinical and clinical development of herbal drugs should follow scientific principles. Presence of
 numerous constituents in herbal extracts requires an activity - guided fractionation and testing procedure, which can ultimately lead to the discrimination of active
 constituents. This pre-clinical study stage is time consuming and results in many  dropouts. Modern herbal drugs should be developed and documented in a way  leading
 to a broader acceptance by the scientific community and pharmaceutical companies. Commercialisation and marketing of herbal product will only be possible when
 sufficient pre-clinical data is generated, which can create interest in drug pharma for commercialization/ collaboration.
     The CDRI has made significant progress in establishing Code AU2-106 as an anti-cholesterol drug. It is expected that the drug would be put  to pre-clinical trials by
 December 20001 and clinical trials would be taken up by 2002 end. Permission to test CDR-134 for antidiarrhoeal and antidiabetic activity on non- human primates has
 been received and tests will begin shortly.
The CDRI is aware of herbal products being marketed by certain companies. .These products will not affect the drug development programme currently underway.
QUESTION 13
What is the present status of the project for developing Geographical Information system, at National Institute of Oceanography (NIO), Goa for monitoring pollution in
 the coastal areas? The Committee would also like to be apprised of the coordination mechanism developed between the Ministry of Environment and Forests and various
 State Pollution Control Boards to prepare Action Plans for mitigation of Coastal Pollution.
ANSWER13
     The GIS based Information system containing COMAPS data is under development by the National Institute of Oceanography, Goa.
     The Integrated Coastal and Marine Areas Management programme of this Department aims inter-alia to develop an information system using Geographic Information
 System (GIS) for 11 critical habitats namely, Gulf of Kachchh, Gulf of Khambat, Malvan, Kadmat, Karwar  islands, Cochin islands, Gulf of Mannar, Pitchavaram,   
 Coringa, Gahirmatha and Suderbans. The tasks involved in the development of such an information system are as follows
·
                     Review of data 1)" the habitats available with various institutions.
·                     Preparation of methodology Manual and conducting a workshop on methodology.
·                     Field data collection on physico-chemical and biological parameters for eleven sites by eleven institutions.
·                     Creation of GIS database using remotely sensed data and other conventional data.
·                     Designing of a GIS module and integration of database.
·                     Development of Management Plans using GIS for 3 habitats, each representing an island marine ecosystem, coral reef and a mangrove.
After collection of field data and development of database, a GIS based information system for Pitchavaram mangrove, namely
 Critical Habitat Information system (CHIS) has been completed and a Compact Disc has been produced and released.  Use of GIS in
 the CHIS helped detection of the areas of degradation of mangrove and areas of recovery.  The CHIS for Kadmat Island of
 Lakshadweep, 7 islands off Karwar and 21 islands of Gulf of Mannar are nearing completion, Development of GIS for the other 7
 habitats is in advanced stages and will be completed by the end of the year. NIO, Goa has collected data on biological, hydrological
 and socio-economical aspects relevant to coastal region of Malvan along the Central West Coast of India under this programme.  The
 data generated by NIO, Goa is an important component of the GIS based Information System under development. Presently given the
 fact that responsibility for marine pollution management is shared between the State and Central Governments and various agencies
 under the Government, there is no single coordinating mechanism.
 

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
 
MINUTES
 
IX
NINTH MEETING
 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday the 29th March, 2001 in Room No.139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah — 
Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.   Shri Birabhadra Singh
3.   Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra
4.   Shri Lalitbhai Mehta
5.   Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray
6.   Smt. Savita Sharda
7.   Shri B.P. Singhal
     
      LOK  SABHA
 
8.   Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura
9.   Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza
10.Shri Baliram Kashyap
11.Shri Hassan Khan
12.Dr. Charan Das Mahant
13.Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
14.Shri Ali Mohd. Naik
15.Shri B. K. Parthasarathi
16.Shri Suresh Pasi
17.Shri Prahlad Patel
18.  Prof. R. R. Pramanik
19.  Shri Naresh Puglia
20.Shri Ram Prasad Singh
21.  Shri V. Vetriselvan
22.Dr.(Smt.) Rajeshwaramma Vukkala
23.Shri Balram Singh Yadav
  
   SECRETARIAT
   Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
        Shri Mom Raj Singh, Under Secretary
        Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
      Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
2.   *                                              *                                        *
      REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF OCEAN DEVELOPMENT
 
Dr. Harsh K. Gupta, Secretary
Shri C. S. Rao, Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser
Shri Anil Misra, Joint Secretary
Shri B. N. Krishnamurthy, Scientist

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
Shri P. K. Tiwari, Director
 
 
 
 
Dr. V. Sampath, Scientist
Shri Girish Pillai, Director
Dr. B. R. Subramanian, Scientist
Smt. Krishna Tyagi, Deputy Secretary
Shri R. K. Sharma, Scientist
Dr. M. P. Wakdikar, Scientist
Shri K. V. Sharma, Scientist
Shri B. M. Vedi, Sr. PPS to Secretary
Shri K. Narayanan, Under Secretary
Shri B. L. Kureel, Under Secretary
Shri D. R. Ratra, Under Secretary
Prof. M. Ravindran, Director, NIOT, Chennai
Dr. P. C. Pandey, Director, NCAOR, Goa
Dr. K. Radhakrishnan, Director, INCOIS, Hyderabad
Dr. V. N. Sanjeevan, SSO, CMLRE, Kochi
Dr. R. R. Kelkar, Director General, Indian Meteorological Dept.
Dr. R. C. Trivedi, Scientist, CPCB
Dr. Ram Raghubir, Dy. Director, Central Drug research Institute, Lucknow
 Dr. E. Desa, Director, National Institute of Oceanography, Goa.
 
3.   ***                                           ***                                           ***
    
4.   The Committee, thereafter, adjourned at 1.00 
P.M. for lunch and re-assembled at 3.00 P.M. to hold the discussion with Secretary, Department of Ocean Development.
    
5.   Resuming the discussion in post-lunch session the Chairman* welcomed the Secretary and other officials to the Department of Ocean
 Development and requested the Secretary to make a brief presentation regarding the Demands for Grants (2001-02).  Thereafter the Secretary
 made a visual presentation regarding the activities and achievements of the Department.  The Secretary also explained briefly the budgetary
 allocation on different heads as also the functioning of the Department.  Thereafter Members sought clarification on the points that emerged
 out of the presentation of the Secretary.  The Secretary replied to the questions and assured the Committee to send written comments on the
 points on which information was not readily available.
 
     The witnesses then withdrew.
    
     A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
 
6.   The Committee then adjourned at 5.00 
P.M. to meet again at 11.00 A.M. on 30.03.2001.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________
*     In the absence of the Chairman, Prof. R. R.  Pramanik was voted to the Chair.
*** Relates to other matters.
 
 
 
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING       
 
The Committee met at 10.00 
A.M. on Wednesday the 18th April, 2001 in Room No.53, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
 
PRESENT

R E P O R T
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/88th.html[29-08-2018 16:17:24]
 
1.   Shri C. Ramachandraiah -— Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.  Shri Sukhdev Singh Libra
3.   Prof.(Smt.) Bharati Ray           
4.   Shri Lachhman Singh         
5.   Shri B.P. Singhal                    
 
     LOK  SABHA
 
6.   Shri Bhan Singh Bhaura
7.   Smt. Bhavana Chikhaliya             
8.   Dr. (Smt.) Beatrix D’ Souza         
     9.   Shri Laxman Giluwa
     10. Shri Bali Ram Kashyap
11.Dr. Charan Das Mahant
12.Shri E.M. Sudarsana Natchiappan
13.Shri Ali Mohd. Naik                
14.Shri Suresh Pasi                   
15.Dr. Ashok Patel                       
16.Shri Prahlad Patel                  
17.Shri Y.S. Vivekananda Reddy  
18.Prof. I.G. Sanadi                     
 
   SECRETARIAT
  
   Shri H. K. Chanana, Joint Secretary
        Shri Momraj Singh, Under Secretary
        Shri A. K. Gandhi, Committee Officer
     Shri Triloknath Mishra, Research Officer
 
2.   The Committee took up for consideration the draft 88 th &  ***  Reports of the Committee on the Demands for Grants (2001-02) of
 Department of Ocean Development and *** respectively.  The Committee considered and adopted each of the reports.
 
3.         The Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence Prof. (Smt.) Bharati Ray to present  the  Reports  to  the Rajya  Sabha  and 
 Smt. Bhavana  Chikhaliya  in    her   absence Prof. I.G.Sanadi to lay the Reports on the table of the Lok Sabha.
 
4.         The Chairman and Members also congratulated officers of the Secretariat for the excellent work done by them.
 
5.   The Committee then adjourned at 10.30 A.M. & to meet again at 10.00 AM on 19th April, 2001.
 
_____________________________________________________________________________
 *** Relates to other matters.
  
 