17th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/17threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (1994-95)
 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT
ON
ANNUAL REPORT (1993-94) OF 'THE DEPARTMENT OF BIOTECHNOLOGY
 
(Development of Immunodiagnostic Kits, Environmental Conservation and Biodiversity, 
 Medicinal and Aromatic Plants and Implications of New GATT Regime and 
 Intellectual Property Rights with regard to new developments in Biotechnology)
 
(Presented on March 31, 1995)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
March, 1995/Chaitra, 1917 (Saka)
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CONTENTS
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
2.INTRODUCTION
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
4.SUMMARY OF RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS 
5.MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE COMMI'ITEE
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
 STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(1994-95)
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
 1. Syed Sibtey Razi---Chairman
   **2. Dr. M. Aram
                   3. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi   
                   4. Dr. Murli Manohar Joshi
               **5. Shri K. Rahman Khan
       6. Prof. M. G.K. Menon
      7. Shri Suresh Pachouri
      8. Shri N. Girl Prasad
            ***9. Shri Satchidananda
    10. Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
  *11. Dr. Ranbir Singh
    12. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 
LOK SABHA
 
  13. Shri E. Ahamed
  14. Shri P.C. Chacko
  15. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
  16. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
  17. Shri Sharad Dighe
  18. Shrimati Saroj Dubey
  19. Shri Oscar Fernandes
  20. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
  21. Shri P. Kumarasamy

17th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/17threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
  22. Shrimati Mahendra Kumari
 + 23. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
  24. Shri M. V. V.S. Murthy
  25. Shri Harpal Panwar
  26. Shri Balraj Pasi
  27. Shri Bhim Singh Patel
  28. Shri Chandresh Patel
  29. Shri Vijay Naval Patil
 
*    Nominated w.e.f. October 4, 1994.
** Nominated w.e.f. November 16, 1994.
*** Nominated w.e.f. March 24, !995 vice Shri Suresh Kalmadi resigned.
 +Nominated w.e.f. August 22, 1994.
30. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
31. Shrimati Vasundhara Raje
32. Shri Rama Chandra Rath
33. Shri M.G. Reddy
34. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
35. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
36. Shri Harchand Singh
37. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
38. Shri K.G. Shivappa
        **39. Shri Bapusaheb Thite
  **40. Kumari Sushila Tiriya
41. Kumari Frida Topno
42. Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
  1.Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary
  2.Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
  3.Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
  4.Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
_____________________________________________________________________
 
**  Nominated w.e.f. August 22, 1994 vice Sarvashri P.R. Kumaramangalam and Praful Manoharbhai Patel resigned.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
INTRODUCTION
 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
 and Forests having been authorised by the Committee to present the report on its behalf, present this Seventeenth Report of
 the Committee. This Report examines the Annual Report (1993-94) of the Department of Biotechnology with Particular
 reference: to the development of immunodiagnostic kits; environmental conservation and biodiversity; medicinal and
 aromatic plants; and implications of new GATT regime and Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) with regard to new
 developments in Biotechnology.
2. The Committee held in all three meetings on January 5, 6 and March 29, 1995. In the meeting held on January 5, 1995
 Secretary, Department of Biotechnology gave a brief presentation about the activities of his Department, particularly in the
 aforementioned four areas selected by the Committee for examination. The Members also raised certain queries with regard to
 the various programmes supported by the department of Biotechnology. In the meeting held on January 6, 1995, further
 discussion took place on the Annual Repot of the Department of Biotechnology. The Secretary and the representatives of the
 Department of Biotechnology furnished answers to the questions raised by the Members on the previous day.
3. The Committee thanks the officials of the Department of Biotechnology for giving it necessary information and placing
 before the Committee relevant papers/background notes which facilitiated the Committee to undertake an in-depth
 examination of the Annual Report (1993-94) of the Department of Biotechnology and commends the Department for its
 excellent work.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the report at its meeting held on the 29th March, 1995.
New Delhi;
March 29, 1995
SYED SIBTEY RAZI
Chairman,

17th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/17threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
Committee on Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
REPORT
 
General Background
 
Biotechnology is a fast growing area of science which has great potential for major applications in the fields of
 agriculture and food, health care, industry, environment, etc. It will have an important role to play in the conservation and
 utilisation of biodiversity including the preservation and propagation of medicinal and aromatic plants. The immediate
 major impact of biotechnology in the medical field relates of the development of immunodiagnostic kits, vaccines, and
 major drugs.
 
2. The Committee was informed about the new initiatives taken by the Department of Biotechnology (DBT) during the
 year 1993-94, which included programmes in the area of human gentics, transgenic research relating to both animals and
 plants, protein engineering, food biotechnology, etc.
 
3. While examining the Annual Report of the Department of Biotechnology for the year 1993-94, the Committee
 decided to focus its attention on the programmes in the areas of: development of immunodiagnostic kits; environmental
 conservation and biodiversity; and medicinal and aromtic plants. The Committee also considered the implications of new
 GATTregime and Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) with regard to new developments in biotechnology.
 
lmmunodiagnostic Kits
 
4. DBT supports R&D for producing safe, low cost, efficacious diagnostic kits, particularly for early detection of
 communicable diseases, both in human beings and animals. The Secretary, DBT gave a detailed account of the progress
 made by the Department in the development of various immunodiagnostic kits. According to him the diagnostics industry
 is making rapid progress globally and the turnover of this industry is picking up very fast. During the year 1993-94, there
 had been an impressive growth in India of over 80 per cent in monetary value over the previous year; the estimated annual
 turnover at manufacturers' prices was placed at Rs. 135 crore. The technology in this area is also moving very fast with
 the availability of diagnostics based on Deoxyribo Nucleic Acid (DNA) probes and polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR)
 techniques. PCR based kits have been recently introduced on an experimental basis by one of the companies. Through the
 promotional efforts of and financial support provided by DBT, the Committee learnt that kits for kala azar, malaria,
 filariasis, HIV kits, tuberculosis probes, aspergillosis and hepatitis A are under various stages of development, validation
 and commercialization. The National Institute of Immunology (NII) has developed a dot Enzyme Linked Immunosorbent
 Assay (ELISA) method for the detection of haemolytic streptococus infection in children which has been transferred to
 M/S Nicolas India Limited, Bombay. ELISA method for the detection of antigens of E. histolytica in amoebic liver
 abscess has been developed and transferred to M/S Cadilla Lab. Ltd., Ahmedabad. Similarly, kit for the detection of
 salmonella typhi in blood has been developed and transferred to M/S Lupin, Bombay. Formats for the early detection of
 pregnancy have been transferred to M/S Ranbaxy Laboratories-Ltd., Delhi. As a result of the programmes initiated by the
 Department, three kits are already in the market which include kits for early detection of pregnancy, amoebiasis and
 leishmaniasis.
4.1 Secretary, DBT informed the Committee that the Delhi component of the International Centre for Genetic
 Engineering and Biotechnology (ICGEB) had recently developed a highly efficient kit for the diagnosis of HIV'I and II.
 The sensitivity of this kit is 100 per cent and the specificity is 98.7 per cent. The Committee was also told the prototype
 diagnostic kits for animal and poultry diseases were also under various stages of development.
5. The Committee wanted to know whether the microplate ELISA and dot ELISA techniques for the detection of kala
 azar had been standardised to industrial scale, and if this had not been done, whether the Department had set any time-
frame for it. To this, the representative of the Department replied that in order to shift from mouse to in vitro, for large
 scale production, more research was required to be done. DBT was already seized of the problem, and it might take about
 two to three years to perfect this technique through in vitro culture. The anti-body detection kit for kala azar developed by
 the Ceraral Drug Research Institute (CDRI), Lucknow, has, however, been transferred to M/S Span Diagnostic, Surat, and
 the Company has already commenced production of this kit.
6. As regards development of HIV kit, the Committee was informed that the Department was considering developing
 the kit indigenously. DBT had invited three experts and gave them a contract for two years. The work is going on at: Nil,
 New Delhi; South Campus, University of Delhi; and the Cancer Research Institute, Bombay. The Committee was assured
 that the progress in these three projects was quite satisfactory. At Nil, prototype kits have been developed, and have been
 evaluated for 100 per cent sensitivity and 100 per cent specificity. These kits are likely to be ready by July, 1995. DBT, in
 consultation with Nil, is making efforts to commercialize them. At the South Delhi Campus of Delhi University, the
 efforts at present relate to assembling prototype kits, and it would take at least one more year to standardise the format. At

17th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/17threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
 the Cancer Research Institute, Bombay, Western Blot Kits are being developed using wholesale viral lysate of HIV I virus
 grown in lymphocytes.
7. About the DNA probes for the early detection of tuberculosis, the Committee was told that the probes developed by
 NII and All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) use radioactivity. The probes of Nil have about 90 per cent
 specificity and about 87 per sensitivity. To make them available for the National TB Control Programme both Nil and
 AIIMS are doing further research, and the work at Nil is in a fairly advanced stage. There is, however, a problem with
 regard to the use of DNA probes, because these require highly trained and skilled manpower to use them. DBT is already
 in touch with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and is trying to persuade the Ministry to make use of these
 probes initially in the hospitals. In response to a pointed question regarding the availability of the non-radioactive kit, the
 representative of the Department told that it should be possible to make it available by the end of 1995.
7.1 The Committee impressed on the Department to develop the non-radioactive kit which can be easily made
 available for the National TB Control Programme. DBT may also explore the possibility of using the existing probes in
 hospital conditions where trained technical manpower is available, and for this the Department should take up the matter
 with the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
8. DBT stated that efforts are being made to shift away from animal-based production to genetic engineering-based
 production, as this was an area of great opportunity and there is already a powerful lobby against the use of animals in
 scientific experiments; the representative of the Department informed the Committee that in some specific projects at Nil
 genetic approaches were being used. For example, in screening for immunomodulator, vaccine development genetic
 approaches were being used. In the coming two to three years, it would be possible to shift from animal based system to
 genetic approaches.
      8. 1 The Committee is of the view that the initiative taken by the Department to shift from animal-based production to
 genetic engineering-based production is praiseworthy. Although the genetic approach is a difficult one, the Committee
 feels that it is an area of great opportunity. If DBT can achieve success in this area, so that one can reduce animal-based
 experiments and production it would be a major achievement; such an approach would prove highly beneficial in the long
 run. The Committee would strongly support these efforts.
9. To a question whether pert charts for the development leading to production of all the immunodiagnostic kits have
 been prepared by the Departments the Committee was informed that, while sanctioning the project, the time-schedule was
 fixed. After every six months, a review of the project was also conducted.
9.1 The Committee expresses its happiness over the range of areas in which efforts are being made by the Department
 to develop immunodiagnostic kits. It emphasised that a set time frame be fixed for development of these kits. The
 Committee noted the progress made in the area of development of detection kit for kala azar, diagnostic test for detection
 of circulating antigen in human filariasis and HIV detection kits, etc; but felt strongly that the Department should be able
 to draw-up a time-schedule by which the kits supported or developed by it would be available. DBT should, therefore,
 introduce pert charts for all the immunodiagnostic kits, as this would enable it to properly monitor the progress achieved
 in this area. The Committee fully appreciates the difficulties which one fates with regard to the development of biological
 systems; however, tight monitoring has to be introduced since development of low cost, easily used immunodiagnostic
 kits for common diseases is a priority area of DBT.
10. With regard to protype diagnostic kits for animal and poultry disease, the Committee was given an account of the
 prototype formats which have been prepared, and techniques which are being transferred to the industry. Work on
 standardisation of reagents, conjugates, shelf life of the plates, etc. has been taken up.
10.1 The Committee is of the view that Indian scientists and Indian industry must try to obtain the best that is available
 out of modern biotechnological advances. It was noted that there is the Centre for Biochemicals, Delhi, which has been
 given the responsibility by DBT to start producing many recombinant agents, restriction enzymes, etc.; in addition there is
 the Bangalore based Gene, Lupin and many such industries which are now coming forward to produce these agents. In the
 view of the Committee DBT should obtain information on work done elsewhere in the world relating to biotechnology
 and the requirements for this work are not only for research but also for production in terms of chemicals and biologicals,
 of various types. It should then arrange for research in the country to develop these, or where appropriate arrange for
 transfer of technology from abroad. The efforts should be to have as much of these produced in the country since easy
 availability of these items of high quality underpin all developments in this field.
11. The Committee is firmly of the view that there is need to bring in the industry, particularly in the area of
 immunodiagnostics, at a fairly early stage, both from the viewpoints of estimating market demand and from the viewpoint
 of the technologies relating ultimately to production. By carrying out field trials, with small quantities of materials one
 can say that results have been successful at the laboratory scale, but when the industry comes into the picture, it requires
 larger quantity of input materials and the availability and costs of these become important. This can then change the whole
 scenario. The Department should, therefore, examine the entire area from the viewpoint of market demand, technology of
 production and inputs required for production. It would be dearly desirable to bring in industry on an overlapping basis
 with the research effort. The Committee noted that the Department was making good efforts in this direction; the fact that
 the Biotechnology Consortium Limited was created to bring an overlap between R&D on the one hand and production
 and trade on the other is indicative of this. The Committee would like the Department to strengthen this area further.

17th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/17threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
 
Medicinal and Aromatic Plants
 
12. The Committee was informed by the Secretary, DBT that India has about 1600 plant species of' medical value and
 about 250 species of aromatic value. A number of agencies like the Indian Council of Agricultural Research, Indian
 Council of Medical Research, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Ministries of Environment and Forests and
 Health and Family Welfare are working on different aspects of medicinal and aromatic plants. The programmes which are
 being supported by the Department focus on the generation techniques for endangered medicinal plants and in vitro
 propagation. The Department is also supporting the biotransformation for production of phytochemicals, and product
 development through gene cloning and related techniques. A detailed proposal for
 the establishment of gene bank for medicinal and aromatic plants among G-15 countries was approved at the Heads of
 Government's meeting at Caracas, Venezuela in 1991. Under the proposal India is the overall coordinator for the
 programme. Under the G-15 agreements, DBT is acting as the regional coordinator of the project for arranging meetings
 of the Scientific Advisory Committees and Regional Coordination Committees and is publishing newsletters, besides
 organising training courses for the G-15 countries.
12.1 For germ plasm conservation three National Gene Banks have been set up. These Gene Banks are located at the
 Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic, Plants (CIMAP), Lucknow; National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources
 (NBPGR), New Delhi; and Tropical Botanical Garden and Research Institute (TBGRI), Trivandrum.
13. The Committee was informed by the representative of the Department that apart from a number of government
 agencies, Companies like Hamdard, Dabur, Zandu, Himalayan Drug House are working in the area of medicinal and
 aromatic plants. The Department of Biotechnology has a Task Force, to ensure proper coordination amongst various
 agencies.                                                                                                                           
      14. Regarding the programme on immunomodulators of plants origin, the Committee wastold that the work had been
 taken up at Nil very recently and significant progress had been made in identifying a number of compounds. As many as
 five compounds have been isolated from 'amla' and 'pipli'.
      15. The Committee was informed that as part of the G-15 agreement, an inventory for medicinal plants for India had
 been prepared. It had been planned to identify initially only 27 plants on which work will start, and this cam be updated
 after three years.
      15.1 The Committee appreciated that 27 plants have been included in the inventory of medicinal plants. It, however
 feels that efforts should be made on a continuous basis to identify more such plants.
      16. The Committee feels that modalities may be finalised to enable the three gene banks established in the country to
 have appropriate exchange arrangements with other gene banks for which coordinators are Brazil and Egypt. The National
 Gene Banks may also think on the possibility of sending material to farmers and other interested parties subject to the
 existing rules and regulations in the matter.
      17. The representative of DBT informed the Committee that, a brain-storming session was/organisedby DBT on March
 5-6, 1993 to evolve a number of projects on medicinal and aromatic plants. Apart from scientists, this session was
 attended by distinguished Ayurvedic specialists as well. Besides, experts from Ayurveda and Unani Councils, other
 clinicians were also present in this session. As a result of the brain-storming session, the Department has identified the
 criteria by which plants should be taken up for further work, and which require biotechnological inputs. The areas which
 the Department has identified include those plants which have potential as also proven medicinal value. In addition, plants
 which are getting endangered and require large scale preservation and conservation, as also those plants where R&D leads
 are available and where further research is needed, have been identified.
17.1 The Committee was happy that DBT had arranged such a get together involving those from the indigenous
 systems; it desired a continuing follow up of the result of the aforesaid brain-storming session.
      17.2 The Committee also feels that DBT should look into the holistic approach that Characterises the use of the
 medicinal and aromatic plants in indigenous systems. There are many components in these plants which act together on
 the human or animal system, where also there are many components involved in defining a state of health or of disease.
 This is different from the "active principles" and "targetted approach" that defines western medical science.
      18. The committee is of the view that Ayurveda has great strength. Ayurvedic products are an important area in which
 one should be able to obtain patents. DBT should clearly spell out its priorities in this area. The Department should in
 association with other concerned national agencies arrange to combine the modern biotechnological approach with the
 traditional holistic approach. The modern approach should result in ensuring quality which is very important. The
 Department should also consider associating private enterprises in this field.
      19. Being basically "a scientific department, the difficulties faced by DBT in ascertaining the market requirements of
 products based on medicinal plants are real. This information is vital for large scale cultivation of various plants which
 then are used for producing medical products.
      19.1 Since many other government agencies and research institutions are working in the area of medicinal and
 aromatic plants, the Committee feels that DBT may think of setting up of a Central organisation which could prepare a
 demand profile of various medicinal and aromatic plant-based products.

17th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/17threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
 Environmental Conservation and Biodiversity
 
      20. The Department of Biotechnology is also working in the area or environmental conservation and biodiversity.
 ELISA/PCR techniques and DNA probes have been developed for the detection of pathogenic viruses and bacteria in
 drinking water. These kits are under field evaluation. The Committee was also told about biosurfactants
, microbial
 desulphurisation of gaseous fuels, biosensors for detection of pesticides as other important developments. The Department
 is supporting programmes for biodiversity conservation in different agro-climatic zone, extraction of nuclear DNA, tissue
 culture protocol for Jojoba, etc. The Committee was also informed that new programmes for important ecosystems such
 as Alpine flora, and flora of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands were being formulated.
      21. The representative of the Department informed the Committee that, with regard to environmental conservation and
 biodiversity, various techniques have been developed by different Institutes with the support of DBT. For example, the
 ELISA, PCR techniques and DNA probes were developed for the detection of pathogenic viruses, bacteria and E.
 histolytica which have been field tested by National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI), Nagpur in
 collaboration with the state municipal authorities of Tamil Nadu and Delhi. The techniques were developed with the
 contributions of AIIMS, Jawaharlal Nehru University and Nil.
      21.1 The Committee is of the view that the new techniques and probes developed for the detection of pathogenic
 viruses, bacteria and E. histolytica can play an important role in assessing water quality. "The Committee recommends
 that these techniques should be put to actual use by encouraging their large scale use.
 
      22. The Committee is happy to note that under several DBT supported programmes in environmental biotechnology,
 NEERI, Nagpur has applied for a number of patents. For example, the process for the deemulsification of oil in water
 emulsion for the recovery of oil, industrial waste water utilisation and an improved process for desulphurisation of coal
 are important technologies developed by NEERI. The Committee recommends that proper information technology
 packages should be prepared on the technologies developed by NEERI for use by industry and efforts may be made to
 pass on these technologies to industry for their commercialisation.
 
      23. On being asked about the progress made relating to the development of biosensors for detection of pesticides in
 water using the potentiometric techniques, the Committee was informed that the biosensors have already been developed
 and are being field-tested and that it will take about two years for field evaluation and finalisation of the" technology
 package.
 
      23.1 The detection of biopesticides through biosensors is a new area. The Committee is happy to note that efforts are
 being made to obtain feedback from farmers and those in the field and, in the light of the feedback received, defects, if
 any, found in the present kit would be rectified.
 
      24. The Committee also feels that certain technologies pertaining to the environment sector which have been perfected
 at the laboratory scale can be really regarded as significant achievements only when they are made available for large
 scale production and use. Since, at laboratory level, many of the technologies have been proven, concerted efforts should
 now be made to make these technologies commercially viable.
 
      25. Biotechnology is a fast developing frontier are of science, and of technology. Accordingly the Department of
 Biotechnology will have to look in detail about the implications of the new GATT regime and land IPR aspects with
 regard to the developments that are planned for the country in the area of biotechnology. In this presentation, the
 Secretary, DBT, gave a detailed account of the implications of new GATT regime and IPR aspects with regard to new
 developments in biotechnology. He informed the Committee about the various advantages and disadvantages flowing
 from the new arrangement in the field of agriculture, particularly of seeds and in the area of human/animal health. The
 Secretary stated that the question of patenting in the biological field was different from other areas like electronics,
 computers, physical or chemical science. At present, there is only one cell in the CSIR system which has some expertise
 in the area of patents. DBT has been taking help from this Cell. It has been decided that initially all the scientific
 departments would
d support in strengthening this Cell, and later on, when adequate expertise has been developed, the
 country will have four or five centres at different places which will provide help to the scientists. He also mentioned that
 the Government had decided to strengthen the Patent Offices, and at Nagpur there will be a Patent Information Office
 where all the information on world patents would be available. In the context of patent awareness, the Secretary informed
 the Committee about a seminar organised at NII which was arranged in collaboration with the World Intellectual Property
 Rights Organisation.
      25.1 The Committee is firmly of the view that the Department of Biotechnology should arrange for a system to
 understand patent laws and their implications in so far as applicable to living organisms. Patenting in the biological area is
 very different from what is done in the other fields of science and technology. There are many grey areas when it come to

17th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/17threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
 living organism. DBT should, therefore, have a group of its own to suggest how India should develop its expertise in the
 area of IPR in biological sciences. This should relate also to identifying what part of our research can be patented
 nationallyI as also internationally, and what support this activity should receive from the Government. This group should
 examine the developments taking place internationally, and advise Government and our scientific community on the
 implications and impact of these. It is not only scientists who need to understand the patent system; it is equally important
 that our legal profession should understand the science behind these new developments in biology. Other Departments of
 the Government are concerned with various aspects of the operation of patent laws, but on the modern biotechnology-
related aspects, DBT has the principal responsibility. The Committee strongly recommends that it should strengthen its
 skills in this area, and be supported by Government for the same.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
PART-II
Summary of Recommendations/Observations
 
1. The Committee impressed on the Department to develop the non-radioactive kit which can be easily made available
 for the National TB Control Programme. DBT may also explore the possibility of using the existing probes in hospital
 conditions where trained technical manpower is available, and for this the Department should take up the matter with the
 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
 [Para 7.1]
            2. The Committee is of the view that the initiative taken by the Department to shift from animal-based production to
 genetic engineering-based production is praiseworthy. Although the genetic approach is a difficult one, the Committee feels
 that it is an area of great opportunity. If DBT can achieve success in this area, so that one can reduce animal-based
 experiments and production it would be a major achievement; such an approach would prove highly beneficial in the long
 run. The Committee would strongly support these efforts.
                                              [Para 8 l]
            3. The Committee expresses its happiness over the range of areas in which efforts are being made by the Department to
 develop immunodiagnostic kits. It emphasised that a set time frame be fixed for development of these kits. The Committee
 noted the progress made in the area of development of detection kit for kala azar, diagnostic test for detection of circulating
 antigen in human filariasis and HIV detection kits, etc; but felt strongly that the Department should be able to draw-up a time-
schedule by which the kits supported or developed by it would be available. DBT should, therefore, introduce pert charts for
 all the immunodiagnostic kits, as this would enable it to properly monitor the progress achieved in this area. The Committee
 fully appreciates the difficulties which one fates with regard to the development of biological systems; however, tight
 monitoring has to be introduced since development of low cost, easily used immunodiagnostic kits for common diseases is a
 priority area of DBT.
[9.1]
      4. The Committee is of the view that Indian scientists and Indian industry must try to obtain the best that is available
 out of modern biotechnological advances. It was noted that there is the Centre for Biochemicals, Delhi, which has been given
 the responsibility by DBT to start producing many recombinant agents, restriction enzymes, etc.; in addition there is the
 Bangalore based Gene, Lupin and many such industries which are now coming forward to produce these agents. In the view
 of the Committee DBT should obtain information on work done elsewhere in the world relating to biotechnology and the
 requirements for this work are not only for research but also for production in terms of chemicais and biologicals, of various
 types. It should then arrange for research in the country to develop these, or where appropriate arrange for transfer of
 technology from abroad. The efforts should be to have as much of these produced in the country since easy availability of
 these items of high quality underpin all developments in this field.                      [Para 10.1]
      5. The Committee is firmly of the view that there is need to bring in the industry, particularly in the area of
 immunodiagnostics, at a fairly early stage, both from the viewpoints of estimating market demand and from the viewpoint of
 the technologies relating ultimately to production. By carrying out field trials, with small quantities of materials one can say
 that results have been successful at the laboratory scale, but when the industry comes into the picture, it requires larger
 quantity of input materials and the availability and costs of these become important. This can then change the whole scenario.
 The Department should, therefore, examine the entire area from the viewpoint of market demand, technology of production
 and inputs required for production. It would be dearly desirable to bring in industry on an overlapping basis with the research
 effort. The Committee noted that the Department was making good efforts in this direction; the fact that the Biotechnology
 Consortium Limited was created to bring an overlap between R&D on the one hand and production and trade on the other is
 indicative of this. The Committee would like the Department to strengthen this area further.
 
[Para 11]
            6. The Committee appreciates that 27 plants have been included in the inventory of medicinal plants. It, however, feels
 that efforts should be made on a continuous basis to identify more such plants.
[Para 15.1]
 

17th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/17threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
            7. The Committee feels that modalities may be finalised to enable the three gene banks established in the country to
 have appropriate exchange arrangements with other gene banks for which coordinators are Brazil and Egypt. The National
 Gene Banks may also think on the possibility of sending material to farmers and other interested parties subject to the existing
 rules and regulations in the matter.
[Para 16]
            9. The Committee also feels that DBT should look into the holistic approach that Characterises the use of the medicinal
 and aromatic plants in indigenous systems. There are many components in these plants which act together on the human or
 animal system, where also there are many components involved in defining a state of health or of disease. This is different
 from the "active principles" and "targetted approach" that defines western medical science.
 
[Para 17.2]
            10. The committee is of the view that Ayurveda has great strength. Ayurvedic products are an important area in which
 one should be able to obtain patents. DBT should clearly spell out its priorities in this area. The Department should in
 association with other concerned national agencies arrange to combine the modern blotechnologicai approach with the
 traditional holistic approach. The modern approach should result in ensuring quality which is very important. The Department
 should also consider associating private enterprises in this field.
 
 [Para 18 ]
 
            11. Since many other government agencies and research institutions are working in the area of medicinal and aromatic
 plants, the Committee feels that DBT may think of setting up of a Central organisation which could prepare a demand profile
 of various medicinal and aromatic plant-based products.
[Para 19.1]
            12. The Committee is of the view that the new techniques and probes developed for the detection of pathogenic
 viruses, bacteria and E. histolytica can play an important role in assessing water quality. "The Committee recommends that
 these techniques should be put to actual use by encouraging their large scale use.
 
[Para 21.1]
            13. The Committee is happy to note that under several DBT supported programmes in environmental biotechnology,
 NEERI, Nagpur has applied for a number of patents. For example, the process for the deemulsification of oil in water
 emulsion for the recovery of oil, industrial waste water utilisation and an improved process for desulphurisation of coal are
 important technologies developed by NEERI. The Committee recommends that proper information technology packages
 should be prepared on the technologies developed by NEERI for use by industry and efforts may be made to pass on these
 technologies to industry for their commercialisation.
[Para 22]
            14. The detection of biopesticides through biosensors is a new area. The Committee is happy to note that efforts are
 being made to obtain feedback from farmers and those in the field and, in the light of the feedback received, defects, if any,
 found in the present kit would be rectified.
[Para 23.1]
            15. The Committee also feels that certain technologies pertaining to the environment sector which have been perfected
 at the laboratory scale can be really regarded as significant achievements only when they are made available for large scale
 production and use. Since, at laboratory level, many of the technologies have been proven, concerted efforts should now be
 made to make these technologies commercially viable.
 
[Para 24]
      16. The Committee is firmly of the view that the Department of Biotechnology should arrange for a system to
 understand patent laws and their implications in so far as applicable to living organisms. Patenting in the biological area is
 very different from what is done in the other fields of science and technology. There are many grey areas when it come to
 living organism. DBT should, therefore, have a group of its own to suggest how India should develop its expertise in the
 area of IPR in biological sciences. This should relate also to identifying what part of our research can be patented
 nationally
I as also internationally, and what support this activity should receive from the Government. This group should
 examine the developments taking place internationally, and advise Government and our scientific community on the
 implications and impact of these. It is not only scientists who need to understand the patent system; it is equally important
 that our legal profession should understand the science behind these new developments in biology. Other Departments of
 the Government are concerned with various aspects of the operation of patent laws, but on the modern biotechnology-
related aspects, DBT has the principal responsibility. The Committee strongly recommends that it should strengthen its
 skills in this area, and be supported by Government for the same.
[Para 25.1]

17th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/17threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
New Delhi;
March 29, 1995
SYED SIBTEY RAZl
Chairman,
Committee on Science and Technology Environment and
 Forests
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
MINUTES
MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
 COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
 
XXIII
TWENTY THIRD MEETING
 
      The Committee met from 10.15 a.m. to 12.18 p.m. and again from 2.15 p.m. to 3.20 p.m. on Thursday, the 5th
 January, 1995 in Room No. 63, Parliament House,  New Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1. Syed Sibtey Razi--Chairman  
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Ajit P.K. Jogi
 3. Shri K. Rahman Khan
 
4. Prof. M.G.K. Menon  
5. Shri N. Giri Prasad  
6. Dr. Ranbir Singh
 7. Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 
LOK SABHA  
8. Shri P.C. Chacko  
9. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia  
10. Shri Jitendra Nath Das  
11. Shri Sharad Dighe  
12. Shri Oscar Fernandes  
13. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale  
14. Shri M.V.V.S. Murthy  
15. Shri Harpal Panwar
 16. Shri Vijay Naval Patil
 
17. Shri Harchand Singh  
18. Shri Ram Prasad Singh  
19.Shri K.G. Shivappa
 20.Shri Bapusaheb Thite
 21.Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
 Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
 Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
 
Representatives of the Department of Electronics  
Shri N. Vittal, Secretary
 Shri O.N. Vaid, Joint Secretary
 
Dr. V.P. Kodali, Advisor
Shri N. Gopalaswami, Jt. Secretary
Shri S.W. Oak, JS & FA
Dr. A.K. Chakravorty, Sr. Director
Shri S.S. Oberoi, Sr. Director
Shri G. Soni, Sr. Director
Dr. U.P. Phadke, Sr. Director
Shri R.K. Shrivastava, Sr. Director
Shri S.L. Sarnot, Sr. Director
Shri B.A. Chetty, Director
Shri R.K. Arora, Director
Shri S.N. Zindal, Director
 

17th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/17threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
Dr. K.S.K. Sai, Director
Shri B.B. Bahl, Dy. Director
 
Representatives of the Department of Biotechnology
 
Dr. C.R. Bhatia, Secretary       
Dr. (Mrs.) Manju Sharma, Advisor
Dr. V.K. Vinayak, Advisor (Medical)
Shri S.B. Krishnan, JS & FA
Dr. P.K. Ghosh, Director
Dr. (Mrs.) Amita Biswas, Director
Dr. S. Natesh, Principal Scientific Officer
Shri S.L. Govindwar, Principal-Scientific Officer
Dr. S.R. Rao, SSO-I
Dr. Rama Mukherjee, N.I.I.
Dr. Vishwa Karma, N.I.I.
Dr. S.K. Gupta, N.I.I.
Dr. Kanuri Roy,
Shri K.C. Srivastava, Dy. Secretary
 
            2. In the forenoon session, the Committee took up consideration of the Annual Report (1993-94) of the
 Department of Electronics with reference to the Software Technology Parks (STPs), Electronics Hardware-
Technology Parks (EHTPs), Electronics for weaker sections including Women, Employment potential of Electronics
 and Support of Department of Electronics for Research & Development, particularly with regard to Technology
 Development Council, National Radar Council and Industrial Promotion. The Secretary of the Department gave an
 overview of the programmes and initiatives being pursued by the Department in these areas and the Members sought
 clarifications from him on various points arising from his presentation.
 
3. In the afternoon session, the Committee, on the "basis of the Annual Report (1993-94) of the Department of
 Biotechnology, took Up consideration of .the following subjects:
            (i) Development of Immunodiagnostic kits;
            (ii) Environmental Conservation and Biodiversity;
            (iii) Medicinal and Aromatic Plants; and
      (iv) Implications of new GATT Regime and Intellectual Property Rights
            (IPRs) with regard to new development in Biotechnology.
 
The Secretary of the Department assisted by other official of his Department, briefly explained for the benefit of
 the Members the activities of the Department in these areas and the Members sought clarifications from him.
4. The discussion on the Annual Reports (1993-94) of the Departments of Electronics and Biotechnology remained
 inconclusive. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.20 p.m. to meet again at 10.15 a.m. on Friday, the 6th January, 1995.
XXIV
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING
 
      The Committee met from 10.15 a.m. to 12.55 p.m. and again from 2.15 p.m. to 3.45 p.m. on Friday, the 6th
 January, 1995 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
 1. Syed Sibtey Razi  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
 
      2.Dr. M. Aram
3.Shri Ajit P. K. Jogi
4.Prof. M.G.K. Menon
5.Shri N. Giri Prasad
6.Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
7.Dr. Ranbir Singh
8.Shri Ram Gopal Yadav
 

17th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/17threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
LOK SABHA
 
9.   Shri. P. C. Chacko
10. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
11. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
12. Shri Sharad Dighe
13. Shri Oscar Fernandes
14. Shri Shankarrao D. Kale
15. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
16. Shri Vijay Naval Patil
17. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
18. Shri Harchand Singh
19. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
20. Shri K.G. Shivappa
21. Shri Bapusaheb Thite
22. Kumari Sushila Tiriya
23. Shri Ram Kirpal Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Joint. Secretary
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Dost Mohammad Nabi Khan, Parliamentary Interpreter
 
Representatives of the Department of Electronics
 
Shri N. Vittal, Secretary
Shri O.N. Vaid, Joint Secretary
Dr. V.P. Kodali, Advisor
Shri N. Gopalaswami, Jt. Secretary
Shri S.W. Oak, JS & FA
Dr. A.K. Chakravorty, Sr. Director
Shri S.S. Oberoi, Sr. Director
Shri G. Soni, Sr. Director
Dr. U.P. Phadke, Sr. Director
Shri R.K. Shrivastava, Sr. Director
Shri V.K.Dharmadhakari, Sr. Director
Shri S.L. Sarnot,Sr. Director
Shri B.A. Cherty Director
Shri R.K. Arora, Director
Shri S.N. Zindal, Director
Dr. K.S.K. Sai, Director
Shri B.B. Bahl, Dy. Director
 
Representatives of 'the Department of Biotechnology
 
Dr. C.R. Bhatia, Secretary
Dr. (Mrs.) Manju Sharma, Advisor
Dr. V.K. Vinayak, Advisor (Medical)
Shri S.B. Krishnan, JS & FA
Dr. P.K. Ghosh, Director
Dr. (Mrs.) Amita Biswas, Director
Dr. S. Natesh, Principal Scientific Officer
Shri S.L. Govindwar, Principal Scientific Officer
Dr. S.R. Rao, SSO-I
Dr. Rama Mukherjee, N,I.I.
Dr. Vishwa Karma, N.I.I.

17th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/17threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
Dr. S.K. Gupta, N.I.I.
Shri K.C. Srivastava, Dy. Secretary
 
2. In the forenoon session, the Committee took up further consideration of the Annual Report (1993-94) of the
 Department of Electronics with reference to its programmes in the areas of Software Technology Parks (STPs),
 Electronics Hardware Technology Parks (EHTPs), Electronics for weaker sections including women, Employment
 potential of Electronics and Support for Research & Development, particularly with regard to Techno­logy
 Development Council, National Radar Council and Industrial Promotion and heard the replies of the Secretary of the
 Department on various points/queries raised by the Members.
 
      3. In the afternoon session, the Committee took up further consideration of the Annual Report (1993-94) of the
 Department of Biotechnology with particular reference to its programmes in the area of Development of
 Immunodiagnostic kits, Environmental Conservation and Biodiversity of Medicinal & Aromatic Plants and
 Implications of new GATI" Regime and Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) with regard to new developments in
 Biotechnology and heard the replies of the representatives of the Department of the various points/queries raised
 by the Members.
4. The discussion on the Annual Reports (1993-94) of the Departments of Electronics andBiotechnology was
 concluded. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 p.m.
XXVIII
 
TWENTY EIGHTH MEETING
 
The Committee-met at 10.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 29th March, 1995 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New
 Delhi.
 
PRESENT
 
1. Syed Sibtey Razi --Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.Dr. M. Aram
3.Shri K. Rahman Khan
4.Shri N. Girl Prasad
5.Shri W. Kulabidhu Singh
 
LOK SABHA
 
6. Shri  E. Ahamed
7. Shrimati Bhavna Chikhalia
8. Shri Jitendra Nath Das
9. Shri Oscar Fernandes
10. Shri Pramothes Mukherjee
11. Shri Chandresh Patel
12. Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik
13. Shri M.G. Reddy
14. Pt. Vishwanath Sharma
15. Shri Harchand Singh
16. Shri Ram Prasad Singh
17. Shri K.G. Shivappa
18. Shri Bapusaheb Thite
19. Kumari Frida Topno
 
SECRETARIAT
 
Shri N.C. Joshi, Joint Director

17th Report of Committee on Science & Technology
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20S%20and%20T,%20Env.%20and%20Forests/17threport.htm[29-08-2018 16:09:58]
Shri G.C. Miglani, Under Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Committee Officer
 
2. The Committee took up consideration of its draft Seventeenth Report on the Annual R~port (1993-94) of the
 Department of Biotechnology with reference to its programmes in the areas'of Development of Immuno-diagnostic
 kits, Environmental Conservation and Biodiversity, Medicinaland Aromatic Plants; and Implications of new GATT
 Regime and \Intellectual Property Rights (IPRs) with regard to new developments in Biotechnology and after some
 discussion, adopted the same unanimously.
 
3. The Committee decided to present this Report to both the Houses of Parliament on the 31st March, 1995. The
 Committee authorised its Chairman and in his absence, Shri K. Rahman Khan to present this Report to the Rajya
 Sabha and Shri Oscar Fernandes and in his absence, Prof. Radhika Ranjan Pramanik to lay the Report on the Table of
 the Lok Sabha.
4. The Committee then adjourned at 10.20 a.m.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
 
 