PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 184
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON SCIENCE  AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT  AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY-FOURTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE RECOMMENDATIONS
CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED SEVENTY-FOURTH REPORT 
OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT AND 
FORESTS ON THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-2008) OF
THE MINISTRY  OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
TH
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 11  MARCH, 2008)
TH
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 11  MARCH, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2008/PHALGUNA, 1929 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-st@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY-FOURTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE ONE HUNDRED
SEVENTY-FOURTH REPORT OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE
AND TECHNOLOGY , ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS ON
THE DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2007-2008) OF
THE MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON THE 11 TH MARCH, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON THE 11 TH MARCH, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2008/PHALGUNA, 1929 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT O F T HE C OMMITTEE ................................................................................................ 1—24
4. M INUTES OF T HE M EETING ................................................................................................... 25—27

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ,
ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS (2007-08)
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Dr. Prabha Thakur
3. Shri Suryakantbhai Acharya
4. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
5. Shri Kamal Akhtar
6. Shri Saman Pathak
7. Shri Jabir Husain
8. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
9. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
*10. Shri D. Raja
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Jasubhai Dhanabhai Barad
12. Dr. Sujan Chakraborty
13. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
14. Shri Pankaj Chowdhary
15. Shri Francis Fanthome
16. Shri Babubhai K. Katara
17. Shri A. Venkatesh Naik
18. Shri Brahmananda Panda
19. Shrimati Neeta Pateriya
20. Shri Jaysingrao Gaikwad Patil
21. Shri Pratik P. Patil
22. Shri Bachi Singh 'Bachda' Rawat
23. Shri K.C. Singh "Baba"
24. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh
#25. V acant
26. Shri Rampal Singh
27. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
28. Shri Aruna Kumar Vundavalli
29. Shri Akhilesh Yadav
30. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
31. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
* Nominated w.e.f. 28th August, 2007.
# Vacancy caused due to resignation of Shri Rakesh Singh from the Committee w.e.f. lst December, 2007.
(i)

SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests, having been authorised by the Committee to present the
Report on its behalf, present this One Hundred Eighty-fourth Report on the Action Taken by the
Ministry of Environment and Forests on the recommendations contained in One Hundred
Seventy-fourth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests.
2. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment
and Forests on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred and Seventy-fourth Report of
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment
and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
which was presented to the Rajya Sabha on 26th April, 2007.
3. There were twenty-three recommendations contained in the One Hundred Seventy-fourth
Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the recommendations of the Committee were
received from the Ministry on 26th October, 2007.
4. In the meeting held on 4th March, 2008 the Committee considered the draft Action Taken
Report and adopted the same.
Dr. V . Maitreyan
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
March 4, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Science and Technology, Environment and Forests.

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment
and Forests on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred Seventy Fourth Report of
the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology,
Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests, which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 26th April, 2007. There were
twenty-three recommendations in the Report of the Committee. Action Taken Notes on the
recommendations of the Committee were received from the Ministry on 26th October, 2007.
The Committee’s recommendations, action taken thereon and comments of the Committee
on the Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forests are set out in the succeeding
paragraphs:—
REVIEW OF PLAN OUTLA Y 2006-07 AND PROPOSALS FOR 2007-08
1. Recommendation (Para 5.5)
The Committee is concerned with the way the budgetary allocation has been made in
respect of the Ministry of Environment and Forests during the year 2007-08. It has been observed
that there is just 1.2 per cent increase in overall budget allocations as compared to last year’s
allocations. It appears that the Planning Commission has not even considered the normal rate of
inflation. At the same time, Committee would like to have clarification from Ministry in this context
as to what are the specific reasons due to which the Planning Commission has approved such a
tight budgetary allocation to the Ministry. The committee has strong apprehensions that with such
tight budget, Ministry would not be able to pursue its ongoing schemes with vigour. The
Committee recommends that their allocations be re-examined in view of the increasing need to
maintain high quality of environmental inputs.
Action Taken by the Government
Overall budgetary allocations for the Ministry was increased from Rs. 1520.14 crores in
2006-07 (BE) to Rs. 1539.00 crores in 2007-08, implying an increase of 1.24 per cent. Plan outlay
was increased from Rs. 1338.93 crores in 2006-07 to Rs. 1351.00 crores, indicating an increase
of 0.90 per cent, and non-plan outlay was enhanced from Rs. 181.21 crores in 2006-07 to
Rs. 188.00 crores in 2007-08, a rise of 3.75 per cent. Thus, the low increase in Ministry’s budget
in 2007-08 was on account of only a marginal increase in Ministry’s plan budget for 2007-08.
Planning Commission, in plan discussions with the Ministry, had approved a plan outlay of
Rs. 1421.00 crores for 2007-08, implying a normal step up of 6.1 per cent over the previous year.
Subsequently, and as a part of its Zero Based Budgeting Exercise, Planning Commission deducted
an amount of Rs. 70 crores from this approved plan outlay, transferring these salary and
establishment related expenses from Plan to Non-Plan budget of the Ministry. This recommendation
of the Planning Commission to the Finance Ministry resulted in a reduction of Plan Budget of the
Ministry to Rs. 1351 crores, while the Non-Plan Budget of the Ministry was required to be
correspondingly enhanced by the Finance Ministry. While this reduction in Plan Budget was
effected by the Planning Commission while allocating plan outlays to the Ministry, corresponding
enhancement of Ministry’s Non-Plan Budget in 2007-08 by the Finance Ministry was not
operationalized.
Subsequently it was clarified by the Finance Ministry, that such transfers from Plan to
Non-Plan budget, as effected by the Planning Commission, were not possible in case of ongoing
schemes. The enhanced requirement of the Ministry will, thus, be examined/considered at Revised

2
Estimates stage, keeping in view its plan fund requirements and the actual performance during the
first half of the current financial year.
Comments
The Committee expresses its serious concern over the fact that there has been a
severe curtailment of funds for the Ministry, despite the fact that there is a greater need
to invest substantially to contain the phenomena of environmental degradation and global
warming. The Committee feels that the Ministry has not been able to project its funds
requirements to the Planning Commission properly. The Committee recommends that the
Planning Commission should be properly sensitized to the issue of funds allocation, during
the discussions with the Ministry, keeping in view the urgent need for environmental
protection. The Committee desires that the changes effected at the R.E. stage be intimated
to the Committee.
2. Recommendation (Para 5.6)
The Committee feels, that due importance has not been given to the budgetary demands
under heads of Ministry of Environment and Forests by the Planning Commission. The Committee
has further noted that expenditure cut during revised estimate stage, sometimes are plainly arbitrary.
Very often the budgeted amount is not fully utilized because of the cut imposed in the plan outlays
or delays in approval of projects by Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). In view of the above,
Committee recommends the Ministry to take this issue seriously because it needs comprehensive
planning and deep introspection while framing the budgetary demands for various projects/schemes.
Action Taken by the Government
The recommendation of the Committee has been communicated to the Planning Commission
and to the Ministry of Finance for its necessary compliance. Subject Divisions within the Ministry
have also been directed to accord necessary importance to comprehensive planning/budgeting while
framing budgetary demands for projects/schemes.
Comments
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the issues of budgetary demands
needs to be taken seriously and vigorously and emphatically presented and pursued with the
Planning Commission as well as the Ministry of Finance.
NEW SCHEMES
3. Recommendation (Para 6.2)
As far as new schemes proposed by the Ministry for this year are concerned, the situation
is far from good. The Committee has been given to understand that Ministry has proposed a total
outlay of Rs. 1122.57 crores for eight new schemes; however, due to resource constraint and
priority accorded to completion of ongoing schemes, only notional provisions have been made to
only four new schemes with the budgetary allocation of just Rs. 0.40 lakhs. The Committee
observes that with such a meagre amount, it would not be possible for Ministry to pursue these
schemes with strength. It also recalls, that similar was the case with last year's proposed seven
new schemes. Committee strongly recommends that Ministry should review its budgetary planning
critically with the Planning Commission and it needs to make its physical and financial targets more
realistic and acceptable in nature.
Action Taken by the Government
While the Annual Plan 2007-08 proposals were formulated within the overall context of the
Eleventh Five Year Plan, the Eleventh Plan proposals for Ministries have not been finalized by the
Planning Commission so far. Pending such a finalization of Eleventh Plan proposals, Planning

3
Commission had decided not to permit initiation of any new schemes in 2007-08, given their
implications for the Eleventh Plan outlays, and thus according priority to completion of ongoing
projects. Given such a policy approach by the Commission, no provisions were made for proposed
new schemes of the Ministry in 2007-08 Plan, pending finalization of its Eleventh Plan proposals.
However, notional provisions have been made for the four schemes, initiated in the preceding year,
to enable completion of their project proposals.
Meanwhile, the Ministry had undertaken a rationalization exercise of its plan schemes for
the Eleventh Five Year Plan, based on which schemes to be taken up/continued in the Eleventh Plan
have been decided. These proposals, along with proposed outlays, have been submitted to the
Planning Commission towards finalization of Ministry’s Eleventh Five Year Plan.
Comments
The Committee feels that while the completion of ongoing projects should be
accorded priority, the new schemes initiated, should not be left out because of paucity of
funds and the Ministry should continue with its efforts of demanding more funds for the
new schemes.
REASONS FOR SHORTFALL IN UTILISATION OF THE OUTLAYS FOR 2006-07
4. Recommendation (Para 10.2)
The Committee observes that non-utilization of the allocated funds by the Ministry under
some schemes are due to procedural delays such as receipt of proposals, approval of schemes,
changes in financing pattern, and timely release of matching funds by the State Governments etc.
The Committee is of the view that Ministry should adopt a well chalked out comprehensive plan
in respect of these schemes so that reduced expenditure or under utilization of funds could be
avoided to a great extent. Further, the Ministry has to work out its entire plan in such a manner
as a result of which its budgetary demands are well accepted by the Ministry of Finance and
projects could be approved well in time.
Action Taken by the Government
Besides the Outcome Budget of the Ministry, which provides the financial and physical
targets scheme-wise, an expenditure plan, comprising of quarterly internal targets of plan
expenditure for each scheme, has been formulated by the Ministry. These targets of expenditure
are closely and regularly monitored and timely remedial steps initiated to ensure utilization of funds
allocated for these schemes.
The rationalization of plan schemes by suitable merger/clubbing during the Eleventh Plan is
also likely to increase the fungibility of resources, resulting in better utilization of these funds by
schemes/projects merged/clubbed under a thematic scheme.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to reiterate that in future
administrative/procedural delays which are routine in nature should not hamper the
progress of various schemes/projects.
RESEARCH
5. Recommendation (Para 13.4)
The Committee feels that Environmental pollution could be curtailed to a large extent with
the development of suitable cost-effective pollution abatement technologies. It is of the view that
research could play an important role in generating such technologies and methodologies. It
recommends that emphasis be laid on development of bio-degradable plastics, ways and means to

4
reduce impact of mining, chemical pollution of soils and hazardous substances including pesticides
and heavy metals. Projects related to waste management and resource recovery from waste along
with the development of eco-friendly and cleaner technologies may also be given priority.
Action Taken by the Government
Many of the problems related to pollution abatement can be resolved through proper
application and upgradation of available technologies. In respect of various industrial operations,
pollution control technologies have been developed and used while others need to adopt such
technologies and look for newer technological interventions. The Central Pollution Control Board
(CPCB) has documented the technology requirement for pollution control industry-wise covering
following groups of industry categories:
(a) Chemical industries
(b) Agro based industries
(c) Mining industries
(d) Power Plants
As per the preliminary findings of the project on ‘‘Establishment and Impact of
Biodegradable Plastics on Environment/Food’’ jointly carried out by the CPCB and Central Institute
of Plastics Engineering and Technology (CIPET), the bio-based or biodegradable plastics can form
the basis for an environmentally preferable, sustainable alternative to current material based on
petroleum feedstock. Biopolymers are generally capable of being utilized by living matter
(biodegraded) and can be disposed in safe and ecologically sound ways like composting, soil
application and biological waste water treatment. The final Report is expected in the month of
March, 2008.
With a view to reduce chemical pollution on soil a set of regulations including the
Hazardous Waste (Management & Handling) Rules, 1989 amended 2000, 2003 has been notified
which stipulates proper disposal of chemical waste generated. Need and planning for spill
containment and accidental release is also prescribed in the MSIHC Rules, 1989 amended 2000.
Guidelines for implementation of these rules have also been issued. In respect of Persistent Organic
Pollutants (POPs) which are mostly pesticides a National Implementation Plan (NIP) is being
prepared to manage and phase out POP’s listed in the Stockholm convention to which India is a
party from January, 2006.
Comments
The Committee is of the opinion that though many cost-effective technologies are
available, due importance has not been accorded to their actual application. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the application of these technologies may be insured by the
Ministry. Efforts should also be made by the Ministry to ensure that the polluting industries
use these technologies for minimising/stopping the pollution levels.
FOREST CONSERV ATION, DEVELOPMENT AND REGENERATION
6. Recommendation (Para 14.4)
Committee expresses its serious concern over the half-hearted approach adopted by the
Ministry while making release of the investments to the concerned divisions in case of Integrated
Forest Protection Scheme (IFPS), there is no use of the funds when it does not meet the
requirements on time. The Committee is of the opinion that the lack of adequate management and
monitoring had led to such non-utilization of funds. Hence the Committee strongly opines that the
focused action plan needs to be prepared to meet the requisite demands of the field functionaries
on timely basis.

5
7. Recommendation (Para 14.5)
The Committee had earlier expressed its apprehensions about the transfer of IFPS to the
State Governments and again reiterates that poor response from them is expected, since forest and
wildlife conservation is not the priority area with State Governments and very meagre amount is
left for the IFPS. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry must take full control of
IFPS, since lack of co-ordination between Centre and State could have ill-effects on a smooth
running of a project/scheme and could lead to delay in meeting its stipulated targets.
Action Taken by the Government
During the current financial year, efforts are being made to ensure timely release of funds
to the State Government. Action has been initiated to streamline the processing of the proposal in
a time bound manner so that the first instalment is released at the earliest. A meeting of all State
officials was convened in April, 2007 and the State Governments were requested to submit the
proposal for the current financial year. Upto first week of August, 2007 a sum of Rs. 24.00 crores
(33 per cent of BE) has been released to the States. The proposals from many States were not
found to be complete and these States have been requested to submit the information so as to
enable the processing division to consider their cases.
(i) The States have been further advised to take effective measures to ensure following:—
(a) Submission of proposals complete in all respects
(b) Furnishing of all the certificates required
(c) Timely submission of Utilization Certificates and Progress Reports.
(ii) To ensure the timely release of funds to State Forest Department, the Ministry is also
taking up the matter with concerned State Government officials.
Comments
The Committee while taking note of the reply feels that all out efforts should be
made by the Ministry to ensure better coordination between the Centre and State to make
the scheme successful.
8. Recommendation (Para 14.6)
It has been observed that as per National Forest Commission Report there is need to fill
the vacancies of front line staff in forest department including forest guards and foresters. Situation
is alarming, around 40-50 per cent posts are lying vacant and average age of the staff is around
45 years. In view of the above, Committee is apprehensive that with so many post lying vacant
and lack of any solid infrastructure, it is difficult to protect our national wealth of forests. On top
of it, ever increasing hardships and lack of promotional and remunerative avenues kill their zeal.
The Committee recommends initiation of concrete steps to tackle this problem.
Action Taken by the Government
As per the National Forest Commission Report there is need to fill the vacancies of front
line staff in forest department including forest guards and foresters. The matter is related to State
Governments/UTs. In this regard this Ministry has organized a conference in consultation with
Forest Ministers, Forest Secretaries and PCCFs for filling of vacant post in the forest department.
This Ministry has proposed a conference of Chief Ministers and Forest Ministers under the
Chairmanship of Hon’ble Prime Minister in which filling up of vacancies of front line staff,
particularly Forests and Wildlife Guards and Foresters in the Forest Departments is also included
in the proposed agenda.

6
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to be apprised of the progress made
in this regard.
WILDLIFE PRESERV ATION PROJECT TIGER
9. Recommendation (Para 15.3)
The Committee has been given to understand that this year earmarking of outlay has been
done for relocation of villages in project tiger areas. In view of the above, the Committee feels
that relocation should be done only where it is necessary, as an isolated habitat for tigers could
be an easy target for poachers. However, in many cases villagers are also found to be protecting
poachers. Thus the pressing need is to sensitise villagers about the co-existence of man-animal and
minimizing the ill-effects of human-animal conflict.
Action Taken by the Government
Village relocation would be undertaken only where necessary for providing inviolate space
for tiger and other wild animals in core areas of tiger reserves, as recommended by the Tiger Task
Force. Enabling provisions have been made in the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, through
amendment done in 2006 for providing buffer zones, where inclusive agenda to redress man-animal
conflict and promote livelihood options for local people towards eliciting their support for wildlife
protection and conservation.
Comments
The Committee while taking note of the reply feels that mere making enabling
provisions in the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972, will not serve any purpose unless
implemented in the right earnest the Committee therefore reiterates its recommendation
that the Ministry should make efforts to sensitise villagers about the co-existence of man-
animal in minimising the ill-effects of human-animals conflict and also involve these
villagers more effectively in conservation of Wildlife.
10. Recommendation (Para 15.4)
China being the largest market for tiger parts is considering lifting ban on the domestic
trade of tiger body parts and would like to meet its need by tiger farms. The Committee would
like to know the steps being initiated by the Ministry in view of the above as there is enough
apprehensions that in such scenario, there would be an added incentives for poachers in India.
Since, rearing tigers in farms is quite costly affair, it would push the price of its products and
subsequently poaching, as compared to a slaughtered captive tiger, a consumer could get products
from a poached tiger for one tenth of price.
Action Taken by the Government
During the 14th meeting of the Conference of Parties to CITES, which was held from 3rd
to 15th June, 2007 at The Hague, India introduced a resolution along with China, Nepal and
Russian Federation which was adopted. The said decision interalia has directions to Parties with
operations breeding tigers on a commercial scale, for restricting such captive populations to a level
supportive only to conserving wild tigers. Further, India made an intervention appealing to China
to phase out tiger farming and eliminating stockpiles of Asian big cats body parts and derivatives.
The importance of continuing the ban on trade of body parts of tigers was emphasized. India also
has a protocol with China on tiger conservation, and official delegations from both the countries
have met to discuss measures to strengthen tiger conservation.
Comments
The Committee feels that efforts should be continued towards ensuring the
continuance of ban on trade of tiger body parts with the neighbouring countries.

7
11. Recommendation (Para 15.5)
In recent times there are incidents of killings of Asiatic Lions in Gir Wildlife Sanctuary in
Gujarat, which is the only habitat of Asiatic Lions in the world. Committee would like to know
the immediate actions taken by the Ministry in this regard and what steps are being taken to
prevent such killings in future. Committee feels that it must be the handiwork of poachers, as lions'
claws and hide sell at a premium in the international market. It also reflects that Gir lions are
equally vulnerable to poaching. Committee is concerned about the protection of wildlife not only
in the protected areas, but also outside the protected areas, and it recommends strengthening of
anti-poaching measures.
Action Taken by the Government
Gir National Park and Wildlife Sanctuaries (GNPWS) in the Saurashtra region of Gujarat
form the nucleus of the last remaining habitat of the endangered free ranging Asiatic lion (Panthera
leo persica). A few recurring instances of the mortality of Lions, reportedly due to poaching, was
reported from Gir during March and April 2007. In response to this, the actions taken by the
Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India is as below:—
• On getting the information regarding the poaching of lions in Gir, the Ministry had
asked Gujarat Government to beef up the protection machinery.
• The Ministry also asked the Regional Offices, Wildlife Preservation to keep a vigil on
all exit points to rule out the involvement of international elements in the matter.
• Ministry of Environment and Forests constituted a Committee for the spot appraisal of
the situation in Gir. The Committee had recommended several measures to strengthen
the protection machinery in Gir and the surroundings to provide protection for bring
down the wildlife crime.
• The Hon’ble Minister of State for Environment and Forests, Government of India has
also written to the Hon’ble Chief Minister of Gujarat urging the State to take
appropriate actions in this regard.
• Further, under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme–Development of National Parks and
Sanctuaries, the Central Government has been providing technical and financial
assistance to State Government for the management of Gir National Park and Gir
Sanctuary and their population of lions. An amount of Rs 68.65 lakh has been allotted
to Gir during 2007-08 for various activities aimed at the conservation and management
of Gir.
Apart from this, the Central Government has also taken the following initiatives to check
wildlife crime including poaching of lions.
• The Central Government has enacted the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 to deal with
the issues of wildlife crime.
• Lion has been included in Schedule I of Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972 thus according
them the highest degree of protection.
• Stringent penalties are imposed on the offenders for the contravention of the provisions
of the Wildlife (Protection) Act, 1972.
• Wildlife Crime Control Bureau, with a network of five Regional and three Sub Regional
Offices, has been set up to control wildlife crime.
• India is a signatory to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of
Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) that regulates international trade in wildlife and its
derivatives.

8
• India has bilateral arrangements with China and Nepal on combating wildlife crime.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and desires that strict implementation of all the anti-
poaching legislations is ensured at ground level.
NATIONAL AFFORESTATION AND ECO-DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
12. Recommendation Para (16.6)
The Committee appreciates Ministry’s efforts to achieve the target of 25 per cent of Forest
Cover by 2007 and working towards establishing a high-tech modern nursery which may help the
State departments in increasing the productivity of forests through modern nursery techniques of
tissue culture, clone techniques and quality seeds. However, it feels that Ministry needs to be more
focused in its budgetary planning under this programme, since an arbitrary cut at R.E. level could
hamper the progressive growth of its performance oriented schemes such as National Afforestation
Programme. Furthermore, Committee recommends that Ministry should formulate an effective
strategy to create mass awareness about afforestation among poor people and tribal communities,
who depend on forests in different ways as it may, in turn not only improve forests but would
also provide better opportunity, empowerment and livelihood security to them.
Action Taken by the Government
The observation of the Department related Parliamentary Standing Committee contained in
Para 16.6 of its One Hundred Seventy-fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the
Ministry of Environment and Forests has been noted for compliance. The Ministry is striving to
achieve the target for increase in Forest and Tree Cover, and to this end, it has considered to
provide increased support to the Forest Development Agencies (FDAs) across the country for
greater coverage under National Afforestation Programme (NAP) Scheme. In this respect, the
Ministry took the initiative to amend the guidelines of the National Afforestation Programme to
allow taking up of advance work for tree planting during the year 2006-07 (which was the last
year of the Tenth Five Year Plan), so that 2007-08 does not become zero planting year. In all,
2,21,460 hectare of additional advance work targets were approved during 2006-07 for this
purpose in 411 FDA in 24 States at a total cost of Rs.l34.98 crores, out of which Rs.72.59 crores
was released during 2006-07.
With regard to the budget utilization of allocation during 2007-08 which stands at Rs.322.57
crores after re-appropriation under the National Afforestation Scheme, expeditious measures are
taken for timely release of fund to the Forest Development Agencies. It is expected that not only
the full allocation would be utilized but additional allocation will be sought at the RE stage
(2007-08) to meet the demand of the FDAs.
With regard to the Committee’s recommendation regarding mass awareness about
afforestation, this Ministry had undertaken various measures like, (a) organization of Vriksha Melas
(Tree Fairs) in the rural weekly markets through the Forest Development Agencies,
(b) advertisement about tree planting on the outer panels of selected local trains running in rural
areas, (c) awareness generation through Nehru Yuva Kendra Sangathan (Ministry of Sports) and
Song and Drama Division (Ministry of lnformation and Broadcasting) to various rural groups
including farmers in the rural areas etc. by organizing street plays etc. (d) dissemination of
pamphlets bearing information about species of plants, planting technology etc. to various interest
groups in the rural areas through Direct Post, etc. It is planned to continue with similar activities
during 2007-08 also subject to availability of funds and proper utilization of previous grants by the
concerned agencies.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and is of view that mass awareness measures about

9
afforestation should not only be continued but further intensified in rural and tribal areas
of the country.
ENVIRONMENTAL EDUCATION/TRAINING/EXTENSION
13. Recommendation Para (17.3)
The need to address environmental issues has never been greater as large-scale
industrialisation and ever increasing population has compelled it to be addressed at larger
perspective. The Committee is aware of the fact that Ministry has been doing commendable job
in creating environmental awareness at formal education system. However, it is of the view that
to make this awareness reach young individuals, especially the pre-teen age-group, it has to
organize tailor maid seminars, work shops to create awareness and knowledge about environment
to these impressionable minds. And at higher level the overall aim of conducting environmental
awareness training programmes should be with the objective of acquiring and appropriate level of
knowledge and understanding of the key concepts involved in environmental awareness.
Action Taken by the Government
In order to create mass environment awareness, Seminar, Workshop, training etc. have been
major component of the Environment Education and Training programme for enhancing the
understanding of people at all levels about relationship between human beings and Environment and
to develop capabilities/skills to improve and protect the environment. Major initiatives through there
components are elaborated as follows:
(i) Seminars/Symposia/W orkshops – This programme provides a platform to scientists/
environmentalists/University professionals/ technocrats, etc, to share their knowledge on various
subjects related to environment. The Ministry provides financial assistance to the Universities/other
institutions/NGOs to organise the events (seminars/symposia/workshops/conferences) and to
publish the proceedings. The scheme facilitates the transfer of technical know-how to different
people including local population. 56 proposals were supported during 2006-07 under this
programme.
(ii) National Environment Awareness Campaign – The NEAC was launched in mid 1986 with
the objective of creating environmental awareness at the national level. In this campaign, nominal
financial assistance is provided to NGOs, schools, colleges, universities, research- institutions,
women and youth organisations, army units, Government departments etc. from all over the
country for organising conducting awareness raising activities. The activities could be seminars,
workshops, training programmes, camps, padyatras, rallies, public meetings, exhibitions, essay/
debate/painting/poster competitions, folk dances and songs, street theatre, puppet shows,
preparation and distribution of environmental education resource materials etc., followed by action
like plantation of trees, management of household waste etc. Diverse target groups encompassing
students, youths, teachers, tribal, farmers, other. rural population, professionals and the general
public are covered under NEAC. The programme is implemented through designated Regional
Resource Agencies (RRAs) appointed for specific States/Regions of the country. The number of
organisations supported under NEAC has steadily increased from about 115 in 1986 to 9784 in
2006-07.
(iii) Mass Awareness through Media – The broad objectives of the programme is to bring about
an attitudinal and behavioural change amongst people by spreading awareness about environmental
issues and projecting in a positive manner Government’s environmental policies and regulations, so
that people, specially the youth, can adopt sustainable life styles and voluntarily follow
environmental regulations. These objectives are sought to be achieved through the electronic and
print media, the film and theatre media, etc. The Ministry has also forwarded a ‘‘Media Action
Plan’’ in this year. The following activities have been taken during the year 2006-07:
• A half-hour weekly Environmental Television Magazine called ‘‘Bhoomi’’ was being
telecast on Doordarshan National Channel.

10
• A fifteen minutes weekly Environmental Television Magazine called ‘‘Sarokar’’ was
being telecast on Rajasthan DD-l.
• An awareness campaign on selected environment themes like water conservation,
conservation of wetlands, man-animal conflict and illegal trade in wildlife, etc. through
private TV channels.
• Conceived in 2002 by CMS, CMS V ATA V ARAN is India’s one and only biennially
competitive and travelling Environment and Wildlife film festival, has grown in prestige,
stature, reach, association and patronage.
• Twelve cities, 36 days, 350 films screenings, 11 workshops/symposiums/panel
discussions/open forums, 13 thematic exhibitions, more than 220 news items in
national and regional newspapers, and participation of around 40,000 people in CMS
V ATA V ARAN 2006.. The figures are a simple statistical resemblance of the movement
called CMS V A TA V ARAN.
• In 2006, CMS V A TA V ARAN Travelling Film Festival was held in TWELVE CITIES.
• The festival in Seven Cities – Chandigarh, Srinagar, Bangalore, Chennai, Guwahati,
Hyderabad and Ranchi was organized by CMS with the partial support of Ministry of
Environment and Forests, Govt. of India.
• The festival was also held in Kolkata, Pune and Sirmour in India and two International
Cities namely Sao Paulo, Brazil and Abu Dhabi. For the first time CMS V ATA V ARAN
went overseas with Abu Dhabi CMS V ATA V ARAN – Indian Environment and Wildlife
Film Festival in collaboration with Embassy of India, Abu Dhabi. The three-day festival
offered a unique opportunity to view an amazing array of CMS V ATA V ARAN films on
topical Indian environment and wildlife issues with global perspective. A ward winning
CMS V ATA V ARAN Films also travelled to Sao Paulo, Brazil, in November as part of
the 5th Ecocine - International Environmental Film and Video Festival.
• To make use of the medium of documentary films for environmental awareness, an
MoU has been signed with Public Service Broadcasting Trust (PSBT) for the
production of 13 films every year for three years (total 39 films) on environmental
issues and their telecast on Doordarshan. During this year 13 documentary films has
been telecast.
• Publishing the bi-monthly magazine Geography and You/Bhugol And Aap, both in
English and Hindi.
• An awareness campaign on Conservation of Estuarine Crocodile for a month on NGC
and Zee News.
• Financial support to TERI for production and successful telecast of five Terra-view
films on Doordarshan.
An ‘‘Advisory Committee of Experts on Media matters’’ has been constituted under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (E&F) to guide it in all media related activities.
(iv) Other A wareness Programmes – Even though financial assistance is provided for awareness
programmes under the NEAC, which are usually held within a specific time-frame and are short-
term projects restricted to a specific area, other proposals for creating awareness among diverse
target groups were also received throughout the year from various NGOs and other agencies.
These are considered on merit as and when received and supported. Few examples of these are:
• An international written Environment Quiz programme known as Green Olympiad
followed by a televised Quiz programme TERRA-QUIZ conducted by The Energy and
Resources Institute (TERI).

11
• Written and televised environmental quiz programmes in other regional languages like
Gujarati have also started.
• Awareness activities/events by NGOs, academic institutions etc. on the occasion of
special Environment day like Earth Day etc.
• Organisation of an annual Vacation Programme on Environmental Resources for high
school level students namely ‘‘Vacation Programme on Natural Resources - Building a
Broader Constituency of Support for Conservation’’.
• As in previous years, the international written Environment Quiz programme known as
‘‘Green Olympiad’’ was held during the year. The programme has gained steady
popularity over the years and in 2006-07, more than 60000 students from India, UAE,
Singapore, Nepal and Bhutan participated in this competition. The programme is in
Hindi also. The programme was followed by a televised Quiz Programme
‘‘TERRA-QUIZ’’ wherein top 32 teams of Green Olympiad participated. Other quiz
programmes in regional.Ianguages were also supported.
• An annual Vacation Programme on Environmental Resources for high school level
students namely ‘‘Vacation Programme on Natural Resources - Building a Broader
Constituency of Support for Conservation’’ was supported.
• Observance of Earth Day : Earth Day is an annual observance held on April 22 every
year to increase public awareness on the environment. During the year, a host of
activities were supported on and before Earth Day to use the occasion to involve
people in making a difference towards a healthy, prosperous and sustainable future.
The activities ranged from competitions (essay, painting, poster making, etc.) to
Rallies, Runs and formation of human chain. Streets plays were also organised to
spread the message of environment conservation. Shramdan to cleanse the ‘‘Sanjay
Lake’’ in Delhi was also supported.
(v) Grants-in-aid to Professional Societies – The programme was launched during the Seventh
Plan period with the underlying objective to encourage the expertise available with the professional
societies and institutions and to help augment the capabilities in the identified areas by developing
programmes and activities in the areas of environmental education, ecology and wildlife.
The major objective of the scheme was to provide one time grant to professional societies
and institutions to develop their activities and projects in the field of environment with an ultimate
objective of enhancing their capabilities in the various activities relating to protection of
environment and conservation of natural resources. The grant is not available for construction,
office equipment, goods and services which are not related or do not facilitate environment
education. The grant under the programme is also not given for research, collection and
compilation of data/information or to any individual/business houses.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and desired that the impact of these measures be
closely monitored.
CONSERV ATION PROGRAMME
14. Recommendation (Para (18.4)
The Committee notes with satisfaction that the Ministry has done commendable job in terms
of increasing the numbers of wetlands and mangrove sites. It observes that mangroves and coral
reefs. are important coastal environmental resources, they provide habitats for marine species,
protection from extreme weather events and a resource base for a sustainable tourism. The

12
Committee would like to recommend that Ministry must make sure that these environmental
resources should be kept secure from human settlements, industrial setups and exploitation.
Action Taken by the Government
The Ministry of Environment and Forests is at the forefront in regard to Mangroves and
Coral Reefs and accords high priority to their conservation and management. The Coastal
Regulation Zone Notification (1991) under the Environmental Protection Act (1986) recognizes the
Mangroves and Coral Reefs areas as ecologically sensitive and categorizes them as CRZ-I (i) which
implies that these areas are afforded protection of the highest order. Under the promotional
measures, the Government has identified 38 Mangrove and 4 Coral Reef areas on a country-wide
basis for intensive conservation and management.
The National Policy, 2006 recognizes that Mangroves and Coral Reefs are an important
coastal environmental resource.
The Ministry feels encouraged by the commendation of the Committee and will make every
effort, as ever and before, for conservation and management of Mangroves and Coral Reefs.
Comments
The Committee while taking note of the reply is of the view that conservation and
management of Mangroves and Coral Reefs should continued to be the thrust area of the
Ministry.
NATIONAL RIVER CONSERV ATION PLAN
15. Recommendation (Para 19.3)
The Committee has been given to understand that lowering of budgetary allocation in
National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) is due to progressive completion of works in some
States. The Committee would like the Ministry to provide it with details of such works. In addition,
Committee has observed that construction of low cost sanitation toilets to prevent open defecation
on river-banks is one of the important objects under this programme. However, in case of Yamuna,
the Committee expresses grave concern as improvement of water quality remains below the
acceptable norms as waste discharge and open defecation is still one of the common sights around
its bank even in Delhi. Financial constraint has never been a problem with cleaning of Yamuna,
funds have been pouring from nation as well as other global banking institutions. If this is the state
of highly propagated, immensely funded river, then one can imagine the plight of other major rivers
in other States of India. Time and again, Committee is pressing for proper coordination and
management between Centre and State Governments, otherwise, money will keep going down the
drain. The Committee recommends that to make this project result oriented, it is high time the
Ministry take punitive actions against defaulters/officials found lacking in terms of deliverance.
Action Taken by the Government
The State-wise details of the works completed under the National River Conservation Plan
(NRCP) during the last three financial years are given in the Annexure. It may be observed that
a total of 183 schemes of pollution abatement have been completed in different States during the
last three years. Among the States where major works of Interception and Diversion of Sewage
(I&D) and installation of Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs) were completed during these years are
Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Maharashtra and Punjab resulting
in creation of additional sewage treatment capacity of 1011 million litre per day (mId) in all the
States combined under NRCP during three years. Progressive completion of these works during the
last three years has resulted in reduction in the amount required for completion of the ongoing
works. Due to these reasons, the budget outlay sought for 2007-08 was less than those of previous
years.

13
With respect to the Low Cost Sanitation (LCS) works, it is to mention that great emphasis
is given for Construction of Community Toilet Complexes (CTCs) under the NRCP, with a total
of 138 schemes of LCS completed out of the sanctioned schemes of 158 so far. Under the Yamuna
Action Plan (YAP) Phase-I, implemented during the period 1993 to 2003, a total of 30 LCS
schemes were completed under this Plan with 2 in Delhi (comprising of 960 CTCs), 16 in Uttar
Pradesh and 12 in Haryana. However, the problem observed is that the State Governments do not
have adequate resources to undertake proper Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of assets created
under the NRCP. This leads to under utilization of the assets created and reflects poorly on the
impact of works done. The State Governments are encouraged to suggest and follow innovative
means to generate the revenue required for Operation and Maintenance of assets.
As regards the river Yamuna, the Government of India has undertaken Yamuna Action Plan
(YAP) for abatement of pollution of river Yamuna with the assistance from Japan Bank of
International Cooperation (JBIC), Government of Japan in a phased manner. Y AP Phase-I was
launched in 1993 and completed in 2003. A total of 269 pollution abatement works pertaining to
interception and diversion of sewage, installation of Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs), Low Cost
Sanitation, Crematoria, River Front Development, Public Participation and Awareness etc. were
taken up in YAP, Phase-I in 21 towns of the three States of U.P., Haryana and Delhi. A total of
38 STPs having a treatment capacity of 753.25 million litres per day (mld) have been created under
this phase. The project was completed within the approved cost.
The second phase of YAP was started in December 2004 with the completion period of
five years. This phase-II was formulated to take up other pollution abatement works of the
river Yamuna, as prioritized by the States and includes, (i) installation/rehabilitation of STPs,
rehabilitation/replacement of trunk sewers in Delhi, (ii) installation of STPs, laying of sewer lines
and rising mains in Agra, Uttar Pradesh and, (iii) laying of sewer lines in six towns of Haryana.
In addition to this, the Government of Delhi is also undertaking large scale sewerage and
non sewerage works for preventing the pollution under the river Yamuna. The quality of water in
Yamuna River has not shown the desired improvement, particularly in Delhi, due to enormous
increase in pollution load and lack of fresh water in the river during lean period. Implementation
of the river pollution abatement works is an ongoing and continuous activity based upon the
estimated pollution loads. Due to ever-increasing population, leading to increased pollution load, and
gap in the availability of Plan Outlay, there is persistent divergence between the pollution load
tackled and the actual pollution load.
A proper mechanism already exists for ensuring coordination and management between the
Centre and the State Governments for monitoring the works under the Plan. In order to further
strengthen this mechanism, recently a High Powered Committee has been constituted for ensuring
proper co-ordination between different agencies in order to develop the river Yamuna in Delhi. The
constitution of the Committee is as under:
• Lieutenant Governor, Delhi — Chairman
• Chief Minister, Delhi — Vice Chairman
• Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development — Member
• Secretary, Ministry of Environment and Forests — Member
• Chief Secretary, Government of NCT of Delhi — Member
• Principal Secretary, Urban Development — Member
Government of NCT of Delhi.
• Chief Executive Officer, Delhi Jal Board — Member
• Vice Chairman, Delhi Development Authority — Member

14
The terms of reference of the Committee include commissioning of studies on different
aspects of the development of the river, development of a policy frame work and preparation of
an integrated plan addressing issues of both quantity in terms of river flow and quality of Yamuna
river, development of an operation plan for implementation of the river action programme, ways
to effect inter-sectoral co-ordination and suggestion of the design for a statutory framework.
State-wise completed schemes under National river
Conservation Plan during last Three Financial Years
Sl. No. States Completed Schemes
Sanctioned Number
Cost (lakh)
1 Andhra Pradesh 320.29 6
2 Jharkhand 31.57 3
3 Gujarat 5273.29 4
4 Karnataka 558.48 7
5 Maharashtra 3119.49 14
6 Madhya Pradesh 2840.99 14
7 Orissa 283.08 6
8 Punjab 7645.09 14
9 Rajasthan 10.75 3
10 Tamil Nadu 46165.89 25
11 Goa 754.60 1
12 Delhi 0.00 0
13 Uttar Pradesh 227.04 6
14 Haryana 1345.90 12
15 Bihar 37.43 2
16 West Bengal 11266.80 53
17 Uttaranchal 511.25 13
18 Kerala 0.00 0
19 Sikkim 0.00 0
20 Nagaland 0.00 0
T
OTAL: 80391.94 183
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and would like to reiterate its recommendation that
proper coordination among various agencies involved in the implementation of the National
River Conservation Plan is of utmost importance for achieving desired objectives which
must be maintained.

15
16. Recommendation (Para 19.4)
The Ganga Action Plan (GAP) is a scheme that was initiated by the Ministry of
Environment and Forests to clean critical areas of the Ganga downstream of Haridwar and to bring
the water back to bathing level, since its initiation crores have been spent on the action plan but
there has not been much improvement in water quality. Experts say the practice of dumping
untreated sewage from cities on the banks of the Ganga and dead bodies and carcasses in the river
are some of the causes of high pollution levels and the practice is still prevalent. The Committee
feels that the project suffered due to lack of suitable system in place to monitor the implementation
and plug the loopholes in the execution of the project.
Action Taken by the Government
The Government of India initiated the river conservation efforts by launching the Ganga
Action Plan (GAP) Phase-I in the year 1985, taking up the pollution abatement works in the
identified polluted stretches of the river. This Phase was declared completed in March, 2000 with
the creation of sewage treatment capacity of 869 million litres per day (mld). Since GAP
Phase-I did not cover the pollution load of Ganga fully, GAP Phase-II including the tributaries of
Ganga namely, Yamuna, Gomti, Damodar and Mahananda, was approved in stages from 1993
onwards. A total of sewage treatment capacity of 1747 mld has been created for Ganga and its
tributaries, out of which 869 mld is for Ganga.
Conservation of rivers is a dynamic activity with the ever-increasing pollution load due to
increase in population. It requires involvement of all the stakeholders in the project, viz., Central
Government, State Government, Local Bodies, Implementing Agencies, NGOs, general public,
users, etc. Water being a State subject, it is the responsibility of State Governments to create
proper sewerage infrastructure to prevent pollution from entering the rivers. Central Government
only supplements the efforts of the State Governments by providing one time grant for capital
works for identified polluted stretches.
With the pollution abatement works completed so far in both the phases under GAP, the
water quality of the river Ganga has shown improvement at major locations over its pre-GAP
quality as per the water quality monitoring undertaken by independent reputed institutions of the
country. A statement indicating the improvement in the water quality of the river between the years
1986 and 2006 is given below.—
Water quality data for river Ganga
(Summer Average i.e. March-June)
Sl. No. Station/Location Dissolved Oxygen [DO] Biochemical Oxygen
(mg/l) Demand [BOD] (mg/l)
1986 2006 1986 2006
12 3 45 6
UTTARAKHAND
1. Rishikesh 8.1 8.30 1.7 1.00
2. Hardwar D/S 8.1 8.10 1.8 1.30
UTTAR PRADESH
3. Garhmukteshwar 7.8 7.70 2.2 2.10
4. Kannauj U/S 7.2 7.35 5.5 1.11

16
12 3 45 6
5. Kannauj D/S NA 6.45 NA 4.20
6. Kanpur U/S 7.2 6.20 7.2 6.80
7. Kanpur D/S 6.7 3.90 8.6 6.80
8. Allahabad U/S 6.4 7.10 11.4 4.90
9. Allahabad D/S 6.6 8.50 15.5 3.20
10. Varanasi U/S 5.6 8.70 10.1 2.10
11. Varanasi D/S 5.9 8.65 10.6 2.25
BIHAR
12. Patna U/S 8.4 7.40 2.0 2.05
13. Patna D/S 8.1 8.10 2.2 2.30
14. Rajmahal 7.8 7.20 1.8 1.95
WEST BENGAL
15. Palta NA 6.96 NA 2.58
16. Uluberia NA 6.46 NA 2.64
Bathing Water Quality Criteria: DO equal to or more than 5.0 mg/l
BOD equal to or less than 3.0 mg/l
Dumping of dead bodies/carcasses in rivers: One of the pollution abatement measures taken
up under the National River Conservation Plan include setting up of Electric and/or Improved
Wood-based Crematoria to conserve the use of wood and help in ensuring proper cremation of
bodies brought to the burning ghat.
Throwing of dead bodies in rivers is a vexatious issue and the State Governments have been
fully sensitized in this regard and District Administrations convene meetings and urge all concerned
that dead bodies should not be buried near the riverbed or thrown in the river. All organizations/
public are being requested by the local administrations in the banks of river Ganga to cremate dead
bodies so that the environment is not polluted. The different local agencies/bodies are being
persuaded to create public awareness in this regard.
With regard to utilization of electric crematoria (EC) and improved wood crematoria (IWC)
which has been set up under the Ganga Action Plan, meetings are regularly conducted with the
local public, religious leaders, community leaders to improve utilization of these modern crematoria.
The local bodies have been encouraged to set up improved wood crematoria along the banks of
the river to prevent dumping of dead bodies into the river.
Under GAP-I, in six towns of Bihar, 9 Electric Crematoria were installed. In UP, 4
crematoria were installed under GAP-I. In West Bengal, under GAP-I, 18 crematoria have been
constructed and commissioned and under GAP-II, 7 crematoria have so far been completed and
commissioned. A number of Public participation and public awareness programmes have been
undertaken in different towns under Ganga Action Plan in the form of exhibition/workshops, street
plays, rallies/padayatras by local people, school based programmes, and shramdan programmes by

17
cleaning, sweeping the banks of river Ganga. Taking into consideration the erratic Power supply
in UP and Bihar, and general reluctance to accept this type of crematorium, it has been decided
to promote improved wood based crematoria from GAP-II onwards.
Monitoring of Implementation : A multi-layer monitoring mechanism exists at the Central,
State and Implementing Agency level for monitoring the implementation of the projects. At the apex
level, major policy directions to implement the pollution abatement works are provided by the
National River Conservation Authority (NRCA) under the Chairmanship of the Hon'ble Prime
Minister. The schemes under the NRCP and the NLCP are implemented through Implementing
Agencies (IAs), nominated for the purpose by the respective State/Union Territory Governments.
The monitoring system to implement the approved schemes under NRCP is being
strengthened and in this regard, the major steps taken are as under:—
• Conducting of review meetings with the individual State Governments quarterly in
addition to the monitoring mechanism at Central and State level for ensuring timely
completion of works.
• Release of funds to the State Implementing Agencies directly by the Central
Government instead of through State Governments to avoid time delays.
• Regular monitoring of water quality status in important polluted stretches of river
Ganga to check the efficacy of the implemented schemes.
• Performance monitoring of STPs already commissioned by independent reputed
institutions on monthly/bi-monthly basis to ensure their working status.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and expresses its dissatisfaction over the fact that
water quality of the River Ganga has not improve despite all the efforts made hitherto by
the Ministry.
PREVENTION OF AIR AND WATER POLLUTION
17. Recommendation (Para 20.2)
The Committee opines that apart from providing financial assistance to the State
Governments for Common Effluent Treatment Plants for modernization and capacity expansion, the
Ministry through its nodal agency i.e. Central Pollution Control Board should make sure that
requisite technical assistance may also be provided to the State Governments and Union Territories.
Furthermore, it recommends that Ministry should seriously look into the matter in the case of
polluting industries, which discharge their effluents into river and lakes. There should be imposition
of heavy penalties and closure notices to such Industrial setups, if they fail to install the requisite
effluent treatment plants within a time frame.
Action Taken by the Government
The concept of the Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETP) arose in order to make a
co-operative movement for pollution control. The main objective of the CETPs is to reduce the
treatment cost to be borne by an individual member unit to a minimum while protecting the water
environment to a maximum. Wastewater of CETPs was envisaged to treat the effluent emanating
from the clusters of compatible small-scale industries. A Centrally Sponsored Scheme has been
undertaken by the Government for enabling the Small Scale Industries (SSI) to set up new and
upgrade the existing Common Effluent Treatment Plants (CETP) in the country. A scheme for
financial assistance for the CETPs has been formulated as follows:—
State Subsidy — 25% of the total project cost

18
Matching Central Subsidy — 25% of the total project cost
Entrepreneurs contribution — 20% of the total project cost
Loan from financial institutions — 30% of the total project cost
(IDBI, ICCI or any other nationalized Banks, State Industrial Financial Corporation etc.)
CPCB has undertaken a study through National Environmental Engineering Research
Institute (NEERI) entitled ‘Feasibility Studies on Wastewater Management for Textile Sector in
Tirupur and Tannery and Textile Sector in Erode, Tamil Nadu’ on performance evaluation of
Reverse Osmosis Technology and Nano Filtration, which can help in achieving standards of TDS.
For prevention of population in waterbodies i.e. Rivers and Lakes, the polluting industrial
units located along the Rivers and Lakes are monitored regularly by the concerned State Pollution
Control Boards (SPCBs) for setting up of Pollution control devices and appropriate actions are
taken against the defaulting units to ensure compliance. The overall criteria for selection of
industries are the pollution potential (type as well as load) in the sense of the environmental impact
of the discharges, emissions and disposal of hazardous wastes. The inspections of the following
types of industries are undertaken by CPCB:—
• Seventeen Categories of polluting Industries,
• Polluting Industries located along the Rivers and Lakes.
• Industries located in the Twenty four identified problem areas, and
• Hazardous Waste reprocessing industries.
The steps taken against pollution causing industries include:
(i) Enforcement of prescribed environmental standards;
(ii) Regular monitoring for compliance of prescribed environmental norms;
(iii) Issuance of notices/directions to defaulting units for installation of pollution control
devices under the provisions of various Pollution Control Acts; and
(iv) Implementation on the Charter on Corporate Responsibility for Environmental
Protection for 17 Categories of polluting industries.
Total of 1204 grossly polluting industries (discharging 100 Kg/D BOD) have been identified
as on December, 2006, out of which 775 industries have installed Effluent Treatment Plant (ETP)
and are functioning satisfactorily, 314 industries have been closed and 115 are defaulting and facing
legal action.
Comments
The Committee is of the view that strict vigilance on the part of the Ministry is
required to check the problem of water pollution by the various industries and
simultaneously speedy and stringent penal action should also be taken against the industries
that do not comply with the rules.
NATIONAL LAKE CONSERV ATION PLAN
18. Recommendation (Para 21.3)
The Committee understands that it is slow poisoning of the water that is daily killing a part
of the Dal Lake, which has been the major attraction in Kashmir Valley. Most of the pollutants are

19
above the permissible limit as prescribed by the Water Act (Prevention and Control of Pollution)
and also by the Central Board for Control of Pollution (CPCB). Besides, the known factors like
human settlements, hotels, floating gardens and even dhobi ghats on the periphery, are negatively
contributing to the lake’s slow death. It has also been observed that to certain extent source of
phosphates and nitrates, both fertilizers promote eutrophication in the lake water, which may be
attributed to the usage of fertilizers by the farmers. Sewage discharge from surrounding
communities around the lake and its tributaries is also a major reason for pollution in Dal Lake.
The Committee is, therefore, deeply perturbed to note the deteriorating water quality of the Dal
Lake.
Action Taken by the Government
Dal-Nagin Lake, like all other inland water bodies in the country, is beset with problems
arising from both natural and anthropogenic causes. The lake is unique in the sense that this
probably is the only lake where a large number of people live inside the lake carrying out cultivation
in water and land, fishing and discharging their wastes into the water body.
The project of ‘‘Conservation and Management Plan for Dal-Nagin Lake in Srinagar’’ has
already been sanctioned by Government of India in September, 2005 under the National Lake
Conservation Plan for Rs. 298.76 crore, which inter-alia  also includes various measures for
reduction of nutrients (pollutants) to improve the lake eco-system. The project is scheduled for
completion by March, 2010. Implementation of works sanctioned under the project has since been
taken up by the J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority, the State implementing agency
for the project, and an expenditure of Rs. 81.70 crore has been incurred till end of August, 2007.
For control of nutrient ingress into the lake (responsible for deterioration of lake water
quality), various actions are being taken up under the project.
(A) Sewerage and Sewage Treatment works and Solid Waste Management
Entry of untreated sewage and solid waste from the peripheral areas and hamlets/
houseboats within the lake has been reckoned as the main factor for eco-degradation
of Dal-Nagin Lake. To address this issue, following achievements have been made till
date by the J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority,
(i) Main sewers
Out of 27,851 metres of main sewers envisaged to be laid, 17644 metres of
sewers have been laid to carry the sewage to the STPs in respective zones.
(ii) Remodeling of drains
19,804 metres length of drains have been remodeled out of a total length of 20000
metres envisaged under the project.
(iii) Sewage Treatment Plants (STPs)
Out of 6 STPs (having a total treatment capacity of 36.7 mld) envisaged to be
constructed under the project, 3 STPs based on Fluidized Aerobic Bed (FAB)
technology and having a treatment capacity of 15.2 mld have been commissioned
and are functional. The 3 STPs constructed at Hazratbal (7.5 mld capacity),
Habak (3.2 mld capacity) and Laam (4.5 mld capacity) can treat around
41 per cent  of the total sewage generated along the lake periphery that was
flowing directly into the lake.
(iv) Regarding the hamlets within the lake areas and the habitations not falling in the
command area of the STPs, LCS (low cost sanitation) measures are being
resorted to reduce the lake pollution.

20
(v) Solid Waste Management for the houseboats and hamlets within the lake, including
areas in the immediate periphery of the lake, is being conducted through various
NGOs where-under about 7,500 structures are being serviced on a day-to-day
basis, as a result of which about 9125 cu.m. of solid waste is being managed
annually in collaboration with Srinagar Municipal Corporation.
(B) Catchment Management
Silt coming from the catchment areas through the main feeding source that would
contribute to shallowness of the lake and particulate nutrient build-up is being arrested
in the Telbal Nala Settling Basin (which has been constructed for this purpose) before
entering the lake. The gravity of sediment yield is also declining as anti-erosion
measures in the catchment area of the lake have been initiated.
(C) Weed Management
Selective de-weeding is being done for maintaining water quality and ecology of the
lake.
(D) Dredging
Dredging of shallow areas of the lake is being undertaken to ensure removal of
nutrients from the sediment pool. This has resulted in lake water expanse of about
1 sq.m along the northern shore of the lake having an average depth of about 2.5 m.
(E) Water Circulation
An additional outflow arrangement for the lake via Brari Numbal Lagoon has been
constructed under the project, which improves the lake water circulation and helps to
flush the lake back waters and periphery lake channels.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and desires that the Ministry should ensure that the
water quality of the Dal-Nagin lake improves with the help of various measures undertaken
in this regard.
19. Recommendation Para (21.4)
The Committee is of the strong view that conservation of Dal Lake, which is a lake of
national importance, is an urgent issue. It is a God given ornament of Kashmir V alley and hence
crucial in terms of not only ecology but also from the point of augmenting economic well being
of its people and ensuring peace in the valley. It recommends that provision of proper sewage
facilities will lead to the reduction of the organic loading in the lake to great extent. The Committee
therefore recommends that it is necessary to look into the possibilities such as a common sewerage
system for a cluster of houseboats, sanitary systems in individual units and devices for removal
of the wastes in containers.
Action Taken by the Government
The J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority have informed that a comprehensive
scheme for houseboat sanitation has been formulated for implementation.
(i) The houseboats located in the Nagin Basin have been realigned along its eastern and
western shore. The sewer line for connecting houseboats on eastern shore has been
laid through which sewage of the houseboats shall be pumped to the STP located at
Hazratbal. The sewage from houseboats on western side of Nagin Lake shall be
connected to sewer for carrying the same to the STP proposed to be constructed at
Nala Amir Khan.

21
(ii) The houseboats located in the Nehru Park Basin of Dal Lake shall be provided with
floating septic tanks and Vacussun sewer system. The pre-requisite of this scheme
requires relocation and realignment of houseboats in the lake, the proposals of which
have been finalized and the dredging of the area on the western side of the lake near
Kohnakhun for providing mooning sites for these houseboats has been undertaken. 32
houseboats have so far been relocated in the area carved out.
Comments
The Committee while taking note of the reply is of the view that the comprehensive
sewage and sanitation system formulated should be put in place expeditiously and the
results monitored.
20. Recommendation (Para 21.5)
The Committee in its earlier report on action taken by the Ministry of Environment and
Forests on the recommendations contained in report of the Committee on ‘Conservation and
Environmental Management Plan for Dal-Nagin Lake’ had further recommended the Ministry to take
initiatives to import Rota Loo, lightweight portable toilet aided by hundred per cent biodegradable
toilet bag which is compostable and is not only environmental friendly but also user friendly. The
Committee, therefore, again recommends for Rota Loo toilets, which could also be used on the
houseboats in Dal Lake. It would like the Ministry to furnish details of actions taken in this
context, as the aerobic breakdown of human wastes in a biodrum is the most advisable technique
for preventing the inflow of human wastes into the lake eco-system.
Action Taken by the Government
The J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority have informed that the proposal of
using ‘‘Rota Loo’’ toilets as well as other alternatives like ‘‘Envirolet’’ biolet units for houseboats
has already been considered and evaluated by them. However, both these options were not
recommended for the following reasons:
(a) Both these units are more specifically designed for situations where water is scarce but
power is abundant. The conditions in case of Dal Lake were found to be opposite.
(b) Waste in such units is composted in pits, which is neither possible nor desirable in the
lake.
(c) The Rota Loo toilets are to be operated manually, which is not possible in houseboat
condition.
(d) The costs involved in both types are prohibitive.
A meeting of Board of Directors of the J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority
on this matter was held on 24.9.2005, wherein it was decided to adopt ‘Floating Septic Tanks’ with
Vacussun sewer system for discharging the liquid waste of houseboats into the terminal shore
sump-cum-pump station for ultimate treatment in the existing/proposed STPs for scientific
houseboat sanitation. The J&K Lakes and Waterways Development Authority have informed that
since the Parliamentary Committee has recommended re-examining the utility of ‘‘Rota Loo’’ toilets
in the houseboats, they will re-examine the matter.
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and desires that an effective method for disposal of
wastes from the Houseboats in the Dal Lake is put in place within a fixed time schedule.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the steps being taken towards this.

22
GREGARIOUS FLOWERING OF MULl BAMBOOS
21. Recommendation (Para 23.3)
The Committee appreciates the efforts initiated by the Ministry to tap the ecological, social
and economic problems likely to arise due to gregarious flowering of muli bamboos. It recommends
that Ministry must keep up its efforts to ensure that the resources and huge amount of funds
involved in this project are managed properly and effectively.
Action Taken by the Government
To tackle the ecological, social and economic problems likely to arise due to gregarious
flowering of Bamboo, the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF), GoI is implementing a
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS), under which following steps have been taken:—
(i) The Comprehensive Action Plan was approved on July 20, 2005. The Scheme has
been finally approved on March 30, 2006 by the Planning Commission and the
Ministry of Finance for implementation from 2005-06 to 2008-09.
(ii) Under this CSS, seven NE States and ICFRE are being financially supported as per
the approved Action Plan. The main activities for which the funds will be utilized are:
• Improvement of link roads for bamboo extraction/regeneration;
• Creation of transit depots/collection centres;
• Purchase of vehicles for monitoring and staff mobility;
• Mechanized ropeways to facilitate extraction of bamboo;
• Regeneration activities;
• Fire-control measures;
• Rodent control;
• Preventive health measures;
• Utilizing bamboo for bio-energy by gasification; and
• Disposal of unutilized bamboo by burning.
(iii) The seven States are: Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland and Tipura.
(iv) The total expected requirement of fund for implementation of the Action Plan has
been estimated as Rs 366.50 crores, out of which the MoEF, is supplementing the
efforts of the State Governments and ICFRE, concerned through by an estimated
budget of Rs. 85.00 crores for total project period.
(v) During Financial Year (FY) 2005-06, an amount of Rs 17.82 crores has been released
to different NE States and ICFRE to combat the problems. In the FY 2006-07, the
total amount released is Rs 25.00 crores and for the current FY , the estimated budget
to be released is Rs 27.00 crores out of which Rs. 6.28 crores has been released so
far to the implementing States.
(vi) A Central M onitoring Committee (CMC) under the chairmanship of Director General
of Forests and Special Secretary (DGF&SS), MoEF, Government of India has been
constituted on August 31, 2004, which includes PCCFs/Forest Secretaries of the State
Governments, representatives from Ministry of Agriculture, DONER, National Mission
on Bamboo Application (NMBA), North-Eastern Council (NEC) and Planning
Commission.

23
(a) This Committee held bimonthly meeting to review the progress of the scheme.
So far CMC has held six CMC meetings; the next one is scheduled to be held
on September 18, 2007 at Guwahati, Assam.
(vii) The major consumer of bamboo produce is HPC. No States report to export of
bamboos to Bangladesh except Tripura. Bamboo produce is being properly utilized for
Paper and Pulp Industry, Handicrafts, Construction/Structural purposes, Bio-energy,
Incense stick, Umbrella handle etc.
(viii) The National Mission on Bamboo Applications (NMBA), Ministry of Science and
Technology is helping the implementing States in providing technical know-how and
financial assistance to the local entrepreneurs for setting up Gasifiers, activated
charcoal units, stick making units providing quality nursery stocks for regeneration.
(ix) MoEF decided to give dispensation from felling restrictions to Muli Bamboos till
gregarious flowering is over. The States can do harvesting without approved working
plans/schemes by developing some mechanism at the State level to ensure proper
harvesting and utilization.
(a) The export restrictions on muli bamboos have been lifted till March, 2008.
Comments
Committee acknowledges the various efforts undertaken by the Ministry to minimize
the problems likely to arise due to flowering of the muli bamboos and hopes that these
efforts would bear fruit.
22. Recommendation (Para 24)
After examining the various aspects of Demand for Grants of the Ministry of Environment
and Forests, the Committee observed that the budget allocation for the year 2007-08 has not been
made with the realistic perception with the result that the Ministry would not be in a position to
complete its ongoing schemes/programmes with such allocations. The Committee also felt that the
major activities/programmes like national afforestation programme, the functioning of Botanical
Survey of India/Zoological Survey of India, filling up of vacant posts in various grades in various
organizations under the purview of the Ministry and creation of scientists pool etc. would suffer
because of the tight budgetary provisions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry
should seek for more allocations at R.E stage for various ongoing projects/programmes so that the
Ministry can deliver better environment inputs which the country needs in the wake of prevailing
environmental degradation.
Action Taken by the Government
The low budgetary allocations in 2007-08 Budget of the Ministry is mainly on account of
only a marginal increase in the plan budget of the Ministry. This was due to reduction in approved
plan outlay of the Ministry by Rs. 70 crores by the Planning Commission, for salary and
establishment related expenditure, as a part of its zero-Budget Based exercise and transfer of the
same to non plan budget of the Ministry. While the reduction in plan budget was effected by the
Planning Commission, its concomitant enhancement in Ministry’s non plan Budget was not effected
by the Finance Ministry.
The requirements of plan funds by various schemes/projects will be assessed, as a part of
Ministry’s mid-year review exercise. Given the progress in utilization of funds and the additional
requirements of funds, if any, necessary demand for additional funds will be made to Finance
Ministry for various schemes/projects at R.E. stage.

24
Comments
The Committee notes the reply and desires that it be apprised of the changes, if any,
that were effected at the R.E. Stage.

25
MINUTES

26

27
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 4th March, 2008 in Committee Room ‘A’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. V . Maitreyan — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Bhagirathi Majhi
3. Shri Jabir Husain
4. Dr. Barun Mukherjee
5. Shri D. Raja
LOK  SABHA
6. Shri Jashubhai Dhanabhai Barad
7. Shri Thupstan Chhewang
8. Shri Francis Fanthome
9. Shri Brahmananda Panda
10. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
11. Shri Mitrasen Yadav
12. Shri Sita Ram Yadav
13. Shri Rampal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri S. Jason, Joint Director
Shri V .S.P. Singh, Deputy Director
Shri S. Rangarajan, Assistant Director
3. The Committee took-up for consideration its draft One Hundred Eighty-fourth Report on
Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred Seventy-
fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and
Technology, Environment and Forests on the Demands for Grants (2007-08) of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests. Some members suggested certain modifications in the report which were
carried out. The Committee, thereafter, adopted the report.
4. The Committee decided to present the 184th Report on the 11th March, 2008. The
Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence Dr. Prabha Thakur or Shri Ravula Chandra
Sekar Reddy to present the report in Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorized Shrimati Jayaben
B. Thakkar and in her absence Shri Thupstan Chhewang or Shri Francis Fanthome to lay a copy
of the report on the Table of Lok Sabha.
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.00 
P.M.
27

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.