 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTIETH REPORT 
 
The DNA Technology (Use And Application) Regulation Bill, 2019 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February, 2021) 
 
 
REPORT NO. 
340 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
Email: rsc-st@sansad.nic.in 

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY, 
ENVIRONMENT, FORESTS AND CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FORTIETH REPORT 
 
The DNA Technology (Use And Application) Regulation Bill, 2019 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 3rd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd February, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2021/Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 


 
C O N T E N T S 
 
 
  PAGES 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i)-(ii) 
2. INTRODUCTION (iii)-(iv) 
3. ACRONYMS (v) 
4. REPORT 1-37 
 (1) Introduction 1 
 (2) Background to the DNA Technology Bill 1-4 
 (3) Highlights of the Bill 4-6 
 (4) Expert Testimony 6-8 
 (5) Committee’s Observations on the Bill 8-9 
 (6) Clause-by-Clause Recommendations 10-37 
5. NOTE OF DISSENT   
 5.1      Note of Dissent received from the Shri Asaduddin Owaisi, M.P., 
Lok Sabha 
5.2      Note of Dissent received from Shri Binoy Viswam, M.P., Rajya 
Sabha 
5.3      Response of the Chairman to the Notes of Dissent  
38-49 
 
50 
 
51-74 
6. MINUTES   
7. ANNEXURES  
 I. The DNA Technology (Use and Application) Regulation Bill,      
2019” 
75-111 
 II. List of person s/organisations who submitted memoranda to the 
Committee (Statement I) 
List of Non-official/official expert witnesses who appeared before       
the Committee (Statement II) 
112-113 
 III. Additional views on the Bill requested and received by the 
Chairman  
114-135 
   

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2019-20) 
(Constituted on 13th September, 2019)  
 
1. Shri Jairam Ramesh -- Chairman 
 
               RAJYA SABHA 
2.    Shri Anil Baluni 
3.    Shri R.S. Bharathi 
4.    Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
5.    Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
        6.    Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
       7.     Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw 
       8.     Shri Ravi Prakash Verma 
9.    Shri Binoy Viswam 
    #10.    Shri Maharaja Sanajaoba Leishemba 
 
                LOK SABHA 
11.    Shri Guharam Ajgalley  
12.    Shri Pradan Baruah 
13.    Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
14.    Shri Jashvantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor  
15.    Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16.    Shri Rameshbhai Lavjibhai Dhaduk 
17.    Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
18.    Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant  
19.    Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
20.    Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
21. Shri S.R. Parthiban 
22. Dr. Ranjan Singh Rajkumar 
23. Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
24. Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
25. Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
26. Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
27. Shri Francisco Cosme Sardinha  
28. Shri Anurag Sharma  
29. Shri Ram Shiromani  
30. Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
31. Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi  
____________________ 
               SECRETARIAT  
   Smt. Sunita Sekaran, Joint Secretary 
   Shri T. N. Pandey, Director 
   Shri S. Rangarajan, Additional Director 
   Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary 
 Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
Shri Ankit Chansoria, Assistant Committee Officer 
_______________________________________________________ 
#Nominated w.e.f. 22nd July, in lieu of Shri Parimal Nathwani who ceased to be a Member of the Committee on 
expiry of his term in Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th April, 2020 
(i) 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2020-21) 
(Constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2020)  
 
  
1.  Shri Jairam Ramesh – Chairman  
  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
2.  Shri Anil Baluni 
3.  Shri R.S. Bharathi 
4.  Shrimati Vandana Chavan 
5.  Shri Hishey Lachungpa 
6.  Shri Parimal Nathwani 
7.  Shri Bhaskar Rao Nekkanti 
8.  Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw 
9.  Shri Binoy Viswam 
10.  @Shrimati Seema Dwivedi  
 LOK SABHA 
 
11.  Shri Guharam Ajgalley 
12.  Shri Pradan Baruah 
13.  Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
14.  Shri Jashvantsinh Sumanbhai Bhabhor 
15.  Shri Sudarshan Bhagat 
16.  Shri Anantkumar Hegde 
17.  Shri S. Jagathrakshakan 
18.  Shri Mohammed Azam Khan 
19.  Shrimati Jyotsna Charandas Mahant 
20.  Dr. Swami Sakshiji Maharaj 
21.  Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
22.  Dr. Ranjan Singh Rajkumar 
23.  Shri Kotha Prabhakar Reddy 
24.  Dr. Jayanta Kumar Roy 
25.  Shrimati Satabdi Roy (Banerjee) 
26.  Shri Mahesh Sahoo 
27.  Shri Francisco Sardinha  
28.  Shri Anurag Sharma 
29.  Shri Ram Shiromani  
30.  Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
31.  Dr. Ramapati Ram Tripathi 
  
SECRETARIAT  
 
 Shri Pradeep Chaturvedi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri T. N. Pandey, Director 
 Shri Rakesh Anand, Additional Director 
 Shri Rajiv Saxena, Under Secretary 
 Shri Harish Kumar, Committee Officer 
Shri Ankit Chansoria, Assistant Committee Officer 
 __________________________________________________________________________ 
@ Nominated w.e.f. 23 rd December, 2020, in lieu of  Shri Ravi Prakash Verma who ceased to be a 
member of the   Committee on expiry of his  term  in  Rajya Sabha   on  25th November, 2020. 
(ii) 

 
INTRODUCTION 
I, the Chairman of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science 
and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, having been authorised by the 
Committee to present the Repo rt on its behalf, do hereby present this Three Hundred Fortieth 
Report on “The DNA Technology (Use And Application) Regulation Bill, 2019”.  
2.   In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the 
Council of States relating to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the 
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha , in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha, referred                   
“The DNA Technology (Use And Application) Regulation Bill, 2019”  as introduced in Lok 
Sabha and pending therein, to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change on the 15th October, 2019, 
for examination and report within a period of three months.  On the request of the Chairman of 
the Committee, Hon'ble Chairman , Rajya Sabha granted extension of time upto t he end of the 
first week of the Winter Session, 2020 for presentation of Report .  S ince the Winter Session, 
2020 was not convened , the Committee is presenting this Report in the Budget Session 2021 of 
Parliament. 
3. The Committee issued a Press Advertiseme nt seeking the comments/ views of the  
experts/public at large on the Bill in order to have a threadbare examination of the Bill after 
wider consultation with the stakeholders.  In response thereto, a number of memoranda from 
different individuals/organistations were received. 
4. In its meeting held on 31 st October, 2019 , the Committee heard the view s of the         
Secretary and other officers of the Department of Biotechnology  on the Bill.  In its subsequent 
meetings held on the 27 th and 28th November 2019 and 16th January 2020, the Committee heard 
the views of non-official/official expert witnesses on the Bill.        
5.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of 
Department of Biotechnology and the representatives of Ministry of Law and Justice for placing 
before the Committee the material and information desired in connection with the examination of 
the Bill.  The Committee also acknowledges the contribution of all those who deposed before the 
Committee and also those who gave their valuable suggestions on the provisions of the Bill to the 
Committee through their written submissions.  
 
(iii) 
 

 
6.  The Committee also considered the Bill in its meetings held on 24th August, 3rd and 10th 
September, 2020  and 11th January, 2021.  The Committee considered and adopted the draft 
Report in its meeting held on 1st February, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
 ( JAIRAM RAMESH ) 
NEW DELHI;    Chairman, 
1st February, 2021   Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Magha 12, 1942 (Saka)                                   Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change, 
 Rajya Sabha 
                         
                                                                   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 (iv) 

 
ACRONYMS 
 
CBI Central Bureau of Investigation 
CDFD Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics  
DBT Department of Biotechnology 
DNA Deoxyribonucleic acid 
D-PAC DNA Profiling Advisory Committee 
GFSU Gujarat Forensic Sciences University 
GoM Group of Ministers  
IISER Indian Institute of Science Education and Research  
LCI Law Commission of India  
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs  
NALSAR National Academy of Legal Studies and Research  
NCRB National Crime Records Bureau 
NGOs Non-Governmental Organisations 
NIA National Investigation Agency 
S&T Science and Technology 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(v) 

 
 
1 
 
REPORT 
1. The Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha, 
referred1  ―The DNA Technology (Use and Application) Regulation Bill, 2019‖ (Annexure -I) 
as introduced in Lok Sabha on 8 th July, 2019 and pending therein, to the Department -related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment,  Forests and 
Climate Change for examination and report.  
2. Background to the DNA Technology (Use and Application) Bill, 2019 
2.1.  The Department of Biotechnology (DBT) submitted in its note to the Committee that: 
a. DNA testing is currently being done on an extremely limited scale in India, 
with approximately 30-40 DNA Experts in 15-18 laboratories undertaking less 
than 3000 c ases per year, which represent 2 -3% of the total need. However, 
the standards of the laboratories are not monitored or regulated. 
b. DNA fingerprinting is already practised in our country and the evidence has 
been used in many criminal court cases with suc cess. Thus, the procedures for 
crime scene collection, sample storage, chain of custody, contamination, data 
analysis etc. are quite routine and what the Bill will do is ensure that they 
become standards for accreditation, which is currently not statutory. 
c. As per the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) reports, there are 40,000 
unidentified bodies per year that need identification. NCRB also reported that 
nearly 100,000 children go missing every year across the country.  So, there is 
an urgent need to p rovide a framework for empowering the justice delivery 
system. 
2.2. The DBT submitted the following outline to the Committee on the genesis of the Bill: 
a. Use of DNA technology in justice delivery system emerged as one of the 
recommendations during a semi nar held in Hyderabad in September 2003 on 
―Impact of new biology on justice delivery system‖. Judges and senior lawyers 
from across the country attended this conference, which was organised by the 
Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyde rabad and 
National Academy of Legal Studies and Research (NALSAR), Hyderabad. 
                                                           
1 Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II No. 59167, dated 17 th October, 2019 

 
 
2 
 
 
b. Accordingly, in November 2003, the proposal was submitted by DBT to the 
Union Cabinet for constitution of DNA Profiling Advisory Committee              
(D-PAC), and the Cabinet approved the same in its meeting held in December 
2003; 
c. In June 2004, the DNA Profiling Advisory Committee (D -PAC) constituted 3 
sub-groups i.e. legal issues, quality control & quality assurance of DNA 
evidence & infrastructure, and ethical & social issues; 
d. In September 2005, a draft DNA Profiling Bill was formulated by the DBT 
based on the recommendations of D-PAC and the proposal sent to the Ministry 
of Law & Justice in July 2006;   
e. During 2006 -07, suggestions made by Ministry of Law & Ju stice were 
incorporated. The Bill was revised and circulated to the Ministries and 
Departments concerned; 
f.  From 2008 to 2010, comments received were discussed with the 
Ministries/Departments. Some other Ministries were also consulted based on 
the sugges tions made by the Directorate of Forensic Science, Ministry of 
Home Affairs (MHA); 
g. In August 2012, a revised draft Bill and Cabinet Note were submitted to the 
Minister of State for Science & Technology. He suggested to discuss privacy 
related issues in the draft Bill; 
h. In December 2012, an Expert Committee was constituted to discuss privacy 
issues; 
i. From January 2013 to November 2014, 4 meetings of the Expert Committee 
were held and the draft Cabinet Note and the Bill were revised accordingly. 
This w as re -circulated to other Ministries/Departments concerned for 
comments in November 2014; 
j.  The comments received from Ministries were incorporated in the Bill and the 
revised draft Cabinet Note and the Bill was again submitted to the Ministry of 
Law & J ustice in January 2015. The re -drafted Bill was approved by the 

 
 
3 
 
Hon’ble Minister of Law & Justice in June 2015. In July 2015, DBT submitted 
the revised Cabinet Note and the Bill was submitted to the Cabinet for 
consideration for introduction in the Parliament. In August 2015, the draft Bill 
and the Cabinet Note were placed on the DBT website and linked with social 
media for public consultations, and also from the Chiefs of Central & State 
Forensic Science Laboratories. 
k. In November 2015, a committee was c onstituted by DBT to discuss the 
comments/feedback received from central and state Forensic Science 
Laboratories and also from the general public. Based on the recommendations 
of the committee, the draft Bill was further revised and submitted to Ministry 
of Law & Justice for concurrence; 
l.  In January 2016, the revised Bill was submitted to the Cabinet for 
consideration. Then the Bill was discussed by a Group of Ministers (GoM) in 
February 2016; 
m. In April 2016, as per the suggestions of the GoM, the Bill  was re-submitted to 
the Cabinet with minor modifications; 
n. In September 2016, the Chairman, Law Commission of India (LCI) was 
consulted. The Law Commission of India re -drafted the Bill and placed the 
271st Report on its website in July 2017. The revised  approved Bill was 
submitted to Cabinet Secretariat with the approval of Minister (S&T) in 
August 2017; 
o. The Bill was discussed again by a Group of Ministers in February 2018, and it 
was suggested to compare the provisions of data protection and privacy of this 
Bill with the provision of ―Digital Data Protection and Policy‖ in the Aadhaar 
Act, 2016. 
p. Accordingly, the Bill was submitted to Ministry of Law & Justice and based 
on their comments, Chapter VI of the Bill was modified in accordance with 
the pr ovisions relating to security and confidentiality of information under 
Section 28 of Chapter VI of Aadhaar Act, 2016. In June 2018, the revised Bill 
was submitted to Cabinet; 

 
 
4 
 
q. The Cabinet approved the Cabinet Note and the Bill in its meeting held in July  
2018. 
r. The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha by the Hon’ble Minister for S&T on 
9th August 2018 and passed in the Lok Sabha on 8 th January 2019. Due to the 
dissolution of Lok Sabha, the Bill soon lapsed. 
s. After the reconstitution of the government following the Lok Sabha elections 
of 2019, the Cabinet approved the Cabinet Note and the Bill in its meeting 
held on 24 th June 2019. Then, the Hon’ble Minister for S&T introduced the 
Bill in the Lok Sabha on 8th July 2019. 
t. On 15 th October 2019, the Bill  was referred to the Department -related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Science & Technology, Environment, 
Forests and Climate Change by the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in 
consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha. 
3. Highlights of the Bill 
3.1.  From the background note on the Bill submitted to the Committee by the DBT, the 
following can be outlined as the main purposes of the Bill: 
a. Enable identification of missing children and of unidentified deceased 
individuals including disaster victims; 
b. Apprehend repeat offenders for heinous crimes (rape, murder, etc.); 
c. Develop stringent standards, quality assurance system to grant approval and 
accreditation to the laboratories undertaking DNA profiling; 
d. Regulate the use of DNA Profiles for lawful  purposes in establishing identity 
in criminal and civil proceedings. 
3.2. From the background note on the Bill submitted to the Committee by the DBT, the 
following can be summarised as highlights of the Bill: 
3.2.1. The Bill aims to establish the identity  of certain category of persons including the 
victims, offenders, suspects, under trials, missing persons and unknown deceased persons. 
 

 
 
5 
 
3.2.2. This Bill seeks to: 
a. To address concerns related to quality, accuracy, security of data and other 
related matt ers that may arise in use of DNA technology, the Bill aims to 
establish a DNA Regulatory Board. This Board will: 
i. advise the Central Government and the State Governments on all issues 
relating to establishing of DNA laboratories and DNA Data Banks and la ying 
down guidelines, standards and procedures for establishment and functioning 
of such laboratories and Data Banks; 
ii. grant accreditation to laboratories for undertaking DNA testing, analysing, 
etc., and to suspend or revoke such accreditation; 
b. Undertake accreditation of DNA laboratories undertaking DNA testing, 
analysing, etc.; 
c. Establish a National DNA Data Bank and Regional DNA Data Banks, which 
shall store and maintain the DNA profiles in accordance with the provisions 
relating to the use and access to information, its retention and expunction. 
3.2.3. According to the DBT, the following is the application/impact of DNA Identification 
in various Ministries/ Departments:  
• Ministry of Home Affairs: Forensics crime investigations 
• Ministry of Defence: Body identification 
• Disaster Management Authority: Unidentified bodies 
• Ministry of External Affairs: Immigration issues 
• Ministry of Women & Child Welfare: Child trafficking and 
missing/abandoned children investigations 
• Investigation agencies (CBI, NIA): Investigations of issues of importance to 
public safety and national security 
• Ministry of Commerce: Certification and identification of produce 
3.2.4. The DBT claims that the proposed Bill takes into account all the important matters 
related to privacy, confidentiality, data protection, viz. 

 
 
6 
 
a.  Profiles from all living individuals shall be stored only after obtaining 
informed consent (with the exception of profiles from offenders and suspects). 
b.  The DNA profiles to be stored are not fo r an entire population but for 
specified categories of individuals such as convicts and suspects of major 
crimes, relatives of missing persons (so that their DNA profiles can be 
compared with profiles of unidentified deceased individuals). 
c.  The information to be stored in the DNA Data Bank of the proposed Bill does 
not reveal any of the traits (race, caste, facial features, or any other 
characteristics) of an individual. 
d. There are provisions in the Bill to remove the DNA profiles once the case has 
been resolved. Chapter V of this Bill has provisions for retention and removal 
of records. The Chapter VI of this Bill deals with protection of information. 
e. The Bill contains stringent safeguards including penal provisions to ensure 
that the DNA Data Bank information is accessed and used for defined 
purposes, and only so with appropriate authorisation. 
3.2.5. According to the DBT, nearly 60 countries have enacted similar legislation. 
 USA: DNA Identification Act (1994) 
 UK: Criminal Justice and Public Order Act (1994) and Criminal Justice and 
 Police Act (2001); 
 Canada: DNA Identification Act (1998); 
 Similar legislation has been enacted in other countries including Norway, 
Finland, Belgium, Denmark, Australia, New Zealand, and Bangladesh. 
 It is to be noted that scientists from Bangladesh were trained in India and 
formulated this legislation in their country on return 
4. Expert Testimony  
4.1. The Committee held a preliminary discussion on the Bill and heard the views of the 
Secretary, DBT on 31 st October 2019, along with the Director, Centre for DNA 
Fingerprinting and Diagnostics.  
4.2. In light of the importance of the Bill, the Committee directed the Secretariat to issue 
an advertisement, in national dailies and other r egional newspapers on 12 th November 2019 

 
 
7 
 
inviting memoranda from the public, experts, organisations, and various stakeholders on the 
Bill. In response the Committee received a number of memoranda. The list of persons who 
submitted memoranda is at Annexure-II (Statement I). 
4.3. The Committee met again on the 27 th and 28th November 2019, to hear in -person the 
views on the Bill of the following non -official expert witnesses, in the order of their 
deposition, who appeared before the Committee. 
1. Dr. Shambhavi Naik, Fellow, Takshashila Institution, Bengaluru 
2. Shri Apar Gupta, Executive Director, Internet Freedom Foundation, New 
Delhi 
3. Shri  Arghya Sengupta, Founder, Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy 
4. Dr. M.R. Madhavan, President, PRS India, New Delhi 
5. Dr. Mandira Kala, Head of Research, PRS India, New Delhi 
6. Shri Murali Neelakantan, Advocate and Principal at Amicus, Mumbai 
7. Ms. Shreya Rastogi, Associate Researcher, National Law University, Delhi 
8. Ms. Smitha Krishna Prasad, Associate Director, Centre fo r Communication 
Governance, National Law University, Delhi. 
9. Ms. Pallavi Bedi, Fellow, Centre for Internet and Society, New Delhi. 
10. Shri Amber Sinha, Fellow, Centre for Internet and Society, New Delhi. 
4.4. The Committee met once more on 16th January 2020, to review the responses from the 
DBT on the memoranda received, and to hear the views of the following expert and official 
witnesses in the order of their deposition: 
1. Dr. J.M. Vyas, Director General, Gujarat Forensic Sciences University 
(GFSU), Gujarat 
2. Prof. Seyed E. Hasnain, Vice Chancellor, Jamia Hamdard University, New 
Delhi 
3. Dr. J. Gowrishankar, Director, Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research (IISER), Mohali 
4. Dr. Debashis Mitra, Director, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diag nostics 
(CDFD), Hyderabad 
5. Shri R.S. Verma, Additional Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs 

 
 
8 
 
4.5. The entire list of Expert Witnesses who appeared before the Committee is provided in 
Annexure-II (Statement II). The Chairman also sought the views of some distinguished 
jurists and police administrators on the Bill.  These views are in Annexure -III.               
The Committee would like the Government to pay very careful attention to the views of 
those who have raised some very important issues on the Bill  and address them in 
Parliament and outside.   
5. GENERAL OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
5.1. The Committee is conscious of the fact that this Bill is very technical, complex and 
sensitive. A number of Members have expressed concern about the use of DNA technology—
or more accurately its misuse —to target different segments of our society based on factors 
like religion, caste or political views. These fears are not entirely unfounded have to be 
recognized and addressed by the Government and by Parliament as  well. It does not, 
however, negate the need for such legislation especially when DNA technology is already in 
use. In fact, its use in recent months has exposed a false encounter in which innocents were 
killed contradicting initial claims made that they w ere militants.  The Committee is of the 
strong opinion that an enabling ecosystem must be created soon to ensure that DNA profiling 
is done in a manner that is fully consistent with the letter and spirit of various Supreme Court 
judgments and with of the Constitution of India. 
5.2. According to an expert witness who appeared before the Committee, the following are 
the key ingredients of a good judicial ecosystem, as witnessed from the experience of other 
countries which use DNA technology.  The Committee is  in strong agreement with these 
views that are enumerated below: 
a) Independent and impartial checks and balances at every stage of the process: 
Each of the police, prosecution and judicial service is independent, which 
means that there is a clear qualitat ive check at every stage so that only those 
cases, where there is a good chance of conviction is taken forward – to arrest, 
chargesheet and then to trial. There is a real risk of the police department and 
the prosecution being personally and financially liable for failed prosecutions. 
b) Rule of Law and procedural fairness: Illegally obtained evidence is 
inadmissible in court and the doctrine of ―fruit of a poisonous tree‖ is an 
effective safeguard against erosion of fundamental rights. This ensures that 
there is strict adherence to all procedural safeguards. 

 
 
9 
 
c) Rights against self -incrimination have been widely accepted as a ―natural 
right‖ and find a prominent place in the constitution. This ensures that no 
person is forced to provide evidence that may inc riminate him/her in any 
crime. There are no exceptions to this rule and all courts have accepted this as 
an inviolable guarantee. 
d) It is the duty of the prosecution to present all evidence, not just evidence of 
guilt so that the judge can be sure that th ere are sufficient grounds to charge 
the accused of a crime. The accused also has access to independent 
investigators who can gather evidence about the incident and present it to the 
court. Since they are licensed in many countries, the evidence that they present 
to court will be given as much weight as that of the police. 
e) There is a well -developed system of independent labs and experts who can be 
brought to court to challenge the government expert. 
f) A well -trained judicial system exists that has had m any years of experience 
with expert witnesses and academic and scientific research to be able to deal 
with complex issues arising from ―scientific evidence‖. 
5.3.  There has been very little research and academic work in the country on the use of 
scientific evidence in courts. As a result, courts have routinely accepted evidence that is not 
based on thorough scientific rigour .  The Committee, therefore, underlines with utmost 
importance that it is essential the Bill enables the creation of an ecosystem that  benefits 
from scientific evidence like DNA, therefore allowing the legal system to become 
experienced in the use and appreciation of DNA evidence. This will enable the legal 
system to understand the technology‟s limitations, identify when it is appropriat e to use 
DNA technology to solve crimes appropriate and over time, substantially minimize all 
possible errors.  Widespread and extensive training is of paramount importance.   
5.4. The Committee feels strongly and unanimously that if a statutory Board is t o be set 
up—which is indeed the purpose of this Bill—then it should not only be professional but also 
be independent and not comprise almost wholly of serving government officials. This is a 
glaring shortcoming of the Bill that the Committee has sought to rectify keeping the larger 
public interest in mind.  Even so, some Members have expressed their fears that this Bill 
when it becomes a law could be used to target certain sections of our society.                      
The Government must assuage these fears both in Parliament and outside. 

 
 
10 
 
6. Clause-by-Clause Recommendations  
The Committee held detailed deliberations on views/suggestion of experts, NGOs and 
various ministries and departments on the provisions of the Bill and took up clause -by-clause 
consideration of the Bill. After taking into account the suggestions received on various 
clauses, the comments/recommendations of the Committee are as follows in seriatim: 
6.1 Long Title 
Many Members of the Committee are in favour of retaining the Long Title as is.  
However, some Members believe that in order to ensure the prevention of misuse 
of the provisions of the Bill and avoid targeting of certain categories of people, 
the application of the Bill must be limited to the terms „victims‟ „offenders‟, 
„missing persons‟ and „unknown deceased persons‟ and not cover „suspects‟ and 
„undertrials‟ as well as provided for presently in the Long Title. The Committee 
has taken on board these concerns that must be addressed by the Government in 
a suitable manner. 
6.1.1 Nevertheless, in keeping with the majority view expressed in the Committee, it 
recommends retaining the Long Title as it stands.  
6.2 Short Title and Clause 1 (1) 
The scope of the Bill is to regulate the use and application of DNA technology in 
the justice delivery system. Therefore, the Committee recommends specifying 
this in the Short Title as follows:  
“This Act may be called The DNA (Use and Application in Justi ce 
Delivery System) Regulation Bill, 2021” 
6.3 Clause 1 (2) to Clause 1 (3)  
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.4 Clause 2 (1)(i) to (iii) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.5 Clause 2 (1)(iv) 
6.5.1 The Committee takes note of the fact that “Crime Scene Index” means an index 
of DNA profiles and is totally different from what is usually understood by the 

 
 
11 
 
term „crime scene‟. It has been informed of the definition of “Crime Scene 
Index” in laws of other countries like Australia and Canada.  
6.5.2 The risk with a national databank of crime scene DNA profiles is that it will 
likely include virtually everyone since DNA is left at the “crime scene” before 
and after the crime by several persons who may have nothing to do with the 
crime being investigate d. There is also DNA to be present of those who were 
nowhere near “crime scene” but bodily material like hair may have been 
transported to the crime scene inadvertently by a variety of ways. Many of these 
DNA profiles will then find their way into the “cri me scene index” without the 
knowledge of these persons.  
6.5.3 It has been suggested to the Committee that crime scene DNA profiles can be 
used in the investigation and trial but (i) should not be put in a databank; and 
(ii) destroyed once the case concludes with acquittal. If there is a conviction, only 
the DNA profile of the convict could be included in the databank. 
6.5.4 This is a fundamental issue on which it has not been possible to arrive at a 
consensus. Some Members feel that the “crime scene index” is unnecessary and 
is not a required feature to solve crimes. Some other Members favour the 
retention of this Clause.  
6.5.5 On balance, while recommending the retention of this Clause as it stands, the 
Committee hopes that the Government will address the concerns raised by the 
critics of the very idea of a “crime scene index” in the revised version of the Bill 
and when it is re-introduced in Parliament. 
6.6 Clause 2 (1)(v) 
The Committee is of the opinion that a National DNA Data Bank alone will 
suffice, and Regional DNA Data Banks are not required. Since it does not 
provide any additional benefits, but on the contrary creates more vulnerability 
to the accuracy, integrity and  security of the entire system. Therefore, the 
Committee recommends that the words, “or a Regional DNA Data Bank” be 
deleted. 
 
 

 
 
12 
 
6.7 Clause 2(1)(vi) 
6.7.1 Change reference of “DNA Data Bank” to “the National DNA Data Bank”. 
Therefore, the Committee recommen ds that the words, “DNA Data Bank” may 
be replaced by the words “The National DNA Data Bank”. The Clause may be 
amended as under: - 
6.7.2 “National DNA Data Bank” means the National DNA Data Bank established 
under sub-section (1) of section 25 and that fol lows systems of storage that at all 
times conform to internationally-acceptable and used standards.  
6.8 Clause 2 (1)(vii) 
The National DNA Data Bank will store information related to DNA profiles 
alone, and not all forms of DNA testing. Rather than define  testing later as the 
Bill has done, the Committee feels it is prudent to avoid the use of the term 
“testing” altogether so that there is no scope for misunderstanding and 
misinterpreting that could create fear and worry.   The Committee therefore 
recommends that the word “testing” may be replaced by the word “profiling”.  
6.9 Clause 2 (1)(viii) 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the definition in the Clause in its 
entirety and replacing it with the following definition , which is both scientifically 
sound and relevant to the purpose of the amended Bill. The Clause may be 
amended as under: - 
 
““DNA profile” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, 
means a phenotype neutral DNA pattern that establishes only  the genetic 
identity of offenders, missing persons or unknown deceased persons, and 
not the characteristics of an individual such as physical appearance, 
behaviour or health status;” 
6.10 Clause 2 (1)(ix) 
The Committee recommends that the word “testing” may be replaced by the 
word “profiling”. 
  

 
 
13 
 
6.11 Clause 2 (1)(x) 
This clause is subsumed under Clause 2 (1)(viii) in the amended Bill. Therefore, 
the Committee recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety. 
6.12 Clause 2 (1)(xi) to (xii) 
 The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.13  Clause 2 (1)(xiii) 
Reference to “Indian Medical Council Act, 1956” will need to be updated given 
that the National Medical Commission Act, 2019 is in place. The Committee 
therefore recommends the wor ds “who possesses any medical qualification as 
defined in clause (h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 and 
whose name has been entered in a State Medical Register under that Act” be 
replaced by “whose name has been entered in a State Reg ister or National 
Register under the National Medical Commission Bill, 2019 Act”. The Clause 
may be amended as under: - 
““medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner whose name has 
been entered in a State Register or National Register under the Nati onal 
Medical Commission Bill, 2019 Act;” 
6.14 Clause 2 (1)(xiv) to (xv) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.15 Clause 2 (1)(xvi) 
The Committee recommends the modification of Clause 2 (1)(xvi)(c) with the 
addition of the words “with the  written consent of such persons”. The amended 
Clause will read as under: - 
“(c) the bodily substances of relatives of the missing persons taken with 
the written consent of such relatives;” 
6.16 Clause 2 (1)(xvii) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
  

 
 
14 
 
6.17 Clause 2 (1)(xviii) 
The Committee feels the offender must be defined in the amended Bill before 
defining the offender‟s index in light of the removal of the Schedule.   The 
Committee recommends addition of sub -section Clause 2 (1)(xviii) with the 
following words,“Offender means any person convicted of an offence and 
punished with imprisonment of 7 years or more”. Further, the Committee 
recommends modifying the words “in a DNA Data Bank” to “in the National 
DNA Data Bank” in the existing Clause defining the offender‟s index. 
6.18 Clause 2 (1)(xix) to (xxiv) 
 The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.19 Clause 2 (1)(xxv) 
The observations made by the Committee on the „Long Title‟ apply to this 
Clause as well. Some members (including the Chairman) are of the view that the 
„suspects‟ index and „undertrials‟ index is unnecessary for the purpose of solving 
crimes, and it can be  misused for targeting certain categories of people.                
They would like this Clause to be deleted.   However, in keeping with other views 
expressed, the Committee is not recommending deletion of this Clause.  
6.20 Clause 2 (1)(xxvi)  
The Committee recommends that the words “maintained in a DNA Data Bank” 
be modified to “maintained in the National DNA Data Bank”. 
6.21 Clause 2 (1)(xxvii) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.22 Clause 2(2) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.23 Clause 3 (1) to Clause 3 (4) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.24 Clause 4 (a)  
The Committee holds a strong view that the Regulatory Board as a statutory 
body should be independent and professional. There is no precedent for a 
serving Secretary to the Government of India also being the Chairperson of an 

 
 
15 
 
independent regulatory board under the administrative jurisdiction of the 
Department/Ministry concerned. The Committee recommends that the words 
“the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Biotechnology” 
be modified under: - 
“(a) a person of eminence in the field of biological sciences or genetics 
having experience of not less than twenty -five years in the field, who shall 
be the Chairperson of the Board. 
6.25 Clause 4 (b)  
The Committee recommends the deletion of this Clause. 
6.26 Clause 4 (c)  
The Committee adopts this Clause without modification. 
6.27 Clause 4 (d)  
The Committee recommends deletion of this Clause and its substitution by t he 
following: 
“ (d) A retired Director of the Central Bureau of Investigation.  
6.28 Clause 4 (e)  
The Committee recommends deletion of this Clause. 
6.29 Clause 4 (f)  
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.30 Clause 4 (h)  
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.31 Clause 4 (i)  
The Committee recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety and 
replacement by the following: 
(i) a legal expert to be nominated by the Central  Government in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of India.  
  

 
 
16 
 
6.32 Clause 4 (j)  
The Committee recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety. 
6.33 Clause 4 (k) 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the Clause and its substitution by 
the following:  
(k)  one expert from amongst persons of eminence in   the field of 
information sciences to be nominated by the Government of India. 
6.34 Clause 4 (l)  
The Committee adopts the Clause with the following modification: 
(l)  an officer, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the 
Government of India  or equivalent, with knowledge and 
experience in biological sciences and genetics, to be nominated by 
the Central Government, ex officio, who shall be the Member -
Secretary. 
6.35 Clause 5 (1) to Clause 5(3) 
 The Committee recommends deletion of these three Clauses. 
6.36 Clause 5 (4) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.37 Clause 6 (1) to 6 (5) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.38 Clause 7 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.39 Clause 8 (1)(a) to 8 (1)(e) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.40 Clause 8 (2) to 8 (3) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.41 Clause 9 (a) to 9 (c) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 

 
 
17 
 
6.42 Clause 10 (1) to 10 (2) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.43 Clause 11 (1) to 11 (2) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.44 Clause 12 (a) 
6.44.1 The Committee recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety and its 
replacement by the following: 
“12 (a) advice the Central Government and the State Governments on 
issues relating to establishment and functioning of DNA laboratories and 
the National DNA Data Bank, their planning, organisational structure, 
size, number, lo cation, manpower, infrastructure, monitoring of their 
performance and activities, upgradation of DNA laboratories and making 
recommendations on funds required for such purposes;” 
6.44.2 In addition, the Committee recommends that a new sub -section Clause 12 (b) be 
introduced as under: - 
“(b) issue guidelines, standards and procedures for the establishment and 
functioning of the DNA Labs and the National DNA Data Bank;”. 
6.44.3 Consequently, the remaining sub- clauses are renumbered in ascending order. 
6.45 Clause 12 (b) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.46 Clause 12 (c) 
The Committee recommends that the words “DNA Data Banks” be modified to 
“the National DNA Data Bank”. 
6.47 Clause 12 (d) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.48 Clause 12 (e) 
The Committee recommends that the words “DNA Data Banks” be modified to 
“the National DNA Data Bank”. 
  

 
 
18 
 
6.49 Clause 12 (f)  
The Committee recommends that the word “testing” may be replaced by the 
word “profiling”. 
6.50 Clause 12 (g) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.51 Clause 12 (h) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.52 Clause 12 (i) 
The Committee recommends that the word “testing” may be replaced by the 
word “profiling”. 
6.53 Clause 12 (i)(i) to 12 (i)(ii) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.54 Clause 12 (i)(iii) 
The Committee recommends that the word “testing” may be replaced by the 
word “profiling”. 
6.55 Clause 12 (i)(iv) 
The Committee recommends that the word “testing” may be replaced by the 
word “profiling”. 
6.56 Clause 12 (j) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.57 Clause 12 (k)(i) to 12 (k)(iii) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.58 Clause 12 (k)(iv)  
The Committee recommends modification of this Clause to read as follows:  
“(iv) timely removal and destruction of DNA profiles and information 
that (a) is obsolete, expunged, or inaccurate; or (b) after the purpose for 
which DNA information has been collected has been served; and” 
  

 
 
19 
 
6.59 Clause 12 (k)(v) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.60 Clause 12 (l) to (m) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.61 Clause 12 (n) 
The Committee recommends that the words “DNA testing” be replaced by 
“DNA profiling”. 
6.62 Clause 12 (o)  
The Committee adopts clause without modification. 
6.63 Clause 12 (p) to (q) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification 
6.64 Clause 13 (1) 
6.64.1 The Committee holds a strong view that the Bill must limit its scope to regulation 
of DNA profiling for the purpose stated in the long and short titles of the 
amended Bill. It should not seek to regulate all other DNA testing.  The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the words in the Clause “a nalysing or 
any other procedure to generate data and perform analysis relating thereto” be 
deleted.  
6.64.2 The Committee also recommends the modification of the word, “testing” to 
“profiling” in the same Clause.   
6.64.3 The Committee further recommends that the word “testing” in the first Proviso 
to the Clause be replaced by the word “profiling”. 
6.65 Clause 13 (2) to (4) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.66 Clause 14 (1) 
 The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
  

 
 
20 
 
6.67 Clause 14 (2) 
The Committee recommends the addition of the following words “, from the date 
of approval of the accreditation”. The amended Clause will read as under: - 
“The accreditation or renewal of accreditation under this section shall be 
valid for a  period of two years, from the date of approval of the 
accreditation.” 
6.68 Clause 15 (1)(a) 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety, since there 
may be a need to build capacity in labs, even if they may have not undertaken 
DNA profiling during the period when they have been authorised. 
6.69 Clause 15 (1)(b) to (e) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.70 Clause 15 (2) to (3) 
 The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.71 Clause 15 (4) 
The Committee recommends that the word “testing” may be replaced by the 
word “profiling”. 
6.72 Clause 16 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.73 Clause 17 (1) 
The Committee recommends that the words “DNA testing” be modified to “DNA 
profiling”. 
6.74 Clause 17 (1)(a) 
The Committee recommends that the word “testing” may be replaced by the 
word “profiling”. 
6.75 Clause 17 (1)(b) to (c) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
  

 
 
21 
 
6.76 Clause 17 (1)(d) 
The Committee feels that  this provision should prevent DNA labs from creating their 
own databases, and the National DNA Data Bank should be the sole repository of 
DNA profiles. The Committee therefore recommends that the words “DNA data” 
be modified to “DNA profiles”. The Committee further recommends the deletion 
of the words “and maintained” and “and the Regional DNA Data Bank”. 
Further, the Committee recommends addition of new sub -section Clause 17 
(1)(e), “(e) remove DNA profile after sharing it with the National DNA Data 
Bank”. 
6.77 Clause 17 (2)  
The Committee is of the view that only the DNA profile that will be in the National 
DNA Data Bank, and that the testing will be in accordance with regulations.                    
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words “DNA  testing” be 
modified to “DNA profiling”. 
6.78 Clause 18 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.79 Clause 19 
The Committee recommends that the words “incharge” be modified to “person 
incharge”. 
6.80 Clause 19 (a) 
The Committee recommends that the words “testing” be modified to “profiling”. 
6.81 Clause 19 (b) to (c) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.82 Clause 20 (1)(a) to (d) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.83 Clause 20 (1)(e) 
The Committee is of the opinion that there is no need for labs to maintain 
indices, since there is an additional risk with multiplicity of indices and 
databases. The Committee recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety. 

 
 
22 
 
6.84 Clause 20 (1)(f) to (i) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.85 Clause 20 (1)(j) 
The Committee is of the opinion that the Bill need not specify costs. This can 
easily be contained in a notification issued from time to time. The Committee 
therefore recommen ds the deletion of the words “not exceeding twenty -five 
thousand rupees” and replaced by the words “which may be notified from time 
to time”. The Committee further recommends that the word “testing” may be 
replaced by the word “profiling”. 
6.86 Clause 20 (2) 
The Committee recommends that the words “DNA Data Bank” be modified to 
“National DNA Data Bank”. 
6.87 Clause 20 (2)(a) 
The Committee recommends that the words “or remaining material” is modified 
to “and remaining material,”. 
6.88 Clause 20 (2)(b) 
The Committee recommends that the words “or remaining material” is modified 
to “and remaining material,”. 
6.89 Clause 20 (3)(a) to (c) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.90 Clause 21 (1)  
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.91 Clause 21 (2) 
 The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.92 Clause 21 (3) 
After a careful consideration of different points of view expressed by some 
Members, the Committee recommends the following modification: 

 
 
23 
 
“The Magistrate, if satisfied that there is reasonable cause to believe that 
the bodily substance may confirm or disprove whether the person so 
arrested was involved in committing the offence, order for taking of 
bodily substance from such person after giving t he such person a hearing 
and thereafter passing a reasoned order.” 
6.93 Clause 22 (1)  
The Committee recommends that the words “Subject to sub -section (2)” be 
deleted, and the words “DNA testing be replaced by the words “DNA profiling”. 
6.94 Clause 22 (1)(a) to (c) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.95 Clause 22 (2) 
After a careful consideration of different views expressed by some members,               
the Committee recommends the modification of this clause as follows: 
“If the person giving the voluntary consent is below the age of eighteen 
years and the consent of the parent or guardian of such person is refused 
or cannot be obtained, the person investigating the case may make an 
appropriate application to the Magistrate having  jurisdiction, for 
obtaining such bodily substances and the Magistrate, if satisfied that 
there is reasonable cause from taking the bodily substances from such 
person, order for taking of bodily substances from that person and after 
giving a hearing to the  parent or guardian and thereafter passing a 
reasoned order.” 
6.96 Clause 23 (1) 
The Committee recommends that the words “DNA testing” be modified to “DNA 
profiling”. 
6.97 Clause 23 (1)(a)  
The Committee recommends that the word “or” be added to the end of  the 
Clause. The Clause may be amended as under:- 
 “(a) bodily substances; or” 
  

 
 
24 
 
6.98 Clause 23 (1)(b) 
The Committee recommends that the word “or” be added to the end of the 
Clause. The Clause may be amended as under:- “(b) scene of occurrence or scene 
of crime; or” 
6.99 Clause 23 (1)(c) 
The Committee recommends the word “or” is deleted from the Clause. 
6.100 Clause 23 (1)(d) 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety. 
6.101 Clause 23 (2)(a) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.102 Clause 23 (2)(b) 
After a careful consideration of different views expressed by some members, the 
Committee recommends the following modification to the Proviso: 
“Provided that before collecting bodily substances for DNA testing of a 
victim or a person reasonably suspected of being a victim who is alive, or 
a relative of a missing person, or a minor or a disabled person, written 
consent of such victim or such relative or the parent or guardian of such 
minor or disabled person shall be obt ained and in case of refusal, the 
person investigating the case may make an application to the Magistrate 
having jurisdiction, for obtaining such bodily substances and the 
Magistrate, if satisfied that there is reasonable cause for taking the bodily 
substances  from such person, order for taking of bodily substances from 
that person after hearing the person concerned and thereafter passing a 
reasoned order.” 
6.103 Clause 23 (3)(a) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.104 Clause 23 (3)(b)(i) to (v) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
  

 
 
25 
 
6.105 Clause 23 (3)(b)(vi) 
There is no current technology to derive DNA profile from photographs and videos, 
and therefore it is unnecessary.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
deletion of the Clause in its entirety. 
6.106 Clause 23 (3)(c)(i) 
There is no current technology to derive DNA profile from these.  The Committee 
recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety. 
6.107 Clause 23 (3)(c)(ii) to (v) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.108 Clause 23 (3)(c)(vi) 
There is no current technology to derive DNA profile from these.  The Committee 
recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety. 
6.109 Clause 23 (3)(d)(i) to (vi) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.110 Clause 23 (3)(d)(vii) to (viii) 
There is no current technology to derive DNA profile from these.  The Committee 
recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety. 
6.111 Clause 24 
The Committee recommends the words “for re -examination” be modified by the 
words “for re -examination by another accredited DNA laboratory”. The Clause 
may be amended as under:  
“If the trial court is satisfied with the plea of the accused person that the 
bodily substances taken from such person or collected from the place of 
occurrence of crime had been contaminated, the court may direct the 
taking of fresh bodily substances for re -examination by another 
accredited DNA laboratory”. 
  

 
 
26 
 
6.112 Clause 25 (1) 
The Committee recommends the words “and such number of Regional DNA 
Data Banks for every State, or two or more States, as it may deem necessary” be 
deleted. 
6.113 Clause 25 (2) 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety. 
6.114 Clause 25 (3) 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the words “receive DNA data from 
Regional DNA Data Banks and shall” from the Clause. 
6.115 Clause 26  
The Committee recommends that the words “Every DNA Data Bank” be 
modified to “The National DNA Data Bank”. 
6.116 Clause 26 (1)(a) 
The Committee‟s observations on Clause 2 (1) (iv) apply to this Clause as well. 
6.117 Clause 26 (1)(b) 
6.117.1 Some members of the Committee are of the view that the fundamental right to 
privacy of suspects or undertrials will be infringed if their DNA, which may be 
obtained with written consent as recommended by the Committee, is held in an 
indexed data bank. Further, it may be misused for targeting certain categories of 
people, and hence should not be held in any DNA data bank. These concerns and 
fears have necessarily to be addressed by the Government. 
6.117.2 However, keeping in view the views expressed by a number of other members , 
the Committee recommends retention of this Clause. 
6.118 Clause 26 (1)(c) to (e) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.119 Clause 26 (2) 
The Committee recommends that the words “every DNA Data Bank” be 
modified to “the National DNA Data Bank”. 

 
 
27 
 
6.120 Clause 26 (2)(a) 
Here again some Members are of the opinion that  the words “suspects index‟ or 
„undertrials index‟ should be deleted from the Clause.  However, keeping in view 
the opinion expressed by other Members and  also the observations made  by the 
Committee on this matter earlier , the Committee recommends retention of this 
Clause without modification.  
6.121 Clause 26 (2)(b) 
The observations made by the Committee in regard to Clause 26(2) (a) apply to 
this Clause as well. 
6.122 Clause 26 (3) 
The Committee recommends that the words, “include information of d ata based 
on DNA testing and records relating thereto” be modified to “contain the DNA 
profile”. 
6.123 Clause 27 (1) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.124  Clause 27 (2) 
The Committee is of the considered view that the Director of the  National DNA 
Data Bank requires expertise in information technology, database management 
etc.  The National DNA Data Bank is not doing any DNA analysis.  It is only 
storing and retrieving data from various indices. Hence an expert in biological 
sciences i s not a necessary condition, as long as they are familiar with the 
subject.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words in “biological 
sciences” be modified with the words “information technology and database 
management, along with a familiarity with biological sciences”.  
6.125 Clause 27 (3) 
The Committee recommends that the words “Director to the Government of 
India” be modified to “Joint Secretary to the Government of India”. The Clause 
may be amended as under: - 

 
 
28 
 
“The Director of the National DNA Data Bank shall be not below the 
rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India or equivalent, and 
shall function under the supervision and control of the Board”. 
6.126 Clause 27 (4)  
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.127 Clause 27 (5)  
The Committee is of the considered view that there is no need for Regional Data 
Banks.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the deletion of the Clause in its 
entirety. 
6.128 Clause 28 (1) 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the words “and the Regional DNA 
Data Banks” from the Clause. 
6.129 Clause 28 (2) 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the words “and the Director of each 
of the Regional DNA Data Bank” from the Clause. 
6.130 Clause 28 (3) 
The Committee recommends the words “assi st the DNA Data Banks” be 
modified to “assist the National DNA Data Bank”. 
6.131 Clause 29 (1)  
The Committee recommends that the words “in the DNA Data Bank” be 
modified to “in the National DNA Data Bank”. The Committee further 
recommends the deletion of the proviso in its entirety since the purpose is 
addressed in the amended Clause 21. 
6.132 Clause 29 (2)  
6.132.1 Here too, some Members have serious reservations on the inclusion of the terms 
„suspects index‟ or „undertrials index‟ in the Clause. The Committee has made 
its observations on these concerns which cannot be wished away.  

 
 
29 
 
6.132.2 While recommending the adoption of the Clause as it stands, the Committee also 
recommends the words “offenders' index” be modified to “offenders index or 
Missing Persons index”.  
6.132.3 The Committee further recommends that the words “shall be communicate d 
only to the authorised persons” be modified to “shall be communicated only to 
the offender and authorised persons”.   
6.132.4 The Committee also recommends that the words “the DNA Data Bank” be 
modified to “the National DNA Data Bank”. 
6.133 Clause 30 (1) 
While reiterating its earlier observations on „crime scene index‟, „suspects index‟ 
and „undertrials index‟, the Committee recommends the adoption of this Clause. 
6.134 Clause 30 (1)(a) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.135 Clause 30 (1)(b) 
The Committee recommends the addition of the words “share the DNA profile 
and” and deletion of the word “or”. The Clause may be amended as under: - 
“(b) if there is a match between the profiles, share the DNA profile and 
any information relating to such matching DNA profile;”. 
6.136 Clause 30 (1)(c) 
The Committee feels that the usage of “Similar” in the Clause is vague and will 
violate the privacy of relatives of those people whose profiles are in the data 
bank.  The Committee recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety. 
6.137 Clause 30 (2) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.138 Clause 30 (3) 
The Committee recommends a modification in the opening sentence of the 
Clause; 

 
 
30 
 
“(3) The Central Government may, in accordance with the regulations 
notified by the Board and in prior consultation with it, 
6.139 Clause 31 (1)  
The Committee recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety. The 
Committee recommends the addition of a new sub -section Clause 31 (1) as 
under: - 
“The National Data Bank shall promptly remove the DNA profile entered 
as an offender within 30 days from the day that the court finds such 
person not guilty.” 
6.140 Clause 31 (2) 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety. The 
Committee recommends the addition of a new sub -section Clause 31 (2) as 
under: - 
“The National DNA Data Bank shall, on receiving a written request from 
authorised persons or relatives, of the identification of an unknown 
deceased person, but whose DNA profile is entered in the unknown 
deceased persons‟ index of the National DNA Data Bank, for removal of 
his DNA profile therefrom, remove the DNA profile of such person from 
the National DNA Data Bank under intimation to the person concerned, 
in such manner as may be specified by regulations”. 
6.141 Clause 31 (3) 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the words “neither an offender”, 
“nor a suspect or an undertrial”, and “crime scene index or” from the Clause. 
The Committee also recommends the replacement  of the words “DNA Data 
Bank” with the words “National DNA Data Bank” wherever applicable in the 
Clause. The Clause may be amended as under: - 
“The National DNA Data Bank shall, on receiving a written request of a 
person whose DNA profile is entered in the  missing persons‟ index of the 
National DNA Data Bank, for removal of his DNA profile therefrom, 
remove the DNA profile of such person from the National DNA Data 

 
 
31 
 
Bank, under intimation to the person concerned, in such manner as may 
be specified by regulations:” 
6.142 Clause 31 (4) 
The Committee recommends the modification of the proviso in the Clause as 
under: -  
“Subject to this section, the procedure for entry, retention and removal of 
any DNA profile in, or from, the DNA Data Bank shall be such as may be  
specified by regulations.” 
6.143 Clause 32 (1)  
The Committee recommends the deletion of the words “or the Regional DNA 
Data Bank” from the Clause. 
6.144 Clause 32 (2) to (3) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.145 Clause 32 (4) 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the words “or the Regional DNA 
Data Bank” from the Clause. The Committee further recommends the words 
“any information relating to DNA profiles, DNA samples” be modified to “any 
information relating to the National DNA Databank, DNA profiles, DNA 
samples”. 
6.146 Clause 33 
The Committee recommends the words “facilitating identification of the person 
and not for any other purpose” be modified to “facilitating identification of the 
offender, missing person or unknown deceas ed person, as appropriate, and not 
for any other purpose”. The Committee further recommends that the words 
“DNA Data Bank” be modified to “the National DNA Data Bank”. 
6.147 Clause 34 
The Committee recommends that the words “a DNA Data Bank” be modified to  
“the National DNA Data Bank”. 
  

 
 
32 
 
6.148 Clause 34 (a) to (d) 
The Committee a dopts the Clause s without modification. Further, the 
Committee recommends the addition of a new sub -section Clause 34 (e) with the 
words “facilitating the identification of missing persons and unidentified 
deceased persons”. 
6.149 Clause 34 (e) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.150 Clause 34 (f) 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety as it is too 
wide and overrides all the legislative limitations and protections that have been 
proposed. 
6.151 Clause 35 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the words “and the Regional DNA 
Data Banks” from the Clause. 
6.152 Clause 35 (a) to (b) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.153 Clause 36 
The Committee recommends the words “for the purpose of criminal 
investigation” in line 15 be modified to “for the purpose of that criminal 
investigation”. The Committee further recommends the words “and the result 
showing either a match or a failure to match” be added to line 20 following the 
words “being included in the index”. The Committee also recommends that the 
words “DNA Data Bank” be modified to “The National DNA Data Bank” in all 
such places in the Clause. The amended Clause may be as under: -  
“A person who is authorised to access an index of the National DNA Data 
Bank, including information of DNA identification records or DNA 
profile in that index, may also access that index for the purposes of 
carrying out one time keyboard search on information obtained from any 
DNA sample collected for the purpose of that criminal investigation, 

 
 
33 
 
except for a DNA sample voluntarily submitted solely for elimination 
purposes. 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section, “o ne time keyboard 
search” means a search under which information obtained from a DNA 
sample is compared with the information in the index of the National 
DNA Data Bank, without resulting in the information obtained from the 
DNA sample being included in the index.” 
6.154 Clause 37  
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.155 Clause 37 (a) to (b) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.156 Clause 38 (1) 
The Committee recommends that the words “DNA Data Bank” be modified to 
“the National DNA Data Bank”. 
6.157 Clause 38 (2) 
The Committee recommends the words “in the DNA Data Banks” be modified to 
“in the National DNA Data Bank”. 
6.158 Clause 38 (3) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.159 Clause 39 to 44 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.160 Clause 45 
The Committee is of the considered view that even negligent or reckless behaviour 
can cause irreparable damage to the information stored, and every person who has 
access to DNA profile, ack nowledged as sensitive personal data, should be strictly 
liable. The Committee, therefore, recommends the word “ wilfully” be deleted. 
Further, the Committee recommends that the words “DNA Data Bank” be 
modified with the words “the National DNA Data Bank”. 
  

 
 
34 
 
6.161 Clause 46 
The Committee recommends the word “ wilfully” be deleted. Further, the 
Committee recommends that the words “DNA Data Bank” be modified with the 
words “the National DNA Data Bank” 
6.162 Clause 47 
The Committee recommends the word “wilfully” be deleted. 
6.163 Clause 48 
The Committee recommends that the words “DNA Data Bank” be modified with 
the words “the National DNA Data Bank”. 
6.164 Clause 49 
The Committee recommends the words “knowingly and intentionally” be 
deleted. The Committee further recommends that the word “testing” be replaced 
by the word “profiling”. 
6.165 Clause 50 to 51 
The Committee adopts the Clauses in its entirety without modification. 
6.166 Clause 52 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the words “and Regional DNA Data 
Banks” from the Clause. 
6.167 Clause 53 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the words “or the Regional DNA 
Data Banks” from the Clause. 
6.168 Clause 54 to 55 
The Committee adopts the Clauses in its entirety without modification. 
6.169 Clause 56 
The Committee is of the view that the Schedule should be amended only after 
Parliamentary scrutiny and debate.  The Committee, therefore, recommends the 
deletion of the Clause in its entirety. 
  

 
 
35 
 
6.170 Clause 57 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.171 Clause 58 (1) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.172 Clause 58 (2)(a) to (b) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.173 Clause 58 (2)(c) 
The Committee recommends that the words “DNA testing” be modified to “DNA 
profiling”. 
6.174 Clause 58 (2)(d) to (f) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.175 Clause 58 (2)(g) 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the words “and the Director of each 
of the Regional DNA Data Bank” from the Clause. 
6.176 Clause 58 (2)(h) to (k) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.177 Clause 59 (1) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.178 Clause 59 (2)(a) to (i) 
The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.179 Clause 59 (2)(j) 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety in the 
amended Bill. 
6.180 Clause 59 (2)(k) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.181 Clause 59 (2)(l) 
The Committee recommends the deletion of the words “DNA data from Regional 
Data Banks” in the Clause. The amended Clause reads as under: - 

 
 
36 
 
“(l) the format in which the National DNA Data Bank shall receive and 
store the DNA profiles under sub-section (3) of section 25;” 
6.182 Clause 59 (2)(m) to (n) 
 The Committee adopts the Clauses without modification. 
6.183 Clause 59 (2)(0) 
The amended Clause reads as under: - 
“(o) the procedure to be followed by the National DNA Data Bank on 
receipt of a DNA profile, the person to whom the result of matching shall 
be communicated  and the manner of communication under sub -section 
(1) of section 29;” 
6.184 Clause 59 (2)(p) to (s) 
6.184.1 The Committee feels these Clauses are vague. There are only two scenarios for 
the DNA profile and data to be expunged i.e. when the missing person is traced, 
or the dead person is identified. It remains unclear how the missing persons 
index will work. 
6.184.2 The Committee recommends the deletion of the Clause in its entirety. The 
Committee further recommends the addition of a sub -section Clause 59 (2)(p) as 
under: 
“(p) the manner of intimation to a person who has requested removal of 
their profile from the missing person‟s index under sub -section (3) of 
section 31.” 
6.185 Clause 59 (2)(t) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.186 Clause 59 (2)(u) 
The Committee adopts this Clause without modification. 
6.187 Clause 59 (2)(v) 
The Committee adopts the Clause without modification. 
6.188 Clause 60 to 61 
The Committee adopts the Clauses in its entirety without modification. 

 
 
37 
 
6.189 Schedule  
The Committee observes that the Schedule sets out the various uses for DNA 
evidence and should be amended by legislation and proper scrutiny by 
Parliament.  
 

116, North Avenue 
New Delhi - 110 001 
Mob: 96057667022 
E-mail: binoyviswam55@gmail.com 
Binoy Viswam 
Member of Parliament 
(Rajya Sabha) 
 
Member, Standing Committee on Science and Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
Member, Consultative Committee on Environment, Forest and Climate Change 
To  
Shri Jairam Ramesh, 
Chairperson, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on  
Science & Technology, Environment, Forests and Climate Change 
 
Respected Chairperson, 
At the outset I would like to congratulate the Standing Committee for their preparation of the 
report on the DNA Technology (Use and Application) Regulation Bill, 2019, despite these 
unprecedented times. The Report raises important issues with regard to the bill and provides 
valuable recommendations that must be incorporated into the final legislation. However, I 
must register my dissent on the report as this law poses a direct threat to the life and liberty 
of all if passed in its current form. 
While I am in agreement regarding the need for a comprehensive law on the use of DNA 
technology in our legal system, it is equally important to ensure that the law does not violate 
the principles of our Constitution. The Right to Privacy as enshrined in Part III  of the 
Constitution and its importance highlighted in the landmark judgement of the Hon’ble 
Supreme Court in Justice K.S.Puttaswamy(Retd) vs Union Of India, cannot be infringed 
upon, especially in a criminal justice system that disproportionately affects marginalized and 
vulnerable identities. Th is bill in its structure and imagination fails to address the lacunae 
created by the lack of a comprehensive data privacy law in the country.  Without adequate 
statutory safeguards to protect against t he opacity of the law on the sort of information being 
collected and its unrestricted usage for a variety of purposes,  this law is susceptible to future 
misuse and abuse. The inevitable misuse of the law is undeniable and  must be taken into 
consideration and protected against while drafting such a law.  The failure to acknowledge 
and safeguard against this reality skews th e balance of the law and makes it a tool for the 
continued targeting of people based on factors like caste, religion , place of birth  or political 
views, etc.  
Despite the committee’s best efforts  to enhance the proposed law,  the impact of this law on 
marginalized and minority communities  such as, Dalits, Adivasis, religious and gender 
minorities, among others , make it impossible for me to support it. In light of the social, 
political and economic realities of India especially given the history of oppression faced by 
particular social groups cannot be ignored while considering such laws . It is time that the 
Government puts a hiatus on the passing of l egislations that continue to encroach upon the 
right to privacy in the name of  reasonable restrictions, till the time comprehensive data 
protection laws are not passed in the country.  
 
Yours sincerely 
 
         Binoy Viswam 
                          Leader of CPI Parliamentary Party &  
18th January 2021      Secretary, National Council  


 
54 
 
Response on the Dissent Note of Shri Asadussin Owaisi, Hon'ble MP, Lok Sabha on the DNA Bill 
 
S. 
No. 
Observations as per the Dissent Note Response from DBT 
1. DNA technology, despite its general reliability, is not infallible.  
 
Under ideal experimental conditions, the principle/concept of the DNA 
technology is infallible.  
 
For example , the publication (enclosed) shows that in 2000, an 
additional four loci were added to the multiplex, which was renamed 
SGM Plus, thereby reducing the match probability to less than  
10-13.  The match probabilities obtained with STR multiplexes are so low 
that their reciprocals vastly exceed the  entire human population  (refer 
page no.743 of the publication). 
2. Setting up of a national database of DN A profiles is not 
accompanied by any stringent statutory safeguards.  
The Chapter VI “Protection of Information”  covers s ecurity and 
confidentiality of information; use of DNA profile s, DNA samples and 
records for facilitating identification of pesons ; restriction on access to 
information in crime scene index; prohibition on access to information in 
DNA Data Bank.  
Under Chapter VIII “Offences ad Penalties”, details of Penalty for 
unauthorized disclosure of information in DNA Data Bank; obtaining 
information from DNA Data Bank without authorisation; using DNA 
sample or result without authorisation; unlawful access to information in 
DNA Data Bank; destruction, alteration, contamination or tampering with 
biological evidence have been covered. 
3. Theproposed B ill is neither in consonancewith the high 
standardset out in the PuttuSwamynorwiththe S ubramanian 
SwamyjudgmentsoftheSupremeCourtof India. The ambit of the 
Puttuswamyjudgment makes it clear that protection of 
personalinformationis a facet of the right to privacy guaranteed in 
the Constitutionof India. However, it is disheartening to note that the 
Bill pays little heed to the judgment. B esidespotentially overriding 
consent under - Clause 21, the Bill also delegates the 
management,sharing and retention of DNA data to the Data Bank 
The judgement of the S upreme Court on K. S. Puttaswamy case is on 
“Right to Privacy ”. The Bill’s provisions do not in any way infringe on 
privacy of individuals, subject to the legally permissible balance between 
privacy infringement on the one hand, and law and order 
maintenance/national security on the other. Thus, no DNA sample or 
profile will be obtained without proper informed consent (Clauses 21 and 
22), except for individuals in conflict with the law (and even in such 
cases, with judicial sanction). As per the Clause 31(2), f or persons in 
conflict with the law, the DNA profiles shall be removed as per court 

 
55 
 
and the Board. The most 
brazeninstancesofthiscavalierattitudeareinSections31(2)and34(f).  
orders or upon filing of police report  under intimation to him as specified 
by the regulations. 
4. Excessive delegation of legislative powers to a statutory 
authority or agency would make the law sus ceptible to being 
struck down. T his particular Bill delegate the key function of 
providing procedural and substantive safeguards to the DNA 
Regulatory Board. This is reflected in the vast powers the 
Board has been given in Section 59 of the proposed Bill. 
The general provisions of this Bill have been framed in consultation with 
the Law Ministry and the Law Commission of India, and all necessary 
Clauses have been incorporated based on the existing judgements and 
provisions which exist in other recently enacted laws.  
 
 
 
 
Procedural details will be covered under the Rules and regulations 
5. It must be ensured that the revised draft of the Bill prevents 
excessive and undue delegation to the powers and functions 
of the Board, as well as the purposes for which DNA 
information may be used. The manner in which data is 
retained, shared and controlled  must be a matter that 
parliament must be concerned with. Within the framework of 
the Puttuswamy judgement, it is not possible to envisage a 
situation where use of such critical data is managed and 
controlled by a mere statutory body.  
6. The Financial Memorandum citing "20 Cro res" as the total 
amount required to operationalize the law deserves serious 
scrutiny. 
The projected cost is for the setting up of Secretariat, infrastructure for 
Data Banks and indices. This is only for the buildings and servers. 
However, the details cost of generating the DNA profiles will be charged 
to the agencies who forward the sample for analysis. 
7. DNA is not only used for the detection of crime. It is unique 
identifier of a person, and if not recorded or retained with 
appropriate safeguards, may allow for the identification of a 
person, and critical information about them. This is not only 
raises co ncerns about the privacy of individual citizens, but 
also national security.  
The proposed Bill addressed the concern of privacy adequately. The  
Chapter VI “Protection of Information  covers the same under  security 
and confidentiality of information; use of  DNA profil es, DNA samples 
and records; restriction on access to information in crime scene index; 
prohibition on access to information in DNA Data Bank . Details of 
penalty for unauthorized disclosure /obtaining/unlawful access of 
information in DNA Data Ba nk; using DNA sample or result without 
authorisationhave also been covered under Chapter VIII “Offences and 
Penalties”. 
8. Indefinite retention of DNA profiles of persons without a 
straightforward process for its removal is a violation of a 
person's right  to privacy. Under S ection 31 of the Bill, data is 
Under Section 31 of the Bill, data is retained only under Crime Scene 
Index and not for other categories of individuals. 

 
56 
 
effectively retained indefinitely because it is preconditioned on 
police reports or court orders.  
 
9. Stringent safegu ards and oversight mechanisms need to be 
incorporated in the Bill to ensure that such critical information is 
maintained in silos from other databases containing identifiable 
information of citizens. for example, the Centre for DNA 
Fingerprinting and Diagnostics collects the caste identity of 
suspects. In such a context, the use of DNA profiling for 
insidious and casteist purposes cannot be taken lightly. 
 
Stringent safeguards and oversight mechanisms have been 
incorporated under Chapter VI as elaborated above.  
Regarding caste ide ntity, it is informed that the Identification F orm 
displayed earlier at the website of the CDFD, Hyderabad contain ed 
the same with the justification that the allele frequencies are collected 
from ethnic/country/social/caste sample sets . B ased on their allele 
frequencies, population genetic principles are applied to infer how 
reasonable it is that a random, unrelated individual could have 
contributed to the DNA profile. 
 
“Caste” has been removed from the “Identification Form ” and only the 
“name of the population” or “population name”  to be used  for the 
analysis of DNA profiling data in a scientific manner. 
10. It must be noted that inclusion of data from crime scenes, 
suspects and under trials is bound to result in two separate 
violations of the right to privacy. Firstly, it may result in the 
violation of an individual's right to privacy, and secondly it can 
enable widespread surveillance and targeted discrimination of 
certain groups. Therefore, it is recommended that all references 
to indices pertaining to suspects, under trials, victims and 
relatives be removed from the Bill. Accordingly, amendments 
must be car ried out to the following clauses: Clause 2 (1)(xxv), 
Clause 26 (1) (b), Clause 26 (2) (a), Clause 26 (2) (b), Clause 
29 (2), Clause 30 (1) and Clause 31 (3). 
 
The Bill has the DNA profiles of suspects and undertrials to assist in 
solving the criminal case s. However, the DNA profiles of a suspect, 
after the filing of the police report under the statutory provisions or as 
per the Order of the Court and that of the undertrial, as per the order 
of the Court, will be removed from the National DNA Data Bank under 
intimation to the suspect and the undertrial (as per the Clause 31 of 
this Bill). Further , protection from any misuse is covered in Chapter 
VIII of the Bill i.e. Penalty & Offences. 
11. Furthermore, there is no clarity as to the retention of DNA for 
purposes other than criminal investigations or prosecutions. 
Although the law permits use in other areas - including many 
civil disputes. Will the DNA collected in such cases also be 
retained in the DNA Data Bank? If yes, will it be indexed? If yes, 
The categories under whi ch the data will be maintained have been 
covered under Clause 26 (1) of the proposed Bill.  As mentioned 
above also, data will only be retained under Crime Scene Index and 
not for other categories of individuals. 

 
57 
 
under which index? it is recommended that Data Banks for both 
criminal and civil purposes be separated, and different retention 
and intimation policies be adopted for both. 
 
12. Another safeguard absent from this framework is the component 
of genetic discrimination. the United States and the United 
Kingdom both have operating frameworks that prohibit the use 
of genetic information for employment and healthcare insurance. 
 
Since DNA profiling data under this Bill has no relevance with genetic 
discrimination, this component is not a part of this Bill.  The purpose 
of the proposed Bill is to regulate use of DNA technology to establish 
the identity of an individual.  
 
13. The necessity of remedial and preventive measures is most felt 
in case of potential procedural lapses. The improper collection 
or storage of samples can result in contamination - resulting in a 
compromised response to a query. Similarly, there have been 
instances where the DNA matches of the accused were found to 
be incorrect - sometimes years after conviction. when the 
freedom and life of a person is at stake, the answer of the 
legislation cannot be "as specified by regulations". It is 
necessary that standards of collection and maintenance are 
encoded in statue, and not left to the "wisdom" of regulators or 
administrators. 
 
The Chapter I V on Obligation of DNA laboratories covers preventive 
measures to be taken by the DNA laboratories.  Every DNA 
laboratory, which has been granted accreditation for undertaking 
DNA testing or any other pr ocedure under this Act will  follow 
standards and procedures for quality assurance in the collection, 
storage, tes ting and analysis of DNA sample, etc. which are 
developed by scientific experts.  
 
Further, in the Clause 24 of this Chapter , it is mentioned that i f the 
trial court is satisfied with the plea of the accused person that the 
bodily substances taken from such person or collected from the place 
of occurrence of cr ime had been contaminated, the C ourt may direct 
the taking of fresh bodily substances for re-examination.  
 

 
58 
 
For DNA profiling analysis, why is the information on caste of a person required? 
If a DNA profile from a suspect does not match the evidence from a crime scene or alleged 
father in a paternity dispute, then we can reliably conclude that the individual in question did not 
contribute the biological sample recovered from the crime scene or not a biological father in 
case of paternity dispute. But the profile from a suspect match with evidence, there is a need to 
support the results with statistical calculation whether thealleles are from the same individual or 
is there someone else out there who might just happen to match the evidence . Allele 
frequencies are collected from ethnic/country/social/caste sample sets. Based on their  allele 
frequencies, population genetic principles are applied to infer how reasonable it is that a 
random, unrelated individual could have contributed to the DNA profile. 
Let us presume that the DNA marker ‘12’ is identified at one of the positions for a given 
individual. The value of this information in identifying that individual depends upon how many 
other individuals in the population also possess the same marker ‘12’ at that position, and this is 
referred to as ‘allele frequency’. The more the number of individuals who possess '12’ at that 
position, the less value it would have in uniquely identifying a given person. 
Hence for an expert opinion to be provided in a court of law on DNA marker -based individual 
identification, it is essential that allele f requencies are known for all DNA markers. Since Indian 
societies are endogamous (that is, marriages most often occur within communities), the allele 
frequency of the marker ‘12’ can vary from one community to another. Thus, allele frequency 
tables have been prepared for different castes, and the expert opinion then is based on which 
caste to which a particular individual belongs. 
An analogy may also be drawn here to clinical practice, where an anaesthesiologist in South 
India would ask and record the caste of any patient who is to be taken up for surgery. The 
endogamous Arya Vysya community has a higher proportion of individuals with genetic 
deficiency of pseudocholinesterase, which would render them liable to serious complications 
and death were the otherwise commonly used anaesthetic succinylcholine to be administered to 
them.  
 
As per the advice, “caste” has been removed from the “Identification Form” and 
uploaded in the CDFD website. I n place of the  “caste” i n the Identification Form, only 
“name of the population” or “population name”  to be used for the analysis of DNA 
profiling data in a scientific manner. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
Affix recent passport size photograph duly attested Do not Pin/Staple 
 
IDENTIFICATION FORM No.: 
[Fill all the columns & strike out whichever is not applicable] 
 
1) Name     : __________________________________________ 
 
2) Father's/Guardian's/Husband's Name : __________________________________________ 
3) Age      :  Years     Months        Days 
4) Gender [Tick the appropriate]  :   Male       Female  
5) Origin of State:    :___________________________________________ 
6) Address [Write legibly]   :___________________________________________ 
      :___________________________________________ 
      :________________________Pin________________ 
 
7) Visible Genetic Abnormalities if any :___________________________________________ 
8) Description of Sample [Viz. Blood/ Bloodstains 
     Buccal or Semen stain/ /Hair/Swab]   :___________________________________________       
     
9) Date of sample collection   :___________________________________________ 
 
10) Case/Crime/FIR/MC/OP/OS No.   :___________________________________________ 
 
11) Hon'ble Court / Police Station  :___________________________________________ 
[Any other specify] 
 
 
DECLARATION BY DONOR/ GUARDIAN 
I,___________________________________________Son/Daughter/Wife/Guardian of Kum/Master 
_____________________________________hereby declare that the blood is given with my 
consent to CDFD, for DNA fingerprinting. The blood is mine/is of my child and I/child did not receive 
a blood transfusion within last three months. 
(Explained in vernacular) 
_____________________________________________ 
(Signature or Thumb Impression of Donor/Guardian) 
____ml blood collected on FTA card/ Blood card in the presence of the following witnesses: 
 
1) Name: _________________________ Signature: _________________________ 
2) Name: _________________________ Signature: _________________________ 
3) Name: _________________________ Signature: _________________________ 
4) Name: _________________________ Signature: _________________________ 
[For CDFD use only] 
 
CDFD File No.     ________________________ Sample received on  : ___________________ 
Sample Code No. ________________________ Received by              :____________________ 
Report No. CDFD/LDFS/20 ________________ Examined by             : ___________________ 
 Assisted by                : ___________________ 
 
CCeennttrree  ffoorr  DDNNAA  FFiinnggeerrpprriinnttiinngg  aanndd  DDiiaaggnnoossttiiccss  CCDDFFDD  
[An autonomous Centre of the Dept. of Biotechnology, Ministry of Science & Technology, Govt. of India] 
Opp. Metro Rail Pillar No. NUP-9, Inner Ring Road, Uppal, Hyderabad - 500 039 
Telangana State, India, 
 
Tel No. 040 -2721 6000 / 2721 6142 / 2721 6143 
Fax No. 040-2721 6006 
 
Affix recent 
passport size 
photograph duly 
attested 
 
Do not Pin 
/Staple 
 
  
  

Forensic science (known in some countries as legal
medicine) is a specialism that aims to help judges and
juries solve legal issues, not only in criminal law but also
in civil cases. The field has great breadth, crossing the
boundaries between biology, chemistry, physics and
mathematics, and including disciplines as varied as
botany and ballistics, and the analysis of fingerprints,
ear-prints, recorded sound and handwriting. Over the
past 20 years, however, one particular biological tool has
revolutionized forensic investigations — the analysis of
DNA. As all living things contain DNA, and all DNA
exhibits variability both among and within species, any
biological material associated with a legal case carries in
it information about its source.
In this review, with the twentieth anniversary appr-
oaching of the development of
DNA FINGERPRINTING1,2 —
the first molecular genetic forensic technique — we take
this opportunity to present an overview of the field.
DNA analysis has evolved to become an indispensable
and routine part of modern forensic casework, employ-
ing extremely sensitive PCR-based techniques to analyse
biological material. Suspects can be linked to crime
scenes, or one crime scene to another, using DNA evi-
dence from as little as the saliva on a cigarette butt, skin
cells on a steering wheel or pet hairs on clothing. Large
DNA databases can be rapidly interrogated for matches
to DNA profiles found at the scene of a crime, or even
partial matches to close relatives of a perpetrator.
Undetected ‘cold’ cases involving sexual assault can be
solved decades after investigations were begun by
analysing degraded DNA from stored swabs or micro-
scope slides. Victims of mass disasters such as air crashes,
where physical identification might be impossible, can
be identified unambiguously in days. However, as pow-
erful as DNA analysis is, it is far from being the sine qua
non of forensic casework. DNA evidence must always
be considered within the framework of other evidence
of many types, and the role of the forensic geneticist is
not to make presumptions of guilt or innocence, but to
provide unbiased information to judge and jury.
We concentrate here on the analysis of human DNA,
including a discussion of recent massive forensic cases
following wars and disasters. However, we also describe
applications of non-human DNA analysis, in particular
the use of animal and plant DNA-typing and the field of
‘microbial forensics’ , which has expanded as a response
to the threat of bioterrorism. Finally, we ask what the
future holds for 
FORENSIC GENETICS, including a considera-
tion of new technological developments and ethical
issues arising from expanding DNA databases.
PATERNITY
TESTING (reviewed in REF. 3) forms part of the field of
forensic genetics and is of great importance in civil and
immigration cases, but owing to space restrictions we
cannot discuss it here.
The evolution of forensic genetics
The aim of the forensic geneticist is one of attribution
— to identify with as much certainty as possible the ori-
gin of a biological sample. The amount of variation that
is currently accessible in DNA is extremely informative
ENCODED EVIDENCE: DNA IN
FORENSIC ANALYSIS
Mark A. Jobling* and Peter Gill‡
Abstract | Sherlock Holmes said “it has long been an axiom of mine that the little things are
infinitely the most important”, but never imagined that such a little thing, the DNA molecule, could
become perhaps the most powerful single tool in the multifaceted fight against crime. Twenty
years after the development of DNA fingerprinting, forensic DNA analysis is key to the conviction
or exoneration of suspects and the identification of victims of crimes, accidents and disasters,
driving the development of innovative methods in molecular genetics, statistics and the use of
massive intelligence databases.
DNA FINGERPRINTING
Generation of a pattern of
bands, by Southern blotting and
hybridization with a multilocus
probe, which is highly
individual-specific.
FORENSIC GENETICS
The application of genetics for
the resolution of legal cases.
PATERNITY TESTING 
Determining whether or not a
particular man is the father of a
child, using genetic analysis. This
generally uses similar autosomal
markers to individual
identification work.
NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 5 | OC TOBER 2004 | 739
*Department of Genetics,
University of Leicester,
University Road,
Leicester LE1 7RH,
United Kingdom.
‡Forensic Science Service,
Trident Court,
2920 Solihull Parkway,
Birmingham Business Park,
Birmingham B37 7YN,
United Kingdom.
Correspondence to 
M.A.J. or P .G.
e-mails: maj4@le.ac.uk;
Peter.Gill@fss.pnn.police.uk
doi:10.1038/nrg1455
REVIEWS

sequences’ between different minisatellite loci allowed
probes to detect many independent minisatellites simul-
taneously, yielding the hypervariable multi-band 
patterns known as DNA fingerprints
2,5.U sing only a
single probe, the match probability was estimated to 
be <3 × 10
–11 and two probes together gave a value of
<5 × 10–19 (REF. 2) — so low that the only individuals
sharing DNA fingerprints are monozygotic twins. At the
same time, a method known as 
DIFFERENTIAL LYSISwas devel-
oped5 that selectively enriched the sperm concentration in 
vaginal fluid/semen mixtures, thereby avoiding the prob-
lem of the victim’s DNA (which is in great excess) mask-
ing the rapist’s. This is the only protocol to have remained
unchanged throughout the past 20 years.
Single-locus probes.Although use of DNA fingerprint-
ing persisted for some years in paternity testing, crimi-
nal casework soon concentrated on the use of specific
cloned minisatellites — ‘single-locus probes’ (SLPs) —
that each revealed only a single, highly polymorphic,
restriction fragment length polymorphism, therefore
simplifying interpretation. Typically, four SLPs were
used successively to probe a Southern blot, yielding
eight hypervariable fragments per individual.
It was with SLPs that the first DNA-based criminal
investigation was carried out; this case, culminating in
the conviction of Colin Pitchfork for a double rape and
homicide in Leicestershire in 1986, encapsulated many
of the defining characteristics and virtues of DNA
analysis. First, the two killings, spaced three years apart,
were shown to have been committed by the same indi-
vidual, because SLP profiles (and DNA fingerprints)
from the crime scenes matched. Second, a suspect who
had confessed was excluded because his SLP profile and
that found on the victims did not match, demonstrat-
ing the power of DNA to exonerate innocent people.
Third, the first ever ‘mass screen’ was organized by the
Forensic Science Service, in which all 500 local men not
and the degree of certainty can be correspondingly high.
However,it was not always this straightforward.
Early markers. The evolution of forensic genetics has
been driven by the analysis of human genetic variation,
beginning more than a century ago with Karl
Landsteiner’s discovery
4 of the human ABO blood
group polymorphisms and his early realization that this
variation was applicable to solving crimes. The TIMELINE
summarizes the important developments that have
occurred since that time. It is noteworthy that even a
simple genetic system such as ABO can be used to show
conclusively that a sample did not come from a specific
person —to prove an ‘exclusion’ . However, showing that
the sample actually did come from another specific per-
son is more difficult and depends on the degree of vari-
ation revealed by the typing system. Until the 1980s,
serological and protein electrophoretic methods were
used to access diversity in blood groups and polymorphic
proteins, but the main drawback of these markers was
that they tended to rapidly degrade or were compromised
by bacterial enzymes. In addition, they showed relatively
low variability and informativeness; when eight systems
were used together to analyse a bloodstain, the probability
of two unrelated people sharing a combination (the
MATCH PROBABILITY, Pm) was ~0.01–0.001, but for other
body fluids, such as semen, not all markers were present
and so the match probability was greater. Also, contami-
nation of body fluid from one person by that from
another (a ‘mixed stain’), such as in rape cases, was diffi-
cult to resolve because the vaginal cellular component
tended to mask the contribution from the sperm.
DNA fingerprinting.The DNA revolution began in 1984
with the discovery, by Alec Jeffreys in Leicester, UK, of
hypervariable loci known as 
MINISATELLITES1.T hese were
detected by hybridization of probes to Southern blots of
restriction-enzyme-digested genomic DNA. Shared ‘core
MATCH PROBABILITY
The chance of two unrelated
people sharing a DNA profile.
MINISATELLITES
Loci made up of a number
(~10–1,000) of tandemly
repeated sequences, each
typically 10–100 bp in length.
Usually GC-rich and often
hypervariable.
DIFFERENTIAL LYSIS
A method to enrich for sperm
DNA in a mixture of sperm and
epithelial cells by preferentially
lysing the latter using detergent
and protease, so that sperm
nuclei can be recovered by
centrifugation.
740 | OC TOBER 2004 | VOLUME 5 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
REVIEWS
First genetic
polymorphism,
human ABO
blood groups,
discovered by
Landsteiner
4
Locard lays
down principle
that ‘every
contact leaves
a trace’
First antibody test
for blood group
(ABO) introduced
and used by Lattes
(1920s–1950s) Discovery
and use of other blood
groups and serum
proteins (e.g. MNSs
system, Rhesus, Lewis,
Kell, haptoglobin)
132
(1960s–1980s)
Multilocus DNA
fingerprinting developed
by Jeffreys
1,2; followed by
single-locus profiling (SLP)
First use of DNA in
a criminal case
(identification of
double-murderer
Colin Pitchfork, in
Leicestershire, UK)
Discovery and use 
of electrophoretic
variants of red blood
cell enzymes (e.g.
phosphoglucomutase,
glyoxylase)
133
First commercial
forensic PCR kit -
detecting SNPs at
the polymorphic
HLA-DQA1 locus
by dot blot and
oligonucleotide
hybridization
First commercial
forensic STR
profiling kits
developed
First Y-STR described, and
used in casework – acquittal
of rape (Germany)
135
Publication of National
Research Council
report ‘The Evaluation
of Forensic DNA
evidence’
137
First mass
disaster case
(Waco,
Texas)
95,121
First useful
polymorphic
human STRs
characterized
134
First use of mtDNA
in casework (UK)
Publication of
National Research
Council report ‘DNA
technology in
forensic science’
136
UK National DNA
Database established
(STR profiles)
DNA profiling from
touched objects
138
and single cells139
demonstrated
New York vs.
Castro judgment
on admissability
of DNA evidence
led to strict
quality control
1900 1915 1920 1960 1984 1986 1987 1988 1991 1992 1993 1995 1996 1997 
Timeline | Developments in forensic genetics
See also REF. 6for further general background. HLA, human leukocyte antigen; mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA;
STR, short tandem repeat.

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 5 | OC TOBER 2004 | 741
REVIEWS
PCR-based methods.DNA amplification by PCR pro-
vided an enormous increase in sensitivity, allowing
minute amounts of degraded DNA to be analysed, and
now forms the basis of all forensic DNA typing. Early
PCR-based systems targeted a small number of SNPs
in the 
HLA-DQA1 GENE7.A lthough these systems were use-
ful when the SLP technology failed, discriminating
power was low and mixtures were difficult to interpret.
Consequently, there was a period when both PCR and
SLP tests were done in parallel. It was the discovery of
SHORT TANDEM REPEATS(STRs), discussed in the next sec-
tion, together with the introduction of automated
sequencing technology, that led to the current power-
ful systems for individual identification. Subsequently,
the use of STRs supplanted both the early PCR and
SLP tests worldwide once their advantages of high dis-
criminating power, sensitivity and ability to resolve
simple mixtures were realized. In addition, the time
needed to carry out an analysis was greatly reduced.
Reduction of costs resulting from partial automation
paved the way for the creation of national STR DNA
databases.
eliminated by a preliminary test for conventional protein
markers were recruited for DNA testing. Pitchfork
showed prescience in realizing the power of DNA analy-
sis: he attempted to evade the screen, but his evasion was
detected, and when his profile was shown to match those
from the crime scenes, he pleaded guilty to the killings.
Methods in forensic genetics must surmount several
hurdles before being applied to casework. First, tech-
niques must be adapted to work on samples that are not
pristine and are often limited in quantity. Second, exten-
sive validation is required to demonstrate robustness,
to pass the test of admissibility in court
6 (admissibility
criteria and legislation differ between countries and even
among states in the United States). Finally, quality man-
agement systems must be implemented once processes
are introduced into casework: external accreditation of
forensic laboratories to internationally recognized stan-
dards (such as 
ISO17025) is a prerequisite. Because of these
constraints, adoption of new technical developments can
sometimes be slow. For example, SLP technology was still
widely in use long after methods based on the polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) were developed in 1988.
ISO17025
A global standard, established by
the International Organization
for Standardization, for the
technical competence of
calibration and testing
laboratories (see Online links
box).
HLA-DQA1 GENE
A polymorphic gene within the
MHC class II region on
chromosome 6, encoding a
human leukocyte antigen cell-
surface protein.
SHORT TANDEM REPEAT
A DNA sequence containing a
variable number (typically ≤50)
of tandemly repeated short (2–6
bp) sequences, such as (GATA)
n ;
forensic STRs are usually
tetranucleotide repeats, which
show little PCR stutter.
Mitochondrion
(100s per cell)
Y chromosome 
(one copy per
male cell)
Marker
types
Source of
variation
Advantages Disadvantages
STRs Independent
chromosomal
assortment;
recombination;
mutation
Extremely
high
discrimination
power
Very degraded
DNA difficult
to type
STRs Mutation
only
Male-
specificity;
useful in
male-female
mixtures
Relatively low
discrimination
power; sharing
within patriline;
possible population
structure problems
SNPs,
usually
in control
region
Mutation
only
High copy
number,
therefore 
good survival
in old/damaged
samples
Heteroplasmy; 
low discrimination
power; sharing
within matriline;
possible population
structure problems
SNPs Independent
chromosomal
assortment;
recombination;
mutation - 
but low rate
Usable on
very degraded
DNA
Mostly biallelic, 
so relatively low
discrimination
power; mixtures
difficult to resolve
mtDNA (several copies 
per mitochondrion)
16,569 bp
Non-recombining region
Pseudoautosomal
region 1(2.6 Mb)
Pseudoautosomal
region 2 (0.32 Mb)
Autosomes
X
Control region
(1.1 kb)
HVS I
(341 bp)
HVS II
D2S1338
TPOX
D3S1358
HUMFIBRA/
FGA
D5S818
CSF1PO D8S1179D7S820
HUMTH01
HUMVWA
D13S317 D19S433D18S51D16S539 D21S11
AMELX
sex-test
AMELY-sex-test
Non-recombining
euchromatin ( 23 Mb)
DYS19
DYS393
DYS391
DYS389I,II
DYS390
DYS385
DYS392
Hetero-
chromatin
YCAII
SGM Plus™
locus
FBI CODIS
locus
locus used
in both
Y-STR
Nucleus
Blood stain
(268 bp)
Figure 1 | Sources of human genetic variation used in forensic analysis.Further details of the properties of different loci can
be found in the text. Heteroplasmy describes the presence of two or more different mitochondrial DNA sequences in the same cell,
or individual. FBI CODIS, US Federal Bureau of Investigation Combined DNA Index System; HVS, hypervariable site; Mb,
megabase; mtDNA, mitochondrial DNA; SGM, second generation multiplex; STR, short tandem repeat.

742 | OC TOBER 2004 | VOLUME 5 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
REVIEWS
is mostly owing to active collaboration between interna-
tional groups that are coordinated under various acade-
mic and government-sponsored institutions 
(TABLE 1).
Recommendations on standard practice, quality issues
and collaborative activities are made at a global level.
Autosomal STR profiling.The first widely used multi-
plex (the ‘quadruplex’ 8) consisted of four SIMPLE STRS .
However,because it had a high match probability of ~1
in 10,000, the first criminal cases involving autosomal
STR profiling were reported in conjunction with SLP
profiling. Subsequent addition of two highly variable
COMPLEX STRS decreased the match probability to ~1 in
Current methods in human identification 
Human forensic casework is now done using commer-
cially developed autosomal STR multiplexes (single-tube
PCR reactions that amplify multiple loci); other sources
of genetic variation that find more specialized uses are
autosomal SNPs, and markers on the Y chromosome
and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 
(FIG. 1).D ifferences
in practice between jurisdictions are considerable owing
to historical, social and legal circumstances. Detailing
these is beyond the scope of this article, so we take a pre-
dominantly UK perspective here. However, despite these
differences, the rapid development and universal accep-
tance of new DNA-based technology in forensic genetics
POPULATION STRUCTURE
The absence of random mating
within a population, leading to
allele frequency differences
among subpopulations.
SIMPLE STRS
Short tandem repeat loci
composed of uninterrupted runs
of a single repeat type.
COMPLEX STRS
Short tandem repeat loci
containing more than one run of
repeats that can be of one or
more repeat type.
Box 1 | Evaluating the weight of DNA evidence
The evidential weight of a match between crime stain profile and suspect is quantified by the match probability (Pm);
the chance of two unrelated people sharing a profile. For independently inherited loci,Pm is calculated by multiplying
the individual allele frequencies in the profile in question (the ‘product rule’): the greater the number of loci, and the
greater the heterozygosity of each locus, the lower the value ofPm.However, there are a number of situations in which
Pm can be substantially increased:
• if the profile is partial because of degradation, reducing the number of informative loci;
• if a suspect and a perpetrator share many alleles by descent (for example, are brothers);
• if a suspect and a perpetrator originate from the same subpopulation.
POPULATION STRUCTUREcan cause frequencies of alleles (and hence profiles) to vary between subpopulations — an issue
that caused great controversy in the application of SLP profiling90. The debate was resolved by applying guidelines to
ensure match probabilities quoted in court were conservative (that is, favourable to the defendant). Similar conservatism
is now applied to STR profiles91.
Despite the high discriminating power of very low Pm values, interpretation in the courtroom has not been without
controversy92, and this is because of the way that DNA evidence is sometimes presented. A wellknown example is the
‘prosecutor’s fallacy’ , or ‘fallacy of the transposed conditional’: suppose a crime is committed in London (population ~7
million) and a crime-scene profile is obtained that has a Pm of 10–6. The prosecutor, finding that a defendant matches the
profile, might say: ‘The odds are a million to one in favour of the defendant being guilty. ’ But, given the population size,
~7 people in the city are expected to match the profile, so it can then be argued that the odds are actually 7 to 1 in favour
of innocence; however, this ‘defence fallacy’ unrealistically assumes that each of the 7 people has equal probability of
guilt, which is untrue as DNA evidence is not used in isolation. This problem of logic can be avoided by an approach
based on a likelihood ratio, using conditional probabilities based on prosecution and defence scenarios: the job of the
court, based on an evaluation of both DNA and non-DNA evidence, is to decide the ultimate issue of guilt or innocence,
given all of the evidence. Under complex scenarios with many different variables,‘Bayesian networks’
93,94 — intuitive
graphical means to display hypotheses regarding the probabilistic relationships between variables — are a powerful aid
to understanding, although they are not intended to supplant the role of the jury.
Table 1 | International coordinating bodies in forensic genetics
Organization/subgroup Purpose Web site
International Society of Forensic Genetics International organization promoting scientific http://www.isfg.org/
(ISFG) knowledge in forensic genetics
• DNA Commission • Makes recommendations for use of DNA markers http://www.rechtsmedizin.uni-
• European DNA Profiling (EDNAP) group • Harmonization of European DNA technologies mainz.de/Remedneu/ednap/ednap.htm
• Paternity Testing Workshops
European Network of Forensic Science Mainly represents government institutions; www.enfsi.org/
Institutes (ENFSI) coordinates efforts to develop European DNA
databases
American Academy of Forensic Sciences Academic body for north American forensic http://www.aafs.org/
(AAFS) scientists
Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Responsible for setting standards, training and http://www.fbi.gov/publications.htm
• Scientific Working Group DNA Analysis development of the national DNA database
Methods (SWGDAM)
National Institute of Science and Supports the forensic community by organizing http://www.nist.gov/
Technology (NIST) collaborative proficiency exercises
• STRBase • Database giving characteristics of forensically http://www.cstl.nist.gov/biotech/
useful short tandem repeats (STRs) and SNPs strbase/index.htm

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 5 | OC TOBER 2004 | 743
REVIEWS
used in the United States11,b ut to improve efficiency,
new multiplexes that amplify 16 loci in a single reaction
(including amelogenin) have also been introduced12.I n
Germany, eight loci are used, including the ACTBP2
locus13.International collaborations have recommended
core loci to facilitate international data exchange — for
example, a set of seven for common use in Europe 14.
Detailed information on most forensic STR markers
can be found at STRBase (see Online links box) and
in REF. 15,w hich also describes the technology of STR
typing.
The match probabilities obtained with STR multi-
plexes are so low that their reciprocals vastly exceed the
entire human population. However, although DNA
profiling is often referred to as ‘individual identification’
and assessments can be made whether or not a DNA
profile is unique in an unsampled population
16, it would
50 million. This ‘second-generation multiplex’ (SGM)
also included a PCR assay targeted at the XY-homolo-
gous amelogenin genes
9, thereby revealing the sex of a
sample donor. It became clear that STRs were more
sensitive than other methods and allowed unambigu-
ous assignment of alleles, making the method suitable
for the development of databases. In 2000, an addi-
tional four loci were added to the multiplex, which
was renamed SGM Plus
10, thereby reducing the match
probability to less than 10–13.T he above account tracks
developments in the United Kingdom; events elsewhere
unfolded differently, and globally there are now a num-
ber of different systems that nonetheless have many loci
in common. The US FBI CODIS (Combined DNA
Index System) contains 13 STRs plus the amelogenin sex
test 
(FIG. 1),w ith a match probability lower than that of
the UK system. Typically, two separate multiplexes are
Amelogenin
Amelogenin
D8S1179
D8S1179
D21S11 D18S51
D3S1358
HUMVWA D16S539 D2S1338
HUMTHO1 HUMFIBRA/FGAD19S433
Amelogenin D21S11D8S1179
D18S51
Fluorescent yield
Molecular weight (bp)
X Y 13 14 16 1829 30
15 186 9.314
15 18 18 1911 1216 17
80 90 100 110 120 130 140 150 160 170 180 190 200 210 220 230 240 250 260 270 280 290 300 310 320
D21S11 D18S51
a
b
c
X Y 1810 28 30 1312
X Y 12 13 15 28 30 31 32.2 1413
Figure 2 | Electropherograms illustrating autosomal STR profiles. a| An electropherogram of the second-generation multiplex
‘SGM Plus’ profile from a male, including X- and Y-specific amelogenin products of 106 and 112 bp, respectively. Most short tandem
repeats (STRs) are heterozygous and the alleles are evenly balanced. Numbers beneath STR peaks indicate allele sizes in repeat
units. The STR profile is displayed in the green, blue and yellow channels of a four-colour fluorescent system, with the red channel
being used for a size marker (not shown). b | A typical mixture from two individuals (green channel only shown). Mixtures can only be
identified if the alleles of the minor component are above the background ‘noise’ in an electropherogram (in practice a ratio of ~1:10)
and can usually be resolved by inspection95. In this example, the contributions are in even proportions — for example, D21S11
shows four alleles where the peaks are approximately equal in height, whereas D18S51 shows two peaks in a 3:1 ratio. The X- and
Y-specific amelogenin peaks are of approximately equal height, indicating that this is a mixture from two males. More complex
mixtures might require interpretative methods based on likelihood ratios96,97, calculations based on peak area98 and consideration of
PCR stutter99, and have led to the development of computer programs to deduce potential underlying genotypes100,101. c | A profile
(green channel only shown) obtained by ‘low copy number’ (LCN) testing102, a method used in the United Kingdom when little DNA
(typically <100 pg or <17 diploid genomes) is available. The method uses an increased number of PCR cycles (for example, 34,
rather than the usual 28), and leads to marked heterozygote imbalance at some loci (here, D21S11 and D18S51) because of
stochastic variation in amplification. Extreme imbalance is drop-out (failure to amplify) of an allele (not shown). Drop-out is a
stochastic effect of the limited number of template molecules, and therefore no two amplifications of the same extract will behave 
the in the same way. The LCN protocol requires duplicate PCR of an extract and only those alleles that are observed in both PCRs
are reported. (See also BOX 2.)

744 | OC TOBER 2004 | VOLUME 5 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
REVIEWS
account fragment size (accurately measured with
respect to internal standard markers and to an ALLELIC
LADDER19 used to identify alleles),ELECTROPHEROGRAMpeak
height and area and an assessment of HETEROZYGOTE 
BALANCE, and include automated checks to interpret arte-
facts such as PCR STUTTER20.D NA quality from ‘reference
samples’ (taken from individuals to create databases —
see next section) is predictably good and makes
automation of typing and interpretation relatively
straightforward. In the UK Forensic Science Service, if
two expert systems working on different principles
agree on a profile it is accepted, but there are regular
challenges with ‘blind’ controls. For casework samples,
preliminary assessment is vital to determine the best
method of processing; but automation is more difficult
because DNA quality and quantity are variable and
DNA mixtures are often encountered, complicating
interpretation. Anomalous profiles can also arise for
biological reasons (such as mutation) and if methods
are used that are sensitive enough to detect single DNA
molecules (‘low copy number’), then laboratory-based
contamination of single or multiple alleles is a strong
possibility and interpretation strategies are needed to
deal with this. These situations are discussed in 
BOX 2.
STR-based forensic DNA analysis has achieved
worldwide public and professional acceptance as a reli-
able means of individual identification and has had a
major impact on criminal justice systems. The increase
in sensitivity of DNA methods has allowed the reopen-
ing and solving of ‘cold’ cases and has also led to the
exoneration of prisoners (some of whom were awaiting
execution) convicted through miscarriages of justice.
Most of these cases have been in the United States (see
the Innocence Projectweb site in the Online links box),
where post-conviction testing attracts federal funding,
although one case in the United Kingdom has been
described
21.
DNA databases of autosomal STR profiles. As well as
matching a crime-scene profile to that from an appre-
hended suspect, a match (‘hit’) can be made to a DNA
database of offender profiles (an ‘intelligence database’),
allowing a new suspect to be investigated. The advances
in automation described above have allowed the estab-
lishment of such databases, which are now in use or
under development in many countries. Criteria for
including a profile in a database vary among countries
(TABLE 2).T he largest example, the UK National DNA
Database22,23,c ontains (at July 25th 2004) ~2.5 million
reference profiles (mostly from buccal scrapes) and
~200,000 crime-scene profiles. Since 1995, there have
been more than 550,000 matches between reference
profiles and crime-scenes, and more than 30,000
matches between crime scenes. A new method of using
the database,‘familial searching’ , has recently been intro-
duced. In 2003, a lorry driver was killed in Surrey, UK,
by a brick thrown through his windscreen. A DNA pro-
file was obtained from the brick, but had no match in
the database. A geographically restricted search of the
database was carried out for potential close relatives of
the perpetrator, under the assumption that close 
be a rare case in which everyone on the planet could be
considered as the pool of potential contributors for a
crime-scene sample
17.R eporting of DNA evidence in
court takes a conservative approach to the low match
probabilities and commonly uses likelihood-based
methods to take account of the factors applying to a
particular case 
(BOX 1).
Multiplexes are analysed and typed using automated
sequencing equipment. These are typically multi-chan-
nel capillary electrophoresis systems that are used to
detect fluorescently labelled PCR products 
(FIG. 2a) and
are combined with robotics and laboratory information
management systems, including bar-coding of samples
to reduce operator errors. This automation reduces cost
and increases throughput. Interpretation (defining
the alle les in a profile) is more difficult to automate.
However,there has been progress in converting tradi-
tional subjective expert opinion into programmable
(heuristic) rules for computer programs (known as
‘expert systems’
18), generally intended to complement,
rather than replace, the human expert. These take into
ALLELIC LADDER
An accurate marker used to
identify alleles at a particular
STR, generated by PCR
amplification of a series of
sequenced alleles from that STR.
ELECTROPHEROGRAM
The graphical output of
electrophoresis devices in STR
and sequencing analysis,
showing fluorescence intensity as
a function of molecular weight;
peak at a particular wavelength
(colour) corresponds to a
specifically labelled molecule 
of a particular size.
HETEROZYGOTE BALANCE
The proportion of the two alleles
of a heterozygote, expressed as
the area of the smaller peak
divided by the area of the larger
peak in an electropherogram.
Box 2 | Dealing with anomalous autosomal STR profiles
As shown in FIGURE 2,several factors can complicate the interpretation of DNA profiles.
These include mixed samples and the availability of only small amounts of DNA, which
(in the UK) is analysed by ‘low-copy number’ (LCN) methods and can lead to allele 
drop-out. LCN analysis also increases the probability of contamination (additional
‘foreign’ alleles in the profile), despite stringent precautions to prevent it.
Contamination can be gross and lead to full additional profiles, where typically
the negative control will be affected; these can be searched against forensic staff
elimination databases and stored in a separate database to allow detection and
monitoring of problems such as contamination of plasticware during
manufacture
103,104.A lternatively, contamination can contribute an extra one or two
alleles per DNA profile (allele DROP-IN102,104), where the negative control is usually
unaffected. The probabilities of a match, of drop-out and of contamination (based
on computer simulation analysis of negative control data
104) can be readily
incorporated into the calculation of the likelihood ratio (LR) when the significance
of the DNA evidence is being assessed
102; calculations are complex but are aided by a
computer program (LoComatioN)105 that can also combine the results of several
profiles into a single LR. Here, we no longer think of a DNA profile either matching
or not matching a suspect, because the twin effects of drop-in and drop-out will
alter the suspect’s apparent profile so that it does not match the crime scene sample,
without indicating an exclusion; rather, the probability of the evidence is lowered.
Anomalous profiles can arise from causes other than mixtures but can readily be
resolved by careful analysis:
• Mutations in the PCR primer target region can cause allele drop-out or heterozygote
imbalance
106,107.
• An STR can be duplicated and segregated in a normal Mendelian fashion or a somatic
STR mutation occurring early in development can lead to a three-peak profile for the STR,
which might vary between tissues; examples are on STRBase (
seeOnline links and REF. 108).
• The STR D21S11 can reveal three alleles in trisomy 21 cases (reviewed in REF. 109).
• Discordant results in the amelogenin sex test can be observed in rare individuals,
including cases of sex-reversal (XX males and XY females) and males
110–112 carrying
deletions that remove AMELY.
• A true mixed profile can also originate from a single individual. Analysis of DNA from
people who had undergone successful bone marrow transplants ≥5 years previously
113,
showed a mixed profile in buccal and fingernail samples; in blood, the recipient’s own
profile had been completely replaced by that of the donor, whereas in hair, the recipient’s
profile remained unmixed.

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 5 | OC TOBER 2004 | 745
REVIEWS
international. However, although large databases with
permissive entry criteria can be powerful, they also raise
ethical questions (BOX 3).
Autosomal SNP typing.Compared to STRs, SNPs have
much lower heterozygosities (a per-SNP maximum of
0.5) and so ~50 SNPs are required to approach the low
match probability of an STR profile 25 (see BOX 1). In
addition, mixtures are especially difficult to resolve for
relatives are more likely to share alleles than unrelated
people (50% for brothers). This highlighted 150 candi-
dates, leading to the identification of a suspect whose
profile matched that on the brick. He was convicted of
manslaughter24.
Legal differences between countries make such
speculative searches impossible in some jurisdictions
and can also complicate the international exchange 
of data when crime is itself becoming increasingly
PCR STUTTER
A PCR artefact in which, as well
as a band of the expected size, an
additional band is seen which is
typically one repeat unit smaller,
resulting from slippage synthesis
errors by the PCR polymerase
DROP-IN
Addition of (typically) one or
two alleles to a DNA profile,
owing to contamination.
Table 2 | Characteristics of some national DNA databases
Country (Year Reference Crime-scene Suspect to Scene to Entry criteria Entry criteria for Removal criteria
established) profile size sample size scene hits scene hits for suspects convicted offenders
UK 2.5 million 200,000 550,000 30,000 Any recordable Entered as suspect Never removed,
(1995) offence* including suspects
USA 1.52 million 67,000 Figure Figure No suspects entered, Depends on Depends on state
(1994) unavailable unavailable but under revision state law law
Germany 286,840 54,570 13,700 5,500 Offence leading to After court decision After acquittal or 5–10 
(1998) >1 yr in prison years after conviction,
if prognosis is good
Austria 64,740 11,460 3,200 1,350 Any recordable Entered as suspect Only after acquittal
(1997) offence*
New Zealand 44,000 8,000 4,000 2,500 No suspects entered A relevant offence Never removed, unless
(1996) (including ≥7 yr in prison) conviction quashed
Switzerland 42,530 7,240 4,840 5,540 Any recordable Entered as suspect After acquittal or 5–30
(2000) offence* years after conviction
France 14,490 1,080 50 70 No suspects entered Sexual assault and 40 years after
(2001) serious crime conviction
Finland 8,170 5,450 2,080 780 Offence leading to Entered as suspect Only after acquittal
(1999) >1 yr in prison
Slovenia 4,820 2,360 370 80 Any recordable Entered as suspect Depends on severity
(1998) offence* of crime
Netherlands 4,260 13,700 2,520 4,260 No suspects entered
‡ Offence leading to >4 yr 20–30 years after
(1997) in prison conviction
Sweden 3,980 9,860 2,500 4,750 No suspects entered Offence leading to >2 yr 10 years after release
(2000) in prison from prison
*That leads to a term of imprisonment. ‡Except when the suspect’s DNA is tested for the case. Adapted from REF. 140, with additional information from Peter Schneider and
Jill Vintiner (personal communications). See also BOX 3.
Box 3 | DNA databases: ethical issues
DNA databases are seen by some as without fault114, but they have not been without their critics115,116.A ny criminal
whose profile is in a database risks detection in further criminal activity — the probability of identifying a suspect when a
crime-scene profile is checked against the UK database is >40%23.Culprits are apprehended more quickly and criminals
might be deterred from future offending, but it is unclear whether overall crime rates are reduced. The UK database is
projected to reach 5 million samples22,which is ~10% of the population and >30% of 10–50-year-old men (those most 
likely to offend30). This enormous size is a result of the relatively liberal criteria for database entry: most samples are taken
(with or without consent) from individuals arrested for offences that could lead to a prison sentence, whereas in some other
jurisdictions only more serious offences are considered and a specific degree of connection (decided by a court) between the
suspect and the offence is necessary before DNA can be sampled (TABLE 2). One justification given for the United Kingdom
practice is that minor criminals might also be perpetrators of more serious crimes — one example is the arrest and
subsequent conviction, in 2001, of a man for a murder committed in 1968, triggered by a match between crime-scene DNA
evidence and a sample taken from the culprit in connection with a motoring offence
114.Recent legislative changes allow
retention of profiles from exonerated suspects and from individuals profiled during mass screens (albeit with consent).
The use of any database involves a balance between the rights of the individual and the interests of the state; this differs
from country to country, and some believe it is tipped too far towards the state in systems like that of the UK117.H o w e v e r ,t h e
discoverer of DNA fingerprinting, Alec Jeffreys118, has argued for the UK database to be extended to the entire population,
under the auspices of an independent authority, arguing that the current database is discriminatory because some groups in
the population are probably overrepresented among suspects. James Watson
119 has called for a global database to fight crime
and terrorism — an enormously costly and complex endeavour, raising serious issues in ethics and law117.
Retention of samples for possible retesting with future technologies (as is done in the UK) is also considered
controversial by some, who argue that it could reveal private genetic information.

746 | OC TOBER 2004 | VOLUME 5 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
REVIEWS
male–female body-fluid mixtures where conventional
methods fail to resolve autosomal profiles, Y-STR typing
can give specific information about the male compo-
nent. Although differential lysis often allows autosomal
profiling of a rapist, the vasectomized or naturally
azoospermic rapist leaves no sperm; in such cases
31,
Y-specific profiling is effective, even in the presence of
a 4,000-fold excess of female DNA32.I n multiple rape
it might be possible to gain information about the
number of assailants.
There are 219 known useful STRs on the Y chromo-
some33,b u t  a  set of 9 or 11 loci is commonly typed in
casework, and there is a large collaborative quality-con-
trolled online population database of more than 24,000
9-locus profiles from 200 populations
29,34.C learly, the
product rule (see BOX 1) for independently segregating
autosomal STRs cannot be applied to markers on the
non-recombining Y chromosome and haplotype fre-
quencies are instead often determined simply by
counting or by more sophisticated 
BAYESIAN methods35.
Excluding STR mutation, all patrilineal relatives
(brothers, father, sons, paternal uncles and so on) of a
suspect will share his Y haplotype and this needs to
be considered when assessing the strength of the evi-
dence
36.F urthermore, the potential association of sur-
names inherited through the paternal line 37 with 
Y haplotypes has led to suggestions that surname pre-
diction from haplotype might be possible. However, the
complexity of the relationship
38 probably precludes this
approach as an absolute determinant, although it might
be powerful if used in the context of a Bayesian method
binary markers, although this limitation might be
overcome by targeting rare tri-allelic SNPs
26.
The practical advantage of SNP typing is that DNA
template size can in principle be only as large as a pair of
specific primers; ~50 bp. This is considerably smaller
than the ~300 bp needed for successful STR profiling
(although special STR multiplexes have been developed
that use particularly small amplicons
27) and makes SNPs
of interest for the analysis of severely degraded material.
The technical challenges of the World Trade Center dis-
aster (see 
BOX 4) have led to the application of forensic
SNP typing. The European Network of Forensic Science
Institutes (ENFSI) and the US FBI Scientific Working
Group on DNA Analysis Methods (SWGDAM) 
(TABLE 1)
working groups are assessing potentially useful multi-
plexes and will make recommendations for global stan-
dardization
28, although it is hard to imagine that SNP
profiling will replace STR-based systems.
Y-chromosomal analysis.Autosomal STR profiles owe
their variability to three processes: independent chro-
mosomal reassortment, recombination and mutation.
On the Y chromosome, mutation alone functions to
diversify STR 
HAPLOTYPES.T hese haplotypes are therefore
less diverse than autosomal profiles (genotypes) con-
taining an equivalent number of markers, leading to rel-
atively high average-match probabilities of ~0.003 for
11 Y-STRs
29.However, Y chromosomes have one crucial
forensically useful property: they are confined to males.
As most serious offences are committed by men
30,w e
expect to find their Y chromosomes at crime scenes; in
HAPLOTYPE
The combination of allelic states
of a set of polymorphic markers
lying on the same DNA
molecule, such as the Y
chromosome or mtDNA
BAYESIAN
Statistical method, based on
Bayes’ theorem, that allows
inferences to be drawn from
both the data themselves and
any prior information.
Box 4 | The challenge of large human identification cases
DNA analysis has a key role in the identification of victims of accidents, disasters and wars, therefore aiding
emotional closure for bereaved relatives. Reference material often comes from these relatives3 — for example, an
approach used early on in the identification of the skeletal remains of murder victim Karen Price compared STR
alleles with her presumptive parents
120.
An early example of a mass identification case followed the Waco disaster95,121 in 1993, in which more than 70 occupants of
a heavily fortified compound in Waco, Texas, perished in a fire following a siege by US law enforcement agencies. About 40
bodies were unidentifiable by conventional means and, of these, 26 could be identified by quadruplex STR profiling.
Reference samples came from living or dead (but positively identified) relatives. For instance, given the alleles present in
parents, the possible genotypes of children could be sought among profiles of victims (taking account of the possibility of
STR mutations between the generations), and the weight of identification evidence considered on a likelihood basis 
(BOX 1).
Air crashes, such as the August 1996 Spitzbergen disaster122 or the September 1998 Swissair flight 111 air crash123,
present problems because of the level of damage to bodies from fragmentation and burning. However, given an accurate
list of passenger and crew, the site can be considered a ‘closed scene’ , where there are no unknown victims; families are
often among the dead, so allele sharing is expected. Reference profiles can be obtained from personal effects of victims
such as clothing or toothbrushes
123, and samples provided by relatives, leading to complete identification.
Without doubt the largest mass identification cases are those arising from wars and genocides, such as that in the
former Yugoslavia, where >30,000 people went missing; in Bosnia-Herzegovina alone >10,000 bodies required
identification (reviewed in REF. 124). On a comparable scale, and with unique challenges, has been the effort to identify the
remains of the estimated 2,819 people who died in the World Trade Center terrorist attacks of September 11th, 2001
(reviewed in REF. 125). Physical identification was impossible for most victims and mixed profiles were common126.
Technical developments during the identification process have included:
• new computer programs to deal with large and complex kinship calculations, involving reference samples from ~6,000
relatives and ~5,000 personal effects
127,128;
• novel DNA extraction procedures129;
• redesigned STR multiplexes (‘miniSTRs’ , based on shorter DNA amplicons27) and autosomal SNP multiplexes to allow
analysis of severely degraded DNA125.
Despite these efforts, the remains of ~1,000 people might never be identified125.

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 5 | OC TOBER 2004 | 747
REVIEWS
basis of highly improbable sequences that are detectable
by phylogenetic analysis50.
Heteroplasmy can lead to different sequences being
found between hairs or tissues in a single individual,
and even along the length of a single hair shaft 51.
Mutation, which distinguishes heteroplasmic types, is
particularly common at some sites (‘hot spots’), but this
can be built into the interpretation using a likelihood
ratio approach
52. Shared heteroplasmy between two
samples can actually increase the strength of evidence,
as was the case in confirming the matrilineal relation-
ship between the putative Tsar Nicholas II and his
brother Georgij Romanov
53 (BOX 5).
Putting face and place to a DNA profile
When a profile from a crime scene does not find a ‘hit’
in an intelligence database, any information that can
be deduced from the DNA about the donor is useful.
A basic piece of information, sex, has already been men-
tioned, but two other areas, population of origin and
phenotypic features, have also been investigated and used
to aid criminal investigations.
Deducing population of origin.Most (~85%;
REFS 54,55)
genetic variation is found within human populations.
Nonetheless, individuals from different populations are,
on average, slightly more different from each other than
are individuals from the same population, and this
allows sets of markers to be used to predict population
of origin (reviewed in 
REF. 56). Similar methods might be
applicable to the analysis of a crime-scene sample.
Forensic STR profiles are very variable among
individuals and so show low inter-population vari-
ance (F
ST). They are therefore not ideal for predicting
population of origin. The ability of SGM Plus profiles
to classify individuals into one of five police-defined
‘ethnic groups’ has been assessed 57, and showed, for
example, that 67% of profiles known to be from
of analysis. On a larger scale, the Y chromosome shows
particularly strong population structure
39 and the avail-
ability of local population databases is essential. These
difficulties can complicate the evaluation of match sig-
nificance, but exclusion of a suspect remains straightfor-
ward. The use of Y-chromosome analysis will increase,
particularly in rape casework, aided by the availability
of standardized commercial Y-STR
40 and Y-SNP kits
(reviewed in REF. 41).
Mitochondrial DNA. mtDNA shares many of the the-
oretical disadvantages of the Y chromosome: it is
non-recombining, so markers (almost all SNPs, but
including length variation in a run of C nucleotides) do
not segregate independently, thereby reducing diversity;
it is uniparentally inherited (through the mother), so all
members of a matriline share a haplotype; and it shows
marked population structure
42.F u rthermore, there is
the complication of heteroplasmy.
The advantage of mtDNA lies in its copy number,
which is between ~200 and 1,700 per cell (reviewed in
REF. 43); this means that it has a greater probability of
survival than nuclear DNA does. Forensic applica-
tions
43,44 include analysis of samples that are old or
severely damaged, or low in DNA (such as hair shafts),
and include historical criminal cases (see BOX 5 ).
The normal practice is to sequence two segments of the
CONTROL REGION that are particularly polymorphic,
known as hypervariable segments I and II (HVSI,
HVSII). SNPs outside the hypervariable segments will
increase the power of mtDNA typing
45,46.
Rather than considering the average-match proba-
bility (which is high 47, at ~0.005–0.025), match sig-
nificance is usually evaluated by the ‘counting
method’ — how many times a specific sequence has
been observed in a population database
48,49 ,w ith a
correction for sampling error. There has been criti-
cism of the q uality of some forensic datasets, on the
CONTROL REGION
Part of mitochondrial DNA that
is non-coding and therefore
more able to accumulate
variation than the rest of the
molecule.
Box 5 | Forensic DNA analysis of historical samples — the case of the Russian royal family
The first DNA-based historical criminal investigation was carried out in 1994 when bones purported to be those of the
Russian royal family (the Romanovs), executed by a Bolshevik firing squad in 1918, were analysed using a combination
of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequencing, sex typing, STR analysis and PCR cloning130.
The samples were more than 70 years old, yet yielded autosomal STR profiles consistent with the presence of a family
group and mtDNA sequences matching reference sequences from living matrilineal relatives: the sequence obtained
from Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh, matched those of the putative Tsarina and her children, whereas those from the
Duke of Fife and Princess Xenia Cheremeteff-Sfiri matched that of the putative Tsar Nicholas II, except for one
discrepant base. After PCR cloning, the putative Tsar’s mtDNA was shown to comprise two different molecules (one of
which matched the living reference samples) and was concluded to be an example of heteroplasmy, thought at the time
to be rare; this led to speculation about the reliability ofthe results. However, when an independent analysis was carried
out on the remains of the Tsar’s brother, Georgij Romanov, by the Armed Forces DNA Identification Laboratory in
Rockville, Maryland
53, it was discovered that he shared a heteroplasmy at the same position in the mtDNA molecule; this
effectively dispelled any lingering doubts. After a consideration of all of the DNA and non-DNA (anthropological)
evidence, the Russian authorities pronounced the remains to be those of the Romanovs.
The remains of one of the Tsar’s daughters, Anastasia, were absent from the grave, and controversy surrounded the
claim that she escaped execution and survived, under the identity of Anna Anderson. STR analysis131 of 20-year-old
paraffin wax embedded samples from Anderson was inconsistent with her being a daughter of the Tsar and Tsarina.
However, the mtDNA sequences matched those of Carl Maucher, a putative maternal relative of a woman named
Franzisca Schankowska. The mtDNA results were confirmed by an independent group from Penn State University, who
concurrently analysed hair shafts purported to have come from Anna Anderson
131.

748 | OC TOBER 2004 | VOLUME 5 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
REVIEWS
colour65,f or which the P gene, the product of which is
involved in melanin production, is a candidate66.T w o
amino-acid substitutions in the gene are associated with
blue or grey eyes66.A  broader association study includ-
ing SNPs in several candidate genes67 has identified 61
SNPs that explain 15% of the variation in eye colour in a
sample, but probably do not provide useful predictive
testing. Work on these and other phenotypes will proba-
bly increase in the future. However, the complexity of
these quantitative traits, coupled with variability intro-
duced by environmental and nutritional differences,
means that even if the genes influencing them were iden-
tified there is no guarantee that simple deterministic tests
would emerge.
Non-human species in forensic genetics
Forensic analysis of animal DNA has been used both
when animal material (usually pet hairs) is found at
crime scenes, and in investigations of the illegal trade in
endangered species. The best-known example of the
former was the matching, using 10 feline-specific dinu-
cleotide STRs, of cat hairs on a bloodstained leather
jacket with a pet cat, known as Snowball, who lived with
the suspect in a murder case
68.M o r e  r e c ently, a com-
mercial kit containing 11 tetranucleotide STRs has been
produced for the individual identification of cats. Work
on canine identification is mostly based on STRs devel-
oped for parentage testing
69,b ut also includes mtDNA
profiling70.I n a recent case, the conviction of a man for
the murder of a seven-year-old girl in California was
supported by mtDNA analysis of dog hairs that
matched a pet belonging to the victim.
In the endangered species field, species-specific
methods target the gene that encodes cytochrome b of
mtDNA
71,72;e xamples include tests for tiger-bone DNA
in traditional Chinese medicines (all of which proved to
be cow or pig73), and also for rhinoceros horn74.
As with animal material, plant material can be asso-
ciated with a crime scene and provide vital evidence.
When morphology is uninformative, DNA could, in
principle, offer species identification or a link to a spe-
cific place. However, in the analysis of plant DNA there
is no easy equivalent of the widely studied animal
mtDNA sequences (although regions of the chloro-
plast genome and the nuclear ribosomal RNA loci
seem promising) and STRs in most species are poorly
characterized. PCR-based fingerprinting methods such
as 
RANDOM AMPLIFIED POLYMORPHIC DNA (RAPD) can allow
identification of plant strains and have been used in
the analysis of mosses in a murder case75, and in civil
disputes over the identity of commercially valuable
cultivars of strawberry76 and chilli77.A  species-specific
PCR assay is available for Cannabis sativa78 and the iso-
lation of a hexanucleotide STR from the same species
provided a marker with some potential to identify the
source of cannabis samples
79.
Microorganisms can be sources of evidence in situa-
tions such as foodstuff contamination and medical
negligence cases involving infections, such as HIV trans-
mission
80.However, in October 2001, at least five people
died in the United States from inhalation anthrax after
African-Caribbeans were classified correctly, whereas
the remainder were wrongly assigned to other ethnic
groups. Despite the misclassification, prediction is
useful if it reduces the number of suspect investiga-
tions carried out before the actual perpetrator is
reached. Policemen are not anthropologists and one
problem with interpreting these studies is the over-
simplified way in which populations are defined. The
haploid Y chromosome and mtDNA show strong geo-
graphic differentiation because their small 
EFFECTIVE
POPULATION SIZE (one quarter of that of any autosome)
leads to enhanced GENETIC DRIFT .M ating practices
might also contribute to inter-population differences.
These markers therefore contain information on pop-
ulation of origin, but, owing to 
ADMIXTURE , can give
misleading results.
Markers with greater power have emerged from stud-
ies of admixed populations for epidemiological purposes
or for mapping disease genes by 
LINKAGE DISEQUILIBRIUM.
Autosomal binary or STR loci have been identified
that show large allele frequency differences (30–50%)
between parental population groups
58,59.M ultilocus
genotypes based on such ANCESTRY INFORMATIVE MARKERS
(AIMS) can be analysed using model-based cluster-
ing algorithms, yielding individual proportions of
ancestry from a number of populations. Although
forensic evaluation has not yet been carried out, tests
using 175 AIMs are already available commercially
for forensic applications
60; their use will probably
increase, although it might be limited in admixed
populations.
Phenotypic information.A strong prediction of popula-
tion of origin might indicate some aspects of pheno-
type, such as skin colour. However, direct genetic tests
would be more useful. Many human phenotypes (for
example, stature, facial features and pigmentation) have
a strong genetic component.
The only relevant trait that has undergone serious
investigation is pigmentation. However, although there
are many human genes that when mutated are known
to cause abnormal pigmentation such as albinism
61,
only a minority appear to influence ‘normal’ variation.
The best studied is the melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R)
gene, the gene product of which lies in the cell membrane
of the 
MELANOCYTE.Binding ofα-melanocyte stimulating
factor to the receptor leads to production of black/
brown pigments, whereas in the absence of a signal
through MC1R,r ed/yellow pigments predominate. The
MC1R gene has more than 30 known variant alleles
involving amino-acid substitutions, three of which are
associated with red hair, fair skin and freckling
62,63.
Population studies64 show that homozygosity or com-
pound heterozygosity for such a variant gives a >90%
probability of having red hair. This test is therefore use-
ful as an investigative tool in populations such as that of
the United Kingdom where red hair is found at an
appreciable frequency.
Other candidate pigmentation genes have been
investigated, but with less success. Linkage analysis has
identified a locus on chromosome 15 that influences eye
EFFECTIVE POPULATION SIZE
The size of an idealized
population that has the same
properties with respect to
genetic drift as does the actual
population in question.
GENETIC DRIFT
The stochastic fluctuation of
allele frequencies in a population
owing to chance variations in the
contribution of each individual
to the next generation.
ADMIXTURE
The formation of a hybrid
population through the mixing
of two ancestral populations.
LINKAGE DISEQUILIBRIUM
MAPPING
Analysing single nucleotide
polymorphism alleles in
population-based studies to
identify loci that are associated
with a particular disease or
phenotype.
ANCESTRY INFORMATIVE
MARKERS
Markers showing marked allele
frequency differences between
ancestral populations, useful for
determining the probable
ancestry of an individual.
MELANOCYTE
The specialized cell type, lying at
the boundary between the
dermis and epidermis, in which
the pigment melanin is
synthesized.
RANDOM AMPLIFIED
POLYMORPHIC DNA
Polymorphic markers generated
by using short (8–12 bases long)
primers to amplify random
fragments of DNA.

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 5 | OC TOBER 2004 | 749
REVIEWS
such devices are validated for forensic use. Methods of
whole-genome amplification (in particular, MULTIPLE
DISPLACEMENT AMPLIFICATION84) have potential forensic value
when the amount of template DNA is extremely small.
However, allele DROP-OUT and imbalance has been
observed with less than 50 picograms of input DNA85,
and further work is needed to determine whether there
are any advantages over conventional low copy number
typing methods.
One of the most difficult problems facing the forensic
biologist is the identification of body fluids. Molecular
biological approaches to the identification of blood,
semen and saliva stains using analysis of specific mRNAs
(which are surprisingly stable) have been described
86 and
will probably increase in use and importance.
As our understanding of the genetic basis of disease
and differences in the response to drugs increases, it will
be increasingly applied to determining the cause of
death — ‘forensic molecular pathology’ . Work has
already been done
87,88 on molecular diagnosis of the
genetic cardiac arrhythmia long QT syndrome,w hich
can cause sudden unexplained death leaving no trace at
autopsy, and also on the post mortem determination of
functional copy number of a gene (CYP2D6) encoding
a drug metabolizing enzyme
89,v a riation in which can
lead to adverse drug effects, including death.
The most important and controversial develop-
ments, however, probably lie in the area of DNA data-
bases 
(BOX 3)and debates on database issues seem set to
continue well into the second two decades of forensic
DNA analysis.
handling mail deliberately contaminated with spores
of Bacill us anthracis and it is the threat of acts of
bioterrorism like this, as well as potential attacks on
crops and animals, that has led to a surge in interest in
the field of forensic microbiology, renamed ‘microbial
forensics’
81.I ts aim is to develop methods to show that
a micro-organism has come from a particular source
and DNA analysis will probably have a major role.
There are formidable problems in the wide range of
possible species that could be encountered, the limited
sequence diversity between strains and sub-strains
and the lack of universally applicable cross-species
methods to detect variation. Microbiologists, epidemi-
ologists and forensic scientists have met to de fine
problems and make recommendations, many of
which will be expensive to implement. Although the
extent of the bioterrorism threat is unclear, the 2001
attacks showed the major impact that even small-
scale incidents can have; also, developments in this
area will probably have useful spin-offs in tracing
natural disease outbreaks.
Future developments
Forensic genetics will continue to take advantage of
technical developments in DNA analysis. A ‘sci-fi’ vision
of a hand-held device (the ‘lab on a chip’) that would
allow rapid DNA profiling at the crime scene is close to
realization, with developments in microfabrication of
capillary electrophoretic arrays
82; single integrated plat-
forms that extract, amplify and sequence DNA have
already been developed83,but it will be some time before
MULTIPLE DISPLACEMENT
AMPLIFICATION
A method for whole-genome
amplification using a highly
processive polymerase from
bacteriophage φ29 and random
primers to synthesize long
molecules from the template.
DROP-OUT
Absence of one or more alleles in
a DNA profile, owing to
stochastic failure of PCR
amplification when the number
of template molecules is  small.
1. Jeffreys, A. J., Wilson, V. & Thein, S. L. Hypervariable
‘minisatellite’ regions in human DNA. Nature314, 67–73
(1985).
Describes the discovery of hypervariable DNA and a
method of detection that is sensitive enough to allow
analysis of the small amounts of DNA that might be
encountered in casework.
2. Jeffreys, A. J., Wilson, V. & Thein, S. L. Individual-specific
‘fingerprints’ of human DNA. Nature316, 76–79 (1985).
3. Primorac, D. & Schanfield, M. S. Application of forensic DNA
testing in the legal system. Croat. Med. J. 41, 32–46 (2000).
4. Landsteiner, K. Zur Kenntnis der antifermentativen,
lytisichen und agglutinierenden Wirkungen des
Blutserums und der Lymphe. Zentralbl. Bakteriol. 27,
357–362 (1900).
5. Gill, P ., Jeffreys, A. J. & Werrett, D. J. Forensic application of
DNA ‘fingerprints’. Nature318, 577–579 (1985).
Shows, for the first time, the application of DNA
profiling in forensics, demonstrated by analysing stain
material. Also, the first description of differential lysis
method to separate sperm from vaginal epithelial cells.
6. Rudin, N. & Inman, K. An Introduction to Forensic DNA
Analysis 2nd edn (CRC, Florida, USA, 2002).
7. Helmuth, R. et al. HLA-DQ alpha allele and genotype
frequencies in various human populations, determined by
using enzymatic amplification and oligonucleotide probes.
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 47, 515–523 (1990).
8. Kimpton, C. P . et al. Automated DNA profiling employing
multiplex amplification of short tandem repeat loci. PCR
Methods Appl. 3, 13–22 (1993).
9. Sullivan, K. M., Mannucci, A., Kimpton, C. P . & Gill, P . 
A rapid and quantitative DNA sex test: fluorescence-based
PCR analysis of X-Y homologous gene amelogenin.
Biotechniques15, 636–641 (1993).
10. Cotton, E. A. et al. Validation of the AMPFlSTR SGM plus
system for use in forensic casework. Forensic Sci. Int. 112,
151–161 (2000).
11. Moretti, T. R. et al. Validation of short tandem repeats (STRs)
for forensic usage: performance testing of fluorescent
multiplex STR systems and analysis of authentic and
simulated forensic samples. J. Forensic Sci. 46, 647–660
(2001).
12. Greenspoon, S. A. et al. Validation and implementation of
the PowerPlex 16 BIO System STR multiplex for forensic
casework. J. Forensic Sci. 49, 71–80 (2004).
13. Junge, A., Lederer, T., Braunschweiger, G. & Madea, B.
Validation of the multiplex kit genRESMPX-2 for forensic
casework analysis. Int. J. Legal Med. 117, 317–325 (2003).
14. Schneider, P . M. & Martin, P . D. Criminal DNA databases:
the European situation. Forensic Sci. Int. 119, 232–238
(2001).
15. Butler, J. M. Forensic DNA Typing: Biology and Technology
Behind STR Markers(Academic Press, 2001).
16. Balding, D. J. When can a DNA profile be regarded as
unique? Sci. Justice39, 257–260 (1999).
17. Budowle, B., Chakraborty, R., Carmody, G. & Monson, K. L.
Source attribution of a forensic DNA profile. Forensic Sci.
Comm. [online] <www.fbi.gov/programs/lab/fsc/backissu/
july2000/source.htm> (2000).
18. Werrett, D., Pinchin, R. & Hale, R. Problem solving: DNA
data acquisition and analysis. Profiles DNA2, 3–6 (1998).
19. Gill, P . et al. A new method of STR interpretation using
inferential logic — development of a criminal intelligence
database. Int. J. Legal Med. 109, 14–22 (1996).
20. Gill, P ., Sparkes, R. & Kimpton, C. Development of
guidelines to designate alleles using an STR multiplex
system. Forensic Sci. Int. 89, 185–197 (1997).
21. Johnson, P . & Williams, R. Post-conviction DNA testing:
the UK’s first ‘exoneration’ case? Sci. Justice 44, 77–82
(2004).
22. Werrett, D. J. The National DNA Database. Forensic Sci. Int.
88, 33–42 (1997).
23. Forensic Science Service. The National DNA Database.
annual report 2002–03.(2003). <http://www.forensic.
gov.uk/forensic/news/press_releases/2003/NDNAD_Annual
_Report_02-03.pdf>
24. Forensic Science Service. First successful prosecution after
use of pioneering DNA technique. <http://www.forensic.
gov.uk/forensic_t/inside/news/list_press_release.php?case
=23&y=2004> (2004).
25. Gill, P . An assessment of the utility of single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) for forensic purposes. Int. J. Legal
Med. 114, 204–210 (2001).
26. Phillips, C., Lareu, V., Sala, A. & Carracedo, A. Nonbinary
single-nucleotide polymorphism markers. Prog. Forensic
Genet. 10, 27–29 (2004).
27. Butler, J. M., Shen, Y. & McCord, B. R. The development of
reduced size STR amplicons as tools for analysis of
degraded DNA. J. Forensic Sci. 48, 1054–1064 (2003).
28. Gill, P ., Werrett, D. J., Budowle, B. & Guerrieri, R. An
assessment of whether SNPs will replace STRs in national
DNA databases — joint considerations of the DNA working
group of the European Network of Forensic Science
Institutes (ENFSI) and the Scientific Working Group on DNA
Analysis Methods (SWGDAM). Sci. Justice44, 51–53
(2004).
29. Roewer, L. et al. Online reference database of Y-
chromosomal short tandem repeat (STR) haplotypes.
Forensic Sci. Int. 118, 103–111 (2001).
Describes the Y-chromosomal DNA reference
database that has become indispensable to the
analysis of Y-STR DNA profiles.
30. Home Office. Criminal Statistics England and Wales 2002
(The Stationery Office, London, 2003).
31. Shewale, J. G., Sikka, S. C., Schneida, E. & Sinha, S. K.
DNA profiling of azoospermic semen samples from
vasectomized males by using Y-PLEX 6 amplification kit. J.
Forensic Sci. 48, 127–129 (2003).
32. Prinz, M., Ishii, A., Coleman, A., Baum, H. J. & Shaler, R. C.
Validation and casework application of a Y chromosome
specific STR multiplex. Forensic Sci. Int120, 177–188
(2001).
33. Kayser, M. et al. A comprehensive survey of human Y-
chromosomal microsatellites. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 74,
1183–1197 (2004).
34. Kayser, M. et al. Online Y-chromosomal short tandem repeat
haplotype reference database (YHRD) for US populations. J.
Forensic Sci. 47, 513–519 (2002).
35. Krawczak, M. Forensic evaluation of Y-STR haplotype
matches: a comment. Forensic Sci. Int. 118, 114–115
(2001).
36. de Knijff, P . Son, give up your gun: presenting Y-STR results
in court. Profiles DNA6, 3–5 (2003).

750 | OC TOBER 2004 | VOLUME 5 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
REVIEWS
37. Jobling, M. A. In the name of the father: surnames and
genetics. Trends Genet. 17, 353–357 (2001).
38. Sykes, B. & Irven, C. Surnames and the Y chromosome.
Am. J. Hum. Genet. 66, 1417–1419 (2000).
39. Jobling, M. A. & Tyler-Smith, C. The human Y chromosome:
an evolutionary marker comes of age. Nature Rev. Genet. 4,
598–612 (2003).
40. Sinha, S. K. et al. Development and validation of a
multiplexed Y-chromosome STR genotyping system, Y-
PLEX 6, for forensic casework. J. Forensic Sci. 48, 93–103
(2003).
41. Butler, J. M. Recent developments in Y-Short Tandem
Repeat and Y-Single Nucleotide Polymorphism analysis.
Forensic Sci. Rev. 15, 91–111 (2003).
42. Richards, M. & Macaulay, V.  The mitochondrial gene tree
comes of age. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 68, 1315–1320
(2001).
43. Holland, M. M. & Parsons, T. J. Mitochondrial DNA
sequence analysis — validation and use for forensic
casework. Forensic Sci. Rev. 11, 21–49 (1999).
44. Budowle, B., Allard, M. W., Wilson, M. R. & Chakraborty, R.
Forensics and mitochondrial DNA: applications, debates
and foundations. Annu. Rev. Genomics Hum. Genet. 4,
119–141 (2003).
45. Vallone, P . M., Just, R. S., Coble, M. D., Butler, J. M. &
Parsons, T. J. A multiplex allele-specific primer extension
assay for forensically informative SNPs distributed
throughout the mitochondrial genome. Int. J. Legal Med.
118, 147–157 (2004).
46. Coble, M. D. et al. Single nucleotide polymorphisms over the
entire mtDNA genome that increase the power of forensic
testing in Caucasians. Int. J. Legal Med. 118, 137–146
(2004).
47. Budowle, B. et al. Mitochondrial DNA regions HVI and HVII
population data. Forensic Sci. Int. 103, 23–35 (1999).
48. Monson, K. L., Miller, K. W. P ., Wilson, M. R., DiZinno, J. A.
& Budowle, B. The mtDNA population database: an
integrated software and database resource of forensic
comparison. Forensic Sci. Comm. 4, [online]
<http://www.fbi.gov/hq/lab/fsc/backissu/april2002/
miller1.htm>(2002).
49. Parson, W. et al. The EDNAP mitochondrial DNA population
database (EMPOP) collaborative exercises: organisation,
results and perspectives. Forensic Sci. Int. 139, 215–226
(2004).
50. Yao, Y.-G., Bravi, C. M. & Bandelt, H. J. A call for mtDNA
data quality control in forensic science. Forensic Sci. Int.
141, 1–6 (2004).
51. Tully, G. et al. Results of a collaborative study of the EDNAP
group regarding mitochondrial DNA heteroplasmy and
segregation in hair shafts. Forensic Sci. Int. 140, 1–11
(2004).
52. Tully, G. et al. Considerations by the European DNA profiling
(EDNAP) group on the working practices, nomenclature and
interpretation of mitochondrial DNA profiles. Forensic Sci.
Int. 124, 83–91 (2001).
53. Ivanov, P . L. et al. Mitochondrial DNA sequence
heteroplasmy in the Grand Duke of Russia Georgij Romanov
establishes the authenticity of the remains of Tsar Nicholas II.
Nature Genet. 12, 417–420 (1996).
DNA analysis of the remains of Georgij Romanov
solves one of the biggest historical mysteries of the
twentieth century.
54. Lewontin, R. C. The apportionment of human diversity. Evol.
Biol. 6, 381–398 (1972).
55. Barbujani, G., Magagni, A., Minch, E. & Cavalli-Sforza, L. L.
An apportionment of human DNA diversity. Proc. Natl Acad.
Sci. USA94, 4516–4519 (1997).
56. Bamshad, M., Wooding, S., Salisbury, B. A. & Stephens, J. C.
Deconstructing the relationship between genetics and race.
Nature Rev. Genet. 5, 598–609 (2004).
57. Lowe, A. L., Urquhart, A., Foreman, L. A. & Evett, I. W.
Inferring ethnic origin by means of an STR profile. Forensic
Sci. Int. 119, 17–22 (2001).
58. Shriver, M. D. et al. Ethnic-affiliation estimation by use of
population-specific DNA markers. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 60,
957–964 (1997).
59. Collins-Schramm, H. E. et al. Ethnic-difference markers for
use in mapping by admixture linkage disequilibrium. Am. J.
Hum. Genet. 70, 737–750 (2002).
60. Shriver, M. D. & Kittles, R. A. Genetic ancestry and the
search for personalized genetic histories. Nature Rev. Genet.
5, 611–618 (2004).
61. Sturm, R. A., Teasdale, R. D. & Box, N. F. Human
pigmentation genes: identification, structure and
consequences of polymorphic variation. Gene 277, 49–62
(2001).
62. Valverde, P ., Healy, E., Jackson, I., Rees, J. L. & Thody, A. J.
Variants of the melanocyte-stimulating hormone receptor
gene are associated with red hair and fair skin in humans.
Nature Genet. 11, 328–330 (1995).
63. Bastiaens, M. et al. The melanocortin-1 receptor gene is the
major freckle gene. Hum. Mol. Genet. 10, 1701–1708
(2001).
64. Grimes, E. A., Noake, P . J., Dixon, L. & Urquhart, A.
Sequence polymorphism in the human melanocortin 1
receptor gene as an indicator of the red hair phenotype.
Forensic Sci. Int. 122, 124–129 (2001).
65. Eiberg, H. & Mohr, J. Assignment of genes coding for brown
eye colour (BEY2) and brown hair colour (HCL3) on
chromosome 15q. Eur. J. Hum. Genet. 4, 237–241 (1996).
66. Rebbeck, T. R. et al. Pgene as an inherited biomarker of
human eye color. Cancer Epidemiol. Biomarkers Prev. 11,
782–784 (2002).
67. Frudakis, T. et al. Sequences associated with human iris
pigmentation. Genetics165, 2071–2083 (2003).
68. Menotti-Raymond, M. A., David, V. A. & O’Brien, S. J. Pet
cat hair implicates murder suspect. Nature386, 774 (1997).
69. DeNise, S. et al. Power of exclusion for parentage
verification and probability of match for identity in American
Kennel Club breeds using 17 canine microsatellite markers.
Anim. Genet. 35, 14–17 (2004).
70. Wetton, J. H. et al. Mitochondrial profiling of dog hairs.
Forensic Sci. Int. 133, 235–241 (2003).
71. Parson, W., Pegoraro, K., Niederstatter, H., Foger, M. &
Steinlechner, M. Species identification by means of the
cytochrome b gene. Int. J. Legal Med. 114, 23–28 (2000).
72. Branicki, W., Kupiec, T. & Pawlowski, R. Validation of
cytochrome b sequence analysis as a method of species
identification. J. Forensic. Sci. 48, 83–87 (2003).
73. Wetton, J. H., Tsang, C. S. F., Roney, C. A. & Spriggs, A. C.
An extremely sensitive species-specific ARMs PCR test for
the presence of tiger bone DNA. Forensic Sci. Int. 140,
139–145 (2004).
74. Hsieh, H.-M. et al. Species identification of rhinoceros horns
using the cytochrome b gene. Forensic Sci. Int. 136, 1–11
(2003).
75. Korpelainen, H. & Virtanen, V. DNA fingerprinting of mosses.
J. Forensic Sci. 48, 804–807 (2003).
76. Congiu, L., Chicca, M., Cella, R., Rossi, R. & Bernacchia, G.
The use of random amplified polymorphic DNA (RAPD)
markers to identify strawberry varieties: a forensic
application. Mol. Ecol. 9, 229–232 (2000).
77. Lekha, Kumar, M., Kathirvel, M., Rao, G. V. & Nagaraju, J.
DNA profiling of disputed chilli samples (Capsicum annum)
using ISSR-PCR and FISSR-PCR marker assays. Forensic
Sci. Int. 116, 63–68 (2001).
78. Linacre, A. & Thorpe, J. Detection and identificaion of
cannabis by DNA. Forensic Sci. Int. 91, 71–76 (1998).
79. Hsieh, H.-M. et al. A highly polymorphic STR locus in
Cannabis sativa. Forensic Sci. Int. 131, 53–58 (2003).
80. Ou, C. Y. et al. Molecular epidemiology of HIV transmission
in a dental practice. Science256, 1165–1171 (1992).
81. Keim, P . Microbial Forensics: a scientific assessment
(American Academy of Microbiology, Washington, DC, USA,
2003).
82. Goedecke, N. et al. A high-performance multilane
microdevice system designed for the DNA forensics
laboratory. Electrophoresis25, 1678–1686 (2004).
83. Paegel, B. M., Blazej, R. G. & Mathies, R. A. Microfluidic
devices for DNA sequencing: sample preparation and
electrophoretic analysis. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 14, 42–50
(2003).
84. Dean, F. B. et al. Comprehensive human genome
amplification using multiple displacement amplification.
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA99, 5261–5266 (2002).
85. Schneider, P . M. et al. Whole genome amplification — the
solution for a common problem in forensic casework? Prog.
Forensic Genet. 10, 24–26 (2004).
86. Juusola, J. & Ballantyne, J. Messenger RNA profiling: a
prototype method to supplant conventional methods for
body fluid identification. Forensic Sci. Int. 135, 85–96 (2003).
Provides an insight into the potential of mRNA to
analyse the type of body fluid in crime-scene samples.
87. Ackerman, M. J., Tester, D. J. & Driscoll, D. J. Molecular
autopsy of sudden unexplained death in the young. Am. J.
Forensic Med. Pathol. 22, 105–111 (2001).
88. Lunetta, P ., Levo, A., Männikkö, A., Penttilä, A. & Sajantila, A.
Death in bathtub revisited with molecular genetics: a victim
with suicidal traits and a LQTS mutation. Forensic Sci. Int.
130, 122–124 (2002).
89. Levo, A., Koski, A., Ojanpera, I., Vuori, E. & Sajantila, A.
Post-mortem SNP analysis of CYP2D6gene reveals
correlation between genotype and opioid drug (tramadol)
metabolite ratios in blood. Forensic Sci. Int. 135, 9–15
(2003).
90. Lander, E. S. & Budowle, B. DNA fingerprinting dispute laid
to rest. Nature371, 735–738 (1994).
91. Foreman, L. A. & Evett, I. W. Statistical analyses to support
forensic interpretation for a new ten-locus STR profiling
system. Int. J. Legal Med. 114, 147–55 (2001).
92. Balding, D. J. & Donnelly, P . Inferring identity from DNA
profile evidence. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA92,
11741–11745 (1995).
93. Garbolino, P . & Taroni, F. Evaluation of scientific evidence
using Bayesian networks. Forensic Sci. Int. 125, 149–155
(2002).
94. Evett, I. W., Gill, P . D., Jackson,G.,Whitaker, J. & Champod,C.
Interpreting small quantities of DNA: the hierarchy of
propositions and the use of Bayesian networks. J. Forensic
Sci. 47, 520–530 (2002).
95. Clayton, T. M., Whitaker, J. P ., Sparkes, R. L. & Gill, P .
Analysis and intepretation of mixed forensic stains using
DNA STR profiling. Forensic Sci. Int. 91, 55–70 (1998).
96. Evett, I. W., Buffery, C., Willot, G. & Stoney, D. A. A guide to
interpreting single locus profiles of DNA mixtures in forensic
cases. J. Forensic Sci. 31, 41–47 (1991).
97. Weir, B. S., Triggs, C. M., Starling, L., Stowell, K. A. J. &
Buckleton, J. Interpreting DNA mixtures. J. Forensic Sci. 42,
213–222 (1997).
98. Evett, I. W., Gill, P . & Lambert, J. A. Taking account of peak
areas when interpreting mixed DNA profiles. J. Forensic Sci.
43, 62–69 (1998).
99. Gill, P ., Sparkes, R. & Buckleton, J. S. Interpretation of
simple mixtures when artefacts such as a stutters are
present — with special reference to multiplex STRs used by
the Forensic Science Service. Forensic Sci. Int. 95, 213–224
(1998).
100. Perlin, M. W. & Szabady, B. Linear mixture analysis: a
mathematical approach to resolving mixed DNA samples. 
J. Forensic Sci. 46, 1372–1378 (2001).
101. Bill, M., Gill, P . & Curran, J. L. PENDULUM — a guideline
based approach to the interpretation of STR mixtures.
Forensic Sci. Int. (in the press).
102. Gill, P ., Whitaker, J., Flaxman, C., Brown, N. & Buckleton, J.
An investigation of the rigor of interpretation rules for STRs
derived from less than 100 pg of DNA. Forensic Sci. Int.
112, 17–40 (2000).
103. Schmidt, T., Hummel, S. & Herrmann, B. Evidence of
contamination in PCR laboratory disposables.
Naturwissenschaften82, 423–431 (1995).
104. Gill, P . & Kirkham, A. Development of a simulation model to
assess the impact of contamination in casework using
STRs. J. Forensic Sci. 49, 485–491 (2004).
105. Curran, J. M., Gill, P . & Bill, M. R. Interpretation of repeat
measurement DNA evidence allowing for multiple
contributors and population substructure. Forensic Sci. Int.
(in the press).
106. Clayton, T. M., Hill, S. M., Denton, L. A., Watson, S. K. &
Urquhart, A. J. Primer binding site mutations affecting the
typing of STR loci contained within the AMPFlSTR SGM
Plus kit. Forensic Sci. Int. 139, 255–259 (2004).
107. Leibelt, C. et al. Identification of a D8S1179 primer
binding site mutation and the validation of a primer
designed to recover null alleles. Forensic Sci. Int. 133,
220–227 (2003).
108. Rolf, B., Wiegand, P . & Brinkmann, B. Somatic mutations at
STR loci — a reason for three-allele pattern and mosaicism.
Forensic Sci. Int. 126, 200–202 (2002).
109. Gill, P . Role of short tandem repeat DNA in forensic
casework in the UK — past, present, and future
perspectives. Biotechniques32, 366–368 (2002).
110. Santos, F. R., Pandya, A. & Tyler-Smith, C. Reliability of
DNA-based sex tests. Nature Genet. 18, 103 (1998).
111. Steinlechner, M., Berger, B., Niederstatter, H. & Parson, W.
Rare failures in the amelogenin sex test. Int. J. Legal. Med.
116, 117–120 (2002).
112. Thangaraj, K., Reddy, A. G. & Singh, L. Is the amelogenin
gene reliable for gender identification in forensic casework
and prenatal diagnosis? Int. J. Legal. Med. 116, 121–123
(2002).
113. Dauber, E. M. et al. Discrepant results of samples taken from
different tissues of a single individual. Prog. Forensic Genet.
10, 48–49 (2004).
114. Linacre, A. The UK National DNA Database. Lancet361,
1841–1842 (2003).
115. Pascali, V. L., Lago, G. & Dobosz, M. The dark side 
of the UK National DNA Database. Lancet362, 834 
(2003).
116. Johnson, P ., Martin, P . & Williams, R. Genetics and
forensics: making the National DNA Database. Sci. Studies
16, 22–37 (2003).
117. Guillén, M., Lareu, M. V., Pestoni, C., Salas, S. & Carracedo,
A. Ethical-legal problems of DNA databases in criminal
investigation. J. Med. Ethics26, 266–271 (2000).
118. Newton, G. DNA fingerprinting and national DNA databases
(The Wellcome Trust, 2004).
119. Connor, S. Take everyone’s DNA fingerprint, says pioneer.
The Independent (London, UK, 3 February 2003).
120. Hagelberg, E., Gray, I. C. & Jeffreys, A. J. Identification of the
skeletal remains of a murder victim by DNA analysis. Nature
352, 427–429 (1991).
The first analysis of bone samples to identify a
murder victim, conducted using mitochondrial DNA
analysis.

NATURE REVIEWS | GENETICS VOLUME 5 | OC TOBER 2004 | 751
REVIEWS
121. Clayton, T. M., Whitaker, J. & Maguire, C. N. Identification of
bodies from the scene of a mass disaster using DNA
amplification of short tandem repeat (STR) loci. Forensic Sci.
Int. 76, 7–15 (1995).
The first use of STRs on a mass disaster case,
demonstrating their usefulness in identifying highly
degraded remains.
122. Olaisen, B., Stenersen, M. & Mevåg, B. Identification by
DNA analysis of the victims of the August 1996
Spitzbergen civil aircraft disaster. Nature Genet. 15,
402–405 (1997).
123. Leclair, B., Frégeau, C. J., Bowen, K. L. & Fourney, R. M.
Enhanced kinship analysis and STR-based DNA typing for
human identification in mass fatality incidents: the Swissair
Flight 111 disaster. J. Forensic Sci. 49,
doi:10.1520/JFS2003311 (2004).
124. Huffine, E., Crews, J., Kennedy, B., Bomberger, K. & Zinbo, A.
Mass identification of persons missing from the break-up of
the former Yugoslavia: structure, function, and role of the
International Commission on Missing Persons. Croat. Med. J.
42, 271–275 (2001).
125. Marchi, E. Methods developed to identify victims of the
World Trade Center disaster. Am. Labor. 36, 30–36 (2004).
126. Budimlija, Z. M. et al. World Trade Center human
identification project: experiences with individual body
identification cases. Croat. Med. J. 44, 259–263 (2003).
127. Brenner, C. H. & Weir, B. S. Issues and strategies in the
identification of World Trade Center victims. Theor. Popul.
Biol. 63, 173–178 (2003). 
Provides a valuable insight into the interpretation
problems that might arise in a major mass disaster,
and how they can be solved.
128. Leclair, B. Large-scale comparative genotyping and
kinship analysis: evolution in its use for human
identification in mass fatality incidents and missing persons
databasing. Prog. Forensic Genet. 10, 42–44 (2004).
129. Bille, T. et al. Novel method of DNA extraction from bones
assisted DNA identification of World Trade Center victims.
Prog. Forensic Genet. 10, 553–555 (2004).
130. Gill, P . et al. Identification of the remains of the Romanov
family by DNA analysis. Nature Genet. 6, 130–135 (1994).
131. Gill, P . et al. Establishing the identity of Anna Anderson
Manahan. Nature Genet. 9, 9–10 (1995).
132. Mourant, A. E., Kopec, A. C. & Domaniewska–Sobczak, K.
The distribution of the human blood groups and other
polymorphisms(Oxford Univ. Press, London, 1976).
133. Harris, H. & Hopkinson, D. A. Handbook of enzyme
electrophoresis in human genetics(North-Holland Pub. Co.,
Amsterdam / New York, 1976).
134. Edwards, A., Civitello, A., Hammond, H. A. & Caskey, C. T.
DNA typing and genetic-mapping with trimeric and tetrameric
tandem repeats. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 49, 746–756 (1991).
135. Roewer, L. & Epplen, J. T. Rapid and sensitive typing of
forensic stains by PCR amplification of polymorphic simple
repeat sequences in case work. Forensic Sci. Int. 53,
163–171 (1992).
136. National Research Council Committee on DNA Technology
in Forensic Science. DNA Technology in Forensic Science,
(National Academy Press, Washington, DC, USA, 1992).
137. National Research Council Committee on DNA Technology in
Forensic Science. The Evaluation of Forensic DNA Evidence,
(National Academy Press, Washington, DC, USA, 1996).
Many of the recommendations of this NRC report
have been incorporated into casework and it has
provided a reference point for the development of
DNA profiling.
138. van Oorschot, R. A. H. & Jones, M. J. DNA fingerprints from
fingerprints. Nature387, 767 (1997).
The first demonstration that DNA profiles can be
obtained from fingerprints on touched surfaces. This
rapidly led to the development of low copy number
methods.
139. Findlay, I., Frazier, R., Taylor, A. & Urquhart, A. Single cell
DNA fingerprinting for forensic applications. Nature389,
555–556 (1997).
140. Martin, P . D. National DNA databases — practice and
practicability. A forum for discussion. Prog. Forensic Genet.
10, 1–8 (2004).
Acknowledgements
We thank Alec Jeffreys, Chris Tyler-Smith and four anonymous
reviewers for helpful comments on the manuscript. We apologize to
colleagues whose work we were unable to cite owing to space
restrictions. M.A.J. is supported by a Wellcome Trust Senior
Fellowship in Basic Biomedical Science.
Competing interests statement
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Online links
DATABASES
STRBase: 
http://www.cstl.nist.gov/biotech/strbase/index.htm
The following terms in this article are linked online to:
Entrez: http://www.ncbi.nih.gov/Entrez/
MC1R
OMIM: http://www.ncbi.mlm.nih.gov/Omim/
Long QT syndrome
FURTHER INFORMATION
UK Forensic Science Service:
http://www.forensic.gov.uk/forensic_t/index.htm
Innocence Project: http://www.innocenceproject.org/
International Organization for Standardization: 
http://www.iso.org/iso/en/ISOOnline.frontpage
Access to this interactive links box is free online.

752 | OC TOBER 2004 | VOLUME 5 www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
REVIEWS
CORRECTION 
ENCODED EVIDENCE: DNA IN FORENSIC ANALYSIS 
Mark A. Jobling and Peter Gill 
Nature Reviews Genetics5, 739–751 (2004); doi:10.1038/nrg1455
The reference highlight for reference 120 (Hagelberg, E., Gray, I.C. & Jeffreys, A.J. Identification of the skeletal remains of a murder
victim by DNA analysis.Nature352, 427–429 (1991)) incorrectly read: “The first analysis of bone samples to identify a murder victim,
using mitochondrial DNA analysis. ” This should have read: “The first analysis of bone samples to identify a murder victim, using
analysis of STRs. ” Jobling and Gill apologize to the authors for this error.
This correction has been made to the online enhanced text and PDF version of this review.

75 
 
Annexure I 
 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 128 of 2019 
 
THE DNA TECHNOLOGY (USEANDAPPLICATION) REGULATION     
BILL,2019  
——————  
ARRANGEMENTOFCLAUSES  
——————  
CHAPTERI  
PRELIMINARY 
 
CLAUSES 
 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTERII  
DNA REGULATORY BOARD 
 
3. Establishment of DNA Regulatory Board.  
4. Composition of Board.  
5. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson 
and Member.  
6. Meetings of Board.  
7. Member not to participate in meetings in certain cases.  
8. Removal and resignation of Chairperson or Member and filling up of 
casual vacancies of Board.  
9. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board.  
10. Delegation of powers of Board.  
11. Officers and other employees of Board.  
12. Functions of Board.  
CHAPTERIII  
ACCREDITATION OF DNA LABORATORIES 
 
13. Prohibition of DNA testing, etc., without accreditation.  
14. Granting of accreditation or renewal thereof.  
15. Power of Board to suspend or revoke accreditation.  
16. Appeal against rejection, suspension or revocation of accreditation.  
CHAPTERIV 
 
 
17. Obligations of DNA laboratory.  
18. Appointment of incharge, scientific, technical and other staff, of DNA laboratory.   
19. Responsibilities of person in-charge of DNA laboratory.  
20. Measures to be taken by DNA laboratory.  
21. Consent for taking bodily substances to be taken from a person arrested. 

76 
 
 
(ii) 
 
CLAUSES  
22. Bodily substances given voluntarily.  
23. Sources and manner of collection of samples for DNA testing.  
24. Taking of bodily substances for re-examination. 
 
 
 
 
25. Establishment of DNA Data Banks.  
26. Maintenance of indices by DNA Data Bank.  
27. Directors of DNA Data Banks.  
28. Officers and other employees of National DNA Data Bank and Regional DNA 
Data Banks.  
29. Comparison and communication of DNA profiles.  
30. Sharing of DNA profiles with foreign Government or international organisation.  
31. Retention and removal of records.  
CHAPTERVI  
PROTECTION OF INFORMATION 
 
32. Security and confidentiality of information.  
33. Use of DNA profiles, DNA samples and records, etc., for facilitating identification 
of persons.  
34. Access to information in certain cases.  
35. Access to information for operation, maintenance and training.  
36. Access to information in DNA Data Bank for one-time keyboard search.  
37. Restriction on access to information in crime scene index.  
38. Prohibition on access to information in DNA Data Bank. 
 
CHAPTERVII  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS 
 
39. Grants by Central Government.  
40. DNA Regulatory Board Fund.  
41. Budget.  
42. Annual report.  
43. Accounts and audit of Board.  
44. Annual report and auditor's report to be laid before Parliament. 
 
CHAPTERVIII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
 
45. Penalty for unauthorised disclosure of information in DNA Data Bank.   
46. Penalty for obtaining information from DNA Data Bank without authorisation.   
47. Penalty for using DNA sample or result without authorisation.  
48. Penalty for unlawful access to information in DNA Data Bank.  
49. Penalty for destruction, alterations, contamination or tampering with 
biological evidence. 

77 
 
 
(iii) 
 
CLAUSES  
50. Penalty for contravention where no specific punishment is provided.  
51. Offences by companies or institutions. 
 
 
 
52. Chairperson, Members, officers to be public servants.  
53. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
54. Power of Central Government to supersede Board.  
55. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
56. Power to amend Schedule.  
57. Court not to have jurisdiction.  
58. Power to make rules.  
59. Power to make regulations.  
60. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
61. Power to remove difficulties.  
THE SCHEDULE. 

78 
 
1 
 
 
 
As INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bill No. 128 of 2019 
 
 
THE DNATECHNOLOGY (USEANDAPPLICATION)  
REGULATION BILL, 2019 
 
A 
 
BILL  
to provide for the regulation of use and application of Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) 
technology for the purposes of establishing the identity of certain categories of 
persons including the vic tims, offenders, suspects, undertrials, missing persons and 
unknown deceased persons and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
 

79 
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY 
Short title, extent and commencement 
 
1. (1) This Act may be called the DNA Technology (Use and Application) 
Regulation 5 Act, 2019.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
. 

80 
 
 
 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act 
and any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be 
construed as a reference to the coming into force of that provision.  
Definitions. 2. (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—  
(i) “Board” means the DNA Regulatory Board established under sub -section 
(1) of section 3;  
(ii) “bodily substances” means any biologica l material of, or from the body 
of, a person, whether living or dead, unidentified human remains, and includes 
intimate bodily substance and non -intimate bodily substance as defined in clauses 
(a) and (c) of sub-section (3) of section 23;  
(iii) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board;  
(iv) “crime scene index” means a list of entries of DNA profiles, in a DNA 
Data Bank derived from DNA samples found—  
(a) at any place where an offence was committed or is reasonably 
suspected of having been committed; or  
(b) on or within the body of the victim, or a person reasonably 
suspected of being a victim, of an offence; or  
(c) on anything worn or carried by the victim at the time when an 
offence was, or is reasonably suspected of having been, committed; or  
(d) on or within the body of a person, or on anything, or at any place, 
associated with the commission of an offence;  
(v) “Director” means a Director of the National DNA Data Bank or a 
Regional DNA Data Bank appointed under section 27;  
(vi) “DNA Data Ba nk” means a DNA Data Bank established under sub -
section (1) of section 25;  
(vii) “DNA laboratory” means any laboratory or facility established by the 
Central Government or a State Government or a person or an organisation which 
has been granted accreditation under this Act to perform DNA testing;  
(viii) “DNA profile” means the result of analysis of a DNA sample for 
establishing human identification in respect of matters listed in the Schedule;   
(ix) “DNA sample” means bodily substances of any nature colle cted for 
conducting DNA testing and includes the materials derived in a DNA laboratory 
from such bodily substances;  
(x) “DNA testing” means the procedure followed in DNA laboratory to 
develop DNA profile;  
(xi) “Fund” means Fund of the Board constituted u nder sub -section ( 1) of 
section 40;  
(xii) “known sample” means the bodily substances of a person whose identity 
is established;  
(xiii) “medical practitioner” means a medical practitioner who possesses any 
medical qualification as defined in clause ( h) of  section 2 of the Indian Medical 
Council Act, 1956 and whose name has been entered in a State Medical Register 
under that Act;  
(xiv) “Member” means a Member of the Board and includes the Chairperson 
and Vice-Chairperson; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
102 of 1956. 
 
 
 
45 

81 
 
 
(xv) “Member-Secretary” means the Member-Secretary of the Board;  
(xvi) “missing persons' index” means a list of entries of DNA profiles, in a 
DNA Data Bank, derived from—  
(a) unidentified human remains; or  
5 (b) the personal effects of persons who are missing; or  
(c) the bodily substances of relatives of the missing persons;  
(xvii) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;   
(xviii) “offenders' index” means a list of entries of DNA profiles of samples 
taken from offenders, in a DNA Data Bank;  
10 (xix) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made by the Central 
Government under this Act;  
(xx) “proficiency testing” means a quality assurance measure used to monitor 
performance and identify areas in which improvement may be needed and includes— 
 
(a) internal test which is devised and administered by the DNA laboratory;  
15 and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
45 of 1860. 40  
1 of 1872.  
2 of 1974. 
 
(b) external test, which may be open or blind, and which is devised and 
administered by an external agency;  
(xxi) “quality assurance” includes the systematic actions necessary to 
demonstrate that a product or service meets specified standards of quality;   
(xxii) “quality manual”  means a document which specifies the quality 
procedures, quality systems and practices of an organisation relating to standards, 
quality control and quality assurance;  
(xxiii) “quality system” means the organisational structure, responsibilities, 
procedure, process and resources for implementing quality management;  
(xxiv) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Board under this Act;  
(xxv) “suspects' index” or “undertrials' index” means a list of entries of DNA 
profiles derived from DNA samples taken from the suspects or, as the case may be, 
undertrials, in a DNA Data Bank;  
(xxvi) “unknown deceased persons' index” means a list of entries of DNA 
profiles derived from DNA samples taken from the remains of a deceased person, 
whose identity is not known, maintained in a DNA Data Bank;  
(xxvii) “validation process” means the process by which a procedure is evaluated 
to determine its efficacy and reliability for casework analysis and includes— 
 
(a) developmental process, being the acquisition of test da ta and 
determination of conditions and limitations, of any new DNA methodology 
for use on case samples; and  
(b) internal process, being an accumulation of test data within the DNA 
laboratory, to demonstrate that the established methods and procedures are 
performed as specified in the laboratory.  
(2) The words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the 
Indian Penal Code, the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973, shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those Codes or that Act. 

82 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Establishment 
of DNA 
Regulatory 
Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Composition 
of Board. 
 
 
CHAPTER II  
DNA REGULATORY BOARD 
 
3. (1) The Central Government may by notification, establish for the purposes of 
this Act, a Board to be called the DNA Regulatory Board.  
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual 5 
succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire,   
hold and dispose of property, both movabl e and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by   
the said name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at such place in the National Capital Region,   
as the Central Government may, by notification, specify. 10  
(4) The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, establish 
regional offices at such other places as it may deem necessary.  
4. The Board shall consist of the following Members to be appointed by the Central 
Government, namely:—  
(a) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Department of Biotechnology,  15 
who shall be the Chairperson, ex officio;  
(b) an eminent person from the field of biological sciences having experience of   
not less than twenty-five years in the field, who shall be the Vice-Chairperson;  
(c) a member of the National Human Rights Commission to be nominated by its   
Chairperson, ex officio; 20 
(d) the Director -General of the National Investigation Agency and the Director   
of the Central Bureau of Investigation or their nominees not below rank of the Joint  
Director, to be nominated by the Central Government, ex officio;  
(e) the Director-General of Police of a State, to be nominated by the Central  
Government by rotation every three years from amongst the States in alphabetical  25 
order, ex officio;  
(f) the Director of the Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics,  
Hyderabad, to be nominated by the Central Government, ex officio;  
(h) the Director of the National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration   
of Laboratories, New Delhi, to be nominated by the Central Government, ex officio; 30 
(h) the Director of a Central Forensic Science Laboratory to be nominated by  
the Central Government, by rotation every three years, ex officio;  
(i) an officer not below the rank of the Joint Secretary to the Government of  
India in the Ministry of Law and Justice, to be nominated by the Central Government,   
ex officio; 35 
(j) an officer not below the rank of the Joint Secretary to the Government of   
India in the Ministry of Science and Technology, to be nominated by the Central  
Government, ex officio;  
(k) one expert, from amongst persons of eminence in the field of biological  
sciences having experience of not less than twenty-five years in the field; and 40  
(l) an officer, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India or 
equivalent, with knowledge and experience in biological sciences, to be nominated by 
the Central Government, ex officio, who shall be the Member-Secretary. 

83 
 
 
 
5. (1) The Chairperson shall hold the office in the Board till he remains Secretary 
in the Department of Biotechnology.  
(2) The Vice-Chairperson appointed under clause (b) and the Member appointed under 
clause (k), of section 4, shall hold office for a period of three years or till he attains the  
5 age of sixty-five years, whichever is earlier and shall be eligible for re-nomination for a 
further period of three years.  
(3) The Vice -Chairperson appointed under clause ( b) and the Member appointed 
under clause ( k), of section 4, shall b e entitled to such pay and allowances as may be 
prescribed.  
10 (4) The Chairperson and other ex officio Members may be entitled to such 
allowances as may be prescribed.  
6. (1) The Board shall meet at such time and place and shall, subject to this section, 
observe such rules of procedure with regard to the transaction of business at its meetings 
(including the quorum at such meetings) as may be specified by regulations.  
15 (2) The Chairperson shall preside over the meetings of the Board and if, for any 
reason, he is unable to attend a meeting, the Vice -Chairperson and in his absence, the 
senior-most Member present, reckoned from the date of his appointment to the Board, 
shall preside over such meeting: 
 
Provided that in case of common date of appointment of Members, the Member 20 
senior in age shall be considered as senior to the other Members.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be decided 
by a majority of votes of the Members present and voting, and in the event of an equality 
of votes, the Chairperson or, in his absence, the Vice -Chairperson or, in his absence, the 
Member presiding over the meeting, shall have a casting vote. 
 
25 (4) Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the Chairperson shall have powers 
of general superintende nce and direction of the affairs of the Board and may also 
exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him by the Board.  
(5) All orders and decisions of the Board shall be authenticated by the Member-
Secretary.  
30 7. Any Member having any direct or in direct interest, whether pecuniary or otherwise,  
in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Board, shall, as soon as possible 
after relevant circumstances have come to his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at 
such meeting and such disclosure shall be recorded in the proceedings of the Board, and such 
Member shall not take part in any deliberation or decision of the Board 
35 with respect to that matter.  
8. (1) The Central Government may remove from office the Chairperson or any 
other Member, who—  
(a) has been adjudged as an insolvent;  
(b) has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude;  
40 (c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member; 
 
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office 
prejudicial to the public interest:  
45 Provided that the Chairperson or a Member shall not be removed from office on the 
grounds specified under clause (d) or clause (e) except by an order made by the Central 
 
 
Term of  
office and  
conditions of  
service of  
Chairperson,  
Vice-  
Chairperson  
and Member. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Meetings of 
Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Member not to 
participate in 
meetings in 
certain cases. 
 
 
 
 
Removal and 
resignation of 
Chairperson or 
Member and 
filling up of 
casual 
vacancies of 
Board. 

84 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vacancies, 
etc., not to 
invalidate 
proceedings 
of Board. 
 
 
 
 
Delegation of 
powers of 
Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
Officers and  
other  
employees of  
Board. 
 
 
 
 
Functions of 
Board. 
 
 
Government after an inquiry made in this behalf in which the Chairperson or such 
Member has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.   
(2) If, for any reason, other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the office  
of a Member, the Central Government shall appoint another Member from the same category  
in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, and such Member shall  5  
hold office for the remainder of the term of the Member in whose place he has been appointed.  
(3) Any Member may, by a notice of not less than thirty days in writing under his 
hand, addressed to the Central Government, resign from office:  
Provided that the Member shall, unless he is permitted by the Central Government to 
relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the 
10 date of receipt of such notice or until a person is duly appointed in his place or till the 
expiry of his term of office, whichever is earlier.  
9. No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalid merely by reason of— (a) 
any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Board; 15  
or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the   
case.  
10. (1) The Board may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette,   
delegate to the Chairperson or any other Member, subject to such conditions, if any, as may 20 be 
specified in the order, its functions under this Act (except the power to make regulations), 
as it may deem necessary.  
(2) An order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,   
before each House of Parliament.  
11. (1) The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, appoint such 25 
officers and other employees, as it considers necessary, for the efficient discharge of its   
functions under this Act.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of  
service, including the manner of appointment, of the officers and other employees, under   
sub-section (1) shall be such as may be prescribed. 30  
12. The Board shall for the purposes of this Act, perform the following functions, 
namely:—  
(a) advice the Central Government and the State Governments on all issues   
relating to establishing of DNA laboratories and DNA Data Banks, including planning,   
organisational structure, size, number, location and laying down guidelines, standards 35 
and procedures for establishment and functioning of such laboratories and Data   
Banks including manpower, infrastructure and other related issues concerning   
monitoring of their performance and activities; upgradation of DNA laboratories; and  
making recommendations on funds required for such purposes;  
(b) grant accreditation to laboratories and to suspend or revoke such 40 
accreditation;  
(c) supervise DNA laboratories and DNA Data Banks, including their quality   
control;  
(d) develop the training modules and frame guidelines for training of manpower,  
including the police and investigating agencies dealing with DNA related matters;  45  
(e) regulate and audit DNA training programmes for DNA laboratories and 
DNA Data Banks; 

85 
 
 
 
(f) identify scientific advances and recommend research and development 
activities in DNA testing and related issues, including intellectual property issues;   
(g) lay down procedures for communication of information relating to DNA 
profile in civil and criminal proceedings and for investigation of crimes by law 
5 enforcement and other investigating agencies; 
 
(h) recommend methods for optimum use of DNA techniques and 
technologies for administration of justice or for such other relevant purposes as 
may be specified by regulations;  
(i) adopt and disseminate best practices, concerning the collection and analysis  
10 of DNA sample to ensure quality and consistency in the use of DNA techniques, 
and on all ethical and human rights issues relating to DNA testing in  consonance 
with international guidelines enumerated by the United Nations Organisation and 
its specialised agencies, inter alia, relating to—  
 (i) the rights and privacy of citizens; 
15 (ii) the issues concerning civil liberties; 
 (iii) issues having ethical and other social implications in adoption of 
 DNA testing technology; and 
 (iv) professional ethics in DNA testing; 
 (j) give advice on matters under this Act which may be referred to it by the 
20 Central Government or the State Government; 
 (k) make recommendations to the Central Government for the application 
 of privacy protection in relation to the access to, or the use of, DNA samples and 
 their analyses, and ensure— 
 (i) implementation and sufficiency of such protection; 
25 (ii) appropriate use and dissemination of DNA information; 
 (iii) accuracy, security and confidentiality of DNA information; 
 (iv) timely removal and destruction of obsolete, expunged or inaccurate  
DNA information; and 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
(v) such other steps as may be required to protect privacy;  
(l) facilitate exchange of ideas and information on DNA technology;  
(m) create awareness among public and other stakeholders, including police 
officers, prosecutors and judicial officers on the use and application of DNA 
technology;  
(n) assist in such manner as may be prescribed, in criminal investigation 
between various investigation agencies within the country and with any foreign 
State, international organisation or institution in dealing with DNA testing;   
(o) advice the Central Government on any modifications required to be made 
in respect of any matter under the Schedule;  
(p) frame guidelines for storage and destruction of bodily substances including  
40 known sample;  
(q) perform such other functions as may be prescribed. 

86 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prohibition of 
DNA testing, 
etc., without 
accreditation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Granting of 
accreditation 
or renewal 
thereof. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of 
Board to 
suspend or 
revoke 
accreditation. 
 
 
CHAPTER III  
ACCREDITATION OF DNA LABORATORIES 
 
13. (1) No laboratory shall undertake DNA testing, analysing or any other 
procedure to generate data and perform analysis relating thereto without obtaining 
accreditation from the Board:  
Provided that a laboratory functioning as on the date of the commencement of th is 
Act, may undertake DNA testing or any other procedure relating thereto, for a period of 
sixty days from such commencement and apply to the Board in accordance with sub -
section (2) for obtaining accreditation: 
 
Provided further that such laboratory may, after making an application, continue to 
undertake DNA testing or any other procedure relating thereto, until its application is 
decided by the Board.  
(2) A laboratory seeking accreditation under sub -section ( 1) shall apply to the 
Board in such form and m anner along with such fees and documents as may be specified 
by regulations.  
(3) A laboratory seeking accreditation shall comply with such onsite assessment 
requirements, standards and such other requirements, as may be specified by regulations.   
(4) The application for renewal of accreditation shall be made to the Board at least 
sixty days prior to the expiration of the accreditation in such form and manner and along 
with such fees as may be specified by regulations.  
14. (1) The Board may, within a period of  ninety days from the receipt of 
application for accreditation or renewal thereof, and after carrying out inspection of the 
laboratory, its records and books, and if it is satisfied that the laboratory fulfils all 
requirements under this Act, by order, gra nt accreditation to such laboratory or renew it, 
subject to such conditions as it may deem fit: 
 
Provided that no application for accreditation shall be rejected by the Board without 
recording the reasons thereof, and giving the applicant an opportunity of being heard. 
 
(2) The accreditation or renewal of accreditation under this section shall be valid 
for a period of two years.  
15. (1) The Board may revoke the accreditation granted to a DNA laboratory, if 
such laboratory fails to—  
(a) undertake DNA testing or any other procedure relating thereto;  
(b) comply with any of the conditions subject to which the accreditation has 
been granted;  
(c) comply with the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations made 
thereunder or any other law for the time being in force;  
(d) comply with the guidelines issued by the Board under this Act; or  
(e) submit or offer for inspection its laboratory or books of account and any 
other relevant documents, including audit reports, when so demanded by the 
officers or agency authorised by the Board.  
(2) Where the Board is of the opinion that any delay in revoking accreditation 
given to a DNA laboratory is prejudicial or detrimental to the public interest, it may 
suspend the accreditation forthwith pending final decision on such revocation.  
(3) No revocation of accreditation of a DNA laboratory shall be made by the Board 
without giving the laboratory an opportunity of being heard. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 

87 
 
 
 
(4) On the revo cation or suspension of accreditation of the DNA laboratory, the 
laboratory shall hand over all DNA samples and records relating to DNA testing from its 
laboratory to such DNA laboratory as may be directed by the Board and it shall not retain 
any sample or record.  
5 16. Any laboratory aggrieved, by an order of rejection of its application for  
accreditation or renewal thereof under section 14 or an order of suspension or revocation of 
accreditation under section 15, may prefer an appeal to the Central Governm ent or such other 
authority as that Government may, by notification, specify, within a period of sixty days from 
the date of such order, which shall be decided by the Central Government or the  
10 authority, as the case may be, within a period of sixty days from the date of receipt of 
such appeal.  
CHAPTERIV  
OBLIGATIONS OF DNA LABORATORY 
 
17. (1) Every DNA laboratory, which has been granted accreditation for 
undertaking 15 DNA testing or any other procedure under this Act, shall—  
(a) follow such standards and procedures for quality assurance in the 
collection, storage, testing and analysis of DNA sample,  
(b) establish and maintain such documentation and quality system, 
(c) prepare and maintain quality manuals containing such details, 
 
20 (d) share DNA data prepared and maintained by it with the National DNA 
Data Bank and the Regional DNA Data Bank, in such manner,  
as may be specified by regulations.  
(2) The DNA laboratory shall report the results of the DNA testing in conformity 
with the provisions of this Act and the regulations made thereunder.  
25 18. Every DNA laboratory shall appoint a person to be in -charge of the laboratory  
and employ such scientific, technical and other staff, possessing such qualifications and 
experience as may be specified by regulations, fo r discharging the duties and performing 
the functions under this Act. 
 
 
19. The incharge of the DNA laboratory shall,—  
30 (a) take such measures for facilitating skill upgradation and advancement in 
the knowledge of its employees in the field of DNA testing and other related fields, 
as may be specified by regulations;  
(b) ensure that its employees undergo regular training in DNA related subjects, in 
such institutions, level and intervals, as may be specified by regulations; 
 
35 (c) maintain such records relating to the laboratory and its personnel as may 
be specified by regulations.  
20. (1) Every DNA laboratory shall,—  
 (a)  possess such infrastructure, 
 (b) maintain such security and follow such procedure to avoid contamination 
40 of DNA samples,  
(c) establish and follow such documented evidence control system to ensure 
integrity of physical evidence,  
(d) establish and follow such validation process and written analytical 
procedure, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appeal against 
rejection, 
suspension or 
revocation of 
accreditation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Obligations of  
DNA  
laboratory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appointment 
of in-charge, 
scientific, 
technical and 
other staff, of 
DNA  
laboratory.  
Responsibilities 
of person in 
charge of DNA 
laboratory. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Measures to 
be taken by 
DNA  
laboratory. 

88 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consent for 
taking bodily 
substances to 
be taken from  
a person 
arrested. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Bodily  
substances  
given  
voluntarily. 
 
  
(e) prepare such indices,  
(f) use such equipment for the methods it employs,  
(h) have such documented programme for calibration of instruments and  
equipment,  
(h) conduct annual quality audits with such standards, 5 
(i) install such security system for the safety of DNA laboratory and its  
personnel,  
(j) charge such fees for conducting DNA testing or any other procedure relating   
thereto, not exceeding twenty-five thousand rupees,  
as may be specified by regulations. 10 
(2) The DNA laboratory shall, after deriving the DNA profile and depositing it with  
the DNA Data Bank,—  
(a) return the biological sample or remaining material for its preservation to the   
investigating officer in a criminal case till the disposal of the case or the order of the   
court; and 15 
(b) in all other cases, destroy the biological sample or remaining material and  
intimate the person concerned.  
(3) For the purposes of this section,—  
(a) “analytical procedure” means an orderly step by step procedure designed  
to ensure operational uniformity; 20 
(b) “quality audit” means an inspection used to evaluate, confirm or verify  
activity related to quality;  
(c) “calibration” means a set of operations which establish, under specified  
conditions, the relationship between values indicated by a measuring instrument or   
measuring system, or values represented by  a material, and the corresponding known  25 
values of a measurement.   
21. (1) No bodily substances shall be taken from a person who is arrested for an 
offence (other than the specified offences) unless the consent is given in writing for the 
taking of the bodily substances.  
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, “specified offences” means 30 
any offence punishable with death or imprisonment for a term exceeding seven years.   
(2) If the consent required under sub-section (1) for taking of bodily substances from  
a person is refused or cannot be obtained, the person investigating the case may make an   
application to the Magistrate having jurisdiction for obtaining bodily substances from the  
35 arrested person. 
(3) The Magistrate may, if he is satisfied that there is reasonable cause to believe that  
the bodily substances may confirm or disprove whether the person so arrested was involved   
in committing the offence, order for taking of bodily substances from such person.   
22. (1) Subject to sub-section (2), any person who—  
(a) was present at the scene of a crime when it was committed; or 40 
(b) is being questioned in connection with the investigation of a crime; or  
(c) intends to find the whereabouts of his missing or lost relative, in disaster or  
otherwise,  
may voluntarily consent in writing to bodily substances being taken from him for DNA   
testing. 45 

89 
 
 
 
(2) If the person giving voluntary consent is below the age of eighteen years and the 
consent of the parent or guardian of suc h person is refused or cannot be obtained, the person 
investigating the case may make an application to the Magistrate having jurisdiction, for 
obtaining such bodily substances and the Magistrate, if he is satisfied that there is  
5 reasonable cause for taking the bodily substances from such person, order for taking of 
bodily substances from that person.  
23. (1) For the purposes of this Act, samples for DNA testing may be collected 
from the following sources, namely:—  
(a) bodily substances;  
10 (b) scene of occurrence or scene of crime; 
(c) clothing and other objects; or 
 
(d) such other sources as may be specified by regulations.  
 (2) For the purposes of sub-section (1),— 
 (a) any intimate bodily substance from living persons shall be collected, and 
15 intimate forensic procedures shall be performed, by a medical practitioner; 
 (b) any non-intimate bodily substance shall be collected and non-intimate 
 forensic procedure shall be performed by the technical staff trained for the collection  
 of samples for DNA testing, under the supervision of a medical practitioner or a 
 scientist having expertise in molecular biology or such other person as may be  
20 specified by regulations:  
Provided that before collecting bodily substances for DNA testing of a victim 
or a person reasonably suspected of being a victim who is alive, or a relative of a 
missing person, or a minor or a disabled person, written consent of such victim or 
such relative or the parent or guardian of such minor or disabled person shall be   
25 obtained an d, in case of refusal, the person investigating the case may make an 
application to the Magistrate having jurisdiction, for obtaining such bodily 
substances and the Magistrate, if he is satisfied that there is reasonable cause for 
taking the bodily substan ces from such person, order for taking of bodily 
substances from that person.  
30 (3) For the purposes of this section,— 
 
(a) “intimate bodily substance” means a sample of blood, semen or any other 
tissue, fluid, urine or pubic hair, or a swab taken from a  person's body orifice other 
than mouth; or skin or tissue from an internal organ or body part, taken from or of a 
person, living or dead;  
35 (b) “intimate forensic procedure” means any of the following forensic 
procedures conducted on a living person, namely:—  
 (i) external examination of the genital or anal area, the buttocks and breasts  
 in the case of a female; 
 (ii) taking of a sample of blood; 
40 (iii) taking of a sample of pubic hair; 
 (iv) taking of a sample by swab or washing from the external genital or 
 anal area, the buttocks and breasts in the case of a female; 
 (v) taking of a sample by vacuum suction, by scraping or by lifting by 
 tape from the external genital or anal area, the buttocks and breasts in the case  
45 of a female; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sources and 
manner of 
collection of 
samples for 
DNA testing. 

90 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taking of  
bodily  
substances for  
re-  
examination. 
 
 
 
Establishment 
of DNA Data 
Banks. 
 
  
(vi) taking of a photograph or video recording of, or an impression or  
cast of a wound from, the genital or anal area, buttocks and breasts in the case   
of a female;  
(c) “non-intimate bodily substance” means any of the following taken from or   
of a person, living or dead, namely:— 5 
(i) handprint, fingerprint, footprint or toe print;  
(ii) a sample of hair other than pubic hair;  
(iii) a sample taken from a nail or under a nail;  
(iv) swab taken from any part of a person's body including mouth, but  
not any other body orifice; 10 
(v) saliva; or  
(vi) a skin impression;  
(d) “non-intimate forensic procedure” means any of the following forensic  
procedures conducted on a living individual, namely:—  
(i) examination of a part of the body other than the genital or anal area, 15 
the buttocks and breasts in the case of a female, that requires touching of the  
body or removal of clothing;  
(ii) taking of a sample of hair other than pubic hair;  
(iii) taking of a sample from a nail or under a nail;  
(iv) taking of a buccal swab with consent; 20 
(v) taking of a sample by swab or washing from any external part of the  
body other than the genital or anal area, the buttocks and breasts in the case of   
a female;  
(vi) scraping or lifting by tape from any external part of the body other  
than the genital or anal area, the buttocks and breasts in the case of a female; 25 
(vii) taking of a handprint, fingerprint, footprint or toe print; or  
(viii) taking of a photograph or video recording of, or an impression or  
cast of a wound from, a part of th e body other than the genital or anal area, the   
buttocks and breasts in the case of a female.  
24. If the trial court is satisfied with the plea of the accused person that the bodily 30 
substances taken from such person or collected from the place of occurrence of crime had  
been contaminated, the court may direct the taking of fresh bodily substances for  
re-examination.  
CHAPTERV  
DNA DATA BANK 35  
25. (1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish a National DNA 
Data Bank and such numb er of Regional DNA Data Banks for every State, or two or 
more States, as it may deem necessary.  
(2) A Regional DNA Data Bank shall share all DNA data stored and maintained by it   
with the National DNA Data Bank. 40  
(3) The National DNA Data Bank shall receive DNA data from Regional DNA 
Data Banks and shall store the DNA profiles received from the DNA laboratories in such 
format as may be specified by regulations. 

91 
 
 
 
26. (1) Every DNA Data Bank shall maintain the following indices for various 
categories of data, namely:—  
(a) a crime scene index;  
(b) a suspects' index or undertrials' index;  
5 (c) an offenders' index;  
(d) a missing persons' index; and  
(e) unknown deceased persons' index.  
(2) In addition to the indices referred to in sub-section (1), every DNA Data Bank 
shall maintain, in relation to each DNA profile, the following information, namely: —  
10 (a) in case of a profile in the suspects' index or undertrials' index or 
offenders' index, the identity of the person from whose bodily substances the 
profile was derived; and  
(b) in case of a profile, other than a profile in the suspects' index or undertrials' 
index or offenders' index, the case reference number of the investigation associated 
15 with the bodily substances from which the profile was derived.  
(3) The indices maintained under sub-section (1) shall include information of data 
based on DNA testing and records relating thereto, prepared by a DNA laboratory.   
27. (1) The Central Government shall appoint a Director of the National DNA Data 
Bank, on the recommendations of a selection committee to be constituted by that  
20 Government, in such manner and consisting of such persons, as may be prescribed, for 
the purposes of execution, maintenance and supervision of the National DNA Data Bank.   
(2) The Directo r of the National DNA Data Bank shall be a person of eminence 
possessing such educational qualifications and experience in biological sciences, as may 
be prescribed.  
25 (3) The Director of the National DNA Data Bank shall be not below the rank of a 
Director to the Government of India or equivalent and shall function under the 
supervision and control of the Board.  
(4) The Director of the National DNA Data Bank shall exercise such powers and 
perform such duties, as may be specified by regulations.  
30 (5) The Central Government may appoint a Director for each Regional DNA Data 
Bank, who shall be not below the rank of Deputy Secretary to the Government of India 
or equivalent, and shall function under the supervision and control of the Board.   
28. (1) The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, appoint such 
officers and other employees, as it considers necessary, for the efficient discharge of the   
35 functions of the National DNA Data Bank and the Regional DNA Data Banks. 
 
(2) The salaries and allowances  payable to, and the terms and other conditions of 
service including the manner of appointment, of the Director of the National DNA Data 
Bank and the Director of each of the Regional DNA Data Bank shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
40 (3) The Board may appo int such number of officers and experts and other 
employees to assist the DNA Data Banks in the discharge of its functions, on such 
remunerations and upon such terms and conditions of service, including the manner of 
appointment, as may be specified by regulations.  
29. (1) The criteria and procedure to be followed by the National DNA Data Bank on  
45 receipt of a DNA profile for comparison with DNA profiles maintained in the DNA Data 
Bank and communication of the results shall be made to such persons and in such 
manner as may be specified by regulations: 
 
 
Maintenance 
of indices by 
DNA Data 
Bank. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Directors of 
DNA Data 
Banks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Officers and  
other  
employees of  
National DNA  
Data Bank  
and Regional  
DNA Data  
Banks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Comparison  
and  
communication  
of DNA  
profiles. 

92 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sharing of  
DNA profiles  
with foreign  
Government  
or  
international  
organisation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Retention and 
removal of 
records. 
 
 
Provided that if the DNA profile is deriv ed from the bodily substances of a living 
person who is neither an offender nor a suspect or an undertrial, no comparison shall be 
made of it with the DNA profiles in the offenders' index or suspects' index or undertrials' 
index maintained in the DNA Data Bank.  
(2) Any information relating to a person's DNA profile contained in the suspects' 5 
index or undertrials' index or offenders' index of the DNA Data Bank shall be communicated 
only to the authorised persons.  
30. (1) On receipt of a DNA profile from the Government of a foreign State or an 
international organisation or any institution of such Government or international   
organisation, the National DNA Data Bank may compare such DNA profile with the DNA  10 
profiles contained in the crime scene index, the offenders' index, the suspects' index, the  
undertrials' index, the missing persons' index and the unknown deceased persons' index, to   
determine whether there is a match between the profiles and the Director of the National   
DNA Data Bank may, with the prior approval of the Central Government communicate any   
of the following information to such Government or organisation or institution, as the case  15 
may be, through any agency authorised by notification by the Central Government,   
namely:—  
(a) that there is no match between the profiles;  
(b) if there is a match between the profiles, any information relating to such  
matching DNA profile; or 20 
(c) if, in the opinion of the Director of National DNA Data Bank, the DNA profile   
is similar to the one contained in the DNA Data Bank, information relating to such  
similar DNA profile.  
(2) After receiving the similar DNA profile under clause (c) of sub-section (1), if the  
foreign Government or organisation or institution referred to in sub -section (1) informs that  25 
the possibility of a match between the similar DNA profile with the DNA profile provided by   
it has not been excluded, any further information in relation to such similar DNA profile may   
also be furnished in the manner specified in sub-section (1).  
(3) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Board,—  
(a) determine the nature and extent of sharing DNA profiles in respect of 30 
offenders, suspects, undertrials, missing persons and unknown deceased persons   
with the Government of a foreign State or an international organisation or an institution   
established by that Government or organisation, as the case may be;  
(b) seek similar information from such foreign State, organisation or institutions,   
and the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) shall mutatis mutandis, apply. 35  
31. (1) The information contained in the crime scene index shall be retained.  
(2) The Director of the National DNA Data Bank shall remove from the DNA Data   
Bank the DNA profile,—  
(i) of a suspect, after the filing of the police report under the statutory provisions   
or as per the order of the court; 40 
(ii) of an undertrial, as per the order of the court,  
under intimation to him, in such manner as may be specified by regulations.   
(3) The National DNA Data Bank shall, on receiving a written request of a person who   
is neither an offender nor a suspect or an undertrial, but whose DNA profile is entered in the   
crime scene index or missing persons' index of the DNA Data Bank, for removal of his DNA 45 
profile therefrom, remove the DNA profile of such person from DNA Data Bank under   
intimation to the person concerned, in such manner as may be specified by regulations:   

93 
 
 
 
Provided that where such DNA profile is of a minor or a disabled p erson, removal 
shall be made on receiving written request from a parent or the guardian of such minor or 
disabled person.  
(4) Subject to this section, the criteria for entry, retention and removal of any DNA  
5 profile in, or from, the DNA Data Bank and DNA laboratories shall be such as may be 
specified by regulations.  
CHAPTERVI  
PROTECTION OF INFORMATION 
 
32. (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall ensure that the information 
10  relating to DNA profiles, DNA samples and any records thereof, forwarded to, or in custody of 
the National DNA Data Bank or the Regional DNA Data Bank or a DNA laboratory or any 
other person or authority under this Act, are secured and kept confidential.  
(2) The Board shall take all necessary measures to ensure that the information 
referred to in sub-section (1) are protected against access, use or disclosure not permitted  
15 under this Act or regulations made thereunder, and against accidental or intentional 
destruction, loss or damage.  
(3) Without prejudice to sub-sections (1) and (2), the Board shall—  
(a) adopt and implement appropriate technical and organisational security 
measures;  
20 (b) ensure that every agency appointed or engaged for performing any 
functions under this Act have in place appropriate technical an d organisational 
security measures for the information; and  
(c) ensure that the agreements or arrangements, entered into with any 
investigation agency, international organisation or institution, impose obligations   
25 equivalent to those imposed on the Board under this Act, and require such agency, 
organisation or institution to act only on instructions from the Board.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, 
and save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Board or  any of its officers or other employee, 
the Director of the National or Regional DNA Data Bank or any of its officers or other  
30 employees, or the in -charge and other staff of DNA laboratory or any officer or 
employee of the agency engaged under this Act sh all not, whether during his service or 
thereafter, reveal any information relating to DNA profiles, DNA samples and any 
records thereof to anyone.  
33. All DNA data, including DNA profiles, DNA samples and records thereof,   
35 contained in any DNA laboratory and DNA Data Bank shall be used only for the 
purposes of facilitating identification of the person and not for any other purpose.  
 
 
 
 
34. Any information relating to DNA profiles, DNA samples and records thereof, 
maintained in a DNA Data Bank shall be made available for the following purposes, namely:— 
 
(a) facilitating the identification of persons in criminal cases by the law  
40 enforcement and investigating agencies; 
 
(b) judicial proceedings, in accordance with the rules of admissibility of 
evidence;  
(c ) facilitating prosecution and adjudication of criminal cases;  
(d) taking defence by an accused in the criminal case in which he is charged; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Security and  
confidentiality  
of  
information. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Use of DNA  
profiles, DNA  
samples and  
records, etc.,  
for  
facilitating  
identification  
of persons. 
 
Access to 
information 
in certain 
cases. 

94 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Access to 
information 
for operation, 
maintenance 
and training. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Access to 
information in 
DNA Data 
Bank for one 
time keyboard 
search. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Restriction on 
access to 
information in 
crime scene 
index. 
 
 
 
 
Prohibition 
on access to 
information 
in DNA Data 
Bank. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Grants by 
Central 
Government. 
 
DNA  
Regulatory  
Board Fund. 
 
  
(e) investigation relating to civil disputes or other civil matters or offences or  
cases specified in the Schedule, by making such information available to the concerned   
parties with the approval of the court, or to the concerned authority; or  
(f) such other purposes, as may be specified by regulations.  
35. Access to such information contained in the National DNA Data Bank and the  5 
Regional DNA Data Banks may be made available by the Director, if he considers   
appropriate,—  
(a) to a person or class of persons, for the sole purpose of proper operation and  
maintenance of the DNA Data Bank; and  
(b) to the personnel of any DNA laboratory for the sole purpose of training, 10 
in accordance with such terms and conditions as may be specified by regulations.   
 
36. A person who is authorised to acc ess an index of the DNA Data Bank, including 
information of DNA identification records or DNA profile in that index, may also access that 
index for the purposes of carrying out one time keyboard search on information obtained 
from any DNA sample collected for the purpose of criminal investigation, except for a DNA  15 
sample voluntarily submitted solely for elimination purposes.  
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, “one time keyboard search” means  
a search under which information obtained from a DNA sample is compared with the  
information in the index of the DNA Data Bank, without resulting in the information obtained  
20 from the DNA sample being included in the index.  
37. Access to the information in the crime scene index contained in the DN A Data 
Bank shall be restricted, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, if such 
information relates to a DNA profile derived from bodily substances of—  
(a) victim of an offence which forms or formed the object of relevant  
investigation; or 25  
(b) a person who has been eliminated as a suspect in the relevant investigation.   
38. (1) No person who receives the DNA profile for entry in the DNA Data Bank 
shall use it or allow or cause it to be used for purposes other than those for which it has 
been collected in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person shall communicate, or authorise 30 
the communication of, or allow or cause to be communicated, any information on DNA 
profiles contained in the DNA Data Banks or the information communicated under section 29 
or section 30. 
 
(3) No person to whom information is communicated or who has access to information 
under this Act shall use that information for any purpose other than for which the 35 
communication or access is permitted under the provisions of this Act.  
CHAPTERVII  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS, AUDIT AND REPORTS 
 
39. The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament by law,   
in this behalf, make to the Board grants of such sums of money as the Central Government 40 
may consider necessary.  
40. (1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the DNA Regulatory Board 
Fund and there shall be credited thereto—  
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board under this Act;  
(b) all sums received by the Board including fees or charges, or donations from 45 
such other source as may be decided by the Central Government; and 

95 
 
 
 
(c) any income from investment of the amount of the Fund.  
(2) The Fund shall be applied by the Board for meeting,—  
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Members, the officers, experts 
and the other employees, including administrative expenses, of the Board; and   
5 (b) the expenses for carrying out the purposes authorised under this Act. 
 
41. (1) The Board shall prepare,  in such form and at such time in each financial 
year, as may be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year showing the estimated 
receipts and expenditure of the Board and forward the same to the Central Government.   
(2) The Board, with the prior approval of the Central Government, shall adopt financial  
10 regulation which specifies in particular, the procedure for drawing up and implementing 
the Board's budget.  
42. The Board shall prepare in such form and at such time in each financial year, as 
may be p rescribed, its annual report giving a full account of its activities during the 
previous financial year and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.   
15 43. (1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records and  
prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
 
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Board under this Act shall have the  
20 same rights and privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller 
and Auditor-General of India generally has in connection with the audit of Government 
accounts and, in particular, shall have th e right to demand the production of books, 
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the 
offices of the Board. 
 
25 (3) The accounts of the Board, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India or any other  person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit 
report thereon shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Board.   
(4) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General 
of India annually and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall 
30 be payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
 
44. The Central Government shall cause the annual report and auditor's report of the 
Board to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament. 
 
CHAPTERVIII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
 
35 45. Whoever, by virtue of his employment or official position or otherwise, has in his  
possession, or having access to, individually identifiable DNA informatio n kept in the DNA 
laboratory or DNA Data Bank, wilfully discloses it in any manner to any person or agency not 
entitled to receive it under this Act, or under any other law for the time being in force, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and  
40 also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
46. Whoever, without authorisation, wilfully obtains individually identifiable DNA 
information from the DNA laboratory or DNA Data Bank, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also with fine which may 
extend to one lakh rupees. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Budget. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual  
report. 
 
 
Accounts and 
audit of 
Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual report 
and auditor’s 
report to be 
laid before 
Parliament. 
 
Penalty for 
unauthorised 
disclosure of 
information 
in DNA Data 
Bank. 
 
 
Penalty for 
obtaining 
information 
from DNA 
Data Bank 
without 
authorisation. 

96 
 
 
 
Penalty for 
using DNA 
sample or 
result without 
authorisation. 
 
Penalty for 
unlawful 
access to 
information 
in DNA Data 
Bank. 
 
Penalty for  
destruction,  
alterations,  
contamination  
or tampering  
with  
biological  
evidence. 
 
Penalty for 
contravention 
where no 
specific 
punishment is 
provided. 
 
Offences by 
companies or 
institutions. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chairperson,  
Members,  
officers to be  
public  
servants. 
 
 
47. Whoever, without authorisation, wilfully uses any DNA sample or result of any 
DNA analysis, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. 
 
 
48. Whoever, accesses information stored in the DNA Data Bank, otherwise than in   
accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 5 
term which may extend to two years and also with fine which may extend to fifty thousand 
rupees. 
 
 
49. Whoever, knowingly and intentionally, destroys, alters, contaminates or tampers 
with biological evidence which is required to be preserved under any law for the time being  
in force, with the intention to prevent that evidence from being subjected to DNA testing or 
10 to prevent the production or use of that evidence in a judicial proceeding, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and also with fine 
which may extend to two lakh rupees. 
 
50. Whoever, contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or the rules and regulations   
made thereunder for which no penalty is provided in this Act, shall be punishable with 15 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and also with fine which may extend  
to fifty thousand rupees. 
 
51. (1) Where an offence under this Act, has been committed by a company or 
institution, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in-charge of, and  
was responsible to, the company or institution for the conduct of the business of the 20 
company or institution, as well as the company or institution, shall be deemed to be guilty   
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:   
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person  
liable to any punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed   
without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of  25 
such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), where an offence under  
this Act has been committed by a company or institution and it is proved that the offence   
has been committed with the consent or connivance of or is attributable to any ne glect on  
the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company or institution,  30 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the   
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation.—for the purposes of this section,—  
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other  
association of individuals; and 35  
(b) “director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS 
 
52. The Chairperson, Members and other officers of the Board, National DNA Data   
Bank and Regional DNA Data Banks shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in  40 
pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of  
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code. 45 of 1860. 

97 
 
 
 
53. No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the Central 
Government or any officer of the Central Government or the Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson 
or any Member or officer of the Board or the National DNA Data Bank or the Regional DNA 
Data Banks acting under this Act for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be  
5 done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
54. (1) If at any time the Central Government is of the opinion—  
(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Board, it is 
unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties assigned to it by or under 
the provisions of this Act; or  
10 (b) that the Board has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction 
issued by the Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the 
functions or performance of the duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of 
this Act and as a result of such defaul t, the financial position of the Board or the 
administration of the Board has suffered; or  
15 (c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest to 
do so,  
it may, by notification, supersede the Board for such period, not exceeding six months, as 
may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall   
20 give a reasonable opportunity to the Board to make representations against the proposed 
supersession and shall consider the representations, if any, of the Board.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub-section (1) superseding the 
Board,—  
(a) the Chairperson and other Members shall, as from the date of supersession,  
25 vacate their offices as such; 
 
(b) all  the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Board shall, until the Board is 
reconstituted under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by an administrator 
who shall be an official not below the rank of a Secretary to the Government of India, 
30 to be appointed by the Central Government; and 
 
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the Board is 
reconstituted under sub-section (3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued 
under sub-section (1), the Central Government may reconstitute the Board by a fresh  
35 appointment and in such case any person or persons who vacated their offices under 
clause (a) of sub-section (2), shall not be deemed to be disqualified for appointment:  
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the expiration of 
the period of supersession, take action under this sub-section.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a copy of the notification issued under  
40 sub-section (1) and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances 
leading to such action to be laid before each House of Parliament at the earliest. 
 
55. (1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Board shall, in the 
discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions 
of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time. 
 
45 (2) I f any dispute arises between the Central Government and the Board as to 
whether a question is or is not a question of policy, the decision of the Central 
Government thereon shall be final. 
 
 
Protection of 
action taken in 
good faith. 
 
 
 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to supersede 
Board. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power of 
Central 
Government 
to issue 
directions. 

98 
 
 
 
Power to 
amend 
Schedule. 
 
 
 
 
Court not to  
have  
jurisdiction. 
 
Power to 
make rules. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to  
make  
regulations. 
 
 
56. (1) The Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that it is expedient so to 
do, by notification, amend the Schedule so as to include therein or exclude therefrom, or 
vary the description of, any entry in any Part thereof.  
(2) Every notification issued under sub -section (1) shall, as soon as may be after it is   
issued, be laid before each House of Parliament. 5  
57. No court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of 
any matter which the Board is empowered by or under this Act to determine. 
 
58. (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out 
the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such  10 
rules may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—  
(a) the pay and allowances of the Vice-Chairperson and the Member under  
sub-section (3), and the allowances payable to the Chairperson and other ex officio  
Members under sub-section (4) of section 5;  
(b) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the terms and other conditions 15 
of service of officers and employees of the Board under sub-section (2) of section 11;  
(c) manner in which the Board shall assist and co-operate in criminal investigation  
between various investigation agencies within the country and with any foreign   
State, international organisation or institution in dealing with DNA testing under   
clause (n) of section 12; 20 
(d) such other functions of the Board under clause (q) of section 12;  
(e) the manner of constitution of a selection committee and persons comprising   
the committee, for the appointment of a Director of the National DNA Data Bank   
under sub-section (1) of section 27;  
(f) the educational qualifications and experience of the Director of the National 25 
DNA Data Bank under sub-section (2) of section 27;  
(g) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the terms and other conditions  
of service including the manner of appointment, of the Director of the National DNA  
Data Bank and the Director of each of the Regional DNA Data Bank, under   
sub-section (2) of section 28; 30 
(h) the form in which and the time at which the Board shall prepare its budget  
under sub-section (1) of section 41;  
(i) the form in which and the time at which the Board shall prepare its annual  
report under section 42;  
(j) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared by the  35 
Board under sub-section (1) of section 43; and   
(k) any other mat ter which is to be, or may be prescribed, or in respect of which 
provision is to be, or may be made by rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
 
59. (1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central Government and   
after previous publication, by notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and 40 
the rules made thereunder, to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, 
such regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:—  
(a) the time and place at which the Board shall meet and the procedure it shall 
observe with regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum 45 
at such meetings), under sub-section (1) of section 6; 

99 
 
 
 
(b) the other relevant purposes for the optimum use of DNA techniques and 
technologies under clause (h) of section 12;  
(c) the form, the fee and the manner in which an application for accreditation 
shall be made by a DNA laboratory under sub-section (2) of section 13;  
5 (d) onsite assessment requirements, standards and such other requirements to 
be complied by a DNA laboratory under sub-section (3) of section 13;  
 (e) the form, the fee and the manner in which an application for renewal of  
 accreditation shall be made by a DNA laboratory under sub-section (4) of section 13; 
 (f) the obligations to be carried out by a DNA laboratory under sub-section (1) 
10 of section 17;  
(g) the educational qualifications experience and other eligibility  criteria, in 
respect of person in charge of a DNA laboratory, technical and managerial staff, 
and other employees of DNA laboratory under section 18;  
(h) the measures to be taken, the level and intervals in which the employees  
15 shall undergo training and the records to be maintained, by the in charge of a DNA 
laboratory under section 19;  
(i) the measures to be taken by DNA laboratories under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 20;  
(j) the other sources for collection of DNA sample, under clause (d) of  
20 sub-section (1), of section 23;  
(k) such other person under whose supervision DNA sample may be 
collected, under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of section 23;  
(l) the format in which the National DNA Data Bank shall receive DNA data 
from Regional DNA Data Banks and store the DNA profiles under sub-section (3) of 
25 section 25; 
 
(m) the powers and duties of the Director of the National DNA Data Bank 
under sub-section (4) of section 27;  
(n) the appointment of number of officers, experts and other employees, their  
remunerations, terms and conditions of service, including the manner of appointment 
30 under sub-section (3) of section 28; 
 
(o) the criteria and the procedure to be followed by the National DNA Data Bank 
on receipt of a DNA profile, the person to whom th e result shall be communicated and 
the manner of communication under sub-section (1) of section 29; 
 
(p) the manner in which the DNA profile of a suspect or an undertrial shall be  
35 expunged by the Director of the National DNA Data Bank under sub-section (2) of 
section 31;  
(q) the manner in which the DNA profile of a person who is neither an 
offender nor a suspect shall be expunged from the crime scene index or a missing 
persons' index under sub-section (3) of section 31;  
40 (r) other criteria for entry, retention and expunction of any DNA profile 
under sub-section (4) of section 31;  
(s) the other purposes for which the information relating to DNA profiles, 
DNA samples and records relating thereto shall be made available under clause ( f) 
of section 34;  
45 (t) the terms and conditions for access to information under section 35; 

100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rules and 
regulations to 
be laid before 
Parliament. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Power to 
remove 
difficulties. 
 
  
(u) the manner in which access to the information in the crime scene index shall  
be restricted under section 37;  
(v) any other matter which is to be, or may be, or in respect of which provisions  
is to be, or may be, made by regulations for carrying out the provisions of the Act.   
60. Every rule and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 5 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period   
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions,   
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive   
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation   
or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation  10 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;   
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the   
validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.   
61. (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central  
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 15 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as may appear to it to be n ecessary, for removing 
the difficulty: 
 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of the 
period of two years from the date of commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 20 
made, before each House of Parliament. 

101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2(1)(viii), 12(o), 34(e) and 56(1)] 
 
List of matters for DNA testing  
PARTA  
Offences under Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) where DNA testing is useful 
for investigation of offences.  
PART B  
Offences under special laws:  
(i) The Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 (104 of 1956);  
(ii) The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 (34 of 1971);  
(iii) The Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition 
of Sex Selection) Act, 1994 (57 of 1994);  
(iv) The Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (43 of 
2005); (v) The Protection of Civil Rights Act, 1955 (22 of 1955); 
 
(vi) The Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention 
of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (33 of 1989);  
(vii) The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988).  
PARTC  
Civil disputes and other civil matters:  
(i) Parental dispute (maternity or paternity);  
(ii) Issues relating to pedigree;  
(iii) Issues relating to assisted reproductive technologies (surrogacy, in-vitro 
fertilisation and intrauterine implantation or such other technologies);  
(iv) Issues relating to transplantation of human organs (donor and recipient)   
under the Transplantation of Human Organs Act, 1994 (42 of 1994);  
(v) Issues relating to immigration or emigration;  
(vi) Issues relating to establishment of individual identity.  
PARTD  
Other cases:  
(i) Medical negligence;  
(ii) Unidentified human remains;  
(iii) Identification of abandoned or disputed children and related issues. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

102 
 
 
 
 
 
 
STATEMENTOF OBJECTSAND REASONS  
The Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) is like a set of instructions or blueprint of all living 
forms, and it encodes a detailed set of plans for building different pieces of the cell of a living 
organism to grow and function. The DNA content of every human individual is comprised of 
one-half of the DNA from each of the two parents. The DNA blueprint varies from one 
individual to another, and it is this variation, which makes every individual (except identical  
twins) unique and different. The individual-to-individual variations in DNA permit its use as a 
means of identification and for establishment of biological relationships between individuals. 
 
2. DNA technology, based on sound scientific principles has been f ound to be very 
effective in establishing the parentage of a child and identifying the source of a biological 
specimen obtained from a scene of crime. The concerns regarding appropriate use of 
DNA technology by the courts of law and other agencies has made  it necessary to 
develop guidelines and standards for the DNA testing.  
3. DNA technology has the potential of wide application in the justice delivery systems. 
In criminal cases, it helps in investigation of crimes through biological evidence including 
semen evidence in rape cases, blood evidence in murder cases, saliva evidence in 
identification of source of anonymous threat letters, etc. In civil cases, it helps in 
investigations relating to identification of victims of disasters like cyclones, air crash, e tc. A 
number of crimes are committed by repeat offenders, who apprehension and conviction will 
be aided by comparison of biological evidence at the scene of crime with DNA profiles stored 
in a DNA Data Bank. At the same time, the DNA analysis offers substa ntial information, 
which if misused or improperly used, can cause harm to individuals or society. 
 
4. Recognising the need for regulation of the use and application of DNA technology, a 
DNA Profiling Advisory Committee comprising of members from the fields of  molecular 
biology, forensic science, human genetics, population biology, bioethics, legal profession, law 
enforcement agencies, etc., was constituted in December, 2003 to make recommendations for 
enacting suitable legislation. On the recommendations of th e said Committee, a draft Bill was 
prepared. Later on, an Expert Committee chaired by the Secretary, Department of 
Biotechnology, was constituted in 2012 to discuss the privacy related issues. Based on the 
recommendations of the Expert Committee, the Bill was revised and subsequently referred to 
the Law Commission of India who in its two hundred and seventy -first report suggested the 
enactment of a legislation. 
 
5. In view of the above, the DNA Technology (Use and Application) Regulation Bill, 
2018 seeks to regulate the use of DNA technology for the purposes of establishing the identity 
of certain categories of persons including the victims, offenders, suspects, under trials, 
missing persons and unknown deceased persons. The Bill, inter alia, seeks to— 
 
(i) pro hibit laboratories from undertaking DNA testing, analysing, etc., 
without obtaining accreditation;  
(ii) establish a National DNA Data Bank and Regional DNA Data Banks 
which shall store and maintain the DNA profiles in accordance with the provisions 
relating to the use and access to information, its retention and expunction;   
(iii) establish a DNA Regulatory Board to carry out the functions assigned to 
it under the proposed legislation which, inter alia, include—  
(a) advising the Central Govenment and the State Governments on all 
issues relating to establishing of DNA laboratories and DNA Data Banks and 
laying down guidelines, standards and procedures for establishment and 
functioning of such laboratories and Data Banks; 
 

103 
 
 
 
(b) granting accreditation to l abouratories for undertaking DNA 
testing, analysing, etc., and to suspend or revoke such accreditation;  
(c) assisting in criminal investigation between various investigation 
agencies within the country and with any foreign State, international 
organisation or institution; and  
(d) making recommendations to the Central Government for the 
application of privacy protection in relation to the access to, or the use of, 
DNA samples and their analysis;  
(iv) make provision for the security and confidentiality of information 
relating to DNA profiling, DNA samples and any records thereof, forwarded to or 
in the custody of Natioinal DNA Data Bank, Regional DNA Data Banks, DNA 
laboratories or any person or authority;  
(v) provide for offences and penalties for contrav ention of certain provisions 
of the Bill.  
6. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives. 
 
NEW DELHI;  
The 27th June, 2019 
 
DR.HARSHVARDHAN 

104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes on Clauses  
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to define the various expressions used in the Bill.  
Clause 3 of the Bill seeks to provide for the establishment of the DNA Regulatory  
Board as body corporate, having perpetual succession and a common seal, whose head 
office shall be at such place in the National Capital Region, as the Central Government 
may speci fy. The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government, establish 
regional offices at such other places as it may deem necessary.  
Clause 4 of the Bill seeks to provide for the composition of the DNA Regulatory 
Board which shall consist of a Chairp erson, a Vice -Chairperson, Member-Secretary and 
ten other Members to carry out the functions assigned to it under the Bill.  
Clause 5 of the bill seeks to provide for the terms of office, conditions of service 
of, Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and other Me mbers of the Board including their pay 
and allowances.  
Clause 6 of the Bill seeks to provide for the procedure for meetings of the Board. It  
further provides that the Chairperson shall have powers of general superintendence and 
direction of the affairs of  the Board and may also exercise such other powers as may be 
delegated to him by the Board.  
Clause 7 of the Bill seeks to provide that the Members of the Board shall not 
participate in meetings in certain cases.  
Clause 8 of the Bill seeks to provide for the removal and resignation of 
Chairperson or Member and filling up of casual vacancies of Board.  
Clause 9 of the Bill seeks to provide that no act or proceeding of the Board shall be  
invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in, or any defect in the consti tution of, the 
Board; or any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Board; or 
any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
 
Clause 10 of the Bill seeks to provide that the Board may, by gener al or special 
order published in the Official Gazette, delegate to the Chairperson or any other Member, 
subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, its functions under the 
Bill (except the power to make regulations), as it may dee m necessary. It further provides 
for laying of such order before each House of Parliament.  
Clause 11 of the Bill seeks to provide that the Board may, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, appoint such officers and other employees, as it 
considers necessary, for the efficient discharge of its functions under the Bill. It further 
provides that the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions 
of service, including the manner of appointment, of the officers and employe es, shall be 
prescribed by rules made by the Central Government. 
 
Clause 12 of the Bill enumerates the various functions of the Board which shall 
include, inter alia, (a) advising the Central Government and the State Governments on 
all issues  relating to e stabiaing of DNA laboratories and DNA Data Banks and laying 
down guidelines, standards and procedures for establishment and functioning of such 
laboratories and Data Banks;  
(b) granting accreditation to laboratories for undertaking DNA testing, analysing,  
etc., and to suspend or revoke such accreditation; ( c) assisting in criminal investigation 
between various investigation agencies within the country and with any foreign State, 
international organisation or institution; and ( d) making recommendations to t he Central 
Government for the application of privacy protection in relation to the access to, or the 
use of, DNA samples and their analyses.  

105 
 
 
 
Clause 13 of the Bill seeks to provide that no laboratory shall undertake DNA testing,  
analysing or any other procedure to generate data and perform analysis relating thereto 
without obtaining accreditation from the Board. It further provides that a laboratory 
functioning as on the date of the commencement of the Bill, may undertake DNA testing or 
any other procedure relating thereto, for a period of sixty days from such commencement and 
apply to the Board in accordance with sub -clause ( 2) of the said clause, for obtaining 
accreditation and that such laboratory may, after making an application, continue to undertak e 
DNA testing or any other procedure relating thereto, until the Board decides its application. It 
also provides that the application for renewal of accreditation shall be made to the Board at 
least sixty days prior to the expiration of the accreditation i n such form and manner and along 
with such fees as may be specified by regulations made by the Board. 
 
Clause 14 of the Bill provides for grant of accreditation or renewal to the laboratory  
which seeks to undertake DNA testing, analysing or any other proce dure to generate data and 
perform analysis relating thereto. It further provides that the accreditation or renewal of 
accreditation under this clause shall be valid for a period of two years. 
 
Clause 15 of the Bill seeks to provide for the power of Board t o suspend or revoke 
accreditation granted to a DNA laboratory, if such laboratory fails to comply with the 
conditions specified therein. It further provides that no revocation of accreditation of a 
DNA laboratory shall be made by the Board without giving t he laboratory an opportunity 
of being heard. It also provides that on the revocation or suspension of accreditation of 
the DNA laboratory, the laboratory shall hand over all DNA samples and records relating 
to DNA testing from its laboratory to such DNA la boratory as may be directed by the 
Board and it shall not retain any sample or record. 
 
Clause 16 of the Bill seeks to provide that any laboratory aggrieved by an order of  
rejection of its application for accreditation or renewal thereof under clause 14 or  an 
order of suspension or revocation of accreditation under clause 15, may prefer an appeal 
to the Central Government or such other authority as that Government may, by 
notification, specify, within a period of sixty days from the date of such order, whic h 
shall be decided by the Central Government or the authority, as the case may be, within a 
period of sixty days from the date of receipt of such appeal. 
 
Clause 17 of the Bill seeks to provide that every DNA laboratory, which has been  
granted accreditation for undertaking DNA testing or any other procedure under the Bill, 
shall follow such standards and procedures for quality assurance in the collection, 
storage, testing and analysis of DNA sample, establish and maintain such documentation 
and quality syst em, prepare and maintain quality manuals containing such details and 
share DNA data prepared and maintained by it with the National DNA Data Bank and 
the Regional DNA Data Banks, in such manner as may be specified by regulations.  
 
Clause 18 of the Bill see ks to provide that every DNA laboratory shall appoint a  
person to be in charge of the laboratory and employ such scientific, technical and other 
staff, possessing such qualifications and experience as may be specified by regulations, 
for discharging the duties and performing the functions under the Bill. 
 
Clause 19 of the Bill seeks to provide that the in -charge of the DNA laboratory shall  
take such measures for facilitating skill up gradation and advancement in the knowledge of its 
employees in the field o f DNA testing and other related fields, as may be specified by 
regulations, ensure that its employees undergo regular training in DNA related subjects, in 
such institutions, level and intervals, as may be specified by regulations and maintain such 
records relating to the laboratory and its personnel as may be specified by regulations. 
 
Clause 20 of the Bill seeks to specify the various measures to be taken by DNA  
laboratory.  
Clause 21 of the Bill seeks to prohibit taking of bodily substances from a person 
who is arrested for an offence (other than the specified offences) unless the consent is 
given in writing for the taking of the bodily substances. 

106 
 
 
 
Clause 22 of the Bill seeks to provide that any person who was present at the scene 
of a crime when it was  committed; or is being questioned in connection with the 
investigation of a crime; or intends to find the whereabouts of his missing or lost relative, 
in disaster or otherwise, may voluntarily consent in writing to bodily substances being 
taken from him for DNA testing, subject to certain conditions specified therein.  
Clause 23 of the Bill seeks to provide for the sources and manner of collection of  
samples for DNA testing.  
Clause 24 of the Bill seeks to provide that if the trial court is satisfied with the plea 
of the accused person that the bodily substances taken from such person or collected 
from the place of occurrence of crime had been contaminated, the court may direct the 
taking of fresh bodily substances for re-examination.  
Clause 25 of the Bill  seeks to provide for the establishment of a National DNA Data  
Bank and such number of Regional DNA Data Banks for every State, or two or more States, 
as it may deem necessary. It further provides that the Regional DNA Data Banks shall share 
all DNA data stored and maintained by it with the National DNA Data Bank. 
 
Clause 26 of the Bill seeks to provide that every DNA Data Bank shall maintain 
the indices for various categories of data and the information specified therein.   
Clause 27 of the Bill seeks to pr ovide for the appointment of a Director for the  
National DNA Data Bank and Directors for each Regional DNA Data Banks.   
Clause 28 of the Bill seeks to provide for appointment of the officers and other  
employees of the National DNA Data Bank and the Regiona l DNA Data Banks, their 
salaries and allowances, terms and other conditions of service including the manner of 
appointment, of the Director of the National DNA Data Bank and the Director of each of 
the Regional DNA Data Bank.  
Clause 29 of the Bill seeks t o provide for the criteria and procedure to be followed 
by the National DNA Data Bank in comparing and communicating of DNA profile.   
Clause 30 of the Bill seeks to provide for the manner of sharing of DNA profiles with  
foreign Government or organisation o r institution or agencies. It further provides that the 
Central Government may, in consultation with the Board, determine the nature and extent of 
sharing DNA profiles in respect of offenders, suspects, under trials, missing persons and 
unknown deceased pe rsons with the Government of a foreign State or an international 
organisation or an institution established by that Government or organisation, and seek similar 
information from such foreign State, organisation or institutions. 
 
Clause 31 of the Bill seeks  to provide for the manner of retention and removal of  
records in the DNA Data Bank.  
Clause 32 of the Bill seeks to make provision for the security and confidentiality of  
Information. It requires the Board to ensure that the information relating to DNA 
profiles, DNA samples and any records thereof, forwarded to, or in custody of the 
National DNA Data Bank or the Regional DNA Data Banks or a DNA laboratory or any 
other person or authority under the Bill, are secured and kept confidential.   
Clause 33 of the Bill seeks to provide all DNA data, including DNA profiles, DNA  
samples and records thereof, contained in any DNA laboratory and DNA Data Bank shall 
be used only for the purposes of facilitating identification of the person and not for any 
other purpose.  
Clause 34 of the Bill seeks to provide for the access to information in certain cases.  
Clause 35 of the Bill seeks to provide for the access to information for the sole 
purpose of operation, maintenance and training, in accordance with such terms and 
conditions as may be specified by regulations. 

107 
 
 
 
Clause 36 of the Bill seeks to provide for the access to information in DNA Data 
Bank for one time keyboard search by the person specified therein.  
Clause 37 of the Bill seeks to provide for the restriction on  access to information in 
crime scene index, in such manner as may be specified by regulations, if such 
information relates to a DNA profile derived from bodily substances of a victim of an 
offence which forms or formed the object of relevant investigation ; or a person who has 
been eliminated as a suspect in the relevant investigation. 
 
Clause 38 of the Bill seeks to provide for the prohibition on access to information 
in DNA Data Banks.  
Clause 39 of the Bill seeks to provide for the grants to the Board by  the Central  
Government.  
Clause 40 of the Bill seeks to provide for the constitution of the DNA Regulatory  
Board Fund.  
Clause 41 of the Bill seeks to provide for the preparation of the budget by the 
Board showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of  the Board and forwarding the 
same to the Central Government.  
Clause 42 of the Bill seeks to provide for the preparation of the annual report by 
the Board giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial year and 
submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.  
Clause 43 of the Bill seeks to provide that the accounts and other relevant records of  
the Board shall be maintained in the form specified by the Central Government by notification 
and the same shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
 
Clause 44 of the Bill seeks to provide that the annual report and auditor's report of 
the Board shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
Clause 45 of the Bill seeks to specify the punishment for unauthorised disclos ure of  
Information in DNA Data Bank. It provides that whoever, by virtue of his employment or 
official position or otherwise, has in his possession, or has access to, individually identifiable 
DNA information kept in the DNA laboratory or DNA Data Bank, wi lfully discloses it in any 
manner to any person or agency not entitled to receive it under the Bill, or under any other 
law for the time being in force, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. 
 
Clause 46 of the Bill seeks to specify the punishment for obtaining information 
from DNA Data Bank without authorisation. It provides that whoever, without 
authorisation, wilfully obtains individually identifiable DNA inf ormation from the DNA 
laboratory or DNA Data Bank, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three years and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.   
Clause 47 of the Bill seeks to specify the punishment for using DNA  sample or result  
without authorisation. It provides that whoever, without authorisation, wilfully uses any DNA 
sample or result of any DNA analysis, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years and also with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees. 
 
Clause 48 of the Bill seeks to specify the punishment for unlawful access of 
information in DNA Data Bank. It provides that whoever, accesses information stored in 
the DNA Data Bank, otherwise than in accordance with the pro visions of the Bill, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and also with 
fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.  
Clause 49 of the Bill seeks to specify the punishment for destruction, alterations,  
contamination or tampering with biological evidence. It provides that whoever, knowingly 
and intentionally, destroys, alters, contaminates or tampers with biological evidence which is 
required to be preserved under any law for the time being in force, with the intention to 

108 
 
 
 
prevent that evidence from being subjected to DNA testing or to prevent the production or use 
of that evidence in a judicial proceeding, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to five years and also with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees. 
 
Clause 50 of the Bill seeks to specify the punishment for contravention when no  
specific punishment is provided. It provides that whoever, contravenes any of the 
provisions of the Bill or the rules and regulations made there u nder for which no penalty 
is provided in the Bill, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years and also with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees.   
Clause 51 of the Bill seeks to specify the punishment for offen ces by companies or 
institutions.  
Clause 52 of the Bill seeks to provide that the Chairperson, Members and other  
officers of the Board, National DNA Data Bank and Regional DNA Data Banks shall be 
deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of an y of the provisions of the 
Bill, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code.   
Clause 53 of the Bill seeks to provide for the protection of action taken in good 
faith by any officer of the Central Government or Board or any Member or officer or 
other employee of the Board.  
Clause 54 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to supersede 
Board in the circumstances specified therein.  
Clause 55 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to issue directio ns.  
Clause 56 of Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to amend the Schedule. 
 
Clause 57 of the Bill seeks to provide that no court shall have jurisdiction to 
entertain any suit or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Board is empowered 
by or under the Bill to determine.  
Clause 58 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government to make rules on  
matters enumerated therein.  
Clause 59 of the Bill seeks to provide that the Board may, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government an d after previous publication, by notification in 
Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with the Bill and the rules made there 
under, to carry out the provisions of the Bill.  
Clause 60 of the Bill seeks to provide that every rule and regulation mad e under 
the Bill shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
Clause 61 of the Bill seeks to empower the Central Government, by order 
published in the Official Gazette, to remove difficulties which may arise in giving effect 
to the provisions of the Bil l within a period of two years from the date of enforcement of 
the Act. It further requires every such order to be laid before each House of Parliament.  

109 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM  
Clause 3 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a DNA Regulatory Boa rd to 
exercise powers conferred on, and perform the functions assigned to it, under the 
proposed legislation.  
2. Clause 25 of the Bill provides for the establishment of a National DNA Data 
Bank and Regional DNA Data Banks.  
3. Clause 40 of the Bill provides for  constitution of a Fund to be called the DNA 
Regulatory Board Fund, into which shall be credited grants and loans made to the Board, 
all sums received by the Board including fees or charges, or donations from such other 
source as may be decided by the Central Government and any income from investment of 
the amount of the Fund.  
4. It is estimated that there would be an expenditure of approximately twenty crore 
rupees as non -recurring capital expenditure and a further recurring expenditure of five crore 
rupees per annum to carry out all the activities envisaged under the proposed legislation. 
 
5. The Bill, if enacted and brought into operation, would not involve any other 
expenditure of a recurring or non-recurring nature from the Consolidated Fund of India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

110 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION  
Clause 58 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules with respect 
to the matters specified under sub -clause ( 2) which, inter alia , relate to ( a) the 
allowances payable to the Chairperson and other ex officio  Members and the pay and 
allowances of the Vice -Chairperson and the expert Member; ( b) the salaries and 
allowances payable to, and the terms and other conditions of service of officers and 
employees of the Board; (c) the manner in which the Board shall assist and co -operate in 
criminal investigation between various investigation agencies within the country and 
with any foreign State, international organisation or institution in dealing with DNA 
testing; (d) the manner of constitution of a selection committee and persons comprising 
the committee, for the appointment of a Director of National DNA Data Bank; ( e) the 
salaries and allowances payable to, and the terms and other conditions of service 
including the manner of appointment, of the Director of the National DNA Data Bank 
and the Director of each of the Regional DNA Data Banks; ( f) and the form for 
preparation of the annual report and the annual statement of accounts by the Board.  
 
2. Clause 59 of the Bill e mpowers the Board to make regulations with the previous 
approval of the Central Government. The matters in respect of which the Board may make 
regulations, inter alia , relate to ( a) the time and place of meeting of the Board and the 
procedure with regard t o the transaction of business at its meetings; ( b) the form, the fee and 
the manner in which an application for accreditation shall be made by a DNA laboratory; ( c) 
onsite assessment requirements, standards and such other requirements to be complied by a 
DNA laboratory; ( d) the obligations to be carried out by a DNA laboratory; ( e) the 
educational qualifications and experience and other eligibility criteria in respect of person in -
charge of a DNA laboratory, technical and managerial staff, and other employe es of DNA 
laboratory; ( f) the measures to be taken by DNA laboratories; ( g) the format in which the 
National DNA Data Bank shall receive DNA data from Regional DNA Data Banks and store 
the DNA profiles; (h) the manner in which the DNA profile of a suspect or an under trial and 
of a person who is neither an offender nor a suspect shall be expunged; ( i) the terms and 
conditions for access to information; and ( j) the manner in which access to the information in 
the crime scene index shall be restricted. 
 
3. Clause 60 of the Bill requires that the rules and regulations made under the 
proposed legislation be laid before each House of Parliament.  
4. The matters in respect of which the rules or regulations may be made are matters of 
procedure and administrative detail, and as such, it is not practicable to provide for them in 
the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power is, therefore, of a normal character. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

111 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A 
 
BILL  
to provide for the regulation of use  and application of Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) 
technology for the purposes of establishing the identity of certain categories of persons 
including the victims, offenders, suspects, undertrials, missing persons and unknown 
deceased persons and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
———— 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Dr. Harsh Vardhan, Minister of Science and Technology and Earth Sciences)  
 
MGIPMRND—1057LS(S3)—01-07-2019. 

 
 
Annexure-II 
Statement I 
List of persons/organisations who submitted memoranda to the Committee 
1. Dr. Shambhavi Naik, Takshashila Institution, Bengaluru 
2. Shri Apar Gupta, Internet Freedom Foundation, New Delhi 
3. Shri Arghya Sengupta, Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy, New Delhi 
4. Dr. M R Madhavan, PRS Legislative Research, New Delhi 
5. Dr. Murali Neelakantan, Head at Amicus, Mumbai 
6. Ms. Shreya Rastogi, National Law University, Delhi 
7. Ms. Smitha Krishna Prasad,  National Law University, Delhi 
8. Ms. Pallavi Bedi, Centre for Internet & Society, New Delhi 
9. Shri Gopal Krishna, Citizens Forum for Civil Liberties, New Delhi 
10. Ikigai Law, New Delhi   
11. Dr J R Gaur, Director (Retd), FSL, Himachal Pradesh 
12. Mr. Achin Jana, Advocate, High Court of Calcutta 
13. Dr. Nupur Chowdhury, Centre for the Study of Law and Governance, Jawaharlal 
Nehru University, New Delhi 
 
14. Shri Ashish Gosain, LLM, Advocate, Supreme Court of India  
15. Dr. Kirodeelal Meena 
16. Shri Gopal P K 
17. Shri Anshul Ranjan 
 
Statement II 
List of Non-official/official expert witnesses who appeared before the Committee 
1. Dr. Shambhavi Naik, Fellow, Takshashila Institution, Bengaluru 
2. Shri Apar Gupta, Executive Director, Internet Freedom Foundation, New Delhi 
3. Shri  Arghya Sengupta, Founder, Vidhi Centre for Legal Policy 
4. Dr. M.R. Madhavan, President, PRS India, New Delhi 
5. Dr. Mandira Kala, Head of Research, PRS India, New Delhi 
6. Shri Murali Neelakantan, Advocate and Principal at Amicus, Mumbai 
7. Ms. Shreya Rastogi, Associate Researcher, National Law University, Delhi 
112 

 
 
 
8. Ms. Smitha Krishna Prasad, Associate Director, Centre for Communication 
Governance, National Law University, Delhi. 
9. Ms. Pallavi Bedi, Fellow, Centre for Internet and Society, New Delhi. 
10. Shri Amber Sinha, Fellow, Centre for Internet and Society, New Delhi. 
11. Dr. J.M. Vyas, Dire ctor General, Gujarat Forensic Sciences University (GFSU), 
Gujarat 
12. Prof. Seyed E. Hasnain, Vice Chancellor, Jamia Hamdard University, New Delhi 
13. Dr. J. Gowrishankar, Director, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research 
(IISER), Mohali 
14. Dr. Debashis M itra, Director, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting & Diagnostics 
(CDFD), Hyderabad 
15. Shri R.S. Verma, Additional Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs 
 
--------- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
113 

114 
 
Annexure-III 
 
Written views of eminent persons on the Bill 
 
In addition to the views expressed by the experts who appeared before the 
Committee, the Chairman requested a few distinguished police administrators and 
jurists for their views on the Bill. These are as follows: 
 
1. Shri R.K. Raghavan, IPS (Retd) and former Director CBI 
 
I have gone through the draft legislation bill several times. In my view it is a 
nearly perfectly drafted law that does not need any drastic changes. Of course 
there are the usual apprehensions that a DNA data bank can be misused by law 
enforcement or adversaries of suspects whose data are stored. These exist the 
world over. There is nothing like a foolproof law just as there is no perfect human 
being who will not be swayed by  pecuniary considerations or personal 
prejudices.   
 
We can fault the lawmakers only if they do not provide for adequate safeguards 
against prospects of those in authority coercing individuals to submit themselves 
to collection of DNA samples.   Or if they fail to fuse enough security into the 
system that stores DNA data. For offences punishable up to seven years, the 
consent of a suspect is required for drawing his or her sample.   This is guarantee 
enough against coercion. 
 
I bring it to the notice of the H onourable Parliamentary Committee that a DNA 
sample is used not only to fix criminal responsibility. It is also used to discharge a 
person arraigned for a crime by mistake. In the U.S., for instance,  DNA has been 
used both by police agencies for solving a complicated offence, and by convicted 
criminals to exculpate themselves. There are scores of cases in which persons on 
death row awaiting the electric chair had moved courts successfully to prove their 
innocence. Unfortunately the statutes of only a few St ates allow prisoners to 
demand a DNA test. There is a strong movement to extend this facility to other 
States as well.   Is this not reason enough to stabilise DNA   testing after building 
enough safeguards against tampering or leakage of data. 
 
The DNA data  bank is a computerised system. It is as safe as the best computer 
systems in the world are. And it has been well established - particularly after 
Wikileaks- that to expect 100 percent security is preposterous. Ultimately a 
system is as strong as its weakest link. 
 
I am all for the Bill to be pursued. The only requirement is statutory provision for 

115 
 
rigorous training of law enforcement/ laboratory personnel who will be handling 
the collection and storage of data. 
 
2. Justice B.S. Chauhan, retired Supreme Court Judge and former Chairman Law 
Commission 
 
The issues raised by the honourable Members of the Committee were raised in the 
Law Commission also at the time of drafting the Bill.   All legal, ethical and 
constitutional issues were considered at that time.  The issues raised by the 
honourable Members are misconceived for the reason that this Bill is proposed 
only for the purpose of identification (alive or dead) and not beyond it. It protects 
the privacy of individuals, maintains confidentiality, serve s public interest and 
subserves the cause of justice.   The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.PC) 
was amended in 2005 and the amendment came into force with effect from 
23.06.2006.  Two provisions were inserted in the code – s. 53A and s.311A.  This 
Bill does not go beyond the scope those two provisions in the Cr.PC.   The said 
provisions are in force and being observed by all courts and investigating 
agencies.  The provisions contained in Clauses 21(2), 21(3), 22(2) and the Proviso 
to Clause 23(2)b are sq uarely covered by the said provisions added in the 
Cr.PC.  While using the provisions for the purpose of identification of a human 
being or a dead person, strict adherence to 13 CODIS loci will eliminate the 
apprehension of revealing genetic traits.  
 
The proposed provisions in the Bill are a part of legislations in almost all 
developed countries. The apprehension of enforcing Clause 2(iv) is not worth 
consideration for the reason that a mere apprehension of abuse of legal provision 
is not a ground of chall enging the validity of law.   Therefore, the Legislature 
should not hesitate to enact a provision merely on the apprehension that it would 
be vulnerable to misuse.  Here, I would like to cite the examples of two Acts, viz., 
The Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 a nd The Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989.   Though there are widespread 
allegations that these Acts are liable to be misused, they find place in our statute 
book.  Further, I assure you, due care has been taken t o prevent violation of 
statutory provisions, providing for severe penalties. While preparing the draft Bill, 
the Commission had taken into consideration all judgments of the honourable 
Supreme Court protecting the fundamental, Constitutional, legal and human rights 
of citizens, whether alive or dead. 
 
As explained above, the purpose of the Bill is restricted only to identification of a 
person, living or dead, that too with proper safeguards, and hence the objection 
raised by the honourable Members about the long title is misplaced. 
 
 

116 
 
3. Justice Madan Lokur, retired Supreme Court Judge 
 
Preamble - Inclusion of “suspects” and “undertrials”  
The preamble to the Bill provides for “the regulation of use and application of 
Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) technology for the purposes of establishing the 
identity of certain categories of persons including the victims, offenders, suspects, 
undertrials, missing persons and unknown deceased persons and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
 
1. The first quest ion that requires an answer is whether a „suspect‟ should be 
subjected to DNA technology for the purposes of identification, possibly in 
respect of a crime. In a „blind‟ crime or a crime involving a large number of 
persons (such as a riot) everybody is sus pect, without any real basis. 
Theoretically, therefore, thousands of persons can be subjected to DNA 
profiling on a mere suspicion. Such an unbridled power is easily capable of 
misuse and abuse by targeting innocents, against whom there is not a shred 
of e vidence. Such an unbridled police power ought not to be conferred on 
anybody or any agency as it would amount to a threat to the life, liberty, 
dignity and privacy of a person.  
2. Although the preamble does not refer to a witness, the text of the Bill does 
and the view expressed above would be applicable with greater vigour to a 
witness, who has absolutely no connection with the commission of a crime, 
and might, in most cases be merely a bystander or a „chance witness.‟ 
3. An undertrial is a person who has been arrested in connection with a crime 
and is in lawful judicial/police custody or is on bail pursuant to an order 
passed by a competent court. The rights of undertrials are, in effect, 
considered later while referring to the rights of arrested persons since they 
fall in the same broad category. 
Targeting through misuse 
4. Misuse of the provisions of the Bill can lead to targeting of select groupings, 
including social, linguistic, religious and other minorities on the ground of 
being suspects. The Law Commission in its 271 st Report noted with concern 
the targeting of minorities on the basis of collected DNA information. The 
Law Commission was considering the 2017 Draft Bill and it noted as 
follows:  

117 
 
“7.5. The Bill of 2017 provides provisions intended to protect th e 
right to privacy. The mechanism provided permits for processing of 
DNA samples only for 13 CODIS loci which would not violate in 
any way the privacy of a person and as a result will never go beyond 
identification of a particular person. The strict adhere nce to 13 
CODIS loci will eliminate the apprehension of revealing genetic 
traits.” 
5. The precautionary note sounded by the Law Commission seems to have been 
overlooked in the present Bill which does not contain any safeguard or 
mechanism to prohibit processi ng of DNA samples for anything other than 
identification. Clause 33 of the present Bill states that “All DNA data, 
including DNA profiles, DNA samples and records thereof, contained in any 
DNA laboratory and DNA Data Bank shall be used only for the purpose s of 
facilitating identification of the person and not for any other purpose.”  
While this may appear mandatory, it is really directory in nature since there 
is no penalty for violating the prohibition, rendering it toothless. Further, 
there is no anti -discrimination clause in the Bill which would emphasise 
protection against targeting of any ethnic, racial or other group or 
community. 
6. The Bill does not mandate the creation of separate Data Banks for DNA 
samples collected for the purpose of criminal investig ations and those 
collected for civil matters. The creation of a single data base through Clause 
25 which may be searched for both criminal and civil purposes will result in 
the DNA of people who only consented to give samples for civil purposes 
becoming po tential results in a criminal investigation search, through false 
positives or otherwise. This will result in a presumption against the person, 
even though they have not consented to giving their DNA sample for use in 
the criminal investigation. It will al so place them at a disadvantage vis -à-vis 
other persons, who may also be potential suspects or accused, whose DNA 
does not happen to be in the Data Bank. 
7. International organisations working in genetic research1 have emphasized the 
need to restrict DNA prof iling in the Bill so that it uses only non -coding 
DNA which prevents the use of parts of the DNA which code for personal 
characteristics, including medical conditions. 
                                                        
1 Helen Wallace, Director of GeneWatch UK in The Hindu https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/decoding-the-
dna-bill/article24636395.ece  

118 
 
8. The “Forensic Genetics Policy Initiative” (FGPI) published a report 
“Establishing Best Practice for Forensic DNA Databases” in 2017 2 after 
extensive consultation and a review of policies worldwide, in which it is 
noted that DNA use policies must attempt to minimise the potential for 
racial/ ethnic bias as follows:  
“DNA databases have often been controversial because of racial bias 
with respect to the selection of those individuals who are subject to 
DNA testing and retention. This bias results from multiple causes 
throughout the criminal justice systems in the UK and the USA. 
There is no sin gle legislative provision that can eliminate racial bias 
with regard to whose records are kept on a DNA database. However, 
it is clear that the retention of DNA profiles from innocent persons 
who have been arrested but not convicted of offences will exacer bate 
such bias. … 
Best practice will involve a combination of legal provisions 
preventing discrimination, combined with in -depth consideration of 
the effect of policies on ethnic minorities.” 
9. Quite apart from the above, in motivated investigations, the inv oluntary 
taking of samples from “suspects” and “undertrials” may also enable 
targeting of vulnerable persons by the police, particularly in motivated 
investigations.  
Clause 2(iv) - Crime Scene Index  
1. The Crime Scene Index defined in Clause 2(iv) of the Bi ll includes DNA 
profiles from samples “on or within the body of a person, or on anything, or 
at any place, associated with the commission of the offence” - 2(iv)(d).  
2. Clause 31(1) of the Bill provides that the information in the Crime Scene 
Index shall be indefinitely retained. Therefore, DNA profiles (prepared on 
the basis of samples taken under Clause 22) can be retained in the crime 
scene index and stored indefinitely. This appears to be a very broad power to 
store biological information without any clear objective specified.  
3. Access to information in the Crime Scene Index is restricted by Clause 37 
only with regard to the profiles of victims or persons who have been 
eliminated as suspects in an investigation. Access is therefore not restricted 
to any oth er profiles maintained in this index, even if the persons are 
                                                        
2 Available at http://dnapolicyinitiative.org/  

119 
 
undertrials or only witnesses. This could pose a threat to the privacy of the 
persons whose profiles are stored in the Crime Scene Index.  
4. The FGPI‟s 2017 Report notes that evidence from crime s cenes is more 
effective than individual DNA profiles. However, it stresses that “Best 
practice legislation requires a clear definition of crime scene evidence, so 
that police are not allowed to collect DNA that people have left behind 
elsewhere (for example, on a coffee cup in a shop or at a political meeting), 
unless the location is part of a criminal investigation.” 
5. There is no definition of what constitutes evidence from the “crime scene” in 
Clause 2(iv) of the Bill and given the broad nature of 2(iv)(d) , there is a high 
degree of possibility of collection, storage and retention of material which is 
not relevant for the purposes of the investigation.   
In providing a view on a few other provisions of the present Bill, the overriding 
concern has been that of privacy under Article 21 and equality of treatment, both 
procedural and substantive, under Article 14 of the Constitution of India.  
A.  General Observations 
Regarding Clauses 21(2), 21(3), 22(2) and the Proviso to Clause 23 (2) (b) 
1. Clause 21 of the Bill is too broad in its application. Under Clause 21(1), 
consent is not required for taking a biological sample of a person arrested for 
a „specified offence‟ that is, an offence punishable with death or 
imprisonment for more than 7 years. On the other hand, consent is postulated 
for taking a biological sample of a person arrested for an offence with 
imprisonment for 7 years or less. Is this categorization justified? 
To get over the rigour of equal treatment under the law mandated by Article 
14 of the Constitution, not only must there be an intelligible differentia, but it 
must have a reasonable nexus with the object sought to be achieved. In The 
State of West Bengal vs. Anwar Ali Sarkar 3 while considering Article 14, it 
was pithily held by one of the learned Judges of the Supreme Court that:  
“Mere classification, however, is not enough to get over the 
inhibition of the Article. The classification must not be arbitrary but 
must be rationa l, that is to say, it must not only be based on some 
qualities or characteristics which are to be found in all the persons 
grouped together and not in others who are left out but those qualities 
                                                        
3 [1952] 1 SCR 284  

120 
 
or characteristics must have a reasonable relation to the obj ect of the 
legislation. In order to pass the test, two conditions must be fulfilled, 
namely, that the classification must be founded on an intelligible 
differentia which distinguishes those that are grouped together from 
others and that that differentia mu st have a rational relation to the 
object sought to be achieved by the Act. The differentia which is the 
basis of the classification and the object of the Act are distinct things 
and what is necessary is that there must be a nexus between them. In 
short, w hile the Article forbids class legislation in the sense of 
making improper discrimination by conferring privileges or imposing 
liabilities upon persons arbitrarily selected out of a large number of 
other persons similarly situated in relation to the privil eges sought to 
be conferred or the liability proposed to be imposed, it does not 
forbid classification for the purpose of legislation, provided such 
classification is not arbitrary in the sense I have just explained.” 
Applying the test laid down, it could be said that there is an intelligible 
differentia between offences where the punishment exceeds 7 years and 
where the punishment is 7 years or less. However, the object sought to be 
achieved by this classification is not clear. If the object is to secure 
conviction on the basis of scientific evidence (as it appears), then the term of 
imprisonment is irrelevant and has no rational nexus with the object sought 
to be achieved. Conviction on the basis of scientific evidence is important 
regardless of whether th at person has committed an offence punishable with 
imprisonment of more or less than 7 years. 
2. The provisions of Clause 21 apply to a person who is arrested but not 
convicted or under trial. It is common knowledge that two or more persons 
may be accused of the same crime, as conspirators or accomplices. 
Depending on the role of the accused person, one of them might be arrested 
for a „specified offence‟ while the other may not be arrested for a specified 
offence. Therefore, though the crime is the same, the o ffence is different and 
therefore the punishment is also different. The test laid down by the Supreme 
Court of “the object sought to be achieved” is not met by the section or is, at 
best, tenuous. Is the focus on the crime or the criminal or the punishment  or 
on collection of evidence?  
3. It is also common knowledge that the police have the propensity to accuse a 
person of an offence carrying the maximum punishment. For example, a case 

121 
 
of voluntarily causing grievous hurt is usually recorded as an attempt to 
murder. In a case of voluntarily causing grievous hurt, the punishment is 
maximum 7 years and it would, therefore, not be a „specified offence‟ while 
attempt to murder would be a „specified offence‟. In such a case, the accused 
transitions from a state of „voluntarily‟ providing a biological sample to a 
state of being obliged to provide a biological sample, which could have a 
long-term adverse impact on the accused, apart from violating privacy rights. 
4. A person can also be arrested for a frivolous, trumped -up, or a motivated 
„specified offence‟ that has no substance at all and even in such a case the 
DNA sample can be taken, for which the arrested person has no recourse in 
law. It is not enough to say that the law will take its own course when a 
person‟s reputation has already been damaged and a biological sample taken. 
The importance of Article 21 pales into insignificance in such cases. 
5. The application of clause 21 to children below the age of 18 years is 
disconcerting. The propensity of the police, while a rresting a juvenile in 
conflict with law, is to record the age of the juvenile as 19 years so that he is 
kept in a jail (for the convenience of the police) rather than an Observation 
Home. There are several decisions of the courts which conclude that the 
offender was a juvenile when he/she committed the crime, but was tried as an 
adult. In such cases, a juvenile in conflict with law would be virtually 
compelled to provide a biological sample if he/she is arrested for a „specified 
offence‟ much to the detrim ent of the future of the juvenile and contrary to 
principles of restorative justice.  
6. The other rather disconcerting aspect is that under clause 21, the stage of 
taking the sample is at the point of arrest, or apprehension. This could lead to 
a conflict wi th regard to a juvenile between the ages of 16 -18 years who is 
apprehended for a „specified offence‟. The juvenile could then be treated as 
an adult by the police, thereby by -passing the provisions of Section 15 of the 
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015. There is then a 
clear danger that a preliminary assessment under Section 15 of the Juvenile 
Justice would not be made and a biological sample taken of the juvenile 
without determining whether the juvenile had the mental and physica l 
capacity to commit such offence, the ability to understand the consequences 
of the offence and the circumstances in which he allegedly committed the 
offence. There is nothing in the Bill to safeguard the rights of the child 
against such use or abuse of the police‟s broad powers under Clause 21. 

122 
 
7. The right to privacy as recognised in Justice K.S. Puttaswamy & Ors. v. 
Union of India & Ors. 4 (“Puttaswamy I”) includes bodily privacy and 
individual autonomy. Puttaswamy I recognised that privacy is not an absolute 
right but laid down the standards to be met when privacy is infringed as 
follows:  
“188. (H) …A law which encroaches upon privacy will have to 
withstand the touchstone of permissible restrictions on fundamental 
rights. In the context of Article 21 an inv asion of privacy must be 
justified on the basis of a law which stipulates a procedure which is fair, 
just and reasonable. The law must also be valid with reference to the 
encroachment on life and personal liberty under Article 21. An invasion 
of life or personal liberty must meet the three-fold requirement of  
(i) legality, which postulates the existence of law;  
(ii) need, defined in terms of a legitimate state aim; and  
(iii) proportionality which ensures a rational nexus between the 
objects and the means adopted to achieve them.” (Emphasis 
supplied.) 
The involuntary taking of a bodily sample for creating a DNA profile will 
undoubtedly entail a violation of this right under Article 21. 
B.  Lack of Procedural Safeguards  
1. The National Human Rights Commission (NHRC) published its Guidelines 
for the Administration of Lie Detector Tests in 2000, which were 
subsequently approved and adopted verbatim by the Supreme Court in Selvi 
v. State of Karnatak a5for the purpose of voluntary administration of Lie 
Detector Tests (polygraph tests). The Court also directed that similar 
guidelines should be adopted for the other two techniques in the case, that is, 
narcoanalysis and brain electrical activation profiles (BEAP). The Guidelines 
are reproduced below.   
2. NHRC guidelines relating to the administration of Lie Detector Test provide, 
inter alia, that  
i. No Lie Detector Test should be administered without the 
consent of the accused. Option should be given to the a ccused 
as to whether he wishes to avail the test.  
                                                        
4 (2017) 10 SCC 1 
5 (2010) 7SCC 263 

123 
 
ii. If the accused volunteers for the tests, he should be given 
access to a lawyer. The police and the lawyer should explain 
the physical, emotional and legal implication of such a test to 
him.  
iii. The consent should be recorded before a Judicial Magistrate.  
iv. During the hearing before the Magistrate, the accused should 
be duly represented by a lawyer.  
v. At the hearing, the person should also be told in clear terms 
that the statement that is made shall not be a 'confessional' 
statement to the Magistrate but will have the status of a 
statement made to the police.  
vi. The Magistrate shall consider all factors r elating to the 
detention including the length of detention and the nature of 
interrogation.  
vii. The actual recording of the Lie Detector Test shall be 
done in an independent agency (such as a hospital) and 
conducted in the presence of a lawyer.  
viii. A full medica l and factual narration of the manner of 
information received must be taken on record. 
Similar guidelines must be developed for the taking of biological samples to 
create a DNA profile.  
3. Further, there must be a statutory gap of a few days after consent is  given 
before a Magistrate for taking a sample to enable the person to consider the 
implications of consent. The procedure should be similar to that always 
followed under Section 164, Cr.P.C. for recording of confessions by a 
Magistrate. The reason for thi s precaution is that giving a biological sample 
may amount to self -incrimination. The individual should also have access to 
a lawyer during this period. 
4. The 271 st Law Commission Report refers to the “Report of the Group of 
Experts on Privacy (Chaired by Justice A.P. Shah) submitted to the Planning 
Commission on 16 October 2012” wherein several safeguards were 
suggested to prevent misuse of DNA data and protect the right to privacy. 
Two of these need to be incorporated in the current Bill. For example, 

124 
 
i. There should a mechanism using which citizens can appeal against the 
retention of data.  
ii. There was no proper procedure to obtain consent and there was no 
mechanism und er which a volunteer can withdraw his data (in the 
earlier draft Bill). Before giving the data to a third party, the person 
must be notified and consent must be sought, if the third party was not 
an authorised agency.  
5. The Bill provides no limitation on ho w many samples can be taken from a 
person. It should be limited to a one -time exercise only. Presently, if there is 
a procedural or other defect in taking or storing the DNA sample, the arrested 
person can once again be subjected to the process and this ca n go on 
indefinitely. Therefore, a defective investigation can be covered up, unlike in 
other statutes dealing with taking material samples for the purpose of 
investigation. For example, the NDPS Act and the Prevention of Food 
Adulteration Act, where if the process of taking and sealing the sample is not 
in accordance with law, the benefit of doubt will go to the accused person. 
The Bill eliminates the possibility of the arrested or accused person being 
given the benefit of doubt in case of defective proced ure while collecting, 
storing, transporting, or analysing the sample. A citizen should not suffer for 
the fault of the investigating agency.  
C.  Post-Order of the Magistrate  
1. The exercise of discretion by the Magistrate in Clauses 21, 22, and 23 is 
uncanalised.  
2. With respect to Clause 21(2) and 21(3), for arriving at a conclusion whether 
the bodily substance will confirm or disprove the involvement of the arrested 
person in the  offence, the Magistrate will necessarily have to appreciate the 
evidence on record. Such a pre -trial assessment is dangerous. There are two 
problems with this. Firstly, the police will only place on record evidence that 
is inculpatory thereby placing the arrested person at a tremendous 
disadvantage, particularly since the arrested person is never made aware of 
the exculpatory evidence. Secondly, it is not clear whether evidence that is 
inadmissible can also be taken into consideration while passing an orde r by 
the Magistrate. For example, if the accused makes an inadmissible 
confessional statement before the police, can that inadmissible statement be 
used by the Magistrate to pass an order for taking a DNA sample? Can the 
admissibility or otherwise of evidence be tested before trial? 

125 
 
3. If the arrested person does not voluntarily provide a biological sample, and 
the Magistrate passes an adverse order against him/her, can the order passed 
by the Magistrate be challenged? The Bill does not provide for any appella te 
procedure and in the absence of any provision for appeal from such an order, 
there is no other statutory right to appeal by virtue of Section 372 of the 
Cr.P.C.: “Section 372. No appeal to lie unless otherwise provided. - No 
appeal shall lie from any ju dgment or order of a Criminal Court except as 
provided for by this Code by any other law for the time being in force.” 
4. The remaining options for an aggrieved person are not adequate. An 
application for revision under Section 397 of the Cr.P.C., would not b e an 
adequate remedy since the power of revision is limited as compared to an 
appellate power, as has been held by the Supreme Court in Associated 
Cement Co. Ltd. vs. Keshvanand6as follows:  
“10. It appears that learned Single Judge has equated appellate p owers 
with revisional powers, and that the core difference between an appeal 
and a revision has been overlooked. It is trite legal position that 
appellate jurisdiction is coextensive with original court's jurisdiction as 
for appraisal and appreciation of e vidence and reaching findings on 
facts and appellate court is free to reach its own conclusion on evidence 
untrammelled by any finding entered by the trial court . Revisional 
powers on the other hand belong to supervisory jurisdiction of a 
superior court. W hile exercising revisional powers the court has to 
confine to the legality and propriety of the findings and also whether the 
subordinate court has kept itself within the bounds of its jurisdiction 
including the question whether the court has failed to exe rcise the 
jurisdiction vested in it . Though the difference between the two 
jurisdictions is subtle, it is quite real and has now become well 
recognised in legal provinces.” (Emphasis supplied.) 
5. In Rajendra Rajoriya vs. Jagat Narain Thapak and Ors . 7 the Sup reme 
Court recently reiterated the limited scope of revision powers as follows:  
“12. The ambit of revisional jurisdiction is well settled. Section 397 of 
Code of Criminal Procedure empowers the Sessions Judge to call for 
and examine the record of any proc eeding before any subordinate 
criminal court situate within its jurisdiction for the purpose of satisfying 
                                                        
6 (1998) 1 SCC 687 
7 AIR 2018 SC 1229 

126 
 
itself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of any finding, sentence 
or order recorded or passed, and as to the regularity of any proceedings  
of such subordinate Court.”  
6. Further, a remedy under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. is not at all an efficacious 
remedy since the arrested person will have to approach the High Court, 
which is not affordable for every arrested person. Access to the High Court is 
not easy even otherwise. 
D.     Retention and Removal of DNA Profiles   
1. How long will all DNA profiles be retained? This is important because it has 
been said that apprehension and conviction of repeat offenders will be aided 
by comparison of biologica l evidence at the scene of the crime. Would the 
„information‟ be available indefinitely? Clause 31(1) states that “the 
information contained in the crime scene index shall be retained”. This 
implies indefinite retention of all profiles stored in this index. 
2. Clause 31(2) provides for removal of certain DNA profiles in some 
circumstances. A suspect‟s DNA profile may be removed after a police 
report is filed or per a Court order - 31(2)(i). An undertrial‟s DNA profile 
may be removed only as per a court order - 31(2)(ii). 
3. A person who is not an offender/ suspect/ undertrial and whose DNA profile 
exists in any index (crime scene/ missing persons) must make a written 
request to the Data Bank for removal of his/her profile - 31(3). It is possible 
that a DNA profile may be created from a sample found at a crime scene, but 
that the concerned individual is never informed of this, since the Bill does 
not appear to mandate the giving of notice to a person whose DNA sample is 
taken from a crime scene, and whose DNA profile is subsequently prepared. 
4. From the scheme summarised above, it appears that an “offender” has no 
opportunity to seek removal of the DNA profile from the Data Bank at any 
point whatsoever. 
5. Further, there is no provision for verification of whether the pro file has 
actually been removed, giving no assurance to the person whose profile has 
been prepared.  
6. Even if a written request is made for removal of the profile, the Data Bank is 
not obliged to remove it and there is no provision for appealing against the 
decision of the Data Bank.  

127 
 
7. The onus for removal should not be on the person whose DNA profile exists, 
but should be on the Data Bank to automatically remove profiles which are 
no longer required for law enforcement or other purposes, and retention 
beyond a certain time period should only be subject to a court order in that 
regard.  
8. In this context, the Supreme Court of the United Kingdom (UKSC) and the 
European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) have held that indefinite retention 
of DNA information in the criminal justice system is in violation of Article 8 
of the European Convention on Human Rights. These decisions were noted 
in the majority judgment in Puttaswamy I, as follows:    
“167. R(GC) v. The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis  [2011] 
UKSC 21 was a  case concerning the extent of the police's power (under 
guidelines issued by the Association of Chief Police Officers -the ACPO 
guidelines) to indefinitely retain biometric data associated with individuals 
who are no longer suspected of a criminal offence.  The UK Supreme 
Court, by a majority held that the police force's policy of retaining DNA 
evidence in the absence of 'exceptional circumstances' was unlawful and a 
violation of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.” 
“223. The Grand Chamber of 18 judges in S and Marper v. United 
Kingdom [2008] ECHR 1581 examined the claim of the applicants that 
their Right to Respect for Private Life under Article 8 was being violated 
as their fingerprints, cell samples and DNA profiles were retained in a 
database after successful termination of criminal proceedings against 
them. The Court held that there had been a violation of Article 8 of the 
Convention. Finding that the retention at issue had constituted a 
disproportionate interference with the applicants'  right to respect for 
private life, the Court held that:  
"the blanket and indiscriminate nature of the powers of retention of the 
fingerprints, cellular samples and DNA profiles of persons...fails to 
strike a fair balance between the competing public and private interests 
and that the Respondent State has overstepped any acceptable margin 
of appreciation".  
… 
Regarding the retention of cellular samples and DNA profiles, it was held 
that:  

128 
 
“Given the nature and the amount of personal information contained i n 
cellular samples, their retention per se must be regarded as interfering 
with the right to respect for the private lives of the individuals 
concerned. That only a limited part of this information is actually 
extracted or used by the authorities through D NA profiling and that no 
immediate detriment is caused in a particular case does not change this 
conclusion... [T]he DNA profiles' capacity to provide a means of 
identifying genetic relationships between individuals... is in itself 
sufficient to conclude that their retention interferes with the right to the 
private life of the individuals concerned... The possibility the DNA 
profiles create for inferences to be drawn as to ethnic origin makes their 
retention all the more sensitive and susceptible of affecti ng the right to 
private life.””  
9. There is also some degree of uncertainty as to the index in which some 
profiles will be stored in. Clause 22(1) deals with a person who has not been 
arrested and is merely a witness or a part of the investigating process an d 
provides that such person may voluntarily give a sample. It is unclear as to 
what is the purpose of this sample or which index it would be kept in. If it is 
to be kept in the “crime scene index”, it will be retained indefinitely until an 
application is m ade for its removal. Putting the onus on the witness in a 
criminal investigation – a witness who merely happens to be present at the 
scene of the offence - to apply for the profile to be removed, failing which it 
shall be retained indefinitely, is an unreasonable condition.  
4. Justice B.N. Srikrishna, retired Supreme Court Judge 
1.The Supreme Court in Selvivs State of Karnataka has held that even in the case 
os suspects, accused and others, involuntary narco test, polygraph test and Brain 
Electronic Mapping are unconstitutional as violative of the guaranteed rights 
under Art,20(3)and such evidence would be inadmissible.. A fortiori, it would be 
prima facie unconstitutional in other cases too.  
 
2. The Puttaswamy judgement of 9 judges of the Supreme Court holds that right to 
privacy is a fundamental right guaranteed under Part III of the Constitution 
founded in Art.21. In para 325 the court explains that this fundamental right can 
only be abridged by law that meets the  three threshold criteria: (1) Law, there is a 
law made by the competent legislature; (2) Need, defined in terms of a legitimate 
State objective; and (3) Proportionality, which ensures a rational nexus between 
the objects and the means adopted to achieve them. Unless these threshold test s 
are met, the law would be unconstitutional. 

129 
 
 
3. In my general assessment, prima facie, the Bill fails on all three Puttaswamy 
threshold tests. It thus violates the fundamental right to privacy guaranteed under 
Art.21 as interpreted by Puttaswamy.  
 
4. The Bill also cannot be justified on the basis of criminal law.  As pointed out in 
Selvi case, involuntary tests are anathema to the fundamental rights guaranteed 
under Art.20(3) of the Constitution and material thus collected is inadmissible. 
 
5. The sweep of the Bill seems rather over -wide and beyond the legitimate 
concerns of the State, as can be seen from the Title. 
 
6. Clause 2(iv) would run counter to the triple test of Puttaswamy as it is over -
wide in its ambit. 
 
7. Clauses 21(2) and 21(3) seems to emp ower the magistrate to do something 
contrary to the right of privacy and collect evidence that may be inadmissible in 
view of the Selvi judgment. 
 
8. 22920 and 23(2)(b) again permit involuntary collection of material and would 
prima facei run counter to the principles in Puttaswamy judgment. 
 
To sum up, the Bill would appear to violate the privacy rights of all persons and 
particularly violative of the rights of accused and suspects also, if the collection of 
material is without consent. 
 
5. India Police Foundation 
 
The incredible advances in DNA science and and identification technology in 
handling of biological evidence holds great promise for furthering the cause of 
truth and justice in crime investigation and criminal justice system in general. The 
proposed legislation will be of immense value for resolving crime; identification 
of victims of accident/disaster/natural calamities, unidentified  dead bodies ,  
missing children/Women/Senior citizen/Mentally challenged etc 
 
The proposed law will also help develop our sparse infrastructure and expertise in 
the field and promote science-driven crime investigation. 
 
However, it is crucial that the proposed law has adequate safeguards against its 
misuse and allay privacy concerns. Our law should also conform to  the UN 
standards. 
 

130 
 
The Concerns  
1. Misuse of Sensitive DNA Information:  can reveal  extremely sensitive 
information about individuals (family ancestry (pedigree), skin colour, 
behaviour, illness, health status and susceptibility to diseases) 
2. Access to such intrusive information can be misused to specifically target 
individuals and their families using their genetic data. 
3. Can be misused for caste/community -based profiling. Needless to say, 
DNA based  profiling would amount to violation of human rights and it 
could also compromise the privacy of the individuals. 
4. The lawful and effective use of DNA technology is subject to its harnessing 
by trained and reliable officials and experts, making use of equipment, tools 
and technology, operational protocols and sampling methods. 
5. The integrity of the process is critical: Vulnerable to manipulation, 
mislabelling and contamination by accident or design. 
6. International best practices  suggest that there must be an independent 
regulator of data to supervise and maintain checks on laboratory quality and 
examination of the crime scene and accordingly submit reports to the 
government. The Regulatory Body proposed here seems to meet the 
requirements, subject to appropriate checks and balances.  
7. Physical and cyber security of DNA Database -Bank/ security of a huge 
number of DNA profiles is critical.  The Bill requires provisions for 
appropriate firewalls and cyber defence. 
8. Most importantly, protocols establishing a trusted chain of custody of 
samples, reliable  and clearly defined processes for analysis, and proper use 
of expert evidence in court are critical to ensure  their evidentiary value. 
Any gaps in chain of custody will cast suspicion on the integrity of the 
sample itself. 
9. Appropriate standards for laboratory quality assurance and crime scene 
examination need to be developed and published. 
Some specific comments: 
 
1. The objective of the bill is to “provide for the regulation of use and 
application of Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) technology for the purposes 
of establishing the identity of certain categories of persons including the 
victims, offenders, suspects, undertrials, missing persons and unknown 

131 
 
deceased persons and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto”. 
 
Instead of „ for the purpose of’  - the objectives should be „limited to‟ the 
above said purposes - to shut the possibility of any mischief through 
universal application of these provisions.  
 
2. The term ""offender"" is not defined.   Whether it means a convict or 
accused is not clear. (2 xviii) 
 
3. Composition of the regulatory board:  (4e). There is no representation of 
MHA.  It is also desirable to have a judicial member (High court or District 
Session Judge).  Most members of the board are from Central Government 
or Central organisations, there is scope for more decentralisation.  
 
4. IPC offenses for which body samples can be taken   without consent should 
have been clearly specified in the schedule. (page 23).  
 
5. There does not appear to be any justification for inclusion of 
following Special and Local Acts –  
 
a. Omnibus inclusion of medical negligence – how can DNA evidence 
help resolve cases of medical negligence? (MTPA 1971 & 
PNDT,1994 are already included).  
b. How can DNA help in the Protection of Civil Rights Act 1955 (no 
injuries are caused-only spoken words) 
c. There is no justification of collecting DNA information for routine 
MV Act cases (death or injury because of accident are already 
covered under Sections 304 A, 337/338 of IPC) 
d. Immigration/emigration cases – while DNA information may help in 
some cases, setting up a data bank of all immigrants or emigrants is 
likely to be contested.  (this needs clarification) 
 
6. Section 21(1)Provides for taking consent of an accused – It is important to 
have safeguards to prevent obtaining „consent‟ through coercion 
 
7. „Anybody being questioned‟ (22 1b) is too wide and subject to misuse. Can 
be safeguarded through a scheme for obtaining permission of a 
jurisdictional judicial magistrate for collection of samples. 
 
8. Even 22(1)a is very wide - anybody present at a scene of crime may or may 
not be an accused or suspect.  There is no need to collect DNA samples of 

132 
 
witnesses!  While it may be useful to maintain DNA index of accused, 
unidentified victims, or the DNA samples of relatives of victims whose 
body has not been identified etc, there is no need to openly extend the crime 
scene index. (privacy concerns) 
 
9. Presence of a lady doctor/lady forensic scientist   must be made mandatory 
for collecting  intimate bodily substances and doing intimate forensic 
procedures on a woman.(23(3) a,b) 
 
10. Suspect index as per 26(1), when maintained ,must be temporary and in 
case of no arrest, must be deleted  through an automatic protocol ( 
mechanism to be evolved) and should not give other handles to extort 
bribes. The need for individu als to apply for removal of their names is 
fraught with risk. (privacy) 
 
11. Safeguards needed to prevent misuse of data and information in the custody 
of the DNA bank ( Section 32). 
 
12.  34(a)- For obtaining information available in the Data Bank, law 
enforcement authorities / investigating agencies must submit a written 
request with adequate justification and FIR number under investigation 
(proforma to be devised), and signed by a police officer of prescribed rank 
only.  
 
13. 34(f) is left undefined – is subject to misuse. 
 
14. Section 57 is totally unwarranted, as it excludes the jurisdiction of courts 
(including SC and HC).   
 
15. Access to foreign / international agencies: Procedure and purposes must be 
well defined. (5iiic -page 25)   - Establish strict  and clear protocol s. 
Information should be handed over only after obtaining an order of an 
Indian Court having jurisdiction.  This is the procedure that other 
democracies follow. 
 
16. Penalties provided under the section 45 for theft or leaking / unauthorised 
sharing & usage of  data should be minimum imprisonment of 10 years 
extendable to life imprisonment and fine up to 1 lakh for each instance 
involved. The proposal of imprisonment up to 3 years and fine up to 1 lakh 
for collective data isn‟t deterrent enough. 
 

133 
 
17. Private DNA lab s should be audited regularly by well qualified technical 
staff of FSL, following an established procedure. 
 
18. The bill must meet the UN standards of security and privacy. 
 
6. An Eminent Jurist  
The Government has been nudged into undertaking this exercise following filing 
of a Writ Petition by Lokniti Foundation in the Supreme Court. On 14.07.2014, 
the Supreme Court passed the following order : 
“....Having heard the learned counsel for the petitioner, we are 
disposed to think, that the learned ASG appearing  for the Union of 
India should impress upon the competent authorities of the Union of 
India to think over it seriously so that an apposite road map is 
brought into existence on making it functional that would echo the 
voice and cry of the feelings and philosophy of the 21st Century. The 
matter be listed on 22.09.2014 to enable the learned ASG to file 
appropriate affidavit of the competent authority in this regard.” 
On 22.09.2014, the following order was passed : 
“At this juncture without getting into the nuances of the Bill, which 
is being thought of, we will desire Mr. Kaul to obtain instructions 
with regard to two aspects: (1) Whether pending the Bill coming 
into force the concerned Department can constitute a Data Bank in 
respect of dead persons who are  not identifiable; and (2) when there 
are missing reports in respect of persons to collect the DNA from 
the permissible sources like siblings or others so that in case any 
unidentified dead body is found to match the DNA to arrive at the 
conclusion about t he missing persons who are dead; or as an 
ancillary the missing person who is a victim of the crime of 
kidnapping or where any child, who is not able to find out his 
parents, can be in a position to find out through the DNA.” 
It appears that the Supreme Co urt was primarily concerned about the missing 
persons. But a look at the long title indicates that the scope is being widened by 
including suspects and under-trials. I think we are spreading the net too wide. The 
statement of objects and reasons refers to the 271st report of the Law Commission 
which suggested the enactment of the legislation. The report was given in July, 
2017 while the judgment by the Nine Judges Bench in the Aadhar case came on 
24.08.2017. The Law Commission's report was submitted when pr ivacy was not 
declared as a fundamental right. 

134 
 
All of us seem to be laboring under the impression that creation of a DNA data 
base would provide instant solution to the ills plaguing the criminal justice 
system. Though in several judgments both of our Supr eme Court as well as other 
jurisdictions, Judges have sung  paeans to DNA technology, I became less 
sanguine after reading an article on the t he effectiveness of the UK national DNA 
database by Aaron Opoku Amankwaa and Carole Mccartney. I have given the link 
to that article. I am sure you have already gone through it and I am merely 
carrying coal to newcastle. The authors question whether creation of a huge 
infrastructure by spending big amounts of money is really worth it.  
Though I do not think inclusion o f suspects and under -trials in the long title may 
lead to targeting of minorities, I have no doubt that it needlessly widens the scope 
and reach of the proposed regime. It is true that in some high profile cases, DNA 
matching had helped to crack cases. Lik ewise, at least in USA in a quite a few 
cases, the convicted persons have been able to obtain honourable exoneration by 
invoking this resource. But, the fact remains that DNA hit by itself may not in 
most cases form the sole basis of conviction. It may pro vide corroboration. 
Likewise, conviction can solely rest on other evidence even without the prop of 
DNA evidence. Therefore, DNA evidence is not always essential for solving 
crimes.  
Clauses 21, 22 and 23 have serious implications for privacy rights. In my  view, 
instead of predicating the power to take bodily substance on the term of sentence 
for the offence, we can instead make it offence -specific. In the schedule, these 
offences can be specifically enumerated. In IPC, for instance, for the offence of 
criminal intimidation (506 ii) the sentence can even be life imprisonment and this 
offence is included regularly in every FIR. That is why, the term of sentence ought 
not to be the criterion. The nature of the offence should be the deciding factor. 
DNA evidence will be relevant mostly in cases of theft, robbery, kidnapping, rape 
and murder. The investigation officer can be authorised to take bodily substance 
even without the consent of the person concerned in such cases. In all other cases, 
if the person concer ned does not consent, the police ought not to have the power 
to go for his DNA profile. By conferring power on the magistrate, the requirement 
to obtain consent has been made redundant. The magistrates rarely say no to the 
investigation officer.  
The provi sions mentioned by you would also fail the test of proportionality. 
Privacy has been recognised as a fundamental right. Of course, it is not an 
absolute one. It may have to give way to public interest. But then, there must be a 
legislation to support the d eprivation and it must also pass the test of 
proportionality. This bill is bound to fail on this score.  

135 
 
I will give only one instance. DNA has two parts, coded and non -coded. DNA 
profile taken by the State should contain information only to the extent it is 
required to establish the identity of the person. If the information is going to 
reveal the other aspects of the individual, if it furnishes more information than 
what is required, it is a clear invasion of one's privacy. We still the lack a robust 
data protection law. What is the guarantee that the information stored in the DNA 
bank will be safe and secure. The Bill does not contain any provision for 
destroying records. For instance, following acquittal, DNA profile of the erstwhile 
accused will have to be erased. The Bill does not say for how long the information 
is to be retained.  
Decoding the information is an expert task by itself. The accuracy of analysis, the 
integrity of the sample are aspects that will have to be factored in. I foresee 
possible miscarriage of justice by false matching. The accused must of course 
have an unfettered right to insist on matching of his DNA profile with what is 
found in the crime scene to establish his innocence. But for the prosecution to 
maintain a huge DNA data bank is fraught with danger. There is no doubt that the 
law is required. But the law as proposed appears too sweeping and expansive.  
 
 
 