 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2023/Kartika, 1945 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO. 
248 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
THE BHARATIYA SAKSHYA BILL, 2023 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 10TH NOVEMBER, 2023) 
(FORWARDED TO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 10TH NOVEMBER, 2023) 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH DECEMBER, 2023)  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4TH DECEMBER, 2023) 

Hindi version of this publication is also available   
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON HOME AFFAIRS 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED FORTY EIGHTH REPORT 
ON 
THE BHARATIYA SAKSHYA BILL, 2023 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE CHAIRMAN, RAJYA SABHA ON 10TH NOVEMBER, 2023) 
(FORWARDEDTO THE SPEAKER, LOK SABHA ON 10TH NOVEMBER, 2023) 
 
(PRESENTED TO RAJYA SABHA ON 4TH DECEMBER, 2023)  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF LOK SABHA ON 4TH DECEMBER, 2023) 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
November, 2023/Kartika, 1945 (Saka) 


C O N T E N T S 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) - (iii)
2. ACRONYMS (iv) 
3. PREFACE (v) - (vi)
4. REPORT      1-15
CHAPTER – I 
INTRODUCTION 
1 – 2 
CHAPTER - II 
SUBMISSION BY THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
3 – 4 
CHAPTER- III 
MAJOR CHANGES INTRODUCED I
N THE BILL 
5 - 6 
CHAPTER- IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS ON CLAUSES 
7- 15
5. OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  OF THE 
COMMITTEE – AT A GLANCE 
16- 19
6. NOTES OF DISSENT 20-155
7. RELEVANT MINUTES OF THE MEETINGS OF THE 
COMMITTEE  
156-205
8. ANNEXURES  (I) BILLS 
(II) LIST OF DOMAIN EXPERTS
206-285

 
i 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri Brij Lal    - Chairman 
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb  
3. Shri N. R. Elango  
4. Dr. Anil Jain  
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar  
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar  
7. Shri Digvijaya Singh  
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
9. *Shri Derek O’Brien 
10. †Shri P. Chidambaram  
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury  
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar  
14. Shri Dilip Ghosh  
15. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami  
16. Shrimati Kirron Kher  
17. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran  
18. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik  
19. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar  
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal  
21. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel  
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
23. Shri R. K. Singh Patel  
24. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram  
25. Shrimati Sarmistha Kumari Sethi 
26. ≠Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale  
27. Shri Ravneet Singh  
28. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
29. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga  
30. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
31. ¥Vacant 
 
 
                                                           
*Shri Derek O'Brien, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f. 23rdAugust, 2023. 
† Shri P. Chidambaram, MP, Rajya Sabha nominated w.e.f  28th  August, 2023 in place of Shri P. Bhattacharya, 
who retired  from the membership of Rajya Sabha on the 18th August, 2023. 
≠ Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 19th October, 2022 in place of Shri Gajanan 
Chandrakant Kirtikar, MP, Lok Sabha. 
¥ Consequent upon disqualification of Shri  Faizal P. P. Mohammed  from the Membership of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 
11
th January, 2023  in terms of the provisions of Article 102(1)(e) of the Constitution of India read with Section   
8 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951, he ceases to be a Member of the Committee. 

 
ii 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
(re-constituted w.e.f. 13th September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri Brij Lal    - Chairman 
 RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri P. Chidambaram 
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb  
4. Shri N. R. Elango  
5. Dr. Anil Jain  
6. Shri Sujeet Kumar  
7. Shri Derek O’Brien 
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar 
9. Shri Digvijaya Singh  
10. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Sanjay Bhatia 
12. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury 
13. Dr. (Shrimati) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar  
14. ‡Dr. Nishikant Dubey 
15. Shri Dilip Ghosh  
16. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami  
17. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran  
18. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik  
19. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar  
20. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal  
21. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel  
22. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel 
23. Shri R. K. Singh Patel  
24. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram  
25. Shrimati Sarmistha Kumari Sethi 
26. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale 
27. Shri Ravneet Singh  
28. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
29. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga  
30. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
31. Vacant 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
‡ Dr. Nishikant Dubey, MP, Lok Sabha nominated w.e.f. 5th October, 2023 in place of Shrimati Kirron Kher, 
MP, Lok Sabha. 

 
iii 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri S. Jason, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Shri V Summinlun, Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 
iv 
 
ACRONYMS 
 
BNS Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita 
BNSS Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 
BSB Bharatiya Sakshya Bill 
IEA Indian Evidence Act 
IPC Indian Penal Code 
NLU National Law University 
  

 
v 
 
PREFACE 
I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs, having been authorised by the Committee to 
present the R eport on its behalf, present thisTwo Hundred Forty Eighth Report 
of the Committee on The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023 (Annexure – I). 
2.  In pursuance of Rule 270 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in the Council of States relating to the Department-related 
Parliamentary St anding Committees, the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in 
consultation with the Hon'ble Speaker, Lok Sabha ha d on 18
th August, 2023 
referred The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023, as introduced in the Lok Sabha  on 
11th August, 2023 and pending therein  to the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Home Affairs for examination and report within three 
months. 
3. The Committee held 12 meetings during the course of examination of the 
Bill. In its first sitting held on 24
th August, 2023, the Home Secretary made a 
presentation on the Bill. Thereafter, in the meetings held on 25 th and 26 th 
August, 2023, the views and opinions of the Members of the Committee were 
gathered.  On the 11 th, 12th, 13th, 22nd, 23rd September, 2023 and 3 rd October, 
2023, the Committee heard the views of domain experts. A list of domain 
experts who appeared before the Committee is at Annexure- II. The Committee 
held a clause -by-clause consideration of the Bill on 4 th and 5 th October, 
2023.Further, on 27 th October, 2023, the Members of the Committee again 
expressed their views on the Bill. 
4. The Committee in its sitting held on 6 th November, 2023, considered the 
draft 248th Report on the Bill and adopted the same. 
5. The Committee relied on the following documents in finalising its 
Report:-  
(i) The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023;  
(ii) The Indian Evidence Act, 1872; 
(iii) Background Note on the Bill received from the Ministry of Home Affairs; 
(iv) Presentation, clarifications and oral evid ence of Home Secretary and 
senior officials of Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Law and 
Justice; 
(v) The Constitution of India; 
(vi) Suggestions received on the Bill from serving and former Members of 
Parliament, various private individuals/associations/organisations/experts, 
State Governments and replies of the Ministry on such suggestions; 

 
vi 
 
(vii) Oral evidence and written submissions by various stakeholders/experts on 
the Bill; and  
(viii) Replies received from the Ministry of Home Affairs to the 
questions/queries raised by Members and the domain experts during the 
meetings on the Bill. 
6. On behalf of the Committee, I would like to acknowledge with thanks the 
contributions made by those who deposed before the Committee and also those 
who gave their valuable suggestions to the Committee through their written 
submissions.  
7.  For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and 
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in bold letters in the body 
of the Report. 
 
 
6th November, 2023 
New Delhi 
Kartika, 1945 (Saka) 
Brij Lal 
Chairman 
Department-related Parliamentary                                                               
Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
1 
 
REPORT 
CHAPTER-I 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 The criminal justice system in its current procedural and substantive 
construction has run its course and is in dire need of a ubiquitous reset. The 
need for such res et is  evidenced by the  delayed justice dispensation systems, 
appellate Courts overburdene d with appeals, victim s waiting years on end for 
much deserved justice and undertrial prisoners languishing in jails for offences 
for which they have not yet been convicted. Further, the current policing system 
as well as the system of dispensation of justice has not embraced the 
advancements of 21st century technology that has transformed investigation and 
criminology in other countries. The Indian criminal justice system has struggled 
to keep pace with the profound technological changes in the Indian socio-
economic milieu that have radically re -imagined the way  in which crimes 
manifest in the  society. The Indian Evidence Act , 1872 is a relic of the past, a 
puzzling solution to problems of an era gone by.  
1.2 The Indian Evidence Act  (IEA), which was enacted in the year 
1872,provides for law s relating to evidence and assist Courts in establishing 
facts of the case brought before it and pronouncing judgments based on such 
facts. It falls within the category of ‘adjective law’ and it defines the pleading 
and methodology by which the substantive and procedural law are 
operationalised. 
1.3 The experience of more than seven decades of democratic governance 
highlighted that the Act has not kept pace with the evolving criminal activities 
as it  has not imbibed the best practices that have developed in the field of 
criminology in recent times. A ttempts have been made to bridge the gap in the 
Act by way  of amendme nts. However, such piece -meal approach though 
repeated amendments has been found to be inadequate to comprehensively 
address the issues in the Act and it was clear that an overhaul of the Act was 
required.  
THE BHARATIYA SAKSHYA BILL, 2023 
1.4 The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on 
11th August, 2023 to replace the outdated Indian Evidence Act, 1872. The Bill 
seeks to consolidate and provide general rules and principles of evidence for fair 
trial.The Bill, as introduced, has omitted four sections which contain colonial 
references and other outdated procedures, from  the earlier Act of 1872. It has 
also included various forward looking provisions such as expansion of the 
definition of evidence to include electronic and digital records, expansion of 
definition of primary evidence, provision for admissibility of electronic or 
digital records as evidence, exclusion of privileged communication between the 

 
2 
 
Ministers and the President of India  from the purview of Courts, provision of 
certificate for handling of electronic and digital evidence, etc. The Bill now 
contains 170 clauses as compared to 167 sections in the IEA, 1872.  
  

 
3 
 
CHAPTER-II 
SUBMISSION BY THE MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
2.1 The Ministry of Home Affairs informed that t he proposed legislation 
seeks to address the problems in the present legal system which includes – 
complex nature of the legal system; huge pendency of cases in the courts; low 
conviction rate; imposition of meagre fine not commensurate with the crime ; 
overcrowding of undertrial prisoners in prisons; scantyadoption of modern 
technology in the legal system; delay in investigation, complicated 
investigation/pending hearing process; inadequate use of forensic evidence; and 
delay in getting justice to the poor, etc.  
2.2 The Bill was drafted with utmost care keeping in mind their implications 
on the citizenry for the years to come. During the drafting process, s uggestions 
were sought fromall Governors, Chief Ministers, Lieutenant 
Governors/Administrators of States and Union Territories. The views and inputs 
of the Chief Justice of India, Chief Justices of all High Courts, Bar Councils, 
Law Universities/ Institutions and Members of Parliament were also solicited . 
Further, the Central Bureau of  Investigation (CB I), Intelligence Bureau (IB),  
Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D), Central Police 
Organisations (CPOs) and more than 1000 police officers from various states 
also submitted their suggestions. 
2.3 ACommittee under the Chairpersonship of the Vice Chancellor, National 
Law University (NLU), Delhi was constituted on 2
nd March, 2020 to examine 
and suggest reforms in criminal laws.  The Committee had invited suggestions 
from various quarters including public and considered suggestions from High 
Courts, experts, research centres, academicians, lawyers, civil societies, Law 
Universities, etc. from across the country. The suggestions received from States, 
Union Territories, the Supreme Court, High Courts, Judicial Academies, Law 
Universities and Members of Parliament were also forwarded to the Committee.  
2.4 The Committee under the Chairpersonship of the Vice Chanc ellor, NLU, 
Delhi after ex tensive consultation with stake holders and i n-depth research 
submitted its Report in February, 2022 containing its recommendations. A total 
of more than 3,200 suggestions were received by the Committee which were 
consolidated in the Report submitted by it.  
2.5 The Ministry thenreviewed these 3,200 consolidated suggestions received 
along with the officers from the Ministry of Law and Justice. After exhaustive 
deliberations, the three new Bills were drafted to bring about  comprehensive 
amendments to the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (IEA)along with the Indian Penal 
Code, 1860 (IPC) and the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC).  
2.6 The stakeholders who  appeared before the Committee  apprised that the 
Ministry has undertaken an extensive  exercise of modernisation of the laws of 

 
4 
 
evidence. They were also of the view that the Bill has been updated to reflect 
the modern legislative intent by consolidating progressive judgment and 
amendments, and removing provisions that are no longer useful. 
2.7 The Committee takes  note of the efforts of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs and the Ministry of L aw & Justice in undertaking the  mammoth 
task of drafting new legislations in an attempt to have comprehensive 
criminal laws. The extensive  consultations and threadbare  discussions 
undertakenin the drafting process have been reflected in the Bills that have 
imbibed Indian thought process and the Indian soul. A comprehensive 
review of India’s legal system was the  need of the hour to bring it on par 
with the contemporary aspirations of the people.  Having taken a c itizen-
centric approach, these B ills serve as a reassurance to the Indian citizens. 
The Committee appreciates the combined efforts of the Ministries in 
reviewing 3, 200 suggestions and thereby drafting comprehensive 
amendments to the Indian Penal Code,  1860, Code of Criminal Procedure , 
1973 and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. 
  

 
5 
 
CHAPTER-III 
MAJOR CHANGES INTRODUCED IN THE BILL 
3.1 The Home Secretary, during his presentation, has highlighted the major 
changes that have been introduced in the Bill vis-à-vis the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872 which are as follows: 
1. Deletion of British Legacy References 
 The words like ‘Parliament of the United Kingdom’, ‘Provincial Act’,  
‘notification by the Crown Representative’, ‘London Gazette’, ‘any Dominion, 
colony or possession of his Majesty’, ‘Jury’, ‘Lahore’, ‘United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Ireland’, ‘Commonwealth,’ ‘Her Majesty or by the Privy 
Council,’ ‘Her Majesty’s Gover nment,’ ‘copies or extracts contained in the 
London Gazette, or purporting to be printed by the Queen’s Printer.’ 
‘possession of the British Crown,’ ‘Court of Justice in England’, ‘Her Majesty’s 
Dominions’, ‘Barrister’ have been deleted. Further, the words ‘Vakil’, ‘Pleader’ 
and ‘Barrister’ have been replaced with the word ‘ Advocate’. S ection 166 
relating to power of Jury to put question,  etc. has been deleted as jury system 
has already been abolished in India. The terms like lunatic, unsound mind, etc. 
have been brought in line with the modern terms. 
2. Use of Technology and Digital Means in Processing Evidence 
The definition of 'documents'  has been expanded to include electronic or 
digital records on emails, server logs, documents on computers, laptop or 
smartphone, messages, websites, locational evidence and voice mail messages 
stored on digital devices. The definition of ‘evidence’ has been expanded to 
include any information given electronically  which will enable the appearance 
of witnesses, accused, experts and victims through electronic means.  
3. Confession affecting person making it and others jointly under trial 
for same offence 
 An e xplanation has been added to provide for a joint trail in sit uations 
where accused has absconded or fails to comply with a proclamation issued 
under section 84 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 
4. Judicial Notice of Extra Territorial Jurisdiction 
A provision has been inserted for Courts to take judicial notice of 
international treaty, agreement or convention with countries or decision made at 
international associations or other bodies. 
5. Primary Evidence 
The definition of primary evidence has bee n expanded to include 
electronic or digital re cord which is created or stored, electronic or digital 
record produced from proper custody , video recording simultaneously stored in 

 
6 
 
electronic form and transmitted or broadcast to another ; andelectronic or digital 
record stored in multiple storage spaces in a computer resource. 
6. Secondary Evidence 
 The s cope of secondary evidence has been expanded to include  copies 
made from original by mechanical processes, copies made from or compared 
with the original, counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not 
execute them and oral accounts of the contents of a document given by some 
person who has himself seen it. I t will also include oral admission when 
genuineness of the document itself is in question. Further , secondary evidence 
may be given when the existence, condition or content of the original is 
admitted in writing.   
7. Admissibility of Electronic or Digital Record 
 A new section has been added to provide for admissibility of electronic or 
digital record. 
8. Electronic Records- Provisions relating to Certificate 
A certificate has been added in the schedule to authenticate and verify the  
contents of electronic records with riders that the conditions that computer must 
be regularly in use for regular activities by person having lawful control over it, 
data was regularly fed in it, computer was working properly, etc. A proposal has 
been made to recognise matching of Hash#  value of original record as proof of 
evidence to ensure the integrity of specific file and not the entire storage 
medium. 
9. Court not to inquire into privileged communication between 
Ministers and President 
A proviso has been added to bar Courtsfrom inquiring into any privileged 
communication between Ministers and the President of India. 
  

 
7 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS ON CLAUSES 
4.1 During the course of the examination of the Bill, the Committee received 
a number of suggestions from various law firms, Members of Parliament, 
advocates, domain experts and other stakeholders. Further, the Committee also 
interacted with a wide range of domain experts who have made their submission 
before the Committee and also furnish ed written inputs and suggestions on 
various clauses of the Bill. The written views of all the State Governments were 
sought on the Bill. The inputs and suggestions received fr om such 
stakeholdersand State Governments were forwarded to the Ministry of Home 
Affairs for its response. Upon in -depth examination of the Bill, the Committee 
is of the view that certain provisions need to be relookedand certain errors ha ve 
to be rectified to serve the intended purpose of the Bill better. The Committee’s 
observations and recommendations contained in the Report reflect an extensive 
scrutiny of submissions and all the viewpoints put forth before it by various 
organisations/experts/State Governments. The Committee in its meeting held on 
4
th and 5 thOctober, 2023  took up clause -by-clause discussion of the Bill. 
Various amendments to the Bill have been suggested by the Committee on 
clauses of the Bill which are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.  
CLAUSE 1 - Short title, application and commencement 
4.2 Clause 1(1) reads as under: 
This Act may be called the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023. 
4.2.1 Members of the Committee raised concerns over the Bill being given a 
Hindi name. Concerns have been expressed that the Hindi name may be in 
violation of the Article 348 of the Constitution of India. The MHA in its 
response has mentioned that the Article 34 8 of the Constitution of India inter 
alia says that the authoritative texts of all Acts passed by the Parliament shall be 
in English language. As the text of the proposed law is in English, it is not in 
violation of Article 348 of the Constitution of India. 
4.2.2 The Committee notes the wording of Article 348 of the Constitution 
of India which says that language to be used in the Supreme Court and in 
the High Courts, as well as for acts, bills and other legal documents shall be 
in English language. The Comm ittee finds that as the text of the Bill is in 
English, it does not violate the provisions of Article 348 of the Constitution. 
The Committee is satisfied with the response of the Ministry and holds that 
the name given to the proposed legislation is not in violation of Article 348 
of the Constitution of India. 
 
 

 
8 
 
4.2.3 Clause 1(3) reads as under:  
It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification, appoint. 
4.2.4 It was suggested by stakeholders that the words “in the Official Gazette” 
should be added after the word “notification” under clause 1(3) of the Bill.  
4.2.5 The Committee takes note of the submission of stakeholders and is of 
the opinion that the addition of the words “in the Official Gazette” in this  
clause will make the provision in tune with similar provisions in all other 
legislations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words “in the 
Official Gazette” may be inserted after the word “notification ” in this  
clause. 
CLAUSE 2 - Definitions 
4.3 Clause 2(1)(e) reads as under: 
 "evidence" means and includes- 
(i) statements or any information given electronically which the 
Courtpermits or requires to be made before it by witnesses in relation to 
matters offact under inquiry and such statements or information are 
called oral evidence; 
(ii) documents including electronic or digital records produced for 
theinspection of the Court and such documents are called documentary 
evidence; 
4.3.1 During deliberations of the Committee, it was brought to the attention of 
the Committee thatinclusion of the word s "any information" within the 
meaning of evidence could cause serious complications in its interpretations. It 
was further apprised that the word "information" is different from statements.  
4.3.2 The Committee deliberated at length regarding the inclusion of the 
words "any information" in the definition of evidence .The Committee 
opines that inclusion of “any information” along with “ statement” in the 
same line may cause complications in its interpretation. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the words “any information” may be deleted in 
this clause to avoid such complications.   
CLAUSE 3 - Evidence may be given of facts in issue and relevant facts 
4.4 Clause 3 of the Bill reads as under: 
Evidence may be given in any suit or proceeding of the existence or non-
existence of every fact in issue and of such other facts as are hereinafter 
declared to be relevant, and of no others. 

 
9 
 
Explanation - This section shall not enable any person to give evidence of 
a fact which he is disentitled to prove by any provision of the law for the time 
being in force relating to Civil Procedure. 
Illustrations 
(a) A is tried for the murder of B by beating him with a club with the 
intention of causing his death. 
At A's trial the following facts are in issue:— 
A's beating B with the club; 
A's causing B's death by such beating; 
A's intention to cause B's death. 
(b) A suitor does not bring with him, and have in readiness for production at 
the first hearing of the case, a bond on which he relies. This section does 
not enable him to produce the bond or prove its contents at a subsequent 
stage of the proceedings, otherwise than in accordance with the 
conditions prescribed by the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023. 
4.4.1 It was bought to the attention of the Committee during interaction with 
stakeholders that the term “the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023” used 
in illustration (b)is irrelevant under this clause as the parallel illustration under 
section 5 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 uses the ter m “Code of Civil 
Procedure”. It was suggested that the term "the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha 
Sanhita 2023" in illustration (b)  should be replaced with "Code of Civil 
Procedure". 
4.4.2 The Committee examined  the text of th isclausealong with the 
corresponding section of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and it observes that 
the particular reference made in illustration (b)  pertains to the “Code of 
Civil Procedure” and not the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 
2023.The Committee,therefore, recommends that "the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita 2023" in illustration (b) may be replaced with "Code of 
Civil Procedure". 
CLAUSE 26 - Cases in which statement of facts in issue or relevant fact by 
person who is deador cannot be found, etc., is relevant 
4.5 Clause 26 relates to the cases in which statement of facts in issue or 
relevant fact by person who is dead or cannot be found, etc., is relevant.  
4.5.1 The clause, inter alia, deals with statements, written or verbal, of relevant 
facts made by a person who is dead, or who cannot be found, or who has 
become incapable of giving evidence, or whose attendance cannot be procured 
without an amount of delay or expense which under the c ircumstances of the 
case appears to the Court unreasonable, are themselves facts in issue or relevant 

 
10 
 
facts, in case of statement of a person, resulted in his death; in the ordinary 
course of business; against the pecuniary or proprietary interest of the person; 
the opinion of any such person, as to the existence of any public right or custom 
or matters of public or general interest; the existence of any relationship by 
blood, marriage or adoption between persons. 
4.5.2 It was b rought to the attention of th e Committee that the insertion of 
"facts in issue" in this particular clause is erroneous and has to be deleted as the 
corresponding sections in the old Act, i.e. Chapter II, s ection 5 to 55  of the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 is called " Of the Relevancy of F acts" or in general, 
they used to be called as res gestae. Further, Chapter II of the Bill, i.e. clause 3 
to 50 is also called “Relevance of Facts”. It was further mentioned that the 
particular clause is not "facts in issue" because the chapter is only talking about 
the relevancy of facts. The "facts in issue" and "relevant facts" are different. 
4.5.3 The Committee examined in detail the submission made before the 
Committee and it obs erves that the parallel section of clause 26 in the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 i.e., section 32 has no mention of “facts in issue” 
and onlyuses “relevant facts”. The Committee also notes that “facts in 
issue” and “relevant facts” have  a distinct connotation in judicial parlance 
and cannot be used interchangeably.  The Committee opines that the use of 
“facts in issue” in this particular clause is erroneous. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to delete the words "facts in issue" in 
this clause.  
CLAUSE 48 - Evidence of character or previous sexual experience not 
relevant in certain cases 
4.6 Clause 48 states as under: 
In a prosecution for an offence under section 64, section 65, section 67, 
section 68, section 70, section 71, section 73, section 74, section 75, section 76 
or section 77 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 or for attempt to 
commit any such offence, where the question of consent is in issue, evidence of 
the character of the victim or of such person's previous sexual experience with 
any person shall not be relevant on the issue of such consent or the quality of 
consent. 
4.6.1  The Committee analys ed the text of the clause and notes  that 
section 376A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 corresponds with section 66 of 
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. Further, sectio n 53A of the I ndian 
Evidence Act, 1872 corresponds with section 48 of the Bharatiya Sakshya 
Bill, 2023 . Upon undertaking  a comparative analysis of the two 
corresponding section s, the Committee observes that section 376A of the 
IPC which was referred to in section 53A of the IEA has been omitted from 
section 48 of the BSB .The Committee is of the opinion that "section 66" of 
the BNS should also be included in the offences referred to in this clause. 

 
11 
 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that "section 66" is  inserted after 
"section 65" to cover all the corresponding offences referred to in the BNS. 
4.6.2  The Committee further observes that the term “ Bharatiya 
Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita,  2023” used in clause 48  of the Bill is 
incongruous since the offences referred under this  clauseare provided in 
the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the words “the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023" in clause 
48 be replaced with "the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023" as it has been 
erroneously mentioned.  
 
CLAUSE 57 - Primary evidence 
 
4.7 Clause 57 of the Bill reads as under: 
Primary evidence means the document itself produced for the inspection 
of the Court. 
Explanation 1- Where a document is executed in several parts, each part is 
primary evidence of the document. 
Explanation 2 - Where a document is executed in counterpart, each counterpart 
being executed by one or some of the parties only, each counterpart i s primary 
evidence as against the parties executing it. 
Explanation 3 - Where a number of documents are all made by one uniform 
process, as in the case of printing, lithography or photography, each is primary 
evidence of the contents of the rest; but, wher e they are all copies of a common 
original, they are not primary evidence of the contents of the original. 
Explanation 4 - Where an electronic or digital record is created or stored, and 
suchstorage occurs simultaneously or sequentially in multiple files, each such 
file is primary evidence. 
Explanation 5 - Where an electronic or digital record is produced from proper  
custody, such electronic and digital record is primary evidence unless it is 
disputed. 
Explanation 6 - Where a video recording is simultaneously stored in electronic 
form and transmitted or broadcast or transferred to another, each of the stored 
recordings is primary evidence. 
4.7.1  Explanation 5 to this clause provides for treating electronic and 
digital records produced from proper custody, as primary evidence. It was 
submitted before the Committee that the Bill has no mention about ensuring the 
maintenance of a proper chain of custody of digital and el ectronic records 
acquired during investigations.  The provision of maintaining proper chain of 

 
12 
 
custody has already been incorporated within the ambit of criminal laws in 
developed countries such as United States of America  (USA) and United 
Kingdom (UK). It was suggested to the Committee that such provision may be 
included in the Bill in view of the susceptibility of electronic and digital records 
to tampering during the handling of evidence. 
4.7.2  The Committee is of the opinion that safeguarding the 
authenticity and integrity of electronic and digital records acquired during 
the course of investigation is crucial due to the fact that such evidences are 
prone to tampering. The Committee takes into account the suggestion 
submitted before the Committee and recommends that a provision may be 
inserted to mandate that all electronic and digital records acquired as 
evidence during  the course of investigation are securely handled and 
processed through proper chain of custody. Appropriate provision in this 
regard may be made in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 
CLAUSE 62 - Special provisions as to evidence relating to electronic record 
4.8 Clause62reads as: 
The contents of electronic records may be proved in accordance with the 
provisions of section 59. 
4.8.1  The Committee was informed that clause 62 of the Bill 
corresponds to section 65A of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. Section 59 
mentioned under this clause deals with proof of documents byprim ary evidence 
which is not applicable under this provision. On comparingclause 62 of the Bill 
to section 65A of the IEA, it can be inferred that section 65Bso mentioned in the 
text of section 65A of the Act, which deals admissibilityof electronic records 
and it co-relates with clause 63 instead of clause 59 of the new Bill. 
4.8.2  The Committee notes that “section 59” of the Bill relates to the 
documents to be proved by primary evidence  while “section 63” of the Bill 
relates to admissibility of electronic records . The Committee agrees with 
the submission of stakeholders and observes that  the appropriate reference 
in this  clause should be “section 63”. The Committee , therefore, 
recommends that "section 59" may be replaced with "section 63" to rectify 
error in cross-referencing.  
 
CLAUSE 77 - Proof of other official documents 
 
4.9Clause 77(f) reads as under: 
Public documents of any other class in a foreign country, by the original 
or by a copy certified by the legal keeper thereof, with a certificate under the 
seal of a Notary Public, or of an Indian Consul or diplomatic agent, that the 

 
13 
 
copy is duly certified b y the officer the legal custody of the original, and upon 
proof of the character of the document according to the law of the foreign 
country. 
4.9.1  The Committee observes that the sentence construction of this 
clause is incomplete as the word “officer” and the words “the legal 
custody” in fourth line are  not appropriately connected. The Committee 
recommends that the word "having" may be inserted after the 
word"officer" to make the sentence grammatically correct.  
 
CLAUSE 138–Accomplice 
 
4.10 Clause 138 of the Bill reads as under: 
An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person; 
and a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the 
uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice. 
4.10.1  The Committee was informed that clause 138 is in conflict with 
illustration (b) to clause 119(1) which reads as under: 
“an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in 
material particulars”  
4.10.2  It was further informed that that clause 138 and illustration (b) to 
clause 119(1) gives contradictory meanings which may create confusion in 
application of the two clauses. The  testimony of an accomplice is applied in a 
conflicting manner in the two afore -mentioned clauses. It was suggested that 
clause 138 may be deleted so as to set right the contradictions between the two 
clauses in the Bill.  
4.10.3  The Committee undertook a nuanced analysis of clause138 and 
it observes that the original text of section 133, which is the corresponding 
section to this clause in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 has been retained in 
this clause. However, a closer scrutiny  of clause 138 and cross-analysing it 
with illustration (b)  to clause 119(1)  highlights evidentcontradiction 
between the two clauses which has not been rectified in the IEA. Clause 138 
considers an accomplice as a competent witness against an accused person 
and uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice is made admissible in  
conviction. However, illustration (b)  to clause 119(1) states otherwise and 
treats uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice as unworthy of credit. 
The Committee is of the opinion that such contradictions between clauses 
in the Bill may jeopardise efficacy of the Bill in its application. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable amendments in clause 138 
may be made. 

 
14 
 
CLAUSE 168 - Judge's power to put questions or order production 
4.11 Clause 168 reads as: 
The Judge may, in order to discover or obtain proof of relevant facts, ask 
any question he considers necessary, in any form, at any time, of any witness, or 
of the parties about any fact; and may order the production of any document or 
thing; and neither the parties nor their representatives shall be entitled to make 
any objection to any such question or order, nor, without the leave of the Court, 
to cross -examine any witness upon any answer given in reply to any such 
question: 
Provided that the exercise of the powers conferred herein must be based 
upon facts declared by this Act to be relevant, and duly proved: 
Provided further that this section shall not authorise any Judge to compel 
any witness to answer any question, or to produce any document which such 
witness would be entitled to refuse to answer or produce under sections 136 to 
140, both inclusive, if the question were asked or the document were called for  
by the adverse party; nor shall the Judge ask any question which it would be 
improper for any other person to ask under section 157 or 158; nor shall he 
dispense with primary evidence of any document, except in the cases 
hereinbefore excepted. 
4.11.1  The Committee recommends that the word "Act" in the first 
proviso may be replaced with "Adhiniyam" as is already used in preceding 
portions of the Bill.  
THE SCHEDULE 
CERTIFICATE 
4.12 Part A and Part B deals with the certificate to be filled by person in-
charge of the computer or communication device and by an expert.  
32.2 The Committee was informed by stakeholders that the certificate s in the 
schedule would assist all litigants and investigating agencies as most of the 
police personnel do not have any set pattern to produce certificates with regard 
to electronic evidence. However, concerns were raised regarding Part A of the 
schedulewherein it was informed that the certificate does not meet the 
requirements specified under sub -clause 2of clause 63 as it does not give 
declaration with regard to the lawful control of the person presenting the record 
and no declaration about the condition of the device, etc. 
4.12.1  The Committee observes that th e certificate in Part A of the 
schedule does not conform to the requirements prescribed in sub-clause (2) 
of clause 63. The Committee opines that such shortcomings may jeopardise 
the authenticity, reliability and integrity of the electronic and digital 
records submitted as evidence in the court of law and will be susceptible to 

 
15 
 
tampering during hand ling of evidence . The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the certificate in Part A may be amended to meet the 
requirements prescribed in clause 63,sub-clause (2)(a) to sub-clause (2)(d). 
4.13 The Committee also undertook a detailed examination of the text of 
each clause and noted that the Bill contains some cross -referencing errors. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to rectify such errors.  
4.14 The Committee agrees with the remaining clauses of the Bill without 
any changes. The Committee strongly believes that the changes b rought in 
the Bill would reflect the growing importance of digital evidence and the 
need for a more comprehensive legal framework in line with 21 st century 
technological advancements and societal changes.  
  

 
16 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS- AT A GLANCE 
The Committee takes note of the efforts of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs and the Ministry of Law & Justice in undertaking the mammoth 
task of drafting new legislations in an attempt to have comprehensive 
criminal laws. The extensive consultations and threadbare discussions 
undertaken in the drafting process have been reflected in the Bills that 
have imbibed Indian thought process and the Indian soul. A comprehensive 
review of India’s legal system was the need of the hour to bring it on par 
with the contemporary aspirations of the people.  Having taken a citizen -
centric approach, these Bills serve as a reassurance to the Indian citizens. 
The Committee appreci ates the combined efforts of the Ministries in 
reviewing 3, 200 suggestions and thereby drafting comprehensive 
amendments to the Indian Penal Code,  1860, Code of Criminal Procedure , 
1973 and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.  
(Para 2.7) 
 
The Committee notes the wording of Article 348 of the Constitution 
of India which says that language to be used in the Supreme Court and in 
the High Courts, as well as for acts, bills and other legal documents shall be 
in English language. The Committee finds that as the text  of the Bill is in 
English, it does not violate the provisions of Article 348 of the Constitution. 
The Committee is satisfied with the response of the Ministry and holds that 
the name given to the proposed legislation is not in violation of Article 348 
of the Constitution of India.         
(Para 4.2.2) 
 
The Committee takes note of the submission of stakeholders and is of 
the opinion that the addition of the words “in the Official Gazette” in this  
clause will make the provision in tune with similar provisions in all other 
legislations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words “in the 
Official Gazette” may be inserted after the word “notification ” in this  
clause. 
(Para 4.2.5) 
 
The Committee deliberated at length regarding the inclusion of the 
words "any information" in the definition of evidence .The Committee 
opines that inclusion of “any information” along with “statement” in the 
same line may cause complications in its interpretat ion. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the words “any information” may be deleted in 
this clause to avoid such complications.   
(Para 4.3.2) 
 

 
17 
 
The Committee examined  the text of this clause along with the 
corresponding section of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 and it observes that 
the particular reference made in illustration (b)  pertains to the “Code of 
Civil Procedure” and not the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 
2023.The Committee, therefore, recommends that "the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita 2023" in illustration (b) may be replaced with "Code of 
Civil Procedure". 
(Para 4.4.2) 
 
The Committee examined in detail the submission made before the 
Committee and it observes that the parallel section of clause 26 in the 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 i.e., section 32 has no mention of “facts in issue” 
and onlyuses “relevant facts”. The Committ ee also notes that “facts in 
issue” and “relevant facts” have a distinct connotation in judicial parlance 
and cannot be used interchangeably.  The Committee opines that the use of 
“facts in issue” in this particular clause is erroneous. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to delete the words "facts in issue" in 
this clause.  
(Para 4.5.3) 
 
The Committee analysed the text of the clause and notes  that section 
376A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 corresponds with  section 66 of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023. Further, sectio n 53A of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 corresponds with section 48 of the Bharatiya Sakshya 
Bill, 2023 . Upon undertaking a comparative analysis of the two 
corresponding sections, the Committee observes that section 376A of the 
IPC which was referred to in section 53A of the IEA has been omitted from 
section 48 of the BSB. The Committee is of the opinion that "section 66" of 
the BNS should also be included in the offences referred to in this clause. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that "section 66" is inserted after 
"section 65" to cover all the corresponding offences referred to in the BNS. 
 
(Para 4.6.1) 
 
The Committee further observes that the term “Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023” used in clause 48 of the Bill is incongruous  since 
the offences referred under this clauseare provided in the Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the words “the 
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023" in clause 48 be replaced with 
"the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023" as it has been erroneously mentioned.  
(Para 4.6.2) 
 

 
18 
 
The Committee is of the opinion that safeguarding the authenticity 
and integrity of electronic and digital records acquired during the course of 
investigation is crucial  due to the fact that such evidences are prone to 
tampering. The Committee takes into account the suggestion submitted 
before the Committee and recommends that a provision may be inserted to 
mandate that all electronic and digital records acquired as evidence during 
the course of investigation are securely handled and processed  through 
proper chain of custody. Appropriate provision in this regard may be made 
in the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023. 
(Para 4.7.2) 
 
The Committee notes that “section 59” of the Bill relates to the 
documents to be proved by primary evidence  while “section 63” of the Bill 
relates to admissibility of electronic records. The Committee agrees with 
the submission of stakeholders and observes that the appropriate reference 
in this  clause should be “section 63”. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that "section 59" may be replaced with "section 63" to rectify 
error in cross-referencing. 
(Para 4.8.2) 
 
The Committee observes that the sentence construction of this clause 
is incomplete as the word “officer” and the words “the legal custody” in 
fourth line are not appropriately connected. The Committee recommends 
that the word "having" may be inserted after the  word "officer" to make 
the sentence grammatically correct.  
(Para 4.9.1) 
 
The Committee undertook a nuanced analysis of clause 138 and it 
observes that the original text of section 133, which is the corresponding 
section to this clause in the Indian Eviden ce Act, 1872 has been retained in 
this clause. However, a closer scrutiny of clause 138 and cross- analysing it 
with illustration (b)  to clause 119(1)  highlights evident contradiction 
between the two clauses which has not been rectified in the IEA. Clause 138 
considers an accomplice as a competent witness against an accused person 
and uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice is made admissible in  
conviction. However, illustration (b)  to clause 119(1) states otherwise and 
treats uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice as unworthy of credit. 
The Committee is of the opinion that such contradictions between clauses 
in the Bill may jeopardise efficacy of the Bill in its application. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that suitable amendments in clause 138 
may be made. 
(Para 4.10.3) 
 

 
19 
 
The Committee recommends that the word "Act" in the first proviso 
may be replace d with "Adhiniyam" as is already used in preceding 
portions of the Bill.  
(Para 4.11.1) 
 
The Committee observes that the certificate in Part A of the s chedule 
does not conform to the requirements prescribed in sub-clause (2) of clause 
63. The Committee  opines that such shortcomings may jeopardise the 
authenticity, reliability and integrity of the electronic and digital records 
submitted as evidence in th e court of law and will be susceptible to 
tampering during hand ling of evidence. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the certificate in Part A may be amended to meet the 
requirements prescribed in clause 63, sub-clause (2)(a) to sub-clause (2)(d). 
 
(Para 4.12.1) 
 
The Committee also undertook a detailed examination of the text of 
each clause and noted that the Bill contains some cross-referencing errors. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends the Ministry to rectify such errors.  
 
(Para 4.13) 
 
The Committee agrees with the remaining clauses of the Bill without 
any changes. The Committee strongly believes that the changes b rought in 
the Bill would reflect the growing importance of digital evidence and the 
need for a more comprehensive legal framework in l ine with 21 st century 
technological advancements and societal changes.  
(Para 4.14) 
 

 
20 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NOTES OF DISSENT 
 

DISSENT NOTE ON THE PROPOSED (1) BHARATIYA NYAYA 
SANHITA BILL, 2023 ('BN'), (2) BHARATIYA NAGARIK SURAKSHA 
SANHITA BILL, 2023 ('BNSS') AND (3) THE BHARATIYA SAKSHYA 
BILL, 2023 ('BSB') 
Without any prior intimation and consultation, the Modi Government 
introduced three news Bills on August 11th, 2023 in the Lok Sabha, namely; 
s. 
No 
EXISTING ACT PROPOSED ACT TO REPLACE THE 
EXISTING ACT 
1. Indian Penal Code, 1860 - 511 
Sections (Including Amendments 
and Additions) 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) 
- 356 total S ections, 174 Se ctions
changed, 8 new Sections added and
22 Sections repealed
2. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 - 
528 Sections (Including 
Amendments and Additions) 
Bharatiya    Nagarik   Suraksha 
Sanhita (BNSS) - 533 total 
Sections, 160 Section s changed, 9 
New Sections and 9 Sections 
repealed 
3. Indian   Evidence   Act,  1872  - 185 
Sections (Including Amendments 
and 
Bharatiya  Sakshya  (BSB) - 170 
total S ections. 23 Se ctions 
changed, 1 new Section added, and 
5 Sections repealed. 
j    Additions) 
The three captioned criminal law Bills cannot be supported in good conscience. 
***1. 
I. The following key issues arise from a reading of the Draft Bills;
1. The Law is vastly the same. Only renumbered and re-arranged; - Far
from being novel, or an intuitive re-evaluation of legal provisions, practices
and offences, the bills are significantly identical in both language and content
to the Acts tha t t hey seek to replace. The proposed bills have largely
reproduced the laws as they exist presently. Arguably, the biggest "change"
has been the renumbering of Sections. This exercise, experts opine, would be
responsible for large scale confusion resulting in unnecessary delay in the
functioning of courts and the policing agencies.
1 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya 
Sabha 

Furthermore, changing  the positionin g of th e provi sions within the 
statues does not make a law mo re effective or better in any way. ***. 
2. HM's Speech in the Parliament  dated 11.0 8. 2023 - The Hon'bl e
HM himself highlighted the substantive changes in his speech on th e
floor of Parliament (dated 2023).
The sum total of these changes which the HM himself has chosen to 
highlight is 25. Even by the most verbose of standards, these could have 
been introduced to the existing law through a simple five page amendment 
bill. There was thus no need to carry out such a comprehensive and 
unnecessary reform for merely 12 substantive amendments (by the HM's 
own examples). In fact, even in the statements put out by the Government, 
it is these examples that are being reiterated. ***2. Even the statement of 
objects and reasons appended to the Bills fails to provide a satisfact ory 
justification. 
3. Imposition of Hindi - Parliament represents all of us. Not just the Hindi
Speakers. Using language which is deliberately exclusionary for the tit le
cannot be justified especially when a Hindi version of the Bill is always
published officially and simultaneously. The usage of sanskritised Hindi
in these bills goes against the spirit of Article 348 of the Indian
Constitution which states that the text of all Bills introduced in Parliament
must be in English, a necessary requirement for a country as diverse as
India.
4. Essentially Colonial - While the Government has hailed the Bills as a
move towards shedding the colonial nature of criminal laws, the Bills
still retain  the colonial spirit of the current laws. For example, most
punishments for offences under the IPC have been retained. Further,
punishments for some offences have been made harsher and the death
penalty has been added  for at least four new crimes such as mob
lynching, organised crime, terrorism and rape of a minor. The removal
of law on sedition was a mere symbolic  gesture as it is replaced by a
Clause 150 BNS which is much more tyrannical and colonial in its
essence. Ultimately, there has been no shift towards a rehabilitative
approach to criminal laws. The proposed law retains the  retributive
nature of the colonial laws. In other words, aside from empty rhetoric
about shedding the colonial spirit there is no clear illustration of how
2 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya 
Sabha 

the Bills seek to actually do so. 
 
5. Poorly Drafted Laws - The version of the Bills that have been released to 
the public is rife with substantive errors that alter the very meaning of the 
law to the extent of rendering the law absurd and otiose. For example, 
Clause 23 of 'The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bill ' states "Nothing is an 
offence which is done by a  person who, at the tim e of  doing  it, is , by 
reason   of intoxication, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that 
he is doing what is either wrong, or contrary to law; unless that the thing 
which intoxicated  him was administered to  him without his knowledge or 
against his will." In other words, the law exempts offences committed by 
persons who are under a voluntary state of intoxication and at the same 
time punishes acts that are done in an involuntary state of intoxication. 
Such serious infirmities is clear evidence of lack of research and a proper 
consultation process. 
 
6. Lack of Public Consultation - The manner, timing and secrecy v.rith 
which the exercise has been carried out reeks of legislative mala fides. Law 
making, especially on a subject of such wide-ranging importance, has to 
be on  done in the full light of day with the widest possible consultation 
amongst stakeholders. The Pre-Legislative Consultation Policy 2014 
expressly prescribes a thirty -day consultation period with the 
public at large before it may be cleared by Cabinet for 
introduction in Parliament. This consultation, done through a 
sharing of the draft in the public domain, must be accompanied by 
(i) justifications for its enactment, (ii) financial  implications and (iii) 
estimation of the  laws' impact.  Finally, comments received 
through the consultation must be published on the  website of the 
nodal ministry. In this case, a committee was constituted, its members 
and mandate shielded from public scrutiny, and its recommendations not 
even subject to peer-review, were taken as gospel. No justification is given 
for why such a large-scale reform was effected to make changes  to a 
handful of sections, by the Home Ministers own statement in Parliament. 
***3. 
7. Enhances the Union Government's policing powers without any checks 
and balances - The changes that have been made to the existing laws also 
enhance the coercive powers of State and its instrumentalities which allow 
for the exercise of its powers at a hitherto unknown scale at which  these 
powers can be exercised by the State. For example, the laws in general have 
                                                      
3 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya 
Sabha 

expanded the scope of police's power without introducing measures to keep 
its activities in check. From the data of the Government, provided as a 
response to Unstarred Question No. 1459 for 26.07.2022 raised in 
parliament, one can see that 4484 persons were victims of Custodial Deaths 
in India between 20 2 0 -20 2 2 . While the Bill seeks to enhance the time 
for which a person can be kept in police custody, there exists no protective 
measures to provide safety to the accused persons under police custody 
which is bound to adversely affect the safety of detainees. 

 
 
DISSENT  ON 
CRIMINA L 
LA W BILLS  
 
 
DRA  FT REPORT OF PA RLIA  MENTA  RY 
STA NDING COMMITTEE ON HOME A 
FFA IRS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
D E R E K O ’ B R I E N 

 
 
 
General statutes of criminal law are here for the ages. They will affect the 
lives of the whole populati on of India including the economically weaker 
Sections and the marginalized. General statutes of criminal law have to be 
crafted with utmost care, it is imperative to scrutinize and dissent when 
necessary. The following is an examination of the Criminal La w Bills, 
aiming to shed light on their potential ramifications and stimulate critical 
discussion. In an effort to ensure that the principles of justice and fairness 
remain at the heart of our legal system, this dissent seeks to address 
concerns, ensure due process is followed, spark debate, and advocate for a 
more equitable and balanced approach to the new criminal legislations under 
consideration of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs. 

INDEX 
 
 
 
 
 
Particulars Page 
No. 
1. Methodology and Procedure of this Committee in Drafting 
these Reports 
1 
2. Demerits of the Draft Report 
9 
3. Annexure A- Intervention- Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs (Part I) 
23 
4. Annexure B- Intervention- Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs (Part II) 
38 
5. Annexure C - Letter to Chairman Dated 19 August 2023 
58 
6. Annexure D - Letter to Chairman Dated 11 September 2023 
59 
7. Annexure E - Letter to Chairman Dated 13 September 2023 
61 
8. Annexure F - Letter to Chairman Dated 14 September 2023 
64 
9. Annexure G - Letter to Chairman Dated 22 September 2023 
67 
10.  Annexure H - Letter to Chairman Dated 27 September 2023 
68 
11. Annexure I - Letter to Chairman Dated 3 October 2023 
74 
12.  Annexure J - Letter to Chairman Dated 23 October 2023 
76 
13. Annexure K - Letter to Chairman Dated 30 October 2023 
81 

4  
A. METHODOLOGY AND PROCEDURE OF THIS COMMITTEE 
IN DRAFTING THESE REPORTS 
 
 
 
I. NO NEED FOR NEW BILLS WHICH ARE 93% COPY PASTE 
LEGISLATION 
The fact that approximately 93% of the existing Crimi nal Law remains 
unaltered, 18 out of 22 chapters have been copy pasted in these new bills 
implies that the pre-existing legislation could have been effortlessly 
modified to incorporate these specific changes. It appears that there was no 
requirement for an  entirely new legislative framework, mostly for the 
purpose of renumbering  and reorganizing the existing legal provisions. 
***. Suspicion is generated whether the effort is in vain and malafide. 
II. *** COMMITTEE PROCEDURE AND AVOIDING QUALITY 
STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION 
I would like to highlight the glaring gaps in the methodology of drafting 
this report. The current process lacked inclusivity in stakeholder 
consultations required for legislation of such magnitude. ***. Many of 
the people called to testify had strong leanings or were associated with the 
ruling dispensation. Multiple verbal and written requests made by the 
undersigned to invite experts and practitioners to testify before this 
committee were, unfortunately, ***. (See Annexure- E, F, G, H, J) 
Also, a broader spectrum of opinions, especially from those directly 
impacted, must be sought to ensure a comprehensive understanding and 
representation of diverse perspectives.  *** Yet again, important 
legislation is being *** and imposed. 
In 2020 , the Ministry of Home Affairs established a committee led by Prof. 
Ranbir Singh , the former Vice Chancellor of the National Law University, 
                                                      
*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 

5  
Delhi, to undertake a comprehensive review of the three codes of criminal law. 
However, it is essential to note tha t this committee was marked by a striking 
lack of diversity. All its members were male, and what's more, they shared not 
only a common gender but also a similar social identity, professional 
background, and experience. 
 
Regrettably, the committee lacked re presentation from various marginalized 
groups, including women, Dalits, religious minorities, adivasis, LGBTQ 
individuals, and those with disabilities. The absence of such diverse 
perspectives is a significant concern, particularly when addressing matters of 
such magnitude and societal impact. 
In a country as diverse as India, where a wide range of perspectives, interests, 
and concerns need to be addressed, diverse and extensive stakeholder 
consultation is essential to ensure that laws are fair, effective, and capable of 
addressing the complex and multifaceted challenges facing the nation. It not 
only enhances the quality of legislation but also promotes a more inclusive and 
accountable democratic process.***1. 
 
Lakhs of stakeholders including judges, lawyer s, students, paralegals, will 
have to relearn the laws. Relearning new laws can disrupt established legal 
practices  and  procedures, potentially  causing  confusion  and delays  in the  
legal system. Significant resources may be required to update educatio nal 
materials, provide training, and ensure stakeholders are adequately prepared to 
work with the new laws. Relearning new laws can be a complex and resource -
intensive process that has a significant impact on the legal community, 
potentially affecting the delivery of legal services and the consistency of legal 
decisions. 
In any case, the government has only sought inputs after the introduction 
of this bill. By seeking input before introducing a bill, the government 
can involve a broader range of perspective s, including those of experts, 
                                                      
1 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha  

6  
affected communities, and the general public. This would have ensured 
that diverse voices are considered in the lawmaking process, promoting 
inclusivity and democratic values. 
I strongly recommended some consultations due to their critical 
importance. (Please refer Annexure A) 
III. NAMES OF THESE BILLS SHOULD BE IN ENGLISH AS WELL 
AS HINDI. 
The names of these Bills being in Hindi is not suitable for the whole of 
the country. This can not only be called Hindi imposition but is also 
unconstitutional. Article 348 of the Constitution mandates that English 
language be used in Acts and Bills. It reads- 
"348. Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts 
and for Acts, Bills, etc 
… 
 
(b) the authoritative texts 
 
(i) of all Bill s to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in either 
House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature of a 
State, 
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and of all 
Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor of a State, and 
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye laws issued under this 
Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a 
State, shall be in the English language.” 
But the report still considers it to be constitutional. In fact it even goes on to 
propose use of Hindi in more places by saying- “The Committee recommends 
that the word "Act" in the first proviso may be replaced with "Adhiniyam" as is 
already used in preceding portions of the Bill.” This goes against the letter and 

7  
spirit of Article 348 of the Constitution. 
 
Funnily enough, the report of the committee in Hindi only came a night before 
the adoption. 
Suggestion: NAMES SHOULD BE IN ENGLISH AS WELL AS HINDI. When 
translated into English, the titles of these bills would be: the Indian Justice 
Code, 2023, the Indian Citizen’s Protection Code, 2023 and the Indian 
Evidence Bill, 2023. If the new law is titled the Indian Citizen’s Protection 
Code, 2023. It will reflect the idea of a procedural shield for citizens against 
the State in the criminal process. 
Use of these laws in local languages is also essential to enhance understanding 
and engagement, ensuring that information is accessible to a broader audience 
and fostering a deeper connection with the con tent, thereby promoting 
effective communication and inclusivity. 
IV. LACK OF DISCUSSION AMONGST MEMBERS OF THE 
COMMITTEE AND LIMITING THE MEANINGFUL 
PARTICIPATION OF THE OPPOSITION. 
It is clear that a consultation process unfolded, with ***. The urgency to 
conclude discussions on bills that could significantly alter our nation's 
safety and law and order regulations raises concerns about the democratic 
and informed nature of the decision -making process. General statutes of 
criminal law are here for the ages. General statutes of criminal law will 
affect the lives of the poor. General statutes of criminal law have to be 
crafted with utmost care. 
Furthermore, ***2. As a result, meetings were scheduled during the 
festive season and when members had prior constitu ency engagements, 
programs and events. ***. Allowing the opposition only a meager hour to 
scrutinize and critique these bills is far from an exhaustive exercise in 
                                                      
2 2*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha  

8  
scrutiny, which is  vital to ensuring that such consequential legislation is 
thoroughly examined and rigorously debated. 
V. ***3 TO ADOPT REPORT RIDICULES LEGISLATIVE 
SCRUTINY- ONLY A STUNT BEFORE ELECTION 2024. 
***. 
*** 
Given the far -reaching consequences associated with these bills, they 
necessitate a meticulous examination of every provision. Basic drafting errors 
require close scrutiny, and various aspects, including the rationale behind 
specific provisions and their potential impact on the public, demand thorough 
examination and extensive discussion. Hasty passage of these bills may result 
in unintended consequences and contribute to public dissatisfaction. 
The urgency with which these bills are being pushed through stands in stark 
contrast to the deliberative process observed by the same Home Affairs 
Committee in discussing Police Training, Modernization, and Reforms. It is 
worth noting that the committee, initially constituted in September 2020 and 
later reconstituted in September 2021, took approximately three years to 
deliberate on that subject, underscoring the importance of careful 
consideration and comprehensive evaluation in the legislative process. 
*** 
                                                      
3*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 

9  
VI. A RESULT OF RUSHING AND ***- NUMEROUS 
DRAFTING ERRORS 
It is imperative to emphasize the presence of basic drafting errors within 
these bills, as these errors can have a profound impact on the 
interpretation and implementation of the proposed laws. Correcting 
these errors is not just a m atter of procedural correctness; it is crucial 
for ensuring the clarity and effectiveness of the legislation. 
My colleagues Shri N. R. Elango and P. Chidambaram have diligently 
pointed out a multitude of drafting errors , underscoring the need for 
thorough revisions. However, the rushed nature of this legislation has 
left limited room for addressing these critical concerns. 
Furthermore, it is regrettable that the committee did not allow for more 
extensive consultations, ***4. The absence of such deliberation  and 
due process further compounds the risk of perpetuating these drafting 
errors, ultimately diminishing the quality and efficacy of the proposed 
laws. 
VII. ABSENCE OF PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT 
 
The manner in which this legislative process has been conducted raises 
legitimate concerns about lack of transparent and honest legislative 
intent. Crafting laws, especially those bearing such extensive 
significance, should ideally be carried out with utmost transparency 
and inclusive consultation among all concerned parties. 
The Pre-Legislative Consultation Policy of 2014, which is designed to ensure 
a fair and open process, mandates a thirty -day consultation period with the 
general public before a law can be approved by the Cabinet for introduction 
in Parliament. This consulta tion process, which involves sharing the draft 
with the public, must be accompanied by (i) explanations for its  enactment, 
                                                      
4*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha  

10  
(ii) financial considerations, and (iii) an evaluation of the law's potential 
impact. Moreover, the comments received during the consultation should be 
made available on the ministry's website. 
 
In the present case, however, a committee was formed with its members and 
objectives ***5. There exists a notable absence of a clear and compelling 
rationale for why such a substantial reform w as undertaken, especially 
considering that, according to the Home Minister's own statement in 
Parliament, the primary objective appeared  to involve alterations to a few 
specific Sections of the law. This lack of transparency and insufficient 
justification raises questions about the intentions behind the legislative  
process. 
In addition to these concerns, while these bills claim to be decolonised, the 
retention of certain provisions contradicts this narrative. A more 
comprehensive effort towards decolonisati on is needed to truly reflect the 
evolving needs of our society. There are many concerns still arising from 
these Bills and I will once again point out some of the major concerns. 
                                                      
5 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Raj ya Sabha 

11  
B. DEMERITS OF THE DRAFT REPORT 
 
 
 
 
PENAL CODE (BNS) 
I. Clause 5 Commutation of a sentence 
The clause gives the executive the powers to commute an offender’s sentence 
punishment for any other punishment. Allowing the executive to commute 
sentences can blur the separation of powers in a government. It gives the 
executive branch, which is responsible for enforcing the law, a role in altering 
or mitigating the legal punishments determined by  the judiciary. This could 
potentially lead to an imbalance of power and an infringement on the 
judiciary's independence. Executive decisions might be  swayed by electoral 
or popularity concerns rather than solely focusing on justice and the merits of 
individual cases. 
Commutations can be seen as undermining the authority and decisions of the 
judiciary. It may give the impression that the executive branc h can override 
or second -guess the judiciary's determinations, eroding trust in the legal 
system. 
II. Clause 11 Solitary Confinement 
This clause should be reconsidered as solitary confinement is inhumane. 
Research has shown that solitary confinement is not an effective tool for 
deterrence or rehabilitation. It does not reduce recidivism or promote positive 
behaviour change; instead, it can increase aggression and antisocial 
behaviour. It has been shown to have serious detrimental effects on 
individuals' mental and physical well-being, and it raises ethical and human 
rights concerns. The characterization of solitary confinement as a brutal type 
of incarceration by the Supreme Court of India in the case of Kishore Singh 
Ravinder Dev v. State of Rajasthan highlights the court's recognition of the 
severe and adverse effects of solitary confinement on individuals. 

12  
 
III. Clause 69 - Promise to Marry 
Relationships and decisions about marriage are deeply personal matters that 
should be left to the individuals involved, subje ct to only some basic 
safeguards that may be consensually instituted by the society Criminalizing a 
Promise to Marry can be seen as an undue intrusion into individuals' Right to 
Privacy and autonomy. Determining whether a promise to marry has been 
made can be subjective and challenging to prove. Intentions can change over 
time, and proving that a promise was genuinely made with the intention to 
marry can be difficult. 
Defining what constitutes a legally binding Promise to Marry can be vague 
and open to interpretation. This lack of clarity can lead to inconsistencies in 
enforcement and judgments. 
Criminalizing a Promise to Marry can be viewed as an unwarranted intrusion 
into the fundamental Right to Privacy and personal autonomy, which are 
cherished principles in a democratic society. In this context, a more nuanced 
and rights-based approach to addressing matters related to promises to marry 
would be both pragmatic and respectful of individual freedoms and choices. 
IV. Kidnapping and begging-Clause 137 
The clause should exclude the exception of lawful guardian of such child. 
Even guardians who wrongfully push children into begging should be 
rigorously punished. Excluding the exception of lawful guardians in a clause 
punishing those who wrongfully push children into  begging is essential to 
safeguard the rights and well -being of vulnerable children. It sends a strong 
message that all individuals, regardless of their legal relationship with the 
child, will be held accountable for such harmful actions, acting as a powerful 
deterrent against child exploitation. This approach prioritizes the child's best 
interests, prevents potential legal loopholes, and aligns with international 
human  rights  standards,  fostering  a  child-centered  and  protective   legal 

13  
framework that leaves no room for evading responsibility in cases of child 
exploitation. 
V. Sedition law- Clause 150 
I would like to include a passage from the report. “The Committee 
compliments the Government in deleting the term ‘sedition’ from criminal 
law by rephrasi ng it without compromising the security of the state. The 
Committee finds it as a very progressive development.” 
The Report acknowledges the fact that the Sedition law has just been 
paraphrased and retained. The 22nd Law Commission suggested that sedition 
should be well defined. The Union government decided to do the opposite of 
that. The provision in the new bill gives it such a broad definition that it can 
encompass any act in the name of endangering the unity and integrity of India. 
It leaves a lot of room for discretion which is the opposite of what was advised 
by the law commission. Clause 150 talks about Acts endangering sovereignty, 
unity and integrity of India. Sedition gets a sinister backfoot entry in the 
proposed legal regime. This broad definitio n could potentially infringe on 
individuals' rights to free expression and peaceful dissent. 
The broad and vaguely worded sedition provisions can create a chilling effect 
on free speech and peaceful protest. Individuals may self -censor their 
opinions and c riticisms, fearing legal consequences, which can undermine 
democratic values and civil liberties. 
Our concerns are rooted in the potential for misuse and abuse of the redefined 
sedition law. Such broad and discretionary provisions can be employed to 
stifle legitimate dissent and criticism, limiting freedom of expression and 
potentially infringing on individuals' rights. 
VI. The problem with not defining community service. 
The introduction of Community Service ‘under clause 4(f) of the BNS is a 
welcome step. In criminal justice systems that emphasize rehabilitation, 
community service provides an opportunity for offenders to make amends for 

14  
their actions and demonstrate their commitment to positive change. It can help 
them develop a sense of responsibility and contribute positively to society and 
aligns with the principles of restorative justice. But the same is nothing 
without giving a proper definition to it. A clear definition will outline the 
objectives and goals of Community Service, ensuring that both offenders and 
those responsible for overseeing its execution understand the intended 
outcomes. It will specify the nature and scope of the service, such as the types 
of activities, the duration, and the target beneficiaries. 
VII. Clarity in definition of life sentence 
The current definition of "imprisonment for life" within the BNS is not 
explicitly clear. It appears to be using the term "imprisonment for the 
remainder of a person's natural life." However, in the Indian Penal Code 
(IPC), Section 53, the term "imprisonment for life" is used without specifying 
whether it means "imprisonment for the remainder of a person's natural life" 
or if it is equivalent to a "whole life sentence." 
There needs to be clarity about whether the convicts are expected to remain 
in prison for the entirety of their natural life or are eligible for release. The 
proposed definition of "imprisonment for life" in the BNS is not explicitly 
clear, and it differs from how "imprisonment for life" is generally understood 
in the context of the Indian Penal Code. To avoid confusion and ensure legal 
clarity, the definition in the BNS be aligned with the understanding that 
"imprisonment for life" means a "whole life sentence" unless otherwise 
specified. This would help in harmonizing the definitions and interpretations 
across different legal contexts in India. 
VIII. Offences Relating to Elections 
One of the general patterns in contemporary India’s criminal law is that 
offences that are particularly difficult to regulate and especially elaborate in 
their organisation internally while having a large-scale impact on society are 
addressed by ‘special statutes’. These special statutes while being harsh    in 

15  
punishment are rigorous in the procedural safeguards, they offer the accused. 
The emphasis being that there are checks and balances present in the quest of 
the state to prosecute and the efforts of the accused to defend herself. Any 
detraction from the procedural protections that general criminal law offers, 
will have checks in place in these special statutes. Off ences related to 
elections should be on Representation of People Act. Similarly with UAPA, 
the special legislation should remain and amended if need be. But it should 
not be subsumed in the IPC. 
IX. Clause 264- Defamation 
There should be a limitation on filing cases for defamation. Imposing a time 
limitation on defamation claims helps protect the fundamental principle of 
free speech. Without such limitations, individuals or organizations could 
potentially bring defamation claims many years after an alleged defa matory 
statement was made. This could have a chilling effect on free expression and 
public discourse, as people may become reluctant to express their opinions or 
engage in critical discussions for fear of facing legal action at any time in the 
future. 
X. Clause 282- Conveying person by water for hire in unsafe or overloaded 
vessel 
Looking at the gravity of the offence, punishment should be increased that 
from 6 months to 3 years. 
XI. Clause 277- Fouling water of public spring or reservoir. 
Looking at the gravity of the offence, punishment should be increased. 
XII. Clause 275- Sale of adulterated drugs. 
Looking at the gravity of the offence, punishment should be increased. 
XIII. Clause 275 and 276- Sale of adulterated drugs. 
Looking at the gravity of the offence, punishment should be increased. 

16  
XIV. 104(1)- Death by negligence 
In medical negligence cases, the standard of care expected of healthcare 
professionals is crucial. Punishment should be based on whether the 
healthcare provider's actions or decisions deviated from the accepted 
standard of care within the medical community. Not all adverse outcomes 
in medicine are the result of negligence. Hence the punishment should be 
reduced from 7 years to 5 years 
XV. Clause 213- Refusing to sign statement 
Requiring individuals to sign stateme nts under the threat of 
imprisonment or fines  can be seen as coercive and may result in 
individuals signing statements against their will. This can undermine the 
voluntariness of the statement and potentially lead to false or coerced 
confessions. Hence this provision should be reconsidered. 
Criminal Procedure- 
BNSS 
 
XVI. Impact on the Digital Ecosystem- BNSS 
Clause 94 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, which 
deals with powers to summon for evidence, explicitly includes 
summoning of “digital evidenc e,” and covers any electronic 
communication such as messages, call recordings, and emails, as well 
as electronic communication devices such as mobile phones, laptops, 
cameras, and any other electronic device that may be specified by the 
government through notification in the future.  A court also has the 
right to order search and seizure of such evidence for various reasons, 
including if the person in possession of the evidence is not expected 
to produce the same. 
A mobile device or a laptop contains a lot of information which might 
not be relevant to the case because electronic devices in today's age 
contain all information pertinent to an individual's general existence. 
So, there’s a question about the invasion of the Right to Privacy 

17  
because of the scope of information that’s in these devices. Secondly, 
the collection of such devices might also go against the Right against  
self-incrimination. 
XVII. Non-Inclusion of trans-women in definition of rape- BNS 
The Sanhita also leaves the question of inclusivity answered as the 
provision of rape is strictly limited to a woman and does not include a 
transgender woman. The Transgender Persons Act, 2019 only 
recognizes ‘sexual abuse’ for which the maximum punishment is two 
years. The law on rape should also bring transgender  woman within 
its purview. 
XVIII. Different punishments for murder depending on the number of 
people convicted.- BNS 
As per Clause 101 of the BNS, when a man commits murder, 
punishment is life  imprisonment or death. No other option. But if a 
group of 5+ men acting in concert commits murder on grounds 
mentioned in this clause, there is an option to give a punishment of 
7+ years imprisonment. 
XIX. Report suggests criminalizing adultery- BNS 
 
The Supreme Court found that Section 497 acknowledged the Right to 
Privacy as a  fundamental right. The court held that the state should not 
interfere in the private matters of consenting adults and that their 
choices in matters of personal relationships should be protected. 
Moreover, one of the factors that influenced the decriminali zation of 
adultery in India was that there were already civil remedies available for 
addressing adultery, and it was also considered grounds for divorce 
under Indian family laws. The Report  insists on including a gender-
neutral provision criminalizing adultery even after the Supreme Court 
has already decriminalized it. 
 

18  
XX. Expansion of powers granted to the Police- BNSS 
 
Clause 172 of the BNSS seeks to expand the powers of the police while 
taking preventive action. The police officer “ may detain or remove any 
person resisting, refusing, ignoring or disregarding to conform to any 
direction” under Chapter XII. The Indian Criminal Justice System is 
based on a due -process model, but giving the Police such wide and 
discretionary powers during preventive action is ess entially pushing us 
towards a crime- control model. ***. 
XXI. Expansion of Police powers- BNSS 
 
Clause 187 (2) and 187 (3) of the BNSS on ‘Procedure when 
investigation cannot be completed in twenty four hours.’ 
The extension of the duration for which a detainee can be held in police 
custody beyond 15 days contradicts the Supreme Court's ruling in CBI 
v. Anupam  J. Kulkarni, (1992) 3 SCC 141, which deemed police 
custody beyond this period impermissible. By el ongating the detention 
period under police custody, the new laws expose detainees to potential 
threats, abuse, or coercion by the police. The protection of judicial 
custody, where police require the Magistrate's permission to interrogate a 
suspect, has been entirely disregarded and nullified by the new laws. 
Another telling signature o f intensifying police raj is  the name of 
reforms! 
 
XXII. Clause      43(3)      on   ‘Arrest       how       made.’       -       
BNSS     In the case of Prem Shanker Shukla v. Delhi 
Administration (1980) 3 SCC 526, the Supreme Court 
unequivocally s tated that employing handcuffs is abhorrent to 
human dignity and infringes upon Article 21 of the Indian 
Constitution. However, this clause seeks to exert punitive control 
and is highly indicative of a ‘crime -control model’ than a ‘due -
process one.’ 

19  
Bringing legislation without proper scrutiny is making a ***6 and 
the integrity of these institutions are of utmost importance for 
democratic functioning. Hence, I strongly oppose these Bills. 
XXIII. Reconsideration of Death penalty 
 
The following is a glimpse of the statistics  about the individuals 
that get sentenced to death penalty (Source: Project 39A) 
1. Economic Background 
 
Based on national statistics, it can be observed that 74.1% of 
individuals on death row in India come from economically 
disadvantaged backgrounds, as determined by their occupation and 
land ownership status. This highlights how the death penalty 
disproportionately affects the marginalized and disadvantaged in 
society. Abolishing the death penalty can be seen as a step toward 
rectifying this social injustice. 
2. Educational Background 
 
Among those sentenced to death, 23% had never attended school, while an 
additional 9.6% had minimal attendance and did not even complete their 
primary education. It is evident that these groups are disproportionately 
affected by t he provision of death penalty. Abolishing capital punishment 
can help mitigate this disparity, promote social equity, and protect the rights 
of minority and marginalized communities. 
3. Socio-economic Background 
 
A significant majority, or 76% (279 individuals), of those sentenced to death 
in India belong to backward classes and religious minority groups. 
Death penalty is more than just a form of punishment. Aforementioned data 
makes it imperative that these aspects are incorporated in our purview. The 
                                                      
6 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha  

20  
high pr evalence of socioeconomic vulnerability and limited education 
among death row prisoners raises concerns about the potential for wrongful 
convictions. It emphasizes the importance of ensuring a fair and just legal 
system to prevent innocent individuals from facing the ultimate punishment. 
In its 262nd Report from August 2015, the Law Commission of India 
recommended the abolition of the death penalty for all crimes, with the 
exception of cases related to terrorism and acts of war. 
Abolition of death penalty h as not been considered in this report. Such 
abolition carries several merits that resonate with principles of justice, 
human rights, and the advancement of society. Foremost, it eliminates the 
risk of executing innocent individuals, as errors in the criminal justice system 
can have irreversible consequences. Abolition also upholds the fundamental 
Right to Life, recognizing that every individual, regardless of their actions, 
possesses inherent dignity. Moreover, it aligns with the evolving global 
consensus  that  values  restorative  justice  over  retribution,  focusing    on 

21  
rehabilitation and the potential for redemption. Abolishing the death penalty 
allows the criminal justice system to focus on rehabilitation and reintegration 
of offenders into society,  rather than permanently ending their lives. This 
approach aligns with principles of restorative justice and offers a chance for 
individuals to reform and make amends for their actions. Many countries like 
Canada, Australia, United Kingdom, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, South 
Africa have already done so because of the fact that it can lead to a more 
humane and enlightened approach to addressing crime and it is disappointing 
to see a lack of concrete suggestions on the same by the Committee. 
The increasing scepticism of the Supreme Court in death row trials is 
indicative of the fact that this requires institutional redressal. There is a stark 
contrast between the trial courts and the Supreme Court, as there have been 
a significant number of acquittals of death row prisoners. When a large-scale 
institutional reform is required, the death penalty provision should be looked 
at in context and reconsidered accordingly. 
In conclusion, the issue of the death penalty is one that merits careful 
reconsideration in Indi a and across the globe. The statistics highlighting 
socioeconomic disparities and the disproportionate impact on marginalized 
groups, along with the potential for wrongful convictions, underscore the 
need for a more just and equitable criminal justice syst em. It is essential to 
engage in open and informed discussions on this matter to ensure that our 
legal systems reflect the principles of justice, fairness, and compassion that 
underpin the values of a modern, progressive society. In sum, broad -based 
social discussions are warranted on the subject. 
XXIV. Accused's Right to File for Discharge 
 
Unlike Section 227 of the Criminal Procedure Code (CrPC), Clause 250(1) 
of  the  BNSS  expressly  acknowledges  the  accused's  right  to  file       an 

22  
application for disc harge. It also sets a sixty -day time limit for filing this 
application from the date of committal to the Sessions Court. While this 
timeline may seem like a step toward reducing trial delays, it overlooks 
systemic challenges in our pre -trial processes. Acc used individuals often 
lack timely access to their case papers and may not have legal representation 
during this stage. Moreover, there can be a significant delay between the 
Magistrate's committal of the case to the Sessions Court and its assignment 
to a Sessions Judge. This gap affects the production of the accused and the 
receipt of necessary records. When courts consider whether to grant 
discharge or frame charges, they must evaluate whether there exists a "strong 
suspicion" supported by material that t he accused committed the offense. 
Addressing issues related to the timely provision of case papers and ensuring 
early access to legal representation is crucial for making this opportunity to 
file for discharge meaningful. 
XXV. Pre-trial Incarceration 
 
The challenge of challenging forensic reports under Clause 329 is further 
complicated by Clause 330, which mirrors Section 294 of the CrPC. It 
eliminates the requirement of formal proof for documents whose 
genuineness is uncontested by the opposing party. Clause 330(1) necessitates 
that parties admit or deny the genuineness of documents within thirty days 
of their supply, with the possibility of extending this time limit at the 
Magistrate's discretion upon providing reasons. Notably, a new proviso in 
Clause 330(1) states that an expert cannot be summoned to appear before the 
court unless their report is disputed by a party. This proviso applies to all 
experts, unlike Clause 329. Clause 330, like Section 294 of the CrPC, applies 
to the pre -trial stage of criminal proc eedings, where parties have the 
opportunity to challenge the genuineness of documents relied upon by the 
opposing party, ensuring the documents are free from forgery or fabrication. 

23  
However, there is a difference of opinion among courts regarding whether 
expert reports, such as medical or post -mortem reports, can be admitted as 
evidence without the testimony of the experts who prepared them, in cases 
where the genuineness of such reports remains unchallenged. 
XXVI. Police Custody vs. Judicial Custody 
 
Clause 187 of the BNSS retains the established timelines of sixty or ninety 
days and the concept of default bail, as found in the CrPC. However, unlike 
Section 167 of the CrPC, Clause 187(2) additionally allows for detention in 
custody, whether police or judicial, for a total of fifteen days, which can be 
imposed at any time during the initial forty or sixty days of the respective 
sixty or ninety-day period. Consistent with the CrPC, Clause 187(2) grants 
any magistrate the authority to authorize detention, regardless  of their 
jurisdiction to try the case. In contrast, Clause 187(3) requires a jurisdictional 
Magistrate. Furthermore, Clause 187(3) permits detention in custody to be 
authorized beyond the fifteen-day period, without the stipulation that it must 
be "otherwise than in police custody," implying that police custody can also 
be used during this extended period. The legislation extends police/judicial 
custody from 15 to 90 days. This would put tremendous pressure and mental 
torture on the accused. 
XXVII. Removal of References to Metropolitan Magistrates and Assistant 
Sessions Judge 
All references to the posts and powers of Metropolitan Magistrates and 
Assistant Sessions Judges have been eliminated from the BNSS. 
XXVIII. Clause 254 
 
Clause 254 outlines the process for taking evi dence in support of the 
prosecution. It mandates that on the specified date, the Judge must proceed 

24  
to collect all evidence presented by the prosecution. Notably, this clause 
allows the recording of a witness's testimony through audio-video electronic 
means under sub -Section (1). Sub -Section (2) of Clause 254 permits the 
deposition of evidence of any police officer or public servant through audio- 
video electronic means. 
This restructured format should make the information more organized and 
accessible. If you have any specific changes or further details to add, please 
let me know. 
XXIX. Clause 254 - Concerns and Open Court Requirement 
 
While Clause 254 delineates the process for taking evidence in support of the 
prosecution, it introduces a provision that may raise concerns.   Sub-Section 
(1) of Clause 254 permits the recording of a witness's testimony through 
audio-video electronic means. This allowance for remote testimony recording 
might give rise to issues related to transparency, fairness, and the fundamental 
principle of an "open court." An open court system provides transparency and 
public scrutiny, allowing for a fair and impartial trial. Recording evidence 
through audio -video electronic means could potentially undermine this 
principle by limiting public a ccess to the trial process and raising questions 
about the integrity of the proceedings. It's essential to strike a balance between 
leveraging technology for efficiency and ensuring the preservation of 
fundamental legal principles, such as open court proce edings, to maintain 
public trust in the justice system. 

25  
DEREK O’BRIEN INTERVENTION- PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
PART I 
 
 
 
General statutes of criminal law are here for the ages. General statutes of 
criminal law will affect the lives of the poor. General statutes of criminal law 
have to be crafted with utmost care. No rushing through. Let every one of us 
on this committee commit ourselves to these. 
When translated into english, the titles of these bills would be: the Indian 
Justice Code, 2023, the Indian Citizen’s Protection Code, 2023 and the Indian 
Evidence Bill, 2023. The three bills have since been referred to us on the 
Parliamentary Standing Committee. 
If the new law is titled the Indian Citizen’s Protection Code, 2023, it will 
reflect the idea of a procedural shield for citizens against the State in the 
criminal process. 
 Negatives:
1. Authorises detention in police custody upto 90 -day for offences punishable 
with death, life imprisonment and imprisonment for a term not less than 10 
years.Also authorises police custody for upto 60 days for offences where 
imprisonment is less than the above mentioned offences. This dilutes the 
Right to life, health (physical and mental) and fair trial. 
2. Enables trial in absentia if the judge finds the att endance of the accused in 
court not necessary “in the interests of justice” or if the accused “persistently” 
disturbs proceedings in court. 

26  
Where did this law come from? 
 
 The Ministry of Home Affairs in 2020, constituted a committee headed by 
Prof. Ranbir  Singh, former Vice Chancellor of National Law University, 
Delhi to review the three codes of criminal law.
 The committee was constituted of only men. Moreover, they were from similar 
social identity as well as professional background and experience.
 There were no women, Dalits, religious minorities, adivasis, LGBTQ persons, 
or persons with disabilities on the Committee.
 The committee has hardly any full time members unlike previous committees 
that had been assigned reforms of such magnitude.

27  
1. METHODOLOGY 
 
 
 
A. Contents from letter to Chairman of Home Affairs Committee: 
I. First, considering the significance of these three Bills, it is imperative that 
multiple bipartisan discussions are held at length. It is my earnest request that 
members of this committee are n ot rushed and are given multiple 
opportunities to express themselves. Choice of domain experts, choice of 
witnesses from across disciplines and the methodology used must always take 
into consideration the "sense of the house". In the spirit of federalism, it is 
imperative that the committee must also travel to multiple states to meet 
stakeholders. Sir, please create an atmosphere for scrutiny, debate and 
detailed discussion. This will embellish the quality of our output as a 
committee. 
II. Second, the minutes of the meetings must be recorded with due diligence and 
provide a true reflection of the proceedings. Key points raised  by members 
must reflect in the minutes. (Verbatim records are not a substitute for minutes.) 
For example, in the meeting that was held on 24 August 2023, Dayanidhi 
Maran (DMK) had submitted a letter stating objections on how the titles of the 
said bills are in Hindi. The submission of this letter making multiple points, 
the summary of its contents, and his intervention  does not reflect  all in the 
minutes of the meeting. Recording of such views is an integral part  of the 
democratic process. Please ensure this is done for future meetings. III.Third, 
considering that the Special Session of the Parliament has  been called from 18 
September to 22 September 2023, the Members have  made multiple 
commitments in their constituencies and other parts of their  State including 
programs and meetings immediately (one week) after the session. This  is a 
request to schedule the next committee meeting at least one week after the 
session concludes. 

28  
 
 
B. Who should the standing committee consult? What is the time frame? 
 
 
 
Consultations to be done 
 
1. Senior  practitioners  of  criminal  law who  have domain knowledge 
accumulated over decades of litigation practice and expertise in the area. 
 
2. Bar Council of all states in India. 
(At least 23 state bar councils) 
(30 days) 
 
3. The judges of the Supreme Court and high courts. 
 
(Supreme Court - Chief Justice and 33 other Judges appointed by the 
President of India. High  Court- Working Strength of at least 785 judges 
across 25 high courts) 
(6 months) 
 
4. The Bar Council of India Supreme Court Bar associations 
(At least 20 office bearers ) 
(20 days) 

29  
 
5. Members of parliament, legislative assemblies, and local councils 
play a role in passing laws. Their input can help ensure that proposed 
reforms align with legislative goals. 
(Lok Sabha - 539 members + 
Rajya Sabha- 238 members + 
State legislative assemblies) 
(6 months) 
 
6. International Organisations: Collaboration with international 
bodies like the United Nations and regional human rights organisations can 
help align reforms with international standards and best practices. (100 
days) 
 
7. Media: Journalists and media organisations can play a  role in 
raising public awareness about the need for criminal justice reform and can 
provide insights into public sentiment. (100 days) 
 
8. Ethnic and Religious Leaders: Considering the diverse cultural 
and religious landscape of India, involving leaders from various 
communities can help ensure that reforms are sensitive to different 
perspectives. (50 days) 

30  
 
9. Experts on Juvenile Justice: Specialists in juvenile  justice can 
provide insights into how reforms could better address the needs and rights 
of young offenders. (5 days) 
 
10. Experts on Cybercrime and Technology:  Given the     rise of 
cybercrime, involving experts in technology and cyber law is crucial when 
considering reforms in this domain. (5 days) 
 
11. Prison Officials and Reform Advocates:   Individuals working 
within the prison system and advocates for prison reform can contribute 
perspectives on conditions, rehabilitation, and the treatment of inmates. 
(1319 prisons in the country and their officials) (4 months) 
 
12. Inclusive Consultation from the general public including women, 
Dalits, religious minorities, adivasis, LGBTQ persons, or persons with 
disabilities etc. (1 month) 
 
13. Governors, chief ministers of states, lieutenant   governors and 
administrators of Union territories. (60-70 officials approx.) (1 month) 
 
14. Legal Scholars and academic institutes (5 days) 
 
15. Law  Enforcement  Agencies:  Representatives  from  police 
departments can offer insights into issues related to investigation, evidence 
collection, and law enforcement procedures. (10 days) 

31  
 
16. Human  Rights  Organizations:  NGOs  and advocacy groups 
focused on human rights can provide critical perspectives on how proposed 
reforms might impact human rights, due process, and individual freedoms. 
(5 days) 
 
A total of 1.5 years 
 
C. Domain Experts who must be invited as witnesses 
 
I.U.U.Lalit 
 
He was designated Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court in April 2004. He 
aided the Court as an amicus curiae in many important matters pertaining to 
forests, vehicular pollution and pollution of the Yamuna ri ver. In 2011, he 
was appointed as the Special Public Prosecutor in the 2G Spectrum scam 
case. He also served as the 49th Chief Justice of India. 
II. Madan Lokur 
 
He  was  appointed  as  Additional  Solicitor   General   of   India   in   
1998. Functioned as Ch ief Justice of Gauhati High Court from 2010 to 
2011, and Chief  Justice  of  High  Court  of  Andhra  Pradesh  from  2011 
to 2012. Has vast experience in Civil, Criminal, Constitutional, Revenue 
and Service laws. 
III. Fali Nariman 
 
Fali Sam Nariman is an Indian jurist. He is a senior advocate to the Supreme 
Court of India since 1971 and was the President of the Bar Association of 
India from 1991 to 2010. 

32  
IV. Menaka Guruswamy Sr Adv: 
 
Menaka Guruswamy is a senior advocate at the Supreme Court of India. She 
is known for having played a significant role in many landmark cases before 
the Supreme Court, including the Section 377 case, the bureaucratic reforms 
case, the Agustawestland bribery case, the Salwa Judum case, and the Right 
to Education case. 
V. Mr Sidharth Luthra, Sr Adv: 
 
Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court. He was appointed the Additional 
Solicitor General of the Supreme Court from 2012 -2014, during which he 
represented Union and State Governments in matters such as fundamental 
rights, environment laws, electora l reform, criminal law, juvenile rights, 
education and policy issues. Mr Luthra also appeared as the Special Public 
Prosecutor for the State of NCT of Delhi in the Nirbhaya gang-rape case. 
VI. Mr Hariharan, Sr. Adv. 
 
Hariharan N enrolled at the Delhi Bar in 1987 and over the last 34 years, has 
cemented a presence on the Criminal side of legal practice. For contributions 
to the practice and development of Criminal Law, he was designated as a 
Senior Advocate by the Delhi High Court in 2013. 
VII. Ms Rebecca John, Sr. Adv. 
 
Rebecca Mammen John has been practising exclusively on the criminal side 
in the Supreme Court of India, High Court of Delhi and in the Trial Courts 
of Delhi for more than three decades. She has conducted a wide range of 
criminal trials and argued appe als dealing with offences under the Indian 
Penal Code, Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, Prevention of Corruption 
Act and other special statutes.Sriram Panchu 

33  
VIII. Sylendra Babu 
IX. Amit Desai 
X. Rajeev Dhavan 
XI. Siddharth Dave 
XII. Adit Pujari 
XIII. Aditya Sondhi 
XIV. Vrinda Grover 
XV. Professor Faizan Mustafa 
 
II. INPUT NOTE - REFORMING CRIMINAL LAW: Menaka 
Guruswamy 
 
You might ask why? Because when you have been detained, being questioned 
and are surrounded by police officers – it’s the Code of Criminal Procedure 
that protects you, limits your detention period in police custody, enables you 
to access a lawyer, who in turn can push for bail and even ask for quashing of 
the FIR or Chargesheet against you. Therefore, I particularly like that 
Welcome reforms: 
 
There’s plenty of welcome refor m to our existing criminal procedure. Some 
of it draws on the technological innovations that have made it into our 
everyday life. For instance, the entire life of a new case, commencing from 
the FIR (first information report) leading to a case diary on its  way to a 
chargesheet and culminating in a judgment is now to be maintained online – 
via digitized recordkeeping. This will make immensely safer the record of the 
case proceedings and enable quicker access when necessary. Significantly, 
when our homes are searched and seizure affected on items found, then such 
proceedings must be accompanied by mandatory video recording. This is a 
hugely important reform since this is protection against planting of evidence 
and can be used by the defense to contest alleged seizures. 

34  
The Protection Code also provides for the registration of a ‘Zero FIR’. This 
kind of FIR is registered when a police station receives a complaint regarding 
an alleged offence committed in the jurisdiction of another police station. 
Here, the original police station registers the FIR and then transfers it to the 
relevant police station for further investigation. 
The Protection Code now makes it mandatory for a forensic expert to visit the 
crime scene and collect forensic evidence for information r elating to an 
offence that is punishable by imprisonment for at least seven years. 
Continuing pandemic-era change, the Protection Code allows trials, inquiries 
and proceedings including examination and recording of evidence to be 
conducted by an electronic  or online mode. This makes it infinitely more 
convenient for accused and witnesses to participate in and complete these 
requirements of the processes of a trial. 
Another welcome reform pertains to the grant of sanction to prosecute a 
public servant. The Protection Code now provides that the decision to grant 
or reject sanction to prosecute a public servant must be reached by the 
government within 120 days of receiving the request. If the government fails 
to do so, sanction shall be deemed to be accorded. A dditionally, no sanction 
shall be required in cases involving public servants when accused of sexual 
offences or trafficking of human beings. More reform comes in the form of  
a provision that mandates that no person can be arrested without prior 
permission of an officer of the minimum rank of a Deputy Superintendent of 
Police for offences punishable with less than three years imprisonment if the 
accused is above the age of sixty years. 
Areas of concern 
 
The most dangerous part of the Protection Code is tha t it permits the 
magistrate to authorize detention in police custody for a period beyond   the 

35  
current 15-day limit, extending up to ninety days. Such detention extending 
to ninety days is for offences punishable with death, life imprisonment and 
imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years. The Protection Code 
enables detention in police custody beyond the current 15 -day mandate and 
up to sixty days for ‘any other offence’ (with imprisonment terms less than 
the ninety -day detention offences). This i s a constitutionally burdensome 
provision that will impinge on the rights of an accused. Spending ninety days 
with the police having unimpeded access to an accused is debilitating from 
the point of view of rights to life, health (including mental well -being) and 
fair trial. At present for any period beyond the 15-day limit for police custody 
means that the judge can have the accused detained in judicial custody or 
order other custodial arrangements. 
While there are many reforms that should be welcomed in th e Protection 
Code, 2023- all of that will be rendered meaningless if an accused can be 
detained to long periods of time in police custody – three months of 
uninterrupted police custody will render any accused extremely vulnerable to 
coercion and intimidation. This move must be thought afresh, and members 
of the parliamentary committee must ask themselves – what if that accused 
was me? 
III. UNDOING CRIMINAL LAW: MAKING HARSH SPECIAL 
STATUTES THE NORM: Menaka Guruswamy 
 
One of the general patterns in contemporary  India’s criminal law is that 
offences that are particularly difficult to regulate and especially elaborate in 
their organisation internally while having a large-scale impact on society are 
addressed by ‘special statutes’. These special statutes while bein g harsh in 
punishment are rigorous in the procedural safeguards they offer the accused. 
The emphasis being that there are checks and balances present in the quest of 

36  
the state to prosecute and the efforts of the accused to defend herself. Any 
detraction from the procedural protections that general criminal law offers, 
will have checks in place in these special statutes. This general pattern has 
been deviated from with the introduction on 11.8.2023 of three bills in the 
Lok Sabha by the Central Government. These bills are intended to 
dramatically change criminal law. 
The BNS, 2023 to replace the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the BNSS, 2023 to 
replace the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 and the Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 
2023 to replace the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 have been tabled in the lower 
house of parliament. 
This law reform effort by the State is at odds with established legislative 
practice of having separate and distinct harsh ‘special statutes’ with 
procedural checks and balances. This current effort shows  that special 
laws are being absorbed into general criminal law – without any of the 
necessary procedural safeguards. This will make it impossible for the 
accused to defend herself and will bring within the criminal process many 
innocent people, for whom the process will be punishment and for which very 
few convictions will be returned. This is a particularly worrying effort – for 
the purpose of criminal law is not to persecute, but to prosecute ably while 
affording the accused a fair chance to prove their innocence. 
Let me give you one example. Special legislation includes statutes like the 
Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 (PMLA) and the Maharashtra 
Control of Organised Crime Act, 1999 (MCOCA, models of which are 
applicable in other states). Both statutes are illustrations of special legislation 
intended to combat alleged offences that are elaborate in how they are planned 
and fulfilled. While the punishments are harsh, both attempt to have some 
balance in the form of the procedural safeguards they o ffer. PMLA law has 
many deficiencies. 

37  
Now let's come to ‘organised crime’. Provisions that have been introduced 
into general criminal law statute like the BNS, 2023. . At present, organized 
crime is principally dealt by the Maharashtra Control of Organised Crime Act, 
1999 (MCOCA), which is applicable in both Maharashtra and the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi. Other states have their own versions of MCOCA. 
However, the BNS brings it into general criminal law by having provisions 
that define and punish organized crime within this statute. 
The BNS brings organized crime within Chapter VI of the Code that pertains 
to ‘offences affecting the human body.’ In the Indian Penal Code, 1860, the 
equivalent chapter that pertains to ‘offences against the body’ included classic 
criminal offences like murder and culpable homicide not amounting to 
murder. Within this classical framework is introduced the rather elaborate 
offence of ‘organised crime syndicates.’ Per the BNS, an organized crime 
syndicate means ‘a criminal organization or group of three or more persons, 
who acting singly or collectively in concert, as a syndicate, gang, mafia or 
crime ring indulging in commission of one or more serious offences or are 
involved in gang criminality, racketeering and syndicated organized crime’. 
BNS provides that a definition of ‘organized crime’ as being ‘any continuing 
unlawful activity including kidnapping, robbery, land grabbing, contract 
killing, economic offences, drug or human trafficking, weapons or 
prostitution either as a member of an organized crime syndicate or on behalf 
of such syndicate, by use of violence, threat of violence, intimidation, 
coercion, corruption or related activities or other unlawful means to obtain 
direct or indirect material benefit including a financial benefit shall constitute 
organized crime’. 
Also included within this fold are economic offences which includes criminal 
breach of trust, forgery, counterfeiting of currency and valuable securities, 
financial scams, running Ponzi schemes, mass marketing fraud or multi-level 

38  
marketing schemes with a view to defraud people at large for obtaining the 
monetary benefits or large -scale organized betting, any forms, offences of 
money laundering and hawala transactions. 
It’s like the drafters thought of a ll the possible offences that can exist when 
three or more accused are involved and stuffed them into one unwieldy 
definition and pasted them into the bill. It is vague, poorly worded, and 
unwieldy. Everything that definitions should not be. While the punishment is 
stringent - for anyone ‘who conspires or organizes the commission of an 
organized crime’ shall be punishable with imprisonment for a minimum of 
five years to life in prison. There are no safeguards that criminal law affords, 
at present. 
MCOCA has procedural safeguards that prevent abuse of such a ‘special law 
with stringent and deterrent provisions’ as per its statement of objects. For 
instance, Section 23 presently provides that no information about the 
commission of an offence of organized crime  shall be recorded by a police 
officer without the prior approval of an officer below the rank of Assistant 
Commissioner of Police (ACP). Further, no investigation shall be carried out 
by a police officer below the rank of ACP. No ‘Special Court’ shall tak e 
cognizance of any offence under this Act without the sanction of a police 
officer of the rank of ACP and above. 
MCOCA also has ‘Special Courts’ that are staffed by judges specially 
appointed by Government with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the 
Delhi High Court. Such a judge should have had experience as an Assistant 
Sessions or Sessions court judge previously. Importantly, authorization for 
interception of wire, electronic or oral communication shall be allowed only 
after an officer not below the rank of Deputy Commissioner of Police, who is 
supervising the investigation of organised crime, submits an application to 
the Competent Authority. A Review committee consisting of the    Principal 

39  
Secretary of Delhi, Law Secretary and Home Secretary shall review orders of 
the Competent Authority. 
In essence, MCOCA an example of a special statute intended to combat an 
elaborate offence (organized crime), balances the stringency of not only the 
punishment it mandates, but also the invasion of privacy by wi re taps to 
further enhance the investigation along with procedural safeguards. Great 
care has been taken by the legislature in the constitution of ‘special courts’, 
and the qualifications in terms of prior experience of the judges who will hear 
such cases. All of this is absent in the reforms that are proposed. What is being 
weakened are principals of criminal law – and it is the general public that will 
suffer by way of lack of procedural protections and absence of checks and 
balances. The right of fair tr ial and rule of law are also the casualties in the 
process. 

40  
DEREK O’BRIEN INTERVENTION- PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HOME AFFAIRS 
PART-II 
 
SOME OTHER ISSUES WITH THESE BILLS 
 
 
 
I. No reasoning as to the requirement of a new legislation. The old act could 
easily have been amended to include these changes. 
II. Name of these Bills is in Hindi 
 This name being in Hindi is not suitable for the whole of the country. 
 Firstly, it is unconstitutional. Article 348 of the Constitution mandates that 
English language be used in Acts and Bills. 
"348. Language to be used in the Supreme Court and in the High Courts and 
for Acts, Bills, etc 
(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, until 
Parliament by law otherwise provides 
(a) all proceedings in the Supreme Court and in every High Court, 
 
(b) the authoritative texts 
 
(i) of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in either 
House of Parliament or in the House or either House of the Legislature of a 
State, 
(ii) of all Acts passed by Parliament or the Legislature of a State and of all 
Ordinances promulgated by the President or the Governor of a State, and 

41  
(iii) of all orders, rules, regulations and bye laws issued under this 
Constitution or under any law made by Parliament or the Legislature of a 
State, shall be in the English language. 
 
 This constitutes as Hindi imposition. 
 NAMES IN ENGLISH AS WELL AS HINDI. When translated into English, 
the titles of these bills would be: the Indian Justice Code, 2023, the Indian 
Citizen’s Protection Code, 2023 and the Indian Evidence Bill, 2023. 
 If the new law is titled the Indian Citizen’s Protection Code, 2023. It will 
reflect the idea of a procedural shield for citizens against the State in the 
criminal process. 
SPECIFIC INPUTS ON BNS 2023 (Penal Code) 
 
III. Sedition law 
 
In the new Bill, sedition has NOT been removed, it has been altered. 
 
Section 124A (The old sedition law) is part of the IPC. Its use had been kept 
in abeyance following a Supreme Court order in May 2022. The court had 
given the government time to re -look the sedition law. This was in lieu of 
several advocates urging the apex court to strike down sedition as an offence 
in any form. 
***7 claimed that sedition has been removed from the list of offences. What 
happened in fact was its reintroduction in a more draconian manner which 
can even encroach on the right to protest. 
Though the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bill does not explicitly have a Section 
124A in it, it has Section 150. This proposed provision in the new Bill avoids 
using the term ‘sedition’, but descr ibes the offence as “endangering 
sovereignty, unity and integrity of India”. 
                                                      
7*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 

42  
The 22nd Law Commission suggested that sedition should be well defined. 
The Union government decided to do the opposite of that. The provision in 
the new bill gives it a very bro ad definition. The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 
2023 Section 150 talks about Acts endangering sovereignty, unity and 
integrity of India. It reads- 
“Whoever, purposely or knowingly, by words, either spoken or written, or by 
signs, or by visible representation, or by electronic communication or by use 
of financial mean, or otherwise, excites or attempts to excite, secession or 
armed rebellion or subversive activities, or encourages feelings of separatist 
activities or endangers sovereignty or unity and integrity of India; or indulges 
in or commits any such act shall be punished with imprisonment for life or 
with imprisonment which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable 
to fine” 
This makes it so broad that it can encompass any act in the name of 
endangering the unity and integrity of India. It leaves a lot of room for 
discretion which is the opposite of what was advised by the law commission. 
IV. Definition of Terrorist 
 
Section 111 (6) (a) of the BNS says that a “terrorist” refers to any person 
who “develop s, manufactures, possesses, acquires, transports, supplies or 
uses weapons, explosives, or releases nuclear, radiological or other 
dangerous substance, or cause fire, floods or explosions.” - The addition of 
‘floods’ is ambiguous and bizarre. Moreover these definitions continue to be 
so vague that it ends up giving the police unreasonably wide powers of arrest. 
V. Section 69 - Promise to Marry- 
 
Subjectivity and Intent: Determining whether a promise to marry has been 
made can be subjective and challenging to prove. Intentions can change over 

43  
time, and proving that a promise was genuinely made with the intention to 
marry can be difficult. 
Privacy and Autonomy: Critics argue that relationships and decisions about 
marriage are deeply personal matters that should be left to the individuals 
involved. Criminalising a promise to marry can be seen as an undue intrusion 
into individuals' private lives and autonomy. 
Lack of Clear Parameters: Defining what constitutes a legally binding 
promise to marry can be vague and open to interpretation. This lack of clarity 
can lead to inconsistencies in enforcement and judgments. 
Cultural and Social Dynamics: In many cultures, pre -marital relationships 
and commitments are complex and can involve various factors beyond just 
legal obligations. Criminalising such promises might not take into account 
cultural or social norms. 
Enforcement Challenges: Proving the existence of a promise to marry, 
especially if it was made verbally and without any evidence, can present 
significant challenges in terms of evidence collection and enforcement. 
Gender Dynamics: Depending on how the law is applied, there is a risk that 
such laws could disproportionately affect certain genders or reinforce 
harmful gender stereotypes. 
SPECIFIC INPUTS ON BNSS 2023 (CRIMINAL PROCEDURE) 
 
I. The recently introduced Procedure Bill allows the possibility of 
requesting a 90-day police custody period for crimes that carry a sentence 
of ten years or more. This situation could potentially lead to significant 
infringements on human rights, particularly if these cases result in a not-guilty 
verdict. 

44  
The Bill permits the magistrate to authorise detention in police custody for a 
period beyond the current 15-day limit, extending up to 90 days. 
 90-day police custody - for crimes that carry a sentence of ten years or more
 60-day police custody - for “any other offence” with imprisonment terms 
less than the 90-day detention offences
This could lead to: 
 
Violation of Human Rights: Increasing the period of police custody without 
proper safeguards could lead to human rights violations, including the risk of 
torture, coerced confessions, and abuse of detainees. This is particularly 
concerning given the history of custodial violence and abuse in India. 
Denial of Legal Rights: Extending police custody could potentially lead to a 
denial of basic legal rights, such as the right to a speedy trial and the right to 
consult with legal counsel. Prolonged detention without proper oversight can 
undermine due process. 
Overburdened Judicial System: According to the Prison Statistics India 2020 
report, three in four prisoners in our country’s jails are under trial. This is the 
highest share of undertrial detainees in prison since 1995. Of these, 49% of 
the prisoners are between 18 and 30 years of age. Consider ing that a 
staggering percentage of such prisoners have spent over a year in prison 
awaiting trial, these inmates suffer due to our overwhelmingly slow legal 
process. The very judicial system that is intended to redress and deliver justice 
pushes them towa rd greater injustice since courts might face challenges in 
timely adjudicating cases, leading to potential delays in the delivery of justice. 
Risk of False Confessions: Prolonged custody can increase the risk of 
suspects giving false confessions due to pressure, intimidation, or exhaustion. 
This can lead to wrongful convictions and miscarriages of justice. 

45  
Impact on Marginalised Communities: Lengthening the period of police 
custody might disproportionately affect marginalised communities and 
individuals who may not have access to legal representation or resources to 
challenge their detention. 
Data also shows that two in three prisoners under trial belong to the SC, ST 
and OBC communities. Two in five of inmates from this category were 
educated below grade X and more than a quarter were illiterate. 
Erosion of Trust in Law Enforcement: Instances of abuse, torture, or 
mishandling of suspects during extended custody periods could further erode 
public trust in law enforcement agencies. 
II. Clause 356 of the BNSS enab les trial in absentia if the judge is satisfied 
that “personal attendance of the accused before the Court is not necessary 
in the interests of justice” or if the accused “persistently disturbs the 
proceedings in Court.” This gives the Judge wide discretionary powers to 
abuse this provision and not give the accused a fair hearing. 
III. Addition of provisions that are demeaning and against human dignity- 
 
The CrPC has no provision of handcuffs. In D.K. Basu versus State of West 
Bengal (1996), the Supreme Court set guidelines on rights of accused while 
being arrested or in custody. As per the guidelines, handcuffing violates all 
standards of decency. Handcuffing is the last resort and should not be 
followed as a custom. 
The BNSS, in Section 43(3), explicitly states that: “The police officer may, 
keeping in view the nature and gravity of the offence, use handcuff while 
effecting the arrest of a person who is a habitual, repeat offender who 
escaped from custody, who has committed offence of organised crime, 
offence of terrorist act, drug related crime, or offence of illegal possession 
of arms and ammunition, murder, rape, acid attack, counterfeiting of  coins 

46  
and currency notes, human trafficking, sexual offences against children, 
offences against the State, including acts endangering sovereignty, unity and 
integrity of India or economic offences.” 
IV. Expansion of powers granted to the Police- 
 
Section 172 of the BNSS seeks to expand the powers of the police while 
taking preventive action. The police officer “ may detain or  remove any 
person resisting, refusing, ignoring or disregarding to conform to any 
direction” under Chapter XII. The Indian Criminal Justice System is based 
on a due-process model, but giving the Police such wide and discretionary 
powers during preventive action is essentially pushing us towards a crime - 
control model. 
SPECIFIC INPUTS ON BSB 2023 (EVIDENCE ACT) 
 
I. Section 19: 
 
The provision in Indian Evidence Act 1872 which was similar to Section 19 
of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill was Section 21. Section 21(1) referred to Section 
32 of Indian Evidence Act 1872 (Cases in which statement of relevant fact 
by person who is dead or cannot be found, etc., is relevant). However, 
Section 19(1) of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill 2023 instead of referring Section 26, 
which is replicat ion of Section 32 of Indian Evidence Act 1872, makes a 
reference to sub-Section (2) of Section 23 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, which 
deals with confession to a police officer. It has no relevance in this Section. 
Instead, reference should have been made to S ection 26 itself (just like 
Section 32 of Indian Evidence Act) or maybe Section 26(2) of Bharatiya 
Sakshya Bill. 

47  
The same discrepancy can be found in the illustrations (b) and (c) of this 
Section. Instead of referring to Section 23(2), it should have made a reference 
to Section 26(2) of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill. 
II. Section 36: 
 
There is an error in this Section. This Section was Section 42 in the Indian 
Evidence Act 1872, and the words used in Section 42 were “other than those 
mentioned in Section 41”. Section 41 of Indian Evidence Act 1872 was 
dealing with “Relevancy of certain judgements in probate, etc, jurisdiction.” 
However, Section 36 of Bharatiya Sakshya bill states “other than those 
mentioned in Section 31.” Section 31 has no relevance here as it talks about 
“Relevancy of statement as to fact of public nature contained in certain Acts 
or notifications” while Section 35 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill discusses 
“Relevancy of certain judgements in probate, etc., jurisdiction” and is similar 
to the Section 41 of Indian Evidence Act 1872. 
III. Section 50 of BSB: 
 
This Section was Section 55 in the Indian Evidence Act 1872, and the words 
used in explanation of Section 55 were “except as provided in Section 54”. 
Section 54 of Indian Evidence Act 1872 was “Previous bad char acter not 
relevant, except in reply”. However, Section 59 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill is 
“Proof of documents by Primary evidence” and Section 49 of Bharatiya 
Sakshya Bill is about “Previous bad character not relevant, except in reply” 
and it is Section 49 which is similar to Section 54 of the Indian Evidence Act 
1872. Use of words “Section 59” here seems erroneous, and it has no 
relevance in Section 50 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill. 

48  
IV. Section 62 of BSB: 
 
As per it, the manner of proving electronic evidence is mentioned in Section 
65B and Section 65B discusses the admissibility of electronic records. In 
other words, how an electronic record can be made admissible before the 
court of law is mentioned in Section 65B. It mentions certain requirements 
which must be fulf illed and then only electronic evidence can be made 
admissible. 
It is Section 63 (Admissibility of electronic records) of Bhartiya Sakshya Bill 
which replaces Section 65B (Admissibility of electronic records) of Indian 
Evidence Act 1872 and not Section 59 (Proof of documents by primary 
evidence.) Mentioning Section 59 in Section 62 appears to be a discrepancy 
because now the definition of document as per Section of Bhartiya Sakshya 
Bill 2023 includes “electronic and digital records.” Hence, they can be 
admitted as primary evidence under Section 59. But Section 62 of Bhartiya 
Sakshya Bill 2023 is a special provision for the succeeding Section 63, which 
talks about the manner which is to be followed (“may be proved in 
accordance with”) for proving electronic e vidence. It is Section 63 of 
Bhartiya Sakshya Bill 2023 which has provisions discussing in detail the 
manner for proving electronic evidence and not Section 59. 
If Section 62 is to be considered correct, then there is no point of having 
Section 63 because if all electronic records may be proved in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 59, then what is the purpose of having Section 
63 altogether? Hence, this seems to be a discrepancy which may be rectified 
by replacing Section 59 with Section 63 in Secti on 62 of the Bhartiya 
Sakshya Bill 2023. 
 
 
 

49  
V. Section 81 of BSB: 
This provision was Section 81A in the Indian Evidence Act 1872, and there 
was no explanation in this Section. However, Section 90A (Presumption as 
to electronic records five year old) of Indian  Evidence Act 1872 (which is 
now Section 93 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill) had an explanation which was 
made applicable to Section 81A. The same explanation has now been 
removed from Section 93 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill and now added in 
Section 81 and it has b een made applicable to Section 93 of Bharatiya 
Sakshya Bill. Some words in the explanation have been changed from “and 
under the care of the person with whom, they naturally be;” to “and looked 
after by the person with whom such document is required to be kept;”. 
The explanation in Section 81 has incorrectly been made applicable to 
Section 96 (Exclusion of evidence to explain or amend ambiguous 
document). It has no application there as there is no reference to any 
electronic record or custody of documents. 
VI. Section 93 BSB 
 
It has been mentioned in this Section that “Explanation to Section 84 shall 
also apply to this Section.” Section 84, however, has no explanation. 
Section 93 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill was Section 90A of Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872. Section 90A of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 is reproduced. 
VII. Section 81 BSB 
 
Now, Section 81A of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 had no explanation but 
Section 81 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill has an explanation, which is being 
made applicable to Section 96 (Exclusion of evidence t o explain or amend 
ambiguous document) of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill. This seems to be erroneous 
on two counts, firstly, explanation of Section 81 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill 
is specifically stating that its explanation is applicable to Section 96, whereas 

50  
Section 96 has no relevance here. Section 81 needs to be rectified by 
replacing the word Section 96 with “Section 93.” Secondly, it is the 
explanation of Section 81 of Bharatiya Sakshya Bill which needs to be made 
applicable here and not that of Section 84, which has no explanation at all. 
VIII.Section 108 BSB 
 
There is an error in illustration (c) of Section 108. Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 
2023 has replaced Section 325 with Section 115 and Section 335 with 
Section 120. These changes should be made in the first part o f illustration 
(c). 
SOME OTHER ISSUES WORTH CONSIDERING? 
 
I. The provision legalising marital rape has been retained. 
 
The colonial laws did not recognise men and women as equals and merged 
the identity of women with their husbands. Under Section 375 of the I ndian 
penal code deals with the offence of rape provides for an exception - ‘Sexual 
intercourse by man with his own wife, the wife not being under 15 years of 
age, is not rape.’ The Report of the 42nd Report of the Law Commission 
(1971) suggested removal of this exception. The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill does 
not make any significant changes to the ‘colonial’ Indian Evidence Act, even 
though the Law Commission report of 2003 had suggested so many changes 
in the form of amendment and substitution of provisions. 
II.Section 112 of Evidence Act speaks about 'Birth during marriage 
conclusive proof of legitimacy except in certain cases'. It reads as follows: 
"The fact that any person was born during the continuance of a valid 
marriage between his mother and any man, or within two hundred and eighty 
days after its dissolution, the mother remaining unmarried, shall be 
conclusive proof that he is the legitimate child of that man, unless it can be 

51  
shown that the parties to the marriage had no access to each other at any 
time when he could have been begotten." One must notice that there was no 
DNA paternity test at the time when this legal presumption got introduced in 
1872. Why is that this bill which is meant to decolonize the existing law, has 
made no changes to the provisio n, apart from simply renumbering it as 
Section 116? 
The Law Commission report had recommended an amendment to this 
Section: 
The fact that any child was born during the continuance of a valid marriage 
between its mother and any man, or within two hundred and eighty days, (i) 
after the marriage was declared nullity, the mother remaining unmarried, or 
(ii) after the marriage was avoided by dissolution, the mother remaining 
unmarried, shall be conclusive proof that such person is the legitimate child 
of that man, unless (a) it can be shown that the parties to the marriage had 
no access to each other at any time when the child could have been begotten; 
or (b) it is conclusively established, by tests conducted at the expense of that 
man, namely, (i) medical tests,  that, at the relevant time, that man was 
impotent or sterile, and is not the father of the child; or (ii) blood tests 
conducted with the consent of that man and his wife and in the case of the 
child, by permission of the Court, that that man is not the father of the child; 
or (iii) DNA genetic printing tests conducted with the consent of that man 
and in the case of the child, by permission of the Court, that that man is not 
the father of the child. 
III.Absence of provision similar to Section 377 IPC in the Bha ratiya Nyaya 
Sanhita- The Supreme Court in Navtej Singh Johar case had struck down 
Section 377 IPC but only to the extent it criminalizes consensual sex. 
However, Section 377 IPC can still be invoked when there is a non - 
consensual sex/rape of a man by another man. A woman can also initiate 

52  
proceedings against her husband for unnatural sex under Section 377 IPC. 
If, as per the Nyaya Sanhita, these acts are not offences, it means that the 
victims of sodomy, buggery etc. will have no remedy available under i t. So 
if a man is 'raped' by another man, what is his remedy? 
 
 
IV. Non-Inclusion of trans-women in definition of rape 
 
The Sanhita also leaves the question of inclusivity answered as the provision 
of rape is strictly limited to a woman and does not include a transgender 
woman. The Transgender Persons Act, 2019 only recognizes ‘sexual abuse’ 
for which the maximum punishment is two years. The law on rape should 
also bring transgender woman within its purview. 
V.Impact on the Digital Ecosystem - Section 94 of the Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 which deals with powers to summon for evidence, 
explicitly includes summoning of “digital evidence,” and covers any 
electronic communication such as messages, call recordings, and emails, as 
well as electronic commu nication devices such as mobile phones, laptops, 
cameras, and any other electronic device that may be specified by the 
government through notification in the future. A court also has the right to 
order search and seizure of such evidence for various reason s, including if 
the person in possession of the evidence is not expected to produce the same. 
A mobile device or a laptop contains a lot of information which might not be 
relevant to the case because electronic devices in today's age contain all 
information pertinent to an individual's general existence. So, there’s a 
question about the invasion of the right to privacy because of the scope of 
information that’s in these devices. And the second thing is that collection 
of such devices might also go against the right to protect yourself from self- 
incrimination. And now with it being codified in law, it just makes it easier 

53  
for the law enforcement and for courts to justify whatever collection that 
they’re doing. 
VI.Basic Drafting and Spelling Errors 
There is no Sec. 498A in BNS. But BNSS mentions it as so in the index. It 
should have been Section 84 instead. Explanation to Section 150 BNS ( 
which modifies S124A IPC ) does not make any sense. It is incomplete. 
VIII.Illogical provisions - As per Section 101 of the BNS, when a man commits 
murder, punishment is life imprisonment or death. No other option. But if a 
group of 5+ men acting in concert commits murder on grounds mentioned in 
this clause, there is an option to give a punishment of 7+ years imprisonment. 
IX. The provisions display an astounding ignorance of the law. For instance, as 
per S. 262. (1), the accused may prefer an application for discharge within a 
period of sixty days from the date of framing of charges. 
X. No congruence between the three bills. For in stance, the definition of 
"Document" in the Sakshya Bill and under Nyaya Sanhita. Nyaya Sanhita 
doesn't include electronic and digital records as Document while the 
amended Sakshya Bill does. 
XI.In Sessions Trial court can frame charge even when accused is  present by 
electronic means u/s 251(2) BNSS but same has NOT been provided in 
Magistrate triable case u/s 263 BNSS. 

54  
INPUTS FROM DOMAIN EXPERTS 
 
 
 
I. Siddharth Luthra- Summary on ‘It’s Still Colonial’ 
 
 
 
 The existing Penal Code, which originated in 1860, i s still in use in 34 
countries.
 It has seen only minor amendments in India previously, such as the inclusion 
of laws related to sedition, cruelty to women, dowry death, and some 
deletions over the years.
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) - The New Penal Code: 
 
 Notable additions include the concept of community service, but it excludes 
the inclusion of open prisons.
 New offences like fake news terrorism, organised crime, and corruption have 
been added.
 However, it does not repeal the existing special laws that cover these offences.
 
Inconsistencies Between Codes 
 
 While terrorism, organised crime, and corruption are addressed in the new 
Penal Code, the corresponding amendments needed in the Bharatiya Sakshya 
Sanhita (Evidence Code) are lacking.
 This omission creates inconsistencies and gaps in the legal framework.
 
Enhancement of Sentences: 
 
 The new Codes enhance sentences for acts of rashness and negligence leading 
to death.

55  
 This change has implications for medical professionals, potentially increasing 
their legal exposure.
Punishment for Mob Lynching 
 
 The new Codes introduce punishment for mob lynching as a distinct offense.
 However, the severity of punishment for mob lynching does not align with 
that for murder or intentional culpable homicide.
Reorganization and Reduction of Provisions 
 
 The new Codes reorganize provisions and reduce the number of Sections.
 This effort includes compiling definitions and updating illustrations while 
grouping similar provisions.
 However, these changes do not fundamentally alter the core of the 1860 Penal 
Code.
Sedition Repealed and Reintroduced: 
 
 Sedition (Section 124A IPC) has been repealed but reintroduced as Section 
150 in the new Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS).
 The new provision requires an intention similar to sedition, raising concerns 
about freedom of speech and possible misuse against dissent.
 Questions arise about the necessity of retaining a relic from the era of 
monarchs in a democratic republic.
Right to Life and Liberty (Article 21): 
 
● Article 21, protecting the right to l ife and liberty, is crucial in safeguarding 
individuals against state action. 
● The 1973 Criminal Procedure Code (CPC) contains provisions related to 
arrest, the right to seek bail, and procedural safeguards, putting Article 21 into 
action. 

56  
● The new law, Bha ratiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita (BNSS), introduces 
reforms like video conference trials and e -filing of FIRs but falls short in 
providing adequate protection to detainees. 
Plea Bargaining and Custody Period: 
 
 The plea bargaining chapter remains untouched i n BNSS and is limited to 
sentence bargaining, missing an opportunity to allow pleading guilty to a 
lesser offence.
 BNSS increases police options to seek custody (PC) for 40/60 days, which 
curtails the right to bail.
 This contradicts the goal of breaking fr om the colonial past and hampers 
BNSS's objective of improving forensic and scientific investigations for 
quicker and better-quality results.
 The government should have considered reducing the 15 -day PC period, as 
even colonial -era rules frowned upon it an d discouraged obtaining 
confessions.
New Evidence Law (Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam): 
 
 The new evidence law updates digital and electronic evidence provisions and 
incorporates principles developed by courts.
 It Indianizes illustrations but doesn't bring substantial changes.
 
Disappointment with New Laws: 
 
 The introduction of three new laws was expected to bring significant 
improvements but reiterated existing colonial-era laws.
 These new laws emphasise increased criminalization, harsher sentences, and 
expanded police powers, which don't align with the nation's constitutional 
objectives.




57  
The Need for Comprehensive Legal Reform: 
 Instead of piecemeal changes, an actual break from the colonial past should 
involve compiling and rationalizing central laws into substantive codes for a 
more efficient criminal justice system.
 This reform should consider rationalisation and decriminalisation, 
introducing new criminal laws where necessary, regulating arrest powers, 
implementing bail and sentencing guidelines, and ensu ring alignment with 
fundamental rights and victims' rights.
Presumption of Innocence and Fair Trial: 
 
 A break from the colonial legacy should strengthen the presumption of 
innocence and the right to a fair trial for the accused while protecting victims' 
participatory rights.
Urgency for Deep Review 
 
 The hope lies with the Standing Committee responsible for reviewing these 
proposed legislations, recognising that criminal law significantly impacts 
everyone's daily lives.
 A thorough study is needed to ensure t hese laws align with the nation's 
constitutional principles, especially the paramount right to life and liberty 
established in 1950.

58  
II. Inputs from Justice Madan B Lokur: ‘Is this a Necessary 
Overhauling?’ 
 
 Fails to address implementation concerns. 
 IPC: 150 years and is still in existence in some form or other in about 30 
countries. Evidence Act is 140 years old, CrPC is 50 years old since its 
revision in 1973. 
 Proposed laws do not address the important issue of judicious 
implementation by police and prosecu tion. Eg: Broadening rather than 
curtailing of sedition laws has led to further misuse. 
 ***8. 
 No redressal in case of errant officials where *** is unjustified. 
 In case of Zero FIR, issues with its implementation persist. Eg: The events 
recorded in the horrific video ***. 
 The legislation extends police/judicial custody from 15 to 90 days. This 
would put tremendous pressure and mental torture on the accused. 
 Purpose of the laws is to expedite justice delivery system. This cannot be 
done when appointments of judges to high courts and local courts take  
years. 
9. WHY THE RUSH ON THIS REFORM? ELECTION 2024? 
 
***  
The law you are passing will stay for 100 years. Let each one of us rise above 
narrow partisan interests. Let us create laws to better the lives of our children 
and our childrens’ children. 
We are all for reform. Who can be against reform. But in the name of reform 
let us not become more repressive than the colonisers. 
While there is an undeniable need to reform colonial era criminal framework, 
                                                      
8 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha  

59  
the current criminal law bills are more draconian than the colonisers law - 
treating citizens worse than ‘native subjects’ of the Raj. 

58 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE - C 
 
 
 
 
MP/2023/20 
 
19 August, 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon’ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
Subject: Request to reschedule the meeting for discussion on Criminal Law Bills in 
September. 
 
Respected Chairperson, 
 
Further to my conversation with you on the telephone this morning, I write to you concerning  notice 
(LAFEAS-HAl2011/1/2023-Comm Sec (HA) -RSS) dated 18 August 2023. The Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023; the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; and the Bharatiya Sakshya  Bill, 2023, 
as introduced in Lok Sabha have been referred to the Department -related Parliamentary Standing 
Committee on Home Affairs for examination and report.  I  have just received the news  that the 
meeting of the committee with respe ct to this is scheduled on the 24, 25 and 26 of August 2023. 
That’s a few days away. 
 
The notice given to us on the 16 th  August stated that a meeting will be held on 24 th  August 11 AM   
to adopt the draft report on Prison - Condition, Infrastructure and R eforms. In accordance with that 
and the fact that monsoon session recently ended, the Members have made multiple commitments   
in their constituency and other parts of their State including programs and  meetings. 
 
Sir, this is too short a notice (a few days only) for discussion of a Bill with implications of this 
magnitude. 
 
Please revise the dates and schedule it in the month of September, considering that many members  
of the committee are present for these  meetings. 
 
Awaiting a response on the same at the earliest. 
Sincerely, 
Derek O’Brien 
 
P.S. May I suggest you reschedule after the tour. Thank you  again 


59 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE- D 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MP/2023/28 
 
11 September, 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon’ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs  
 
Subject: Concerns regarding discussion on Criminal Law Bills and suggestions for 
way forward. 
 
Respected Chairperson, 
The first four meetings on this subject have been held. I am looking forward to attending 
more meetings (5 th and 6 th  meetings) on 12 and 13 Se ptember. These are my observations  
and suggestions. 
First, considering the significance of these three Bills, it is imperative that multiple  
bipartisan discussions are held at length. It is my earnest request that members of this 
committee are not rushed  and are given multiple opportunities to express  themselves.  
Choice of domain experts, choice of witnesses from across disciplines and the methodology 
used must always take into consideration the "sense of the house". In the spirit  of  
federalism, it is  imperative that the committee must also travel to multiple states to meet 
stakeholders. Sir, please create an atmosphere for scrutiny, debate and detailed discussion. 
This will embellish the quality of our output as a committee. 
Second, the minutes of the  meetings must be recorded with due diligence and provide a true 
reflection of the proceedings. Key points raised by members must reflect in the minutes. 
(Verbatim records are not a substitute for minutes.) 
 
 
Page 1 of 2 

60 
 
 
 
 
For example, in the meeting th at was held on 24 August 2023, Dayanidhi Maran (DMK)   
had submitted a letter stating objections on how the titles of the said bills are in Hindi. The 
submission of this letter making multiple points, the summary of its contents, and his 
intervention does not reflect at all in the minutes of the meeting. Recording of such views is 
an integral part of the democratic process. Please ensure this is done for future  meetings. 
Third, considering that the Special Session of the Parliament has been called from 18 
September to 22 September 2023, the Members have made multiple commitments in their 
constituencies and other parts of their State including programs and meetings immediately 
(one week) after the session. This is a request to schedule the next committee mee ting at  
least one week after the session concludes. 
I am sure that you will accept these concrete suggestions in the spirit that they have been 
made. 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Derek O’Brien 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 2 


Page 1 of 3 
61 
 
ANNEXURE - E 
 
13 September, 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon'ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on Home Affairs 
 
Subject: Suggested  consultation  methodology for the Criminal  Law  Bills. 
 
Respected  Chairperson, 
 
This is with regard to the consultation methodology suggested at the meeting held on 13.09.2023 to 
discuss the Criminal Law Bills. 
 
As mentioned during the meeting, general statutes of criminal law are for ages to come. These laws 
will affect the lives of the poor, and therefore must be crafted with utmost care. To that end, we are 
reproducing below for your careful consideration the organizations the Committee must consult with 
along with a projected timeline. 
 
 
 
 
Consultations to he done 
 
1. Senior practitioners of criminal law who have domain knowledge accumulated over decades 
of litigation practice and expertise in the area. 
 
2. Bar Council of all states in India. 
(At least 23 state ba,J:councils) 
(30 days) 
 
3.  The judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts. 
 
(Supreme Court- Chief Justice and 33 other Judges appointed by the President oflndia. High Court­ 
Working Strength of at least 785 judges across 25 high    courts) 
(6 months) 

Page 2 of 3 
62 
 
 
4. The Bar Council of India Supreme Court Bar associations 
(At least 20 office bearers) 
(20days) 
 
5. Members of parliament, legislative assemblies, and local councils play a role in passing laws. 
Their input can help ensure that proposed reforms align with legislative goals. 
(Lok Sabha - 539 members + 
Rajya Sabha- 238 members + 
State legislative assemblies) 
(6 months) 
 
6. International Organizations: Collaboration with international bodies like the United Nations and 
others can help align reforms with international  standards  and  best practices. (100  days) 
 
7. Media: Journalists and media organizations can play a role in raising public awareness about the 
need for criminal justice reform and can provide insights  into public sentiment.    (100 days) 
 
8. Ethnic and Religious Leaders: Considering the diverse cultural and religious landscape of India, 
involving leaders from various communities can help ensure that reforms are sensitive to different 
perspectives. (50 days) 
 
9. Experts on Juvenile Justice: Specialists in juvenile justice can provide insights into how reforms 
could  better address the needs and rights of young offenders.  (5  days) 
 
10. Experts on Cybercrime and Technology: Given the rise of cybercrime, involving experts in 
technology and cyber law is crucial when considering reforms in this domain. (5 days) 

Page 3 of 3 
63 
 
 
11. Prison Officials and Reform Advocates : Individuals working within the pr ison system and 
advocates for prison reform can contribute perspectives on conditions , rehabilitation, and the 
treatment of inmates. (1319 prisons in the country and their officials) (4 months) 
 
12. Inclusive Consultation from the general public including women, Dalits, religious minorities, 
adivasis, LGBTQ persons, or persons with disabilities etc. (1 month) 
 
13. Governors, chief ministers of states, lieutenant governors and administrators of Union territories. 
(60-70 officials approx.) (1 month) 
 
14. Legal Scholars and academic institutes (5 days) 
 
15. Law Enforcement Agencies: Representatives from police departments can offer insights into 
issues related to investigation, evidence collection, and law enforcement procedures. (10 days) 
 
16. Human Right s Organizations: NGOs and advocacy groups focused on human rights can provide 
critical perspectives on how proposed reforms might impact human rights, due process, and  
individual  freedoms.  (5 days) 
 
A total of 1.5 years 
 
 
 
We are sure that you will accept these concrete suggestions in the spirit that they have been made. 
Sincerely, 
 
 
P. Chidambaram Derek O'Brien 


Page 1 of 3 
64 
 
ANNEXURE - F 
 
14 September, 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon'ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on Home Affairs 
 
Subject: Suggested  witnesses for consultation  on the Criminal  Law Bills. 
 
Respected Chairperson, 
 
Further to our letter dated September 13, 2023, and the interventions made during the 
Committee meeting held on the same day, we are reproducing below for your careful 
consideration the witnesses the Committee must call as experts for consultation. 
 
As mentioned during the meeting, general statutes of criminal law are for ages to come. These 
laws will affect the lives of the poor, and therefore must be crafted with utmost care. 
 
1. Former CJI U.U.Lalit 
 
He was designated Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court in April 2004. He aided the Court 
as an amicus curiae in many important matters pertaining to forests, vehicular pollution and 
pollution of the Yamuna river. In 2011, he was appointed as the Special Public Prosecutor 
in the 2G Spectrum scam case. He also served as the 49th Chief Justice of India. 
2. Justice Madan Lokur 
 
He was appointed as Additional Solicitor General of India in 1998 . Functioned as Chief 
Justice of Gauhati High Court from 2010 to 2011, and Chief Justice of High Court of Andhra 
Pradesh from 2011 to 2012. Has vast experience in Civil, Criminal, Constitutional, Revenue 
and Service laws. 

Page 2 of 3 
65 
 
3. Fali Nariman 
 
Fali Sam Nariman is an Indian jurist. He is a senior advocate to the Supreme Court of India 
since 1971 and was the President of the Bar Association of India from 1991 to 2010. 
4. Adv. Maneka Guruswamy 
 
Maneka Guruswamy is a senior advocate at the Supreme Court of India. She is known for 
having played a significant rol e in many landmark cases before the Supreme  Court,  
including the Section 377 case, the bureaucratic reforms case, the Agustawestland bribery 
case, the Salwa Judum  case, and the Right to Education   case. 
5. Sr. Adv. Sidharth Luthra: 
 
Advocate Sidarth Luthra is a Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court. He was appointed the 
Additional Solicitor General of the Supreme from 2012-2014, during which he represented 
Union and State Governments in matters such as fundamental rights , environment laws, 
electoral reform, criminal law, juvenile rights, education and policy issues. Mr Luthra also 
appeared as the Special Public Prosecutor for the State of NCT of Delhi in the Nirbhaya 
gang-rape case. 
6. Sr. Adv. Hariharan 
 
Hariharan N enrolled at the Delhi Bar in 1987 and over t he last 34 years, has cemented a 
presence on the Criminal side of legal practice. For contributions to the practice and 
development of Criminal Law, he was designated as a Senior Advocate by the Delhi High 
Court in 2013. 
7. Sr. Adv. Rebecca John 
 
Rebecca Mammen John has been practicing exclusively on the criminal side in the Supreme 
Court of India , High Court of Delhi and in the Trial Courts of Delhi for more than three 
decades. She has conducted a wide range of criminal trials and argued appeals dealing with 
offenses under the Indian Penal Code, Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, Prevention of 
Corruption  Act and other  special statutes. 

Page 3 of 3 
66 
 
8. Dr. Sylendra Babu 
9. Sr. Adv. Amit Desai 
10.Sr. Adv. Rajeev Dhavan 
11. Sr. Adv. Siddharth Dave 
12. Adit Pujari 
13. Sr. Adv. Aditya Sondhi 
14.N. Dinakar 
15.Justice R.Balasubramaniam 
16.Sr. Adv. Vrinda Grover 
17.Sr. Adv. Meenakshi Arora 
We are sure that you will accept these concrete suggestions in the spirit that they have been 
made. 
Sincerely, 
 
P. Chidambaram Derek O'Brien 


 
67 
 
 
 
D  EREK  O '  B   RI  E N 
Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha 
Leade,rAll India Trinamool Congress Parliamentary  Party, Rajya Sabha 
ANNEXURE - G 
 
 
MP/2023/33 
22 September 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon'ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
Respected Chairperson, 
With reference to your letter D.O. No.-lMP/DLI/BL/RS/2023/397 dated 15th September 
2023 please note the following: 
 
1. The stakeholders that you wrote to, comprise a very small part of the list of 
stakeholders we suggested. As mentioned  during the meeting, these statutes of 
criminal law are for ages to come. These laws will affect the lives of the poor, and 
therefore must be crafted with utmost care. Hence, I reiterate what I said it the last 
letter. 
2. The minutes of the meeting, although a summary, should provide a true reflection 
of the proceedings. The point that Mr Dayanidhi Maran made was a very important 
one. A summary must at least reflect the most important points made during the 
meeting in order to safeguard the health of the democratic process. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Derek O'Brien 


 
68 
 
 
 
 
D EREK  O '  B  RI  E N 
Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha 
Leade.rAll India Trinamool Congress Parliamentary  Party, Rajya Sabha 
ANNEXURE - H 
 
 
MP/2023/34 
27 September 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon'ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary  Standing  Committee  on Home Affairs 
 
Subject: Concerns regarding rushing the scrutiny of Criminal Law Bills. 
Respected Chairperson, 
 
I am writing to you regarding your letter IMP/DLI/BL/RS/2023/407 dated 23rd 
September 2023 and Commi ttee Notice LAFEAS-HA12011/2/2023- Comm Sec (HA)­ 
RSS dated 25th September 2023. I am once again compelled to express my concerns 
regarding the discussion on Criminal Laws under consideration in this Committee. The 
methodology of the deliberations leaves a  lot to be desired. Many issues are still 
unaddressed. 
One cannot ignore the ***9 and the rushed nature of this process of consideration of 
Bills. 
The Committee which recommended these reforms, Prof. Ranbir Singh Committee, was 
constituted of only men from similar social identities as well as professional backgrounds 
and experiences. This makes it even more important to consult a diverse group of 
stakeholders. It is imperative that we expand the pool of witnesses who come and present 
their views to the Committee. 
 
 
                                                      
9*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha  


 
Leaving out important stakeholders from the conversation undermines the legitimacy of 
the process. It is our responsibility to ensure that any new law is well -reasoned, well­ 
informed, and thoroughly debated to prevent any unintended negative consequences. 
The Committee should reconsider the approach to this discussion and take the necessary 
steps to ensure that the Bill undergoes proper consultation and scrutiny. It is in the best 
interest of our democracy. 
I am enclosing once again for your peru sal a list of people who should be called as 
witnesses. They have impeccable credentials. The Committee will benefit from their wise 
counsel and insights. I once again urge you to invite those mentioned in the list (enclosed 
once again) to share their expert opinions in the future. 
Awaiting a response on the same at the earliest. 
 
 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Derek O'Brien 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Enclosed: As above 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69 


 
 
Consultations to be done 
 
1. Senior  practitioners  of criminal  law who have domain  knowledge accumulated over 
decades of litigation practice and expertise in the area. 
 
2. Bar Council of all states in India. 
(At least 23 state bar councils) 
 
3. The judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts. 
(Supreme Court- Chief Justice and 33 other Judges appointed by the President of India. High 
Court- Working Strength  of at least 785 judges across 25 high   courts) 
 
4. The Bar Council of India Supreme Court Bar associations 
(At least 20 office bearers) 
 
5. Members of parliament, legislative assemblies, and local councils play a role in passing 
laws. Their input can help ensure that proposed  reforms align with legislative   goals. 
(Lok Sabha - 539 members+ Rajya Sabha- 238 members+  State legislative assemblies) 
 
6. International Organizations: Collaboration with international bodies like the  United 
Nations and others can help align reforms with international  standards and best    practices. 
 
7. Media: Journalists and media organizations can play a role in raising public awareness  
about the need for criminal justice reform and can provide insights into public sentiment. 
 
8. Ethnic and Religious Leaders: Considering the diverse cultural and religious landscape of 
India, involving  leaders from various communities  can help ensure that reforms are sensitive  
to different  perspectives. 
 
 
Page 1 of 4
 70 

Page 2 of 4 
71  
9. Experts on Juvenile Justice: Specialists in juvenile justice can provide insights into how 
reforms could better address the needs and rights of young offenders. 
 
10. Experts on Cybercrime and Technology: Given the rise of cybercrime, involving experts 
in technology and cyber law is crucial when considering reforms in this domain. 
 
11. Prison Officials and Reform Advocates: Individuals working within the prison system and 
advocates for prison reform can contribute perspectives on conditions, rehabilitation, and the 
treatment of inmates. (1319 prisons in the country and their officials) 
 
12. Inclusive Consultation from the general public including women, Dalits, religious 
minorities, adivasis, LGBTQ persons, or persons with disabilities etc. 
 
13. Governors, chief ministers of states, lieutenant governors and administrators of Union 
territories. (60-70 officials approx.) 
 
14. Legal Scholars and academic institutes. 
 
15. Law Enforcement Agencies: Representatives from police departments can offer insights  
into issues related  to investigation, evidence  collection, and law enforcement  procedures. 
 
16. Human Rights Organizations: NGOs and advocacy groups focused on human rights can 
provide critical perspectives on h ow proposed reforms might impact human rights,  due  
process,  and  individual freedoms. 

Page 3 of 4 
72  
Additional  recommendations: 
l.  Former CJI U.U.Lalit 
He was designated Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court in April 2004. He 
aided the Court as an amicus curiae in many important matters pertaining to 
forests, vehicular pollution and pollution of the Yamuna river. In 2011, he was 
appointed as the Special Public Prosecutor in the 2G Spectrum scam case. He 
also served as the 49th Chief Justice of India. 
2. Justice Madan Lokur 
He was appointed as Additional Solicitor General of India in 1998 . Functioned 
as Chief Justice of Gauhati High Court from 2010 to 2011, and Chief Justice of 
High Court of Andhra Pradesh from 2011 to 2012. Has vast experience in Civil, 
Criminal, Constitutional, Revenue and Service laws. 
3. Fali Nariman 
Fali Sam Nariman is an Indian jurist. He is a senior advocate to the Supreme 
Court of India since 1971 and was the President of the Bar Association of India 
from  1991  to 2010. 
4. Adv. Menaka  Guruswamy 
Menaka Guruswamy is a senior advocate at the Supreme Court of India. She is 
known for having played a significant role in many landmark cases before the 
Supreme Court, including the Section 377 case, the bureaucratic reforms case, 
the Agustawestland bribery ca se, the Salwa Judum case, and the Right to 
Education case. 
5. Sr. Adv. Sidharth Luthra: 
Advocate Sidarth Luthra is a Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court. He was 
appointed the Additional Solicitor General of the Supreme from 2012 -2014, 
during which he represented Union and State Governments in matters such as 
fundamental rights, environment laws, electoral reform, criminal law, juvenile 
rights, education and policy issues. Mr Luthra also appeared as the Special 
Public Prosecutor for the State ofNCT of Delhi in the Nirbhaya gang-rape case. 

 
6. Sr. Adv. Hariharan 
Hariharan N enrolled at the Delhi Bar in 1987 and over the last 34 years, has 
cemented a presence on the Criminal side of legal practice . For contributions to 
the practice and development of Criminal Law , he was designated as a Senior 
Advocate  by the Delhi High Court in  2013. 
7. Sr. Adv. Rebecca John 
Rebecca Mammen John has been practicing exclusively on the criminal side in 
the Supreme Court of India, High Court of Delhi and in the Trial Courts of Delhi 
for more than three decades. She has conducted a wide range of criminal trials 
and argued appeals dealing with offenses under the Indian Penal Code, Unlawful 
Activities (Prevention) Act, Prevention of Corruption Act and other special 
statutes. 
8. Dr. Sylendra Babu 
9. Sr. Adv. Amit Desai 
10. Sr. Adv. Rajeev Dhavan 
11. Sr. Adv. Siddharth Dave 
12. Adit Pujari 
13. Sr. Adv. Aditya Sondhi 
14. N. Dinakar 
15. Justice R.Balasubramaniam 
16. Sr. Adv. Vrinda Grover 
17. Sr. Adv. Meenakshi Arora 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4 of 4
 73 

 
 
 
DEREK O'BRIEN 
Member of Parliament. Rajya Sabha 
Leade,r All India Trinamool Congress Parliamentary  Party, Rajya Sabha 
 
ANNEXURE - I 
 
 
MP/2023/35 
3 October 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon'ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
Respected Chairperson, 
 
I am writ ing to you regarding the Notice  [LAFEAS-HA12011/2/2023-  Comm  Sec  
(HA)- RSS] from the Committee dated 25th September 2023 calling for a clause -by­ 
clause discussion on the Criminal Law Bills. 
First, ***10 and the rushed nature of this process of consider ation of Bills. The 
Committee which recommended these reforms, Prof. Ranbir Singh Committee, was 
constituted of only men from similar social identities as well as professional backgrounds 
and experiences. Leaving out important stakeholders from the convers ation undermines 
the legitimacy of the process. It is our responsibility to ensure that any new law is well -
reasoned, well­ informed,  and thoroughly debated to prevent any unintended negative  
consequences. 
Second, it is imperative that every member of the committee contributes to the discussion 
for a comprehensive deliberation. Only some members have voiced their opinions. The 
members who have spoken haven't been able to express their views. Proceeding to 
clause-by-clause amendments would be premature and c ounterproductive. A fruitful 
discussion requires the active participation of all committee members so that diverse 
perspectives are considered before making informed decisions. The essence of a 
committee lies in collaborative efforts, and only through the thoughtful contributions of 
each member can we achieve the purpose and effectiveness of our committee 
deliberations. 
 
 
Page 1 of 2 
 
 74 
                                                      
10*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 


 
 
Considering the significance of these three Bills, it is imperative that multiple bipartisan 
discussions are held at length. I earnestly request that members of this committee are not 
rushed and are given multiple opportunities to express themselves. 
Due to the above-mentioned reasons, a clause-by-clause discussion is out of question till 
we thoooughly consult the stakeh olders and members are given ample opportunity to 
express their views on the same. I request that the consultation process is not rushed and 
more time be granted for discussions and stakeholder consultations. Please consider 
pushing the date of the clause-by-clause amendment discussion. 
Awaiting a response on the same at the earliest. 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
Derek O'Brien 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 2 
 
 
75 

76  
 
ANNEXURE - J 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MP/2023/42 
23 October 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brijlal, 
Hon’ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs  
 
Respected Chairperson, 
 
With reference to Home Affairs Committee Notice LAFEAS -HA12011/2/2023- Comm Sec 
(HA)- RSS dated 20 October 2023 regarding the consideration and adoption of draft Reports 
on Criminal Law Bills on 27 Octo ber 2023. In my earlier letters to you, I have flagged the 
undue haste and ***11 of these Bills without due diligence and meaningful scrutiny by this 
Committee. In the last few months this has become a trend. 
*** adoption of such an important report will h ave negative implications and will turn out 
counterproductive. Hastily rushing through the process is not doing justice   to this important 
proposed legislation. 
Allow me to elucidate. 
1. The Draft reports were only sent about 8.30 pm on 21 October 202 3. Which leaves only 5 
days to read and analyse the three reports. This is too short a notice for discussion of a  Bill 
with implications of this magnitude. There are so many drafting errors pointed out by my 
colleagues Shri N. R. Elango and Shri P. Chidambaram. 
 
2. *** and rush in the nature of this process of consideration of Bills. The laws that are being 
examined are going to last over 100 years and such a hasty adoption of the reports without 
consultation of stakeholders would be premature and counterprodu ctive. I am enclosing 
once again for your perusal a list of people who should be called as witnesses. They have 
impeccable credentials. The Committee will benefit from their wise counsel and insi ghts. I 
once again urge you to invite those mentioned in the  list (enclosed once again) to share 
their expert opinions in   the future. 
 
Page 1 of 2 
                                                      
11*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha  

77  
 
3. Members of this Committee have made multiple commitments in their constituencies 
during the festive season. In Bengal, much is lined up on 27 and 28 October. The Uni ted 
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) has included 
Kolkata’s famous Durga Puja in its Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity list (ICH). 
The carnival is on the 27 October and Lakshmi Pujo is on the 28 October, for which t he 
preparations start at least a day in advance. ***12 
Respected Chairperson, I humbly urge you not to hurriedly rush through this legislation. We 
will be doing a grave disservice to a large section of the population, especially those who are 
marginalised o r economically challenged. This consultative process needs us to rise above 
narrow partisan interest or short term electoral stunts. Kindly assess all this in the interest of 
140 crore Indians who look up to Parliament to legislate with  wisdom. 
Awaiting a response on the same at the earliest. 
 
Sincerely, 
 
Derek O’Brien 
Leader, AITC Parliamentary Party, Rajya Sabha  
 
 
Enclosed: As Above 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 2 of 2 
                                                      
12 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 


78  
Consultations to be done 
 
1. Senior practitioners of criminal law who have domain knowledge accumulated over 
decades of litigation practice and expertise in the area. 
2. Bar Council of all states in India.  (At least 23 state bar   councils) 
3. The judges of the Supreme Court and High Courts. 
 
(Supreme Court- Chief Justice and 33 other Judges appointed by the President of India. 
High Court- Working Strength of at least 785 judges across 25 high  courts) 
 
4. The Bar Council of India Supreme Court Bar associations (At least 20 office 
bearers) 
5. Members of parliament, legislative assemblies, and local councils play a role in 
passing laws. Their input can help ensure  that proposed reforms align with legislative 
goals. 
 
(Lok Sabha - 539 members + Rajya Sabha- 238 members + State legislative assemblies) 
 
6. International Organizations: Collaboration with international bodies like the  
United Nations and others can help ali gn reforms with international standards and best 
practices. 
7. Media: Journalists and media organizations can play a role in raising public 
awareness about the need for criminal justice reform and can provide insights into public 
sentiment. 
8. Ethnic and Religio us Leaders: Considering the diverse cultural and religious 
landscape of India, involving leaders from various communities can help ensure that 
reforms are sensitive to different perspectives. 
9. Experts on Juvenile Justice: Specialists in juvenile justice can  provide insights into 
how reforms could better address the needs and rights of young  offenders. 
10. Experts on Cybercrime and Technology: Given the rise of cybercrime, involving 
experts in technology and cyber law is crucial when considering reforms in this domain. 
11. Prison Officials and Reform Advocates: Individuals working within the prison 
system and advocates for prison reform can contribute perspectives on conditions, 
rehabilitation, and the treatment of inmates. (1319 prisons in the country and their 
officials) 
12. Inclusive Consultation from the general public including women, Dalits, religious 
minorities, adivasis, LGBTQ persons, or persons with disabilities etc. 
13. Governors, chief ministers of states, lieutenant governors and administrators of 
Union territories. (60-70 officials approx.) 
14. Legal Scholars and academic institutes. 

79  
15. Law Enforcement Agencies: Representatives from police departments can offer 
insights into issues related to investigation, evidence collection, and law enforcement 
procedures. 
16. Human Rig hts Organizations: NGOs and advocacy groups focused on human 
rights can provide critical perspectives on how proposed reforms might impact human 
rights, due process, and individual freedoms. 
 
Additional  recommendations: 
 
1. Former CJI U.U.Lalit 
 
He was desig nated Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court in April 2004. He aided the 
Court as an amicus curiae in many important matters pertaining to forests, vehicular 
pollution and pollution of the Yamuna river. In 2011, he was appointed as the Special 
Public Prosecutor in the 2G Spectrum scam case. He also served as the 49th Chief Justice 
of India. 
 
2. Justice Madan Lokur 
 
He was appointed as Additional Solicitor General of India in 1998. Functioned as Chief 
Justice of Gauhati High Court from 2010 to 2011, and Chief Jus tice of High Court of 
Andhra Pradesh from 2011 to 2012. Has vast experience in Civil, Criminal, 
Constitutional, Revenue and Service laws. 
 
3. Fali Nariman 
 
Fali Sam Nariman is an Indian jurist. He is a senior advocate to the Supreme Court of 
India since 1971 and was the President of the Bar Association of India from 1991 to 2010. 
 
4. Adv. Menaka Guruswamy 
 
Menaka Guruswamy is a senior advocate at the Supreme Court of India. She is known 
for having played a significant role in many landmark cases before the Suprem e Court, 
including the Section 377 case, the bureaucratic reforms case, the AgustaWestland bribery 
case, the Salwa Judum case, and the Right to Education case. 
 
5. Sr. Adv. Sidharth Luthra: 
 
Advocate Sidarth Luthra is a Senior Advocate at the Supreme Court. H e was appointed 
the Additional Solicitor General of the Supreme from 2012 -2014, during which he 
represented Union and State Governments in matters such as fundamental rights, 
environment laws, electoral reform, criminal law, juvenile rights, education and policy 
issues. Mr Luthra also appeared as the Special Public Prosecutor for the State of NCT of 
Delhi in the Nirbhaya gang-rape case. 

80  
6. Sr. Adv. Hariharan 
 
Hariharan N enrolled at the Delhi Bar in 1987 and over the last 34 years, has cemented a 
presence on the Criminal side of legal practice. For contributions to the practice and 
development of Criminal Law, he was designated as a Senior Advocate by the Delhi High 
Court in 2013. 
7. Sr. Adv. Rebecca John 
 
Rebecca Mammen John has been practicing exclusively on th e criminal side in the 
Supreme Court of India, High Court of Delhi and in the Trial Courts of Delhi for more 
than three decades. She has conducted a wide range of criminal trials and argued appeals 
dealing with offenses under the Indian Penal Code, Unlawful Activities (Prevention)  Act, 
Prevention of Corruption Act and other special 
statutes. 
 
8. Dr. Sylendra Babu 
9. Sr. Adv. Amit Desai 
10. Sr. Adv. Rajeev Dhavan 
11. Sr. Adv. Siddharth Dave 
12. Adit Pujari 
13. Sr. Adv. Aditya Sondhi 
14. N. Dinakar 
15. Justice R.Balasubramaniam 
16. Sr. Adv. Vrinda Grover 
17. Sr. Adv. Meenakshi Arora 

 
 
 
D  EREK   O  ' B RIEN 
Member of Parliament, Rajya Sabha 
Leade,rAll India Trinamool Congress Parliamentary Party, Rajya Sabha 
 
ANNEXURE- K 
 
MP/2023/44 
30 October, 2023 
 
To, 
Shri Brij Lal, 
Hon'ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
Respected Chairperson, 
 
I recently received a memorandum from the Indian Police Foundation, accompanied by their 
comprehensive clause-by-clause analysis of the recently proposed three Criminal Law bills. It is 
imperative that we pay heed to their views and engage them in the ongoing discussions, as inputs 
from domain experts are essential for bills of such profound significance. 
The Indian Police Foundation (IPF), renowned for its expertise in police reform and  policing 
standards, should be called upon to participate in the stakeholder consultation for these bills. IPF 
conducts comprehensive research, offers capacity building, and actively engages in policy 
advocacy, all centered around advancing policing standards and contributing to the enhancement 
of law enforcement practices. The foundation is overseen by a coalition of progressive police 
professionals and engaged citizen stakeholders, all of whom recognise the potential for positive 
transformation within the  Indian Police. Their board comprises eminent members, including 
active and retired police officers and civil servants. 
I strongly recommend that IPF be called for a consultation in early November. Their participation 
will provide invaluable  insights and ensure a thorough examination  of these   bills. 
 
Sincerely, 
Derek O'Brien 
 
 
P.S. We have hardly called any stakeholders to testify. Please refer to my earlier 
letters. For the sake of the millions of marginalised who these bills will affect, please  
do not rush this  bill. 
 
 
184 South Avenue , New Delhi-110011  • Phone : +91 11 23012585   • Fax  +9111 23795549 
E-mail : derek.ob@sansad.nic.in 81 


 
 

PPage 1 oof 3 
 
November 8, 2023 
To, 
Shri Brij Lal, 
Hon’ble Chairperson, 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
Subject: Note of Dissent on Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and Bharatiya Nagrik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 
 
 
Respected  Chairperson, 
 
I write to express my strong dissent regarding the proposed bills, namely Bharatiya 
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023, and Bharatiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023, currently under 
deliberation by the Departmentally Related Standing Committee on Home Affairs. My 
concerns are as follows: 
I. NO NEED FOR NEW BILLS WHICH ARE 93% COPY PASTE LEGISLATION 
The introduction of new legislation ***1 raises concerns about the efficient use of 
legislative resources. The bills mostly mirror existing criminal laws, making it 
more sensible to amend them instead. 
II. *** COMMITTEE  PROCEDURE AND AVOIDING QUALITY STAKEHOLDER 
CONSULTATION 
Moreover, the drafting process lacks inclusive stakeholder consultations, which are 
crucial for legislation of this magnitude. The committee responsible for reviewing 
these laws lacks diversity, excluding representation from marginalized groups. 
III. LIMITING THE MEANINGFUL PARTICIPATION OF THE OPPOSITION. 
 
The *** scheduling of discussions during the festive season, ***, restricts 
meaningful opposition participation. Adequate scrutiny and debate are 
indispensable for such consequential legislation. *** with far-reaching 
implications is insufficient and disconcerting. Rushed passage may result in 
unintended consequences and public dissatisfaction. 
 
IV. RESULT OF RUSHING AND ***- NUMEROUS DRAFTING ERRORS 
                                           
1 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 

PPage 2 oof 3 
 
Basic drafting errors have been identified, necessitating comprehensive revisions. 
The hurried nature of the legislation leaves minimal room for addressing these 
concerns, imperilling the clarity and effectiveness 
These bills *** 2  for new legislation, inclusive stakeholder consultations, 
meaningful opposition participation, and transparency in the legislative 
process. Rushing their adoption may lead to unintended consequences and 
public dissatisfaction. *** and ensure that our legislative process is thorough, 
transparent, and representative of all stakeholders. 
V. NAMES OF THESE BILLS SHOULD BE IN ENGLISH AS WELL AS HINDI. 
 
The bills in question have names in Hindi. This is seen as not just Hindi imposition 
but also unconstitutional, as Article 348 of the Constitution specifically mandates the 
use of the English language in Acts and Bills. However, a report maintains that the 
use of Hindi names for bills is constitutional and even suggests expanding the use of 
Hindi in these contexts, which seemingly contradicts the constitutional provision. 
VI. CRITIQUE OF SEDITION LAW-BNS 
 
Regarding the Sedition Law, the report commends the government for rephrasing it 
while supposedly safeguarding state security. However, the law has been retained 
with a broader definition that can encompass a wide range of actions under the 
pretext of endangering India's unity and integrity. This expansion of the law provides 
authorities with significant discretion, contrary to the recommendation of the 22nd 
Law Commission, which called for a well-defined sedition law. The Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita, 2023, specifically Clause 150, deals with acts that endanger the sovereignty, 
unity, and integrity of India, indicating the broad scope of the revised sedition law. 
***. Simply delaying it by a day or a week won ’t solve our problem . ***. 
Pushing the committee's work forward hastily would be a severe detriment to the 
legislative process. What we truly need is an extension of no less than three months, 
making the new deadline March 2024 an absolute necessity. 
                                           
*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 

PPage 3 oof 3 
 
VII. DEATH PENALTY PROVISIONS 
 
The statistics provided by Project 39A reveal troubling disparities in the application 
of the death penalty in India, with a significant majority of death row inmates coming 
from economically disadvantaged backgrounds, lacking proper education, and 
belonging to marginalized communities. This data underscores the urgent need for 
re-evaluating the death penalty in the country. Such re-evaluation is a means to 
rectify these social injustices, prevent potential wrongful convictions, and promote 
principles of justice and human rights. A more humane approach to addressing 
crime, focusing on rehabilitation and reintegration, is necessary, as many other 
countries have already done. The disparities between trial courts and the Supreme 
Court, as well as the increasing scepticism surrounding death row trials, highlight the 
need for institutional reform in the criminal justice system. In sum, broad-based 
social discussions are warranted on the subject. 
 
VIII. 90-DAY POLICE CUSTODY 
The Bill permits the magistrate to authorise detention in police custody for a period 
beyond the current 15-day limit, extending up to 90 days. 
90-day police custody - for crimes that carry a sentence of ten years or more 
60-day police custody - for “any other offence” with imprisonment terms less than 
the 90-day detention offences 
Increasing the period of police custody without proper safeguards could lead to 
human rights violations, including the risk of torture, coerced confessions, and abuse 
of detainees. This is particularly concerning given the history of custodial violence 
and abuse in India. 
I firmly believe that these issues deserve our utmost attention and consideration. In 
hope that the principles of justice and constitution will prevail in shaping the future 
of our legislative endeavours, I express my dissent. 
Sincerely, 
 
 
 
 
 
D
(M
r
e
K
m
a
b
k
e
o
r
l
o
i 
f
G
P
h
a
o
rl
s
ia
h
m
D
en
a
t
s
, 
t
L
i
o
d
k
a
S
r
abha) 


DAYANIDHI MARAN 
Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha 
Chennai Central Constituency  
3, First Avenue, 
Boat Club, 
R.A. Puram, Chennai - 600 028. 
Ph : (044) 2437  1515 
E_mail : dmaranoffice@gmail.com  
 
 
 
 
 
07.11.2023 
 
 
 
Dear Chairman, Vanakkam! 
 
Subject  Dissent  Note on Draft 246th Report on The  Bharatiya Nyaya 
Sanhita Bill 2023, 247th report on The Bharatiya Nagarika 
Suraksha Sanhita Bill, 2023, 248th report on The Bharatiya 
Sakshaya  Bill, 2023 
 
Through my letters dt. 26.10.2023 & 23.08.2023 to the Chairman & members 
of the Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs, I had 
apprised the Committee as to how the titles of The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bill, 
2023; The Bharatiya Nagarika Suraksha Sanhita Bill, 2023 and The Bharatiya 
Sakshya Bill, 2023 are violative of Article 348 of the Constitution and that the clauses 
of these three Bills need extensive consultation with all the stakeholders such as the 
State Governments, Judges, Police Authorities, Bar Council of India, State Bar 
Councils, Advocate Association, Bar Associations, Senior Advocates, Advocates, 
Women Lawyers' Association, Eminent Jurists, Academicians etc. Furthermore, I  had 
submitted my objections highlighting that we have a golden opportunity in our  hands 
to conduct an effective exercise in bringing changes to our criminal justice delivery 
system as The Indian Penal Code, 1860, The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, The 
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 were largely untouched before. While examining the above 
three Bills, it must be considered whether we can amend the existing Bills either by 
deleting or incorporating new provisions thereby bringing actual reforms to make the 
criminal justice delivery system more efficient and user friendly instead of thrusting 
old wine in a new bottle. 
 
However, I am deeply saddened by  the fact that ***1. There is no  specific 
reason stated so as to justify the non-consideration of the 
recommendationsIsuggestions made by the stakeholders. 
                                                      
1 *** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 

DAYANIDHI MARAN 
Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha 
Chennai Central Constituency  
3, First Avenue, 
Boat Club, 
R.A. Puram, Chennai - 600 028. 
Ph : (044) 2437  1515 
E_mail : dmaranoffice@gmail.com  
 
 
 
 
 
These Bills will further change the federal relationship and structure between 
the Union and the State. As you are aware, India is a Union of States - states which 
speak different languages i.e., languages other than Hindi. On the other hand, except 
for a few words, the body of these Bills is in English, but the title of the Bill is in 
Hindi which is violative of Article 348. The Article 348 of the Constitution puts a 
complete embargo on a Bill having any other language in its text other than English. 
Therefore, the titles of the Bills ought to be changed to their English translation. The 
usage of a Sanskrit / Hindi title and words in some clauses is imposition of Sanskrit (a 
language used by less than 10,000 people as per the 2011 census) and Hindi on non-
Hindi speaking states. I make it clear that we are not opposed to Hindi, but we are 
opposed to imposition of Hindi on non -Hindi speaking states. If these bills tum into 
Act's, the people in non -Hindi speaking states will find difficulty in pronouncing and 
handling these Acts. At the grass root level they will not be able to understand  the 
texture, character, tenor, and nature of the act if the title remains in Hindi and 
implementation will be very difficult including filing of FIR's. 
 
Therefore, I humbly request you to change the titles from Sanskrit / Hindi to 
English translations for  The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Bill, 2023; The Bharatiya 
Nagarika Suraksha Sanhita Bill, 2023 and The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023 and to 
consider revising the contents of the bills to bring about the much needed reforms in 
our laws, instead of the mere superficial attempt of this bill. 
 
Thanking you, 
Member,  Parliamentary  Standing  Committee on Home Affairs 
 
 
To 
Shri. Brij Lal, 
The Hon'ble Chairman, 
The Department Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Home Affairs 
C-1/9, Pandara Park, 
New Delhi - 110 003 


 
 
DISSENT NOTE SUBMITTED BY P CHIDAMBARAM 
 
At the outset, I wish to register three fundamental objections to the three Bills:  
 
(i) Under Article 348 of the Constitution , all Acts shall be in the English language which is also 
the language of the Supreme Court and the High Courts. Laws are, and will be, translated into 
other Indian languages. It is therefore correct that the three Bills, first drafted in English, have 
been translated into Hindi. In due course, the Bills will be translated into other Indian languages 
and such translated Bills  will be used in the proceeding before the Courts subordinate to the 
High Courts. The name of the Bill must, therefore, be in English and translated into Hindi and  
also translated into other Indian languages.  To have a Hindi only name to the Bill 
irrespective· of the language of the Bill is highly objectionable, unconstitutional, an affront to 
the  non-Hindi speaking people (e.g. Tamils, Gujaratis or Bengalis) and opposed to federalism. 
 
(ii) The three Bills are largely a copy and paste of the existing Laws.  There  was 
absolutely no need to draft so-called new Bills. All that the Bills have done is to make a few 
amendments (some acceptable, some not acceptable), re-arrange the 
sections of the existing Laws, and merge different sections into one section with 
many sub-sections. This is a wasteful exercise that will have many undesirable 
consequences.  To locate a familiar section - e.g. Sec tion 302 of IPC, 
punishment for murder -one has to search the Bill and find the equivalent Clause 
101. 
Hundreds of thousands of judges, lawyers, police officers - and even the general 
public - will be put to enormous trouble and inconvenience without any benefit at all. They 
will have to "re-learn" the laws which will take years before the new provisions are used 
extensively. This seems to be an exercise in self-glorification rather than a scholarly exercise to 
improve the laws. 
 
(iii) *** 3. Besides, State gove rnments, Bar Associations, State and Central Police 
organizations, the Indian Police Foundation, the National Law School Universities, 
judges of the subordinate judiciary who apply the laws every day, eminent retired 
judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts, eminent senior advocates and legal 
scholars were not consulted at the consideratio n stage by circulating the draft Bills 
and inviting them to comment. ***. We strongly object to the process followed on 
the grounds of insufficiency, non­ inclusionary, non-scholarly and lack of adequate 
time for consideration by the Members. 
 
 
Bill to replace the Indian Evidence Act,1872 (Bill No. 123 of 2023) 
 
This Bill is the most striking example of 'much ado about nothing". Every one of the 170 
clauses of the Bill is a copy and paste of the provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872. The extent of the copying and pasting is estimated to be 99 per cent. The 
sections in the Indian Evidence Act have been re-arranged and a word added or deleted 
 
 
                                                      
3 3*** Expunged as per Rule 90(7)(i) of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Rajya Sabha 
 


here and there, but to what purpose? The unfortunate consequence is the new Bill will 
confuse the judges, lawyers, legal scholars and students of law and oblige them re­ 
learn the new numbers of the old provisions. For example, everyone knows that 
Section 115 of the Indian Evidence Act deals with 'estoppel'. Now, judges, lawyers, 
legal scholars and students of law have to re-learn the new number which is Clause 
121. 
 
2. I am, therefore, of the view that the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 must be retained. The 
very few changes that have been made while drafting the Bill (e.g. relating to the 
certificate included in the Schedule) could have been introduced by way of 
amendments. There is absolutely no need to bring a Bill and replace the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872. 
 


156 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
  

157 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The DRSC on Home Affairs met at 11:00 a.m. on Thursday, the 24th 
August, 2023 in Committee Room '2', PHA-Extension, New Delhi 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJ
YA SABHA 
1. S
hri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
3. Dr. Anil Jain
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
5. Shri Digvijaya Singh
6. Shri Rakesh Sinha
7. Shri Derek O’Brien
L
OK SABHA 
8. Shri
 Sanjay Bhatia
9. Shri Dilip Ghosh
10. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
11. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran
12. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
13. Shri Ranjitsingh Naik Nimbalkar
14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
15. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
16. Shri Ravneet Singh
17. D
r. Satya Pal Singh
18. Smt. Geeta Viswanath Vanga
19. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav

158 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri
 Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Shri
 Rajesh N. Naik, OSD to Vice-President of India 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
i. S
hri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Home Secretary
ii. Shri Satpal Chouhan, DG (Awards)
iii. Shri Sri Prakash, JS (Judicial)
 Representatives of Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. Shri
 Diwakar Singh, JS & Legislative Counsel (Parl.)
ii. Shri R.K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel
2. A
t the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of th e
C
ommittee....xxx ∗ xxx xxx. 
3. T
hereafter, the Chairman informed the Committee about the agenda of th e
da
y.  .... xxx xxx xxx. 
4. T
he next item the Committee took up was the three Bills namely - ‘The
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita,  2023
a
nd The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023’ which were introduced in Lok Sabha  on
11th August, 2023 and referred to this Committee on 18 th August, 2023 by th e
H
on’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation with Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha
for examination and report. In this regard, the Chairman sought the cooperation o f
th
e Members in completing the work within the allo tted time of three months. H e
a
lso informed that the Committee would have more meetings to discuss these Bills
during the months of September and October, 2023.
∗xxx Relates to other matters 

159 
5. The Chairman further informed that he would write to the Members of t he
C
ommittee to give suggestions in respect of the Bills. Thereafter, the Committee
decided to invite written suggestions on the three bills from all the Stat e
G
overnments. It also decided to hear the views Chief Secretaries, if they wish to
appear before the Committee. In this regard, the Committee authorised t he
C
hairman of the Committee to seek the permission of Hon’ble Chairman, Rajy a
Sa
bha. Going further, the Chairman informed that the Home Secretary and hi s
t
eam of officials were present to give a detailed presentation on the Bills.
(On arrival of witnesses) 
6. The Chairman welcomed the officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs a nd
t
he Ministry of Law & Justice and asked the Home Secretary to make his
presentation on the three Bills. Home Secretary started his presentation beginning
with the ‘The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023’ followed by ‘The Bharatiya Sakshya
B
ill, 2023’ and ‘The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023’.
7. xxx ∗   xxx    xxx. The Government ha d
c
onsultation with various stakeholders like Governor, Chief Ministers, Lt.
Governors/Administrators of States and Union Territories, Chief Justice of India,
Chief Justices of all High Courts, Bar Councils and Law Universities/Institutio ns,
Members of Parliament, Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D) in
preparing the draft bills. MHA reviewed about 3,200 suggestions received from the
stakeholders. He also explained about the problems in the present legal system
such as huge pendency of cases in courts, low conviction rate, overcrowding of
under trial prisoners, etc.
8. xxx xxx
 xxx 
9. A
s regards the Bhartiya Sakshya Bill, 2023, Home Secretary informed that
the draft bill inter alia contains  major changes like – deleting British legacy
references, use of technology and digital means, confession affecting person
making it and others jointly under trial form same offence, judicial notice - extra
t
erritorial jurisdiction, documentary evidence - primary evidence, documentary
evidence - secondary evidence, admissibility of electronic or digital record,
provisions relating to certificate - electronic records, court not to inquire into fil e
n
otes - privileged communication between Ministers and President, etc.
10. xxx xxx
 xxx 
∗xxx Relates to other matters 

160 
11. After the presentation on the bills concluded, the Chairman and Members
raised some queries to which Home Secretary replied. On other queries, the
representatives from the Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Law & Justic e
w
ere asked to furnish written replies to the Secretariat within 3 days.
(T
he witnesses then withdrew) 
12. A
 Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
13. T
he meeting was adjourned at 3:45 p.m.

161 
XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11 :00 a.m. on Friday, the 25 th August,  20 23 
in Committee Room '2',  PHA-Extension, New Delhi 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJY
A SABHA 
1. Sh
ri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
3. Shri N. R. Elango
4. Dr. Anil Jain
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shri Digvijaya Singh
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK
 SABHA 
9. Shri Sa
njay Bhatia
10. Shri Dilip Ghosh
11. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
12. Shri Thiru Dayanidhi Maran
13. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
14. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar
15. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
16. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
17. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
18. Shri Ravneet Singh
19. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
20. Smt Geetha Viswanath Vanga

162 
21. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
S
ECRETARIAT 
Shri
 Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Shri
 Rajesh N. Naik, OSD to Vice-President of India 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
i. S
hri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Home Secretary
ii. Shri Satpal Chouhan, DG Awards
iii. Shri
 Sri Prakash, JS (Judicial)
 Representatives of Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. Shri
 Diwakar Singh, JS & Legislative Counsel (Parl.)
ii. Shri R.K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel
2. A
t the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of th e
C
ommittee and as per the agenda, instructed the Members to raise their queries a nd
se
ek clarifications regarding all the three Bills from the officials of the Ministry o f
Ho
me Affairs.
(O
n arrival of witnesses) 
3. T
he Chairman welcomed the officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs a nd
t
he Ministry of Law & Justice and requested them to answer the queries a nd
provi
de clarifications that the Members are going to raise on the three Bills
referred to the Committee.
4. xxx ∗ xxx  xxx 
5. xxx xxx
 xxx 
∗xxx Relates to other matters 

163 
6. As regards The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill (BNB), 2023, it  was suggested that
Section 2(e) has to be further deliberated upon in view of the wide implication it
can have in interpretation of the said clause. Further, Section 23 should be
thoroughly re-examined and confession made before police officer not below t he
ra
nk of Superintendent of Police (SP) should also be made admissible in courts. It
was also suggested that the term 'Magistrate' in clause (2) of Section 23 should be
clarified whether it points to a ‘Judicial Magistrate’ or an ‘Executive Magistrate’.
The Members also opined that more clarity needs to be given on whether loose
sheets would be considered as evidence in law courts.
7. T
he representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs replied to some queries.
On other queries, the representatives from the Ministry of Home Affairs and t he
M
inistry of Law & Justice were asked to furnish written replies to the Secretariat
within 3 days.
(T
he witnesses then withdrew) 
8. A
 Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
9. T
he meeting was adjourned at 2:56 p.m.

164 
XVI 
SIXTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11 :00 a.m. on  Saturday, the 26 th August, 2023 
in Co mmittee Room '2', PHA-Extension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJY
A SABHA 
1. Sh
ri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
3. Shri N. R. Elango
4. Dr. Anil Jain
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shri Digvijaya Singh
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK
 SABHA 
9. Shri Sa
njay Bhatia
10. Shri Dilip Ghosh
11. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
12. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar
13. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
15. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
16. Shri Ravneet Singh
17. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
18. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav

165 
S
ECRETARIAT 
Shri
 Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Shri
 Rajesh N. Naik, OSD to Vice-President of India 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
i. S
hri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Home Secretary
ii. Shri Satpal Chouhan, DG Awards
iii. Shri Sri Prakash, JS (Judicial)
 Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. Shri
 Diwakar Singh, JS & Legislative Counsel (Parl.)
ii. Shri R.K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel
2. A
t the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the
Committee and, as per the agenda, informed the Members that they may present
their views/comments on all the three Bills referred to the Committee.
(O
n arrival of witnesses) 
3. Th
e Chairman welcomed the officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs and
the Ministry of Law & Justice. He requested the Members to proceed wit h
pre
senting their views/comments and seek clarifications from the Ministry
officials, if required.
4. xxx∗ xxx  xxx 
5. xxx xxx
 xxx 
∗xxx  Relates to other matters 

166 
6. R egarding The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill (BSB), 2023, one of the Membe rs
poi
nted out that the word ‘trial’ being miss pelt as ‘trail’ in the cover page of t he
B
SB, 2023 which requires correction; one of the Members observed that the
burden of proof under the Section 106 of BSB is always on the accused and
suggested that the word ‘unless’ need to be replaced with ‘provided that’ in Section
106 as the word ‘unless’ shifts the burden of proof on to the prosecution which is
not in line with the provision of that Section. Besides, the Members generally
appreciated the efforts of the Government in drafting the new laws to replac e the
existing laws of the colonial era completely; xxx
∗                    xxx        xxx
7. T
he officials from the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Ministry of Law &
Justice replied to the queries raised and clarifications sought by the Chairman a nd
t
he Members. With regard to the queries that remained unanswered, the officials of
the Ministries were asked to furnish written replies to the Secretariat within 3
days.
(T
he witnesses then withdrew) 
8. A
 Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
9. T
he meeting was adjourned at 12:53 p.m.
∗xxx  Relates to other matters 

167 
XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3 :00 p.m. on Monday,  the 11 th September, 2023 
in Committee Room '2', PHA-Extension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJY
A SABHA 
1. Sh
ri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri P. Chidambaram
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
4. Shri N. R. Elango
5. Dr. Anil Jain
6. Shri Sujeet Kumar
7. Shri Derek O’ Brien
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Dilip Ghosh
11. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
12. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
13. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
15. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
16. Shri Ravneet Singh
17. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
18. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga

168 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri
 Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Shri
 Rajesh N. Naik, OSD to Vice-President of India 
WITNESSES 
Domain Experts 
i. Shri
 Praveen Sinha, Ex-Spl. Director, CBI
ii. Dr. Padmini Singh, JS, Department of Legal Affairs.
iii. Smt. Anupama Nilekar Chandra, ADG, BPR&D.
 Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. Shri
 Diwakar Singh, JS & Legislative Counsel (Parl.)
ii. Shri R.K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel
2. xxx∗   xxx    xxx. He  informed the Members that 
the Committee has invited three domain experts to hear their views on the three 
Bills, namely, The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; The Bharatiya Nagarik 
Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; and The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023. 
 (On arrival of witness) 
3. The Chairman welcomed Shri Praveen Sinha, former Special Director, CBI
.
H
e asked him to present his views on the implications that the three proposed law s
a
re going to have on the criminal justice system.
4. xxx xxx xxx.  
5. xxx xxx xxx 
6. xxx xxx xxx 
7. xxx xxx xxx 
∗xxx Relates to other matters 

169 
8. Certain Members also p ointed out not to rush the Bills, enough time t o be
provi
ded for discussion. Then, Chairman replied that the Committee runs not o n
one
 person’s convenience but on the convenience of the whole Committee...xxx∗
xxx
    xxx
(T
he witness then withdrew) 
9. T hereafter, the Chairman welcomed Dr. Padmini Singh, Joint Secretary,
Department of Legal Affairs. He asked to present her views on the implications
that the three proposed laws are going to have on the criminal justice system.
10. xxx xxx xxx 
11. xxx xxx xxx 
12. xxx xxx xxx 
13. xxx xxx xxx 
 (The witness then withdrew) 
14. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed Smt. Anupama Nilekar Chandra,
Additional Director General, Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D)
and asked to make her presentation.
15. xxx  xxx    xxx 
16. xxx  xxx    xxx 
17. xxx  xxx    xxx...The witness replied to some of the 
queries and on other queries, she was asked to furnish written replies to the 
Secretariat within three days. 
(The witness then withdrew) 
 
 
18. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
20. The meeting then adjourned at 06:26 p.m.
∗xxx  Relates to other matters 

170 
XVIII 
EIGHTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 a.m.  on Tuesday, the 12 th September, 2023 in Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJY
A SABHA 
1. Sh
ri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri P. Chidambaram
3. Shri N. R. Elango
4. Dr. Anil Jain
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar
6. Shri Derek O’ Brien
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
10. Shri Dilip Ghosh
11. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
12. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
13. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar
14. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
15. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
16. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
17. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
18. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
19. Shri Ravneet Singh
20. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

171 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri
 Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Shri Rajesh N. Naik, OSD to Vice-President of India
WITNESSES 
Domain Experts 
i. Shri
 Vikram Singh, Former Director General of Police.
ii. Prof. Naveen Chaudhary, National Forensic Sciences, University,
Gandhinagar, Gujarat.
iii. Ms. Sonia Mathur, Sr. Advocate.
 Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. Shri
 Diwakar Singh, JS & Legislative Counsel (Parl.)
ii. Shri R.K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel
2. A
t the outset, the Chairman welcomed the  Members to the meeting of the
Committee. He informed the Members that the Committee will hear the views of
three domain experts Dr. Vikram Singh, former Director- General of Police, Prof.
Naveen Chaudhary, National Forensic Sciences University and Ms. Sonia Mathur,
Senior Advocate on the three Bills, namely, The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; and The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill,
2023. xxx
∗   xxx xxx 
(On arrival of witness) 
3. The Chairman welcomed Dr. Vikram Singh, former Director- General of
P
olice and asked him to present his views on  the implications that the three
proposed laws are going to have on the criminal justice system.
4. xxx xxx
 xxx 
∗xxx Relates to other matters

172 
5. xxx xxx xxx 
6. xxx xxx xxx 
7. xxx xxx xxx 
8. xxx xxx xxx 
9. xxx xxx xxx 
10. The
 Chairman and Members also raised some queries on     xxx∗    xxx
xxx confession made before police officer under 26 of the Evidence Act should be
admissible; etc. The witness replied to the queries. He was requested to send t he
a
dditional information, if any, and the replies to the queries that remai n
una
nswered in three days.
(
The witness then withdrew) 
11. The Chairman welcomed Prof. Naveen Chaudhury, National Forensi c
Sc
iences University and requested him to present his views on the proposed Bills
and the implications they are going to have on the criminal justice system.
12. Prof.
 Naveen Chaudhury informed the Committee that he will present his
view on “The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023”. At first he apprised the Committe e
a
bout the overview of existing laws relating to electronic evidence in India. He
informed that Section 65B  of the Indian Evidence Act 1872 deals with t he
aa
dmissibility of electronic records along with paper based documents.  It classifies
evidence into oral and documentary categories. Evidence is also classified into
primary and secondary evidence. Primary evidence means presenting the original
electronic record before the court, whereas secondary evidence includes the
computer output content of the electronic record and its digital copies. Wheneve
r
a
ny digital record or electronic evidence is presented as secondary evidence, it
requires a certificate in this regard. The new bill has format for certificate. In this,
the format of the certificate should be a uniform format, so that the scholars and
legal experts associated with this field do not face any problem in the admissibility
of secondary evidence. The new Bill has provisions to take data from emails, logs,
laptops, data centers, clouds, digital platforms etc.
13. He informed that apart from computers, all those devices which can
co
mmunicate, which have st orage and processing power, all these new platforms
of technologies such as drones, mobile phones, laptops, CCTV, DVR (Digital
Video Recorder) should be brought under this Section, which will help in
∗xxx Relates to other matters

173 
investigation and then the conviction rate will also inc rease. Keeping electronic 
evidence in mind, whatever important technologies which are relevant, have been 
included in this new Bill. It has provisions to take data from emails, logs, laptops, 
data centers, clouds, digital platforms, etc. The new bill has format for certificate 
as well, the format of the certificate should be a uniform one, so that the scholars 
and legal experts associated with this field do not face any problem in the 
admissibility of secondary evidence. He also informed that whenever any 
electronic evidence is acquired from a crime scene, the acquisition of digital 
evidence is very important; there are two aspects to this, to meet the legal 
requirement and to meet the technical requirement. Admissibility of evidence is 
very important to mee t the legal requirement. These aspects are covered in new 
Bill. 
14. The
 Chairman and Members raised some queries on part B of the Certificat e
t
o be attached with evidence; provision of forensic training module for police
personnel; use of artificial intel ligence to analyse evidence; means to address t he
m
icro level crimes in IT, pendency cases of cyber crime; etc. The witness replied
to the queries. He was requested to send the additional information, if any, and t he
r
eplies to the queries that remain unanswered in three days.
 (T
he witness then withdrew) 
15. The Chairman welcomed M s. Sonia Mathur, Sr. Advocate and requested
her to present her views on the proposed Bills and the implications they are goi ng
to have on the criminal justice system.
16. xxx∗ xxx  xxx 
17. xxx xxx xxx 
The witness replied to some of the queries and on others, she was asked to furnish 
replies to the Secretariat within three days.  
 (The witness then withdrew) 
 
18. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee
was kept.
19. The meeting then adjourned at 04.40 p.m.
∗xxx Relates to other matters

174 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 a.m. o n Wednesday, the 13 th September, 2023 
in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri P. Chidambaram
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
4. Shri N. R. Elango
5. Dr. Anil Jain
6. Shri Sujeet Kumar
7. Shri Derek O’ Brien
8. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
9. Shri Digvijaya Singh
10. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri SanjayBhatia
12. Shri Dilip Ghosh
13. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
14. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
15. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar
16. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
17. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
18. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
19. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
20. Shri Ravneet Singh

175 
21. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
 SECRETARIAT 
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
WITNESSES 
Domain Experts 
i. Shri Jagdish Rana, Advocate
ii. Shri  Anand Dey, Advocate
iii. D r. Pinky Anand, Sr. Advocate and Former Addl. Solicitor
iv. G eneral of India.
 Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
Shri R.K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of th e
Co
mmittee. He informed the Members that as per agenda, the Committee has
invited three domain experts i.e.  Shri Jagdish Rana, Advocate; Shri Anand Dey,
Advocate; and Dr. Pinky Anand, Sr. Advocate andformer Addl. Solicitor General
of India to hear their views on the three Bills, namely, The Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023; The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; and The Bharatiya
Sakshya Bill, 2023.
3. Be fore, calling the witness, the Chairman requested some Members of the
Committee to present their views on the proposed Bills who have requested to do
so.  One of the Committee members mentioned that general statutes of criminal
laws have to be crafted with utmost care and views of the experts from varied
fields may be heard while examining the three Criminal Laws Bills. He expresse d
h
is views on the various aspects of the Bills. He mentioned that there are some
positive changes in the proposed Bills, however there are negative aspects too. H e
is o
f the view that the title of the Bills could be in English. He had also pointed ou t
th
at in the Committee constituted  by the Ministry of Home Affairs to review the 3
Bills, there were no women, Dalits, Advasis, LGBTQ, Minorities, persons with
disabilities. He had also commented that the special laws are being absorbed into

176 
general criminal law without necessary procedural safeguards.  He further 
mentioned that the Committee may call domain experts like Judges from Supreme 
Court and High Courts, Bar Council of States, Supreme Court Bar Association, 
Senior practitioners of criminal law, legal scholars, experts in juvenile justice, 
prison officials and reform advocates, etc. The Committee could also hear the 
views of International organizations, ethnic and religious groups,  regional human 
rights organizations and media.  He also provided names of the some domain 
experts who could be invited to appear before the Committee to express their views 
on the proposed Bills
(O
n arrival of witness) 
4. T he Chairman welcomed Shri Jagdish Rana, Advocate and requested him to
present his views on the proposed Bills and the implications they are going to ha
ve
o
n the criminal justice system.
5. Shri  Jagdish Rana informed the Committee that he wi ll present his views and
suggestions on ‘The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023’ (BSB) which has been
proposed to replace Indian Evidence Act, 1872. He informed that this Bill is a
 huge
st
ep, it is for the greater good and it also widens the scope of secondary e videnc e
by i
ncluding evidences in electronic form and soft copy. He discussed about
the various clauses of the Bill and suggested his views on these clauses.   In
respect of Clause 2(1) (c) he informed that illustrations covers a vast range of
electronic documents which intends to remove the difficulty faced at trial level and
in Clause 2(1)(e) - Scope of 'evidence' has been enlarged;   He informed further in
Clause 31, some colonial terms deserved to be omitted which are unnecessary a
nd
re
dundant in present day.
6. He expressed his views on Clause 32 and opines that addition of words such
as "including in electronic or digital form under the authority of the Government",
"including in electronic or digital form" is a step forward to match the present
advanced digital era. Regarding Clause 57 which pertains to primary evidence, h
e
i
nformed that new explanations have been added which are insufficient and nee d
m
ore illustrations to better explain the wish of the Bill. In Clause 58, new Sub
clauses have be en included which will facilitate the adjudication and the courts
will be relieved of keeping and maintaining bulky records. He is of the view that
Clause 61 will bring a drastic change in the dispensation of justice.   By this
provision, the electronic or digital record has been brought at par with the pape
r
re
cord. Explanation added to the Clause 81 is relevant for that Clause. Schedul e
Pa
rt B in the Bill is for the Expert and is a good addition as it would make it ea sy
for t
he Experts to produce all the required and important information about th e
de
vice and the evidence or record it contains.

177 
7. He also suggested changes in some other Clauses which inter- alia included
t
hat in Clause 3(b), instead of words ‘Bharatiya Nagarika Suraksha Sanhita, 2023’
it should be ‘Code of Civil Procedure’; in Clause 36, instead of Section 31, the
proper Section should be Section 35 as Section 35 deals with relevancy of certain
judgments; in Clause 50 instead of Section 59 the proper Section should be Section
49 as Section 49 deals with previous bad character not relevant, except in reply; in
Clause 62 instead of Section 59, the proper Section should be Section 63 which
pertains to admissibility of electronic records. He further suggested that in Cla
use
93 “E
xplanation to Section 84 shall also apply to this Section” can be omitted a s
t
here is no Explanation to the Section 84.
8. He informed that Clause 63 which corresponds to Section 65B of Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 has some major changes and a more modern approa ch.
Addition of word communication device along with computer all over the Claus e
he
lps including every digital device which can be used for communication as
computer is a very specific term and leaves a lot of loopholes and hindrances for
the investigating authorities as many of the crimes are committed through various
small communication devices.
9. He also informed that Schedule Part A of the Bill would be of a great help to
all the litigants and the investigating agencies as it is seen that most o f the polic e
pe
rsonnel do not have any set pattern to produce certificates regarding electronic
evidence. However Part A does not fulfill the desire of Section 63 as the certificat e
doe
s not meet the requirements of Sub Clause 2 as it does not gives any declaration
as to the lawful control of the person presenting the record and no declaration
about the condition of the device etc.
10. T he witness replied to the queries raised and clarifications sought by the
Chairman and the Members. With regard to the  queries that remained unanswered,
the witness was asked to furnish written replies to the Secretariat within 3 days.
(The witness then withdrew) 
11. T
he Chairman welcomed Shri Anand Dey, Advocate and requested him to
present his views on the proposed Bills and the implications they are going to ha ve
o
n the criminal justice system.
12. Shri Anand Dey informed the Chairman and Members of the Committ ee
th
at these bills may form the foundation for Criminal Justice Administration and
would be imperative for smooth and transparent functioning of the democracy. H e
i
nformed that however, some corrections and changes are required in the propose d
B
ills.

178 
13. xxx ∗ xxx  xxx 
14. xxx xxx xxx 
15. xxx xxx xxx
16. xxx xxx  xxx 
17. xxx xxx  xxx 
(The witness then withdrew)
18. T hereafter, the Chairman welcomed Dr. Pinky Anand, Sr. Advocate a nd
form
er Addl. Solicitor General of India and asked to make her presentation on the
proposed Bills.
19. xxx xxx  xxx
20. xxx xxx  xxx 
21. xxx xxx xxx 
22. She also presented her views on Bhartiya Sakshya Bill, 2023, (BSB). She
informed that in this Bill electronic evidence and digital records have been
incorporated, it has provisions for expanding the scope of secondary evidence,  and
j
oint trials for the absconding accused.
23. xxx xxx  xxx 
The witness replied to the queries. With regard to additional information, the 
witness was asked to furnish written inputs to the Secretariat within 3 days.
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
24. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
25. The meeting was adjourned at 03:23 p.m.
∗xxx  Relates to other matters 

179 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 03:00 p.m. on Friday, the 22 nd September, 2023 
in Committee Room '2', Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri Sujeet Kumar
3. Shri Derek O’ Brien
4. Shri N eeraj Shekhar
5. Shri Digvijaya Singh
6. Shri Rakesh Sinha 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
8. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
9. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
10. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
11. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
12. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
13. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
14. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
15. Shri Ravneet Singh
16. Dr. Satya Pal Singh 
17. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga 
18. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav

180 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
WITNESSES 
Domain Experts 
i. Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi, Chairman, Law Commission of India.
ii. D r. Adish C. Aggarwala, (Sr. Advocate), President, Supreme Court Ba r
A
ssociation. 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. Shri Vinay Kumar Mishra, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
ii. Shri  Shanti Bhushan, Deputy Legislative Counsel.  
2. A t the outset, the Chairman welcomed the  Members to the meeting of the
Committee. He  informed the Members that as per agenda, the Committee has 
invited two domain experts to hear their views on the three Bills, namely, The 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; 
and The Bharatiya  Sakshya Bill, 2023.
(O
n arrival of witness) 
3. Th e Chairman welcomed Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi, Chairman, Law
Commission of India and requested him to present his views on the proposed Bills
and the implications they are going to have on the criminal justice system.
4. Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi informed the Committee that the proposed Bills are
need of the hour and amendments of the existing criminal laws are required. H e
m
entioned that he will present his views and suggestions on all the three Bills. As

181 
regards, ‘The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023’ (BSB) which has been proposed to 
replace Indian Evidence Act, 1872, he informed that there is not much change in 
the new Bill, except electronic evidence and the new technology has been 
incorporated. He mentioned that there are some typographical and cross 
referencing errors in the Bill that inter alia  included in Clause 1(2),  instead 
of  word ‘applies’, word ‘apply’ should be used; in Clause 1(3), the words ‘in the 
Official Gazette’ should be added after the word ‘notification’; in illustration (b) of 
Clause 3, the term Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023 to be replaced by 
Code of Civil Procedure; in Clause 19(1), reference of Clause 23 needs to be 
replaced with Clause 26 and the same applies to the illustration also; in Clause 36, 
referring of Clause 31needs to be replaced with Clause 35;   in Explanation part of 
Clause 50, instead of Clause 59, references should be made to Clause 49; in Clause 
62 instead of referring to Clause 59, reference should be made to Clause 63; in 
illustration (c) of Clause 108, Clause 325 should be replaced by Clause 115 of 
BNS and Clause 335 should be replaced by Clause 120 of BNS.
 
5. Apart from above, he also suggested changes in Explanation part of Clause
120, and proviso to Clause 149, in both the cases he suggested that the term
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023 should be replaced by Bharatiya Nya ya
Sa
nhita, 2023. In explanation part of Clause 124, he suggested that the term
‘mental illness’ should either be replaced by the words, ‘unsound mind’ or
‘lunatic’ or otherwise the term ‘mental illness’ needs to be defined clearly unde
r
C
lause 124 of the Bill.
6. xxx ∗ xxx  xxx 
7. xxx xxx
 xxx 
8. xxx xxx xxx 
9. xxx xxx xxx 
10. xxx xxx xxx 
11 xxx xxx xxx 
12. The Chairman and the Members raised queries and sought clarification on
various Clauses of the Bills ..............xxx   xxx    xxx. 
The witness replied to the queries. He was requested to furnish any other 
information to the Secretariat within 3 days. 
∗xxx  Relates to other matters 

182 
(The witness then withdrew)
13. T he Chairman welcomed Shri Adish C. Agarwala, Senior Advocate,
President, Supreme Court Bar Association and requested him to present his views
on the proposed Bills and the implications they are going to have on the criminal
justice system.
14. Shri  Adish C. Agarwala informed the Chairman and Members of th e
C
ommittee that these Bills have brought some good changes.   Provisions that ar e
no l
onger relevant and which were being criticized by the general public have bee n
rem
oved.  With these amendments people will be getting justice at the earliest even
though the legal fraternity might face some problems.......xxx∗ xxx 
xxx. 
15. The Chairman and Members sought clarifications and also made som e
su
ggestions xxx   xxx    xxx...The witness replied to the
queries. With regard to additional information, the witness was asked to furnish
written inputs to the Secretariat within 3 days.
 (T he witness then withdrew)  
16. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
17. The meeting was adjourned at 05:38 p.m.
∗xxx  Relates to other matters 

183 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 a.m. on Satu rday, the 2 3rd September, 2023 
in Committee Room '2', Parliament House Annexe- Extension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri P. Chidambaram
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
4. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
LOK SABHA 
5. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
6. Shri Dilip Ghosh
7. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
8. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
9. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
10. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
11. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
12. Shrimati Geetha Viswanath Vanga
13. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav
 SECRETARIAT 
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Secretary 

184 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
WITNESSES 
Domain Experts 
i. Justice (Retd.) Satish Chandra
ii. Shri  Utkarsh Sharma, Advocate
iii. Shri  K. L. Janjani, Senior Advocate
iv. Shri  Sanjeev Deshpande, Senior Advocate
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. Shri Vinay Kumar Mishra, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
ii. Shri  Shanti Bhushan, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the  Members to the meeting of th e
C
ommittee. He informed the Members that as per agenda four domain experts have
been invited to hear their views on the three Bills, namely, The Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023; The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; and The Bharatiy a
Sa
kshya Bill, 2023.
(On arrival of witnesses) 
3. T he Chairman welcomed Justice (Retd.) Satish Chandra and Shri Utkars h
Sha
rma, Advocate to the meeting of the Committee and requested them to present
their views on the proposed Bills and the implications they are going to have on the
criminal justice system.
4. xxx * xxx  xxx 
5. xxx xxx xxx
6. xxx xxx  xxx
7. xxx xxx  xxx 
*xxx  Relates to other matters

185 
8. He informed that in Bhartiya Sakshya Bill, 2023 (BSB) there are now  170
Se
ction while in existing Evidence Act, there are 167 Sections, amendments ar e
m
ade in 23 Sections, repeal in 5 Sections and only one Section has been added.
9. T he Chairman and the Members raised queries and seek clarificati on on
s
ome Clauses of the Bills........ xxx   xxx    xxx......... 
The witness replied to the queries. He was requested to furnish any other 
information to the Secretariat within 3 days.  
(The witnesses then withdrew)
10. T hereafter, the Chairman welcomed Shri K. L. Janjani, Senior Advocate, a nd
re
quested him to present his views on the proposed Bills and the implications they
are going to have on the criminal justice system.
11. xxx ∗ xxx  xxx 
12. xxx xxx xxx 
13. xxx xxx xxx 
14. The Chairman and the Members raised queries and sought clarification on
various Clauses of the Bill.  The witness replied to the queries He was requested to
furnish any other information to the Secretariat within 3 days.
(The witness then withdrew)
15. The Chairman welcomed Shri Sanjeev Deshpande, Senior Advocate, and
re
quested him to present his views on the proposed Bills and the implications they
are going to have on the criminal justice system.
16. xxx xxx xxx 
17. xxx xxx xxx 
18. xxx xxx xxx 
19. xxx xxx xxx 
20. The Chairman and the Members raised some queries and sought clarification
on some of his observations and suggestions on the Clauses of the Bill. T he
∗xxx Relates to other matters 

186 
witness replied to the queries. He was requested to furnish any other information to 
the Secretariat within 3 days.  
 (The witness then withdrew)
21. A  Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee wa s
ke
pt.
22. The meeting was adjourned at 04:29 p.m.

187 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 a.m. on  Tuesday, the 3rd Octob er, 2023 in 
Committee Room '2', Parliament House Annexe- Extension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri P. Chidambaram 
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
4. Shri N.R. Elango
5. Dr. Anil Jain
6. Shri Derek O’Brien
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8.
Shri R akesh Sinha  
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
10. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
11. Shri Dilip G hosh 
12. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
13. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Ni mbalkar
14. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
15. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
16. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

188 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S. Jason, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
WITNESSES 
Domain Experts 
i. Prof. (Dr.) Faizan Mustafa, Former Vice-Chancellor, NALSAR
ii. D r. Aditya Sondhi, Sr. Advocate
iii. Shri  Amit Desai, Sr. Advocate
iv. Shri  Priyank Kanoongo, Chairperson, National Commission for Protecti on
of C
hild Rights 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. Shri Vinay Kumar Mishra, Deputy Legislative Counsel.
ii. Shri  Shanti Bhushan, Deputy Legislative Counsel.  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the  Members to the meeting of th e
C
ommittee. He informed the Members that as per today’s agenda the Committ ee
w
ill hear the views of four domain experts on the three Bills, namely, The
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023; The Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023;
and The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023. He also apprised the Members that before
the Committee proceeds with the agenda, Shri P. Chidambaram will present his
views on Bhartiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 (BNS) as requested by him.
3. So me of the Members had also expressed their wish to present their views on
the proposed Bills. The Chairman acceded to their request and informed them that
they may present their views in the next meeting of the Committee.

189 
4. xxx ∗ xxx  xxx 
(On arrival of witness) 
5. T he Chairman welcomed Prof. Faizan Mustafa, Former Vice -Chancellor
N
ational Academy of Legal Studies and Research (NALSAR), Hyderabad to t he
m
eeting of the Committee and requested him to present his views on the proposed
Bills and the implications they are going to have on the criminal justice system.
6. xxx xxx  xxx
7. xxx xxx  xxx
8. xxx xxx  xxx 
9. He informed that not much has been done in Bhartiya Sakshya Bill, 2023
(BSB). He stated that definitions given in the Evidence Act, 1872 of terms lik e
‘Pro
ved’, ‘Disproved’, ‘Not Proved’, ‘evidence’ have not been improved and no
change has been made in ‘Dying  Declaration’ and burden of proof. There is no
provision for witness protection scheme in this Bill, it should not be left on t he
St
ates to bring law on it. He also informed that proof of preponderance  of
proba
bilities has not been included in the Bill.
10. T he witness replied to the queries raised and clarifications sought by the
Chairman and the Me mbers. He was requested to furnish any other information t o
th
e Secretariat within 3 days.
 (T he witness then withdrew)
11. T he Chairman welcomed Shri Aditya Sondhi, Sr. Advocate and requeste d
hi
m to present his views on the proposed Bills and the implications they are going
to have on the criminal justice system.
12. xxx xxx  xxx 
13. xxx xxx xxx
14. T he Chairman and Members raised some queries related to completel y
rem
oving the death penalty from the penal code and are of the view that it ca n be
r
etained in rarest of rare case. The witness replied to the queries. He was request ed
t
o furnish any other information to the Secretariat within 3 days.
 (T he witness then withdrew)
∗xxx  Relates to other matters 

190 
15. The Chairman welcomed Shri Amit Desai, Sr. Advocate and requested him
to present his views on the proposed Bills and the implications they are going to
have on the criminal justice system.
16 xxx∗ xxx xxx 
17. xxx xxx xxx 
18. xxx xxx xxx  
19. xxx xxx xxx
 
20. The Chairman and Members raised some queries, the witness replied to them.
With regard to additional information, the witnes s was asked to furnish written
inputs to the Secretariat within 3 days.
(The witness then withdrew)
21. The Chairman welcomed Shri Priyank Kanoongo, Chairperson, Chairperson,
N
ational Commission for Protection of Child Rights and requested him to present
his views on the proposed Bills and the implications they are going to have on the
criminal justice system.
22. xxx xxx xxx 
23.
xxx xxx xxx
24. The Chairman and the Members raised some queries and sought clarification
o
n some of the suggestions made on the Clauses of the Bill. The witness replied to
the queries. He was requested to furnish any other information to the Secretariat
within 3 days.
(The witness then withdrew)
25. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
ke
pt.
26. The meeting was adjourned at 04:22 p.m.
∗ xxx  Relates to other matters 

191 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 1 1:00 a.m. on Wedn esday, the 4 th October, 2023 
in Committee Room '2', Parliament House Annexe- Extension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri P. Chidambaram 
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
4. Shri N.R. Elango
5. Dr. Anil Jain
6. Shri Derek O’Brien
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8.
Shri R akesh Sinha  
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
10. Dr. (Smt.) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
11. Shri Dilip Ghosh 
12. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
13. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar
14. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
15. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
16. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
17. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram

192 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S. Jason, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Smt. Prabita Khoyumthem, Deputy Director 
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
 i  Shri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Home Secretary 
ii  Shri Satpal Chouhan, DG (Awards) 
iii  Shri Shri Prakash, Joint Secretary (Judicial) 
 Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. Shri Diwakar Singh, JS & Legislative Counsel. 
ii. Shri R. K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel. 
2. A t the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the
Committee. He informed the Members that as per agenda the Committee will take
up Clause- by-Clause discussion on the three Bills, namely, the Bharatiya Nyay a
Sa
nhita, 2023; the Bharatiya  Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023; and the Bharatiy a
Sa
kshya Bill, 2023.   He also informed that before proceeding, the Committee will
hear the views of some members who wished to express their views on the Bills  or
w
ith regard to any Clause of the Bills. Then, he requested Shri Derek O'Brien t o
e
xpress his views on the Bills, followed by Shri P. Chidambaram and Shri N.R.
Elango.
3. Shri Derek O'Brien expressed that there is a need to hear more domai n
e
xperts and stakeholders on the proposed criminal law Bills to have valuable inputs
on t
hese Bills. He suggested names of stakeholders whose views could be hea rd on
t
he proposed Bills. He stated that Clause by clause consideration of the Bills needs

193 
to be deferred as there are numerous drafting errors......xxx∗ xxx  xxx. He 
stated that the titles of the English version of the Bills should be in English.......xxx 
xxx xxx.
4. Thereafter, Shri P. Chidambaram also expressed that Clause -by-Clause
c
onsideration should be postponed..........xxx   xxx      xxx. He 
pointed out flaws in Clause 63 of the Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023 (BSB) which 
has been brought in place of Section 65B of The Indian Evidence Act, 
1872........xxx   xxx    xxx.   
5. T
hereafter, Shri N.R. Elango expressed that no major new  provisions and
reforms have been introduced in the proposed criminal law Bills. The fundamental
rights whether those of the accused or of the victim, are not taken care of in thes e
B
ills. He informed that there are a lot of drafting mistakes in these Bills and ther e
i
s a need to have larger discussion with Bar associations, judges, stakeholders etc.
to have better understanding on them. He observed that these Bills are bringi ng
m
ore stringent laws than what is already there, provision of death penalty is s till
t
here, it has not been removed.
6. xxx xxx xxx
7. xxx xxx  xxx
8. xxx xxx  xxx
9. xxx xxx  xxx
10. T hereafter, he touched upon some Clause of the BSB.   He informed that t he
a
ddition of the words 'any information' in the definition of evidence in Claus e
2(1)
(e) makes the interpretation very confusing and needs to be omitted. In Cla use
2
6, the earlier law states that the statements so given are themselves relevant facts,
but in BSB it is either facts -in-issue or relevant facts. They are two different a nd
di
ametrically opposite concepts, therefore, facts in issue should be deleted. H e
i
nformed in Clause 63 there is provision for Part A certificate.   He suggested tha t
i
nstead of this, the chain of custody of relevant documents or relevant gadgets
should be explored as being done in various developed countries and it should be
made mandatory in this Bill.
(On arrival of witnesses) 
∗xxx  Relates to other matters 

194 
11. T he Chairman welcomed the officers of the Ministry of Home Affairs a nd
t
he Ministry of Law and Justice to this meeting. He requested Home Secretary to
assist the Committee in Clause -by-Clause discussion on the three Bills and to
clarify and solve the queries raised by the Members of the Committee on Clause s
o
f the Bills, if so required.
12. H e informed that the Committee has received many representations and
suggestions from private individuals and organisations, Members of Parliament,
ex-Member of Parliament and State Governments, which were taken up with the
Ministry of Home Affairs for their comments.  Based on the number of suggestions
received on these Bills, the Ministry has prepared a statement containing Clause -
wise suggestions along with their comments which has been circulated to the
Members for reference.
13. T he Home Secretary informed the Committee that the Ministry looked at all
the suggestions from Members as well as experts and the typographical mistakes
which were pointed out and has prepared their response.   Before taking up clause -
by-clause considerati on, he stated that regarding the names of the Bills, t he
M
inistry will suggest that the names will be retained as has been proposed by th e
M
inistry. The texts of the Bills are in English, it does not violate the provisions of
article 348 of the Constitutio n, however, the Committee could take a final view in
this regard.
14. xxx ∗ xxx  xxx
15. xxx xxx  xxx
16. xxx xxx  xxx
17. xxx xxx  xxx
18. T hereafter, Bharatiya Sakshya Bill was taken up for Clause by Claus e
d
iscussion. The Home Secretary stated that in Clause 1(2) there is a suggestion that
instead of the word ‘applies’ the word ‘apply’ should be used, which will be
accordingly corrected. In Clause 1(3), certain suggestions were given with respect
to notification and he agreed to it. In Clause 2(1)(c) which relates to definition o f
‘doc
ument’, suggestion was to include the verification of the source of electronic
and digital records, since definition has already been expanded, it was not
accepted.  In Clause 2(1) (e) which relates to definition of ‘evidence’ there was a
sugge
stion that the words "any information" are not required, for which t he
M
inistry agreed to look into it. In Clause 3 which deals with relevance of facts,
suggestions were there to make corrections in cross-references, similarly, in Clause
∗xxx  Relates to other matters 

195 
19 and it was agreed to. In Clause 23 which deals with confession to police officer, 
there were suggestions to make it admissible if it is made before a certain level of 
officer, however, the Ministry did not agree with it.
19. A
part from these, changes were suggested in some other clauses of the Bill.
In Clause 24, there was suggestion that the provision of joint trial in the absence of
the absconding person can increase the probability of multitude of challenges as
charges would be framed against a person in absentia. It was explained by the
Ministry that an explanation has been inserted to facilitate evidence in respect of
the proclaimed offender. In Clause 26 which deals with statement of facts in issue
or relevant fact, there was a suggestion that fact in issue is different from relevant
facts, therefore, it should be only relevant facts and the Ministry agreed to it. In
Clause 36 which deals with relevancy and effect of judgments, orders, decrees,
etc., there were suggestions to make corrections in cross- references of sections and
which was agreed to by the Ministry. In Clause 57 which pertains to primary
evidence, there was a suggestion that Explanations under the Clause ar
e
i
nsufficient and need more illustrations to better explain the wish of the Bill. The
Home Secretary informed that Ministry felt there is no need for further illustration.
However, a Member of the Committee suggested that chain of custody of relevant
documents or relevant gadgets should be proved from the date of seizure to the
production as being done in various developed countries, rules and laws have to be
framed for that, otherwise it can be misused on a very large scale. Considering t
he
sugge
stion, the Ministry agreed to work on it. In Clause 61 whi ch relates t o
a
dmissibility of electronic records, there was a suggestion to add a proviso to thi s
c
lause in line with the amended section 63 of the Adhiniyam, the Ministry felt that
no change is required in this Clause. There was a suggestion to re- look th e
C
ertificate as provided in Clause 63 which corresponds to Section 65(B) of T he
Indi
an Evidence Act, 1872 as some necessary elements of Section 65(B) have  not
been incorporated in this Clause. The Home Secretary agreed to relook into t he
i
ssue. There wer e some other minor suggestions pertaining to cross reference s
e
rrors and typographical errors in Clauses 50, 62, 81, 92, 93, 108, 120, 149 etc.
which was agreed to by the Ministry. It was also suggested by a Member t o
c
onsider deleting Clause 138 as it is contradictory to Clause 119 which was also
agreed by the Ministry.
20. T he Members of the Committee raised queries and sought clarifications from
the Home Secretary on the Bill. He replied to them. Thereafter, the Chairman
informed that the Clause by C lause discussion on the remaining Bill will be taken
up in the next meeting.
(The witnesses then withdrew)

196 
21. A Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
22. The meeting was adjourned at 04:04 p.m.

197 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 12:00 p.m. on Thursday, the 5 th October, 2023 
in Co mmittee Room '2', Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri P. Chidambaram
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
4. Shri N. R. Elango
5. Dr. Anil Jain
6. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
7. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri SanjayBhatia
9. Shri Dilip Ghosh
10. Shri Dulal Chandra Goswami
11. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
12. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
13. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
14. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
15. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

198 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri S. Jason, Joint Secretary 
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director 
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary 
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary 
Smt. Prabita Khoyumthem, Deputy Director 
Shri Rajesh N. Naik, OSD to Vice-President of India
WITNESSES 
Representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs 
i  Shri Ajay Kumar Bhalla, Home Secretary 
ii  Shri Satpal Chouhan, DG (Awards) 
iii  Shri Shri Prakash, Joint Secretary (Judicial) 
Representatives of the Ministry of Law & Justice 
i. Shri Diwakar Singh, JS & Legislative Counsel.
ii. Shri  R. K. Pattanayak, Addl. Legislative Counsel.
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of th e
C
ommittee and informed them that the Committee will take up Clause -by-Clause
discussion............xxx∗ xxx xxx. 
(On arrival of witnesses) 
3. xxx xxx xxx 
4. xxx xxx xxx
5. xxx    xxx    xxx. He stated that as regards the
name of the Bill, it had been informed earlier, that the Ministry will retain it as has 
been proposed by it. The texts of the Bill are in English, it does not violate the 
∗xxx Relates to other matters 

199 
provisions of article 348 of the Constitution, however, the Committee could take a 
final view in this regard. 
6. xxx xxx  xxx
7. xxx xxx  xxx
8. xxx ∗ xxx  xxx
9. xxx xxx  xxx 
10. xxx xxx xxx 
11. xxx xxx xxx
12. T he Members of the Committee raised some queries on various aspects of t he
B
ill..............xxx   xxx    xxx. The Home Secretary 
replied to the queries of the Members and also clarified the stand of the Ministry 
with regard to suggestions of the Members and other speakers on various Clauses 
of the Bill. 
(The witnesses then withdrew)
13. A
 Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
14. The meeting was adjourned at 04:23 p.m.
∗xxx  Relates to other matters  

200 
VII
SEVENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 12:00 noon on Friday , the 27 th October, 2023 in 
Committee Room '2', Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
3. Shri N. R. Elango
4. Dr. Anil Jain
5. Shri Sujeet Kumar
6. Shri Derek O’Brien
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
10. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
11. Dr. (Smt) Kakoli Ghosh Dastidar
12. Dr. Nishikant Dubey
13. Shri Dilip Ghosh
14. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
15. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
16. Shri Gajendra Singh Patel
17. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
18. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
19. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
20. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
21. Shri Ravneet Singh

201 
22. Dr. Satya Pal Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri S. Jason, Joint Secretary
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary
Smt. Prabita Khoyumthem, Joint Director 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the
Committee. xxx∗   xxx    xxx Proceeding further, he
informed the Members that the Committee was scheduled to consider and adopt
the draft xxx   xxx    xxx 248th Reports on the propose d
c
riminal laws Bills. However, on the request received from some members to
allow more time for the Members to go through the three draft Reports, he
proposed that the consideration and adoption of the reports be postponed t o
N
ovember 6, 2023. The Committee, accordingly, agreed.
3. xxx xxx xxx
4. T hereafter, few Members made certain suggestions on some of the
recommendations in the three draft Reports. xxx     xxx                      xxx
5. xxx xxx xxx 
6. xxx xxx xxx
7. As  regards, Bharatiya Sakshya Bill (BSB), 2023 it was submitted before th e
C
ommittee that there is a need to amend the clause 23(1) to make confession ma de
by a
n accused before the police officer admissible in court; and there is no need to
exhibit police documents like FIR, seizure memo, recovery memo, disclosur e
st
atement of the accused under section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
8. Som e of the general observations made before the Committee inter alia
included - the criminal law Bills should not be hastily taken up for consideration;
more deliberation is required on the Bills; views of the High Courts, Bar Council
of India, State Bar Councils, Advocate Associations, Bar Associations, Seni or
A
dvocates, Women Lawyers Associations and eminent jurists need to be sought;
need to consult more stakeholders before preparing any report on the Bills; request
∗xxx Relates to other matters 

202 
to extend the deadline for presenting the Reports; and to request to provide 
sufficient time for submitting dissent notes.
9. W ith respect to extension of time for submission of Reports,  the Chairman
clarified that on 7th September, 2019, the Ministry of Home Affairs wrote letters to
all the Governments, Governors, Chief Ministers, Lieutenant Governors,
Administrators of the States and Union Territories, r equesting them to send their
suggestions on comprehensive amendment to the criminal laws. Further, on 6 th
Ja
nuary, 2020 and on 9 th January, 2020, suggestions were also sought from Chi ef
Just
ice of India, Chief Justices of all High Courts, Bar Councils and Law
Universities/institutions and on 31 st December, 2021, the Ministry also requested
Members of Parliament, both Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha to give thei r
su
ggestions.  This clearly shows an elaborate exercise had been undertaken by the
Ministry before drafting the Bills. Moreover, the Secretariat also wrote to all the
Chief Secretaries inviting suggestions from the respective State Government s on
th
e three Bills.
10. A  Verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
11. T he meeting was adjourned at 01:02 p.m.

203 
VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 1 2:00 noon on Monday, the 06th November, 2023 in 
Committee Room '2', Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
RAJYA SABHA
1. Shri Brij Lal - Chairman
2. Shri P. Chidambaram
3. Shri Biplab Kumar Deb
4. Shri N. R. Elango
5. Dr. Anil Jain
6. Shri Derek O’Brien
7. Shri Neeraj Shekhar
8. Shri Rakesh Sinha
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Sanjay Bhatia
10. Dr. Nishikant Dubey
11. Shri Dilip Ghosh
12. Thiru Dayanidhi Maran
13. Shri Raja Amareshwara Naik
14. Shri Ranjeetsingh Naik Nimbalkar
15. Shri Jamyang Tsering Namgyal
16. Shri Lalubhai Babubhai Patel
17. Shri R.K. Singh Patel
18. Shri Vishnu Dayal Ram
19. Shri Rahul Ramesh Shewale
20. Shri Ravneet Singh
21. Dr. Satya Pal Singh

204 
SECRETARIAT
Shri S. Jason, Joint Secretary
Shri Ravinder Kumar, Director
Shri Goutam Kumar, Deputy Secretary
Shri Sreejith V., Deputy Secretary
Smt. Neelam Bhatt, Under Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the
Committee and informed the Members that the draft 246 th, 247th, and 248th Reports
on 
The Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS), 2023; The Bharatiya Nagarik Sura ksha
Sa
nhita (BNSS), 2023; and The Bharatiya Sakshya  Bill (BSB), 2023 respectivel y
w
ould be considered and adopted in the meeting.
3. Before taking up the agenda, the Chairman breifly mentioned the chronology
of the three Bills which inter alia  included - introduction of the Bills in Lok Sabha
on 11th August, 2023; referral of the Bills to the DRSC on Home Affairs on 18 th
A
ugust, 2023; Committee's deliberations on the Bills; presentations made by Home
Secretary on the Bills; expression of views/suggestions by Members on the Bills;
Committee hearing the views of 19 domain experts on the Bills; and Committee
holding 12 meetings for examination of the Bills.
4. H
e also informed the Committee that on 4 th and 5th October, 2023, clause-
wise comments prepared by the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) on the
suggestions received by the Committee were discussed. The draft reports were
prepared based on the suggestions & deliberations in the Committee, and that the
same have been circulated to Members. xxx
∗  xxx         xxx
5. xxx xxx  xxx
6. xxx xxx  xxx
7. xxx xxx  xxx
8. xxx xxx  xxx
9. C ontinuing the discussions further, some of the Members appreciated the
holistic approach of the Government to decolonize the Indian mind and t he
d
eliberations of the Committee made on the Bills. The Members also opined tha t
∗ xxx Relates to other matters 

205 
many of the stakeholders have been consulted by the Committee which included 
academicians, lawyers, judges, etc. It was also suggested that keeping these Bills 
pending for more time is not desirable and that the Committee Reports on these 
Bills need to be adopted as soon as possible.
10. xxx ∗ xxx   xxx
11. xxx xxx    xxx
12. xxx xxx    xxx
13. Thereafter, the 246th, 247th, and 248th Reports of the Committee were
a
dopted with the broad consensus of the Members. The Committee authorised the
Chairman to carry out corrections of typographical/factual errors, if any. The
Committee also authorised him to present the Reports to the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha, and to forward a copy to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha, during the
current inter- Session period as both the Houses of Parliament are not in session.
The Committee also authorised the Chairman to finalise the date of
presentation/laying the Reports in the ensuing Session of Parliament and nominate
Members for presentation/laying of Reports in the Rajya Sabha/Lok Sabha.
14. The Chairman then thanked all the Members of the Committee for keenly
tak
ing part in the discussions on the Bills and for giving various suggestions on the
Bills for streamlining, strengthening, simplifying, and enhancing the efficiency of
the criminal justice system. He remarked that the cooperation and contribution of
the Members has been indispensable for the successful completion of the
examination of the three criminal law Bills, and the preparation of the Reports. He
also congratulated the  Members for successfully completing the task in a time -
bound manner and concluded the meeting.
15. A Verba
 tim record of the proceedings of the meeting of the Committee was
kept.
16. The meeting was adjourned at 02:06 p.m.
***** 
∗ xxx Relates to other matters 

ANNEXURES 
206

Bill No. 123 of 2023
THE BHARATIYA SAKSHYA BILL, 2023
————
ARRANGEMENT OF CLAUSES
————
PART I
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
CLAUSES
1. Short title, application and commencement.
2. Definitions.
PART II
CHAPTER II
RELEV ANCY OF FACTS
3. Evidence may be given of facts in issue and relevant facts.
Closely connected facts
4. Relevancy of facts forming part of same transaction.
5. Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect of facts in issue or relevant facts.
6. Motive, preparation and previous or subsequent conduct.
7. Facts necessary to explain or introduce fact in issue or relevant facts.
8. Things said, done by conspirator in reference to common design.
9. When facts not otherwise relevant become relevant.
10. Facts tending to enable Court to determine amount are relevant in suits for
damages.
11. Facts relevant when right or custom is in question.
12. Facts showing existence of state of mind, or of body of bodily feeling.
13. Facts bearing on question whether act was accidental or intentional.
14. Existence of course of business when relevant.
Admissions
15. Admission defined.
16. Admission by party to proceeding or his agent.
17. Admissions by persons whose position must be proved as against party to suit.
18. Admissions by persons expressly referred to by party to suit.
19. Proof of admissions against persons making them, and by or on their behalf.
20. When oral admissions as to contents of documents are relevant.
21. Admissions in civil cases when relevant.
A
S INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Annexure - I

22. Confession caused by inducement, threat, coercion or promise, when irrelevant
in criminal proceeding.
23. Confession to police officer.
24. Consideration of proved confession affecting person making it and others jointly
under trial for same offence.
25. Admissions not conclusive proof, but may estop.
Statements by persons who cannot be called as witnesses
26. Cases in which statement of facts in issue or relevant fact by person who is dead
or cannot be found, etc., is relevant.
27. Relevancy of certain evidence for proving, in subsequent proceeding, the truth
of facts therein stated.
Statements made under special circumstances
28. Entries in books of account when relevant.
29. Relevancy of entry in public record or an electronic record made in performance
of duty.
30. Relevancy of statements in maps, charts and plans.
31. Relevancy of statement as to fact of public nature contained in certain Acts or
notifications.
32. Relevancy of statements as to any law contained in law books including electronic
or digital form.
33. What evidence to be given when statementforms part of a conversation,
document, electronic record, book or series of letters or papers.
Judgments of Courts when relevant
34. Previous judgments relevant to bar a second suit or trial.
35. Relevancy of certain judgments in probate, etc., jurisdiction.
36. Relevancy and effect ofjudgments, orders or decrees, other than those mentioned
in section 35.
37. Judgments, etc., other than those mentioned in sections 34, 35 and 36 when
relevant.
38. Fraud or collusion in obtaining judgment, or incompetency of Court, may be
proved.
Opinions of third persons when relevant
39. Opinions of experts.
40. Facts bearing upon opinions of experts.
41. Opinion as to hand-writing and digital signature, when relevant.
42. Opinion as to existence of general custom or right, when relevant.
43. Opinion as to usages, tenets, etc., when relevant.
44. Opinion on relationship, when relevant.
45. Grounds of opinion, when relevant.
Character when relevant
46. In civil cases character to prove conduct imputed, irrelevant.
(ii)
C
LAUSES

47. In criminal cases previous good character relevant.
48. Evidence of character or previous sexual experience not relevant in certain cases.
49. Previous bad character not relevant, except in reply.
50. Character as affecting damages.
PART III
O
N PROOF
CHAPTER III
FACTS WHICH NEED NOT BE PROVED
51. Fact judicially noticeable need not be proved.
52. Facts of which Court shall take judicial notice.
53. Facts admitted need not be proved.
CHAPTER IV
O
F ORAL EVIDENCE
54. Proof of facts by oral evidence.
55. Oral evidence to be direct.
CHAPTER V
O
F DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
56. Proof of contents of documents.
57. Primary evidence.
58. Secondary evidence.
59. Proof of documents by primary evidence.
60. Cases in which secondary evidence relating to documents may be given.
61. Admissibility of electronic or digital record.
62. Special provisions as to evidence relating to electronic record.
63. Admissibility of electronic records.
64. Rules as to notice to produce.
65. Proof of signature and handwriting of person alleged to have signed or written
document produced.
66. Proof as to electronicsignature.
67. Proof of execution of document required by law to be attested.
68. Proof where no attesting witness found.
69. Admission of execution by party to attested document.
70. Proof when attesting witness denies the execution.
71. Proof of document not required by law to be attested.
72. Comparison of signature, writing or seal with others admitted or proved.
73. Proof as to verification of digital signature.
(iii)
C
LAUSES

Public documents
74. Public and private documents.
75. Certified copies of public documents.
76. Proof of documents by production of certified copies.
77. Proof of other official documents.
Presumptions as to documents
78. Presumption as to genuineness of certified copies
79. Presumption as to documents produced as record of evidence, etc.
80. Presumption as to Gazettes, newspapers, and other documents.
81. Presumption as to Gazettes in electronic or digital record.
82. Presumption as to maps or plans made by authority of Government.
83. Presumption as to collections of laws and reports of decisions.
84. Presumption as to powers-of-attorney.
85. Presumption as to electronic agreements.
86. Presumption as to electronic records and electronic signatures.
87. Presumption as to Electronic Signature Certificates.
88. Presumption as to certified copies of foreign judicial records.
89. Presumption as to books, maps and charts.
90. Presumption as to electronic messages.
91. Presumption as to due execution, etc., of documents not produced.
92. Presumption as to documents thirty years old.
93. Presumption as to electronic records five years old.
CHAPTER VI
O
F THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL EVIDENCE BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
94. Evidence of terms of contracts, grants and other dispositions of property reduced
to form of document.
95. Exclusion of evidence of oral agreement.
96. Exclusion of evidence to explain or amend ambiguous document.
97. Exclusion of evidence against application of document to existing facts.
98. Evidence as to document unmeaning reference to existing facts.
99. Evidence as to application of language which can apply to one only of several
persons.
100. Evidence as to application of language to one of two sets of facts, to neither of
which the whole correctly applies.
101. E vidence as to meaning of illegible characters, etc.
102. Who may give evidence of agreement varying terms ofdocument.
103. Saving of provisions of Indian Succession Act relating to Wills.
(iv)
C
LAUSES

PART IV
PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII
OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
CLAUSES
104. Burden of proof.
105. On whom burden of proof lies.
106. Burden of proof as to particular fact.
107. Burden of proving fact to be proved to make evidence admissible.
108. Burden of proving that case of accused comes within exceptions.
109. Burden of proving fact especially within knowledge.
110. Burden of proving death of person known to have been alive within thirty years.
111. Burden of proving that person is alive who has not been heard of for seven
years.
112. Burden of proof as to relationship in the cases of partners, landlord and tenant,
principal and agent.
113. Burden of proof as to ownership.
114. Proof of good faith in transactions where one party is in relation of active
confidence.
115. Presumption as to certain offences.
116. Birth during marriage,conclusive proof of legitimacy.
117. Presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married woman.
118. Presumption as to dowry death.
119. Court may presume existence of certain facts.
120. Presumption as to absence of consent in certain prosecution for rape.
CHAPTER VIII
E
STOPPEL
121. Estoppel.
122. Estoppel of tenants and of licensee of person in possession.
123. Estoppel of acceptor of bill of exchange, bailee or licensee.
CHAPTER IX
OF WITNESSES
124. Who may testify.
125. W itness unable to communicate verbally.
126. Competency of husband and wife as witnesses in certain cases.
127. Judges and Magistrates.
128. Communications during marriage.
129. Evidence as to affairs of State.
130. Official communications.
(v)

131. Information as to commission of offences.
132. Professional communications.
133. Privilege not waived by volunteering evidence.
134. Confidential communication with legal advisers.
135. Production of title-deeds ofwitness not a party.
136. Production of documents or electronic records which another person, having
possession, would refuse to produce.
137. W itness not excused from answering on ground that answer will criminate.
138. Accomplice.
139. Number of witnesses.
CHAPTER X
OF EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
140. Order of production and examination of witnesses.
141. Judge to decide as to admissibility ofevidence.
142. Examination of witnesses.
143. Order of examinations.
144. Cross-examination of person called to produce a document.
145. W itnesses to character.
146. Leading questions.
147. Evidence as to matters in writing.
148. Cross-examination as to previous statements in writing.
149. Questions lawful in cross-examination.
150. When witness to be compelled to answer.
151. Court to decide when question shall be asked and when witness compelled to
answer.
152. Question not to be asked without reasonable grounds.
153. Procedure of Court in case of question being asked without reasonable grounds.
154. Indecent and scandalous questions.
155. Questions intended to insult or annoy.
156. Exclusion of evidence to contradict answers to questions testing veracity.
157. Question by party to his own witness.
158. Impeaching credit of witness.
159. Questions tending to corroborate evidence of relevant fact, admissible.
160. Former statements of witness may be proved to corroborate later testimony as to
same fact.
161. What matters may be proved in connection with provedstatement relevant under
section 32 or 33.
162. Refreshing memory.
(vi)
C
LAUSES

163. T estimony to facts stated in document mentioned in section159.
164. Right of adverse party as to writing used to refresh memory.
165. Production of documents.
166. Giving, as evidence, of document called for and produced on notice.
167. Using, as evidence, of document production of which was refused on notice.
168. Judge's power to put questions or order production.
CHAPTER XI
OF IMPROPER ADMISSION AND REJECTION OF EVIDENCE
169. No new trial for improper admission or rejection of evidence.
170. Repeal and savings.
THE  SCHEDULE.
(vii)
CLAUSES

1
THE BHARATIYA SAKSHYA BILL, 2023
A
BILL
to consolidate and to provide for general rules and principles of evidence for fair trial.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Seventy-fourth Year of the Republic of India as
follows:—
PART I
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Bharatiya Sakshya Adhiniyam, 2023.
(2) It shall applies to all judicial proceedings in or before any Court, including
Courts-martial, but not to affidavits presented to any Court or officer, nor to proceedings
before an arbitrator.
Short title,
application and
commencement.
AS INTRODUCED IN LOK SABHA
Bill No. 123 of  2023
5

2
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification,
appoint.
2. (1) In this Adhiniyam, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) "Court" includes all Judges and Magistrates, and all persons, except
arbitrators, legally authorised to take evidence;
(b) "conclusive proof" means when one fact is declared by this Adhiniyam to
be conclusive proof of another, the Court shall, on proof of the one fact, regard the
other as proved, and shall not allow evidence to be given for the purpose of disproving
it;
(c) "document" means any matter expressed or described or otherwise recorded
upon any substance by means of letters, figures or marks or any other means or by
more than one of those means, intended to be used, or which may be used, for the
purpose of recording that matter and includes electronic and digital records.
Illustrations.
(i) A writing is a document.
(ii) Words painted, lithographed or photographed are documents.
(iii) A map or plan is a document.
(iv) An inscription on a metal plate or stone is a document.
(v) A caricature is a document.
(vi) An electronic record on emails, server logs, documents on computers, laptop
or smartphone, messages, websites, locational evidence and voice mail messages
stored on digital devices are documents;
(d) "disproved" in relation to a fact, means when, after considering the matters
before it, the Court either believes that it does not exist, or considers its non-existence
so probable that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case,
to act upon the supposition that it does not exist;
(e) "evidence" means and includes—
(i) statements or any information given electronically which the Court
permits or requires to be made before it by witnesses in relation to matters of
fact under inquiry and such statements or information are called oral evidence;
(ii) documents including electronic or digital records produced for the
inspection of the Court and such documents are called documentary evidence;
(f) "fact" means and includes—
(i) anything, state of things, or relation of things, capable of being
perceived by the senses;
(ii) any mental condition of which any person is conscious.
Illustrations.
(a) That there are certain objects arranged in a certain order in a certain place, is
a fact.
(b) That a person heard or saw something, is a fact.
(c) That a person said certain words, is a fact.
Definitions.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

3
(d) That a person holds a certain opinion, has a certain intention, acts in good
faith, or fraudulently, or uses a particular word in a particular sense, or is or was at a
specified time conscious of a particular sensation, is a fact;
(g) "facts in issue" means and includes any fact from which, either by itself or
in connection with other facts, the existence, non-existence, nature or extent of any
right, liability or disability, asserted or denied in any suit or proceeding, necessarily
follows.
Explanation.—Whenever, under the provisions of the law for the time being in
force relating to Civil Procedure, any Court records an issue of fact, the fact to be
asserted or denied in the answer to such issue is a fact in issue.
Illustrations.
(i) A is accused of the murder of  B.
(ii) At his trial, the following facts may be in issue.
(iii) That A caused B's death.
(iv) That A intended to cause B's death.
(v) That A had received grave and sudden provocation from B.
(vi) That A, at the time of doing the act which caused B's death, was, by reason
of mental illness, incapable of knowing its nature;
(i) "may presume".—Whenever it is provided by this Adhiniyam that the Court
may presume a fact, it may either regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is
disproved or may call for proof of it;
(j) "not proved".—A fact is said to be not proved when it is neither proved nor
disproved;
(k) "proved".—A fact is said to be proved when, after considering the matters
before it, the Court either believes it to exist, or considers its existence so probable
that a prudent man ought, under the circumstances of the particular case, to act upon
the supposition that it exists;
(l) "relevant".—A fact is said to be relevant to another when it is connected
with the other in any of the ways referred to in the provisions of this Adhiniyam
relating to the relevancy of facts;
(m) "shall presume".—Whenever it is directed by this Adhiniyam that the Court
shall presume a fact, it shall regard such fact as proved, unless and until it is disproved
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Information
Technology Act, 2000, Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 and Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023 shall have the same meanings as assigned to them in the said Act and Sanhita.
PART II
CHAPTER II
R
ELEVANCY OF FACTS
3. Evidence may be given in any suit or proceeding of the existence or non-existence
of every fact in issue and of such other facts as are hereinafter declared to be relevant, and
of no others.
Explanation.—This section shall not enable any person to give evidence of a fact
which he is disentitled to prove by any provision of the law for the time being in force
relating to Civil Procedure.
Evidence may
be given of
facts in issue
and relevant
facts.
21 of 2000.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

4
Illustrations.
(a) A is tried for the murder of B by beating him with a club with the intention of
causing his death.
At A's trial the following facts are in issue:—
A's beating B with the club;
A's causing B's death by such beating;
A's intention to cause B's death.
(b) A suitor does not bring with him, and have in readiness for production at the first
hearing of the case, a bond on which he relies. This section does not enable him to produce
the bond or prove its contents at a subsequent stage of the proceedings, otherwise than in
accordance with the conditions prescribed by the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita 2023.
Closely connected facts
4. Facts which, though not in issue, are so connected with a fact in issue or a
relevant fact as to form part of the same transaction, are relevant, whether they occurred at
the same time and place or at different times and places.
Illustrations.
(a) A is accused of the murder of B by beating him. Whatever was said or done by A
or B or the bystanders at the beating, or so shortly before or after it as to form part of the
transaction, is a relevant fact.
(b) A is accused of waging war against the Government of India by taking part in an
armed insurrection in which property is destroyed, troops are attacked and jails are broken
open. The occurrence of these facts is relevant, as forming part of the general transaction,
though A may not have been present at all of them.
(c) A sues B for a libel contained in a letter forming part of a correspondence. Letters
between the parties relating to the subject out of which the libel arose, and forming part of
the correspondence in which it is contained, are relevant facts, though they do not contain
the libel itself.
(d) The question is, whether certain goods ordered from B were delivered to A. The
goods were delivered to several intermediate persons successively. Each delivery is a
relevant fact.
5. Facts which are the occasion, cause or effect, immediate or otherwise, of relevant
facts, or facts in issue, or which constitute the state of things under which they happened,
or which afforded an opportunity for their occurrence or transaction, are relevant.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A robbed B. The facts that, shortly before the robbery,
B went to a fair with money in his possession, and that he showed it, or mentioned the fact
that he had it, to third persons, are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A murdered B. Marks on the ground, produced by a
struggle at or near the place where the murder was committed, are relevant facts.
(c) The question is, whether A poisoned B. The state of B's health before the symptoms
ascribed to poison, and habits of B, known to A, which afforded an opportunity for the
administration of poison, are relevant facts.
6. (1) Any fact is relevant which shows or constitutes a motive or preparation for any
fact in issue or relevant fact.
Relevancy of
facts forming
part of same
transaction.
Facts which are
the occasion,
cause or effect
of facts in issue
or relevant
facts.
Motive,
preparation
and previous
or subsequent
conduct.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

5
(2) The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party, to any suit or proceeding,
in reference to such suit or proceeding, or in reference to any fact in issue therein or relevant
thereto, and the conduct of any person, an offence against whom is the subject of any
proceeding, is relevant, if such conduct influences or is influenced by any fact in issue or
relevant fact, and whether it was previous or subsequent thereto.
Explanation 1.—The word "conduct" in this section does not include statements,
unless those statements accompany and explain acts other than statements; but this
Explanation is not to affect the relevancy of statements under any other section of this
Adhiniyam.
Explanation 2.—When the conduct of any person is relevant, any statement made to
him or in his presence and hearing, which affects such conduct, is relevant.
Illustrations.
(a) A is tried for the murder of B. The facts that A murdered C, that B knew that A had
murdered C, and that B had tried to extort money from A by threatening to make his knowledge
public, are relevant.
(b) A sues B upon a bond for the payment of money, B denies the making of the
bond. The fact that, at the time when the bond was alleged to be made, B required money for
a particular purpose, is relevant.
(c) A is tried for the murder of B by poison. The fact that, before the death of B, A
procured poison similar to that which was administered to B, is relevant.
(d) The question is, whether a certain document is the will of A. The facts that, not
long before, the date of the alleged will, A made inquiry into matters to which the provisions
of the alleged will relate; that he consulted advocates in reference to making the will, and
that he caused drafts of other wills to be prepared, of which he did not approve, are relevant.
(e) A is accused of a crime. The facts that, either before, or at the time of, or after the
alleged crime, A provided evidence which would tend to give to the facts of the case an
appearance favourable to himself, or that he destroyed or concealed evidence, or prevented
the presence or procured the absence of persons who might have been witnesses, or
suborned persons to give false evidence respecting it, are relevant.
(f) The question is, whether A robbed B. The facts that, after B was robbed, C said in
A's presence—"the police are coming to look for the person who robbed B", and that
immediately afterwards A ran away, are relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A owes B ten thousand rupees. The facts that A asked
C to lend him money, and that D said to C in A's presence and hearing—"I advise you not
to trust A, for he owes B ten thousand rupees", and that A went away without making any
answer, are relevant facts.
(h) The question is, whether A committed a crime. The fact that A absconded, after
receiving a letter, warning A that inquiry was being made for the criminal, and the contents
of the letter, are relevant.
(i) A is accused of a crime. The facts that, after the commission of the alleged crime,
A absconded, or was in possession of property or the proceeds of property acquired by the
crime, or attempted to conceal things which were or might have been used in committing it,
are relevant.
(j) The question is, whether A was raped. The fact that, shortly after the alleged rape,
A made a complaint relating to the crime, the circumstances under which, and the terms in
which, the complaint was made, are relevant. The fact that, without making a complaint, A
said that A had been raped is not relevant as conduct under this section, though it may be
relevant as a dying declaration under clause (1) of section 26, or as corroborative evidence
under section 160.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

6
(k) The question is, whether A was robbed. The fact that, soon after the alleged
robbery, A made a complaint relating to the offence, the circumstances under which, and the
terms in which, the complaint was made, are relevant. The fact that A said he had been
robbed, without making any complaint, is not relevant, as conduct under this section,
though it may be relevant as a dying declaration under clause ( 1) of section 26, or as
corroborative evidence under section 157.
7. Facts necessary to explain or introduce a fact in issue or relevant fact, or which
support or rebut an inference suggested by a fact in issue or a relevant fact, or which
establish the identity of anything, or person whose identity, is relevant, or fix the time or
place at which any fact in issue or relevant fact happened, or which show the relation of
parties by whom any such fact was transacted, are relevant insofar as they are necessary
for that purpose.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether a given document is the will of A. The state of A's
property and of his family at the date of the alleged will may be relevant facts.
(b) A sues B for a libel imputing disgraceful conduct to A; B affirms that the matter
alleged to be libellous is true. The position and relations of the parties at the time when the
libel was published may be relevant facts as introductory to the facts in issue. The particulars
of a dispute between A and B about a matter unconnected with the alleged libel are irrelevant,
though the fact that there was a dispute may be relevant if it affected the relations between
A and B.
(c) A is accused of a crime. The fact that, soon after the commission of the crime, A
absconded from his house, is relevant under section 6, as conduct subsequent to and
affected by facts in issue. The fact that, at the time when he left home, A had sudden and
urgent business at the place to which he went, is relevant, as tending to explain the fact that
he left home suddenly. The details of the business on which he left are not relevant, except
insofar as they are necessary to show that the business was sudden and urgent.
(d) A sues B for inducing C to break a contract of service made by him with A. C, on
leaving A's service, says to A—"I am leaving you because B has made me a better offer".
This statement is a relevant fact as explanatory of C's conduct, which is relevant as a fact in
issue.
(e) A, accused of theft, is seen to give the stolen property to B, who is seen to give it
to A's wife. B says as he delivers it—"A says you are to hide this". B's statement is relevant
as explanatory of a fact which is part of the transaction.
(f) A is tried for a riot and is proved to have marched at the head of a mob. The cries of
the mob are relevant as explanatory of the nature of the transaction.
8. Where there is reasonable ground to believe that two or more persons have
conspired together to commit an offence or an actionable wrong, anything said, done or
written by any one of such persons in reference to their common intention, after the time
when such intention was first entertained by any one of them, is a relevant fact as against
each of the persons believed to be so conspiring, as well for the purpose of proving the
existence of the conspiracy as for the purpose of showing that any such person was a party
to it.
Illustration.
Reasonable ground exists for believing that A has joined in a conspiracy to wage war
against the State.
The facts that B procured arms in Europe for the purpose of the conspiracy, C collected
money in Kolkata for a like object, D persuaded persons to join the conspiracy in Mumbai,
E published writings advocating the object in view at Agra, and F transmitted from Delhi to
Facts
necessary to
explain or
introduce fact
in issue or
relevant facts.
Things said,
done by
conspirator in
reference to
common
design.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

7
G at Singapore the money which C had collected at Kolkata, and the contents of a letter
written by H giving an account of the conspiracy, are each relevant, both to prove the
existence of the conspiracy, and to prove A's complicity in it, although he may have been
ignorant of all of them, and although the persons by whom they were done were strangers
to him, and although they may have taken place before he joined the conspiracy or after he
left it.
9. Facts not otherwise relevant are relevant—
(1) if they are inconsistent with any fact in issue or relevant fact;
(2) if by themselves or in connection with other facts they make the existence or
non-existence of any fact in issue or relevant fact highly probable or improbable.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A committed a crime at Chennai on a certain day.
The fact that, on that day, A was at Ladakh is relevant. The fact that, near the time
when the crime was committed, A was at a distance from the place where it was
committed, which would render it highly improbable, though not impossible, that he
committed it, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A committed a crime. The circumstances are such
that the crime must have been committed either by A, B, C or D. Every fact which
shows that the crime could have been committed by no one else, and that it was not
committed by either B, C or D, is relevant.
10. In suits in which damages are claimed, any fact which will enable the Court to
determine the amount of damages which ought to be awarded is relevant.
11. Where the question is as to the existence of any right or custom, the following
facts are relevant—
(a) any transaction by which the right or custom in question was created,
claimed, modified, recognised, asserted or denied, or which was inconsistent with its
existence;
(b) particular instances in which the right or custom was claimed, recognised
or exercised, or in which its exercise was disputed, asserted or departed from.
Illustration.
The question is, whether A has a right to a fishery. A deed conferring the fishery on
A's ancestors, a mortgage of the fishery by A's father, a subsequent grant of the fishery by
A's father, irreconcilable with the mortgage, particular instances in which A's father exercised
the right, or in which the exercise of the right was stopped by A's neighbours, are relevant
facts.
12. Facts showing the existence of any state of mind such as intention, knowledge,
good faith, negligence, rashness, ill-will or goodwill towards any particular person, or
showing the existence of any state of body or bodily feeling, are relevant, when the existence
of any such state of mind or body or bodily feeling is in issue or relevant.
Explanation 1.—A fact relevant as showing the existence of a relevant state of mind
must show that the state of mind exists, not generally, but in reference to the particular
matter in question.
Explanation 2.—But where, upon the trial of a person accused of an offence, the
previous commission by the accused of an offence is relevant within the meaning of this
section, the previous conviction of such person shall also be a relevant fact.
When facts
not otherwise
relevant
become
relevant.
Facts tending
to enable Court
to determine
amount are
relevant in suits
for damages.
Facts relevant
when right or
custom is in
question.
Facts showing
existence of
state of mind,
or of body of
bodily feeling.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

8
Illustrations.
(a) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen. It is proved that
he was in possession of a particular stolen article. The fact that, at the same time, he was in
possession of many other stolen articles is relevant, as tending to show that he knew each
and all of the articles of which he was in possession to be stolen.
(b) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to another person a counterfeit currency
which, at the time when he delivered it, he knew to be counterfeit. The fact that, at the time
of its delivery, A was possessed of a number of other pieces of counterfeit currency is
relevant. The fact that A had been previously convicted of delivering to another person as
genuine a counterfeit currency knowing it to be counterfeit is relevant.
(c) A sues B for damage done by a dog of B's, which B knew to be ferocious. The fact
that the dog had previously bitten X, Y and Z, and that they had made complaints to B, are
relevant.
(d) The question is, whether A, the acceptor of a bill of exchange, knew that the name
of the payee was fictitious. The fact that A had accepted other bills drawn in the same
manner before they could have been transmitted to him by the payee if the payee had been
a real person, is relevant, as showing that A knew that the payee was a fictitious person.
(e) A is accused of defaming B by publishing an imputation intended to harm the
reputation of B. The fact of previous publications by A respecting B, showing ill-will on the
part of A towards B is relevant, as proving A's intention to harm B's reputation by the
particular publication in question. The facts that there was no previous quarrel between A
and B, and that A repeated the matter complained of as he heard it, are relevant, as showing
that A did not intend to harm the reputation of B.
(f) A is sued by B for fraudulently representing to B that C was solvent, whereby B,
being induced to trust C, who was insolvent, suffered loss. The fact that, at the time when
A represented C to be solvent, C was supposed to be solvent by his neighbours and by
persons dealing with him, is relevant, as showing that A made the representation in good
faith.
(g) A is sued by B for the price of work done by B, upon a house of which A is owner,
by the order of C, a contractor. A's defence is that B's contract was with C. The fact that A
paid C for the work in question is relevant, as proving that A did, in good faith, make over to
C the management of the work in question, so that C was in a position to contract with B on
C's own account, and not as agent for A.
(h) A is accused of the dishonest misappropriation of property which he had found,
and the question is whether, when he appropriated it, he believed in good faith that the real
owner could not be found. The fact that public notice of the loss of the property had been
given in the place where A was, is relevant, as showing that A did not in good faith believe
that the real owner of the property could not be found. The fact that A knew, or had reason
to believe, that the notice was given fraudulently by C, who had heard of the loss of the
property and wished to set up a false claim to it, is relevant, as showing that the fact that A
knew of the notice did not disprove A's good faith.
(i) A is charged with shooting at B with intent to kill him. In order to show A's intent,
the fact of A's having previously shot at B may be proved.
(j) A is charged with sending threatening letters to B. Threatening letters previously
sent by A to B may be proved, as showing the intention of the letters.
(k) The question is, whether A has been guilty of cruelty towards B, his wife.
Expressions of their feeling towards each other shortly before or after the alleged cruelty are
relevant facts.
(l) The question is whether A's death was caused by poison. Statements made by A
during his illness as to his symptoms are relevant facts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

9
(m) The question is, what was the state of A's health at the time when an assurance on
his life was effected. Statements made by A as to the state of his health at or near the time in
question are relevant facts.
(n) A sues B for negligence in providing him with a car for hire not reasonably fit for
use, whereby A was injured. The fact that B's attention was drawn on other occasions to the
defect of that particular car is relevant. The fact that B was habitually negligent about the
cars which he let to hire is irrelevant.
(o) A is tried for the murder of B by intentionally shooting him dead. The fact that A on
other occasions shot at B is relevant as showing his intention to shoot B. The fact that A
was in the habit of shooting at people with intent to murder them is irrelevant.
(p) A is tried for a crime. The fact that he said something indicating an intention to
commit that particular crime is relevant. The fact that he said something indicating a general
disposition to commit crimes of that class is irrelevant.
13. When there is a question whether an act was accidental or intentional, or done
with a particular knowledge or intention, the fact that such act formed part of a series of
similar occurrences, in each of which the person doing the act was concerned, is relevant.
Illustrations.
(a) A is accused of burning down his house in order to obtain money for which it is
insured. The facts that A lived in several houses successively each of which he insured, in
each of which a fire occurred, and after each of which fires A received payment from a
different insurance company, are relevant, as tending to show that the fires were not
accidental.
(b) A is employed to receive money from the debtors of B. It is A's duty to make entries
in a book showing the amounts received by him. He makes an entry showing that on a
particular occasion, he received less than he really did receive. The question is, whether
this false entry was accidental or intentional. The facts that other entries made by A in the
same book are false, and that the false entry is in each case in favour of A, are relevant.
(c) A is accused of fraudulently delivering to B, a counterfeit currency. The question
is, whether the delivery of the rupee was accidental. The facts that, soon before or soon
after the delivery to B, A delivered counterfeit rupees to C, D and E are relevant, as showing
that the delivery to B was not accidental.
14. When there is a question whether a particular act was done, the existence of any
course of business, according to which it naturally would have been done, is a relevant fact.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether a particular letter was dispatched. The facts that it was
the ordinary course of business for all letters put in a certain place to be carried to the post,
and that particular letter was put in that place are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether a particular letter reached A. The facts that it was posted
in due course, and was not returned through the Return Letter Office, are relevant.
Admissions
15. An admission is a statement, oral or documentary or contained in electronic form,
which suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or relevant fact, and which is made by
any of the persons, and under the circumstances, hereinafter mentioned.
16. (1) Statements made by a party to the proceeding, or by an agent to any such
party, whom the Court regards, under the circumstances of the case, as expressly or impliedly
authorised by him to make them, are admissions.
Facts bearing
on question
whether act
was accidental
or intentional.
Existence of
course of
business when
relevant.
Admission
defined.
Admission by
party to
proceeding or
his agent.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

10
(2) Statements made by—
(i) parties to suits suing or sued in a representative character, are not admissions,
unless they were made while the party making them held that character;
(ii) persons who have any proprietary or pecuniary interest in the subject
matter of the proceeding, and who make the statement in their character of persons so
interested; or
(iii) persons from whom the parties to the suit have derived their interest in the
subject matter of the suit,
are admissions, if they are made during the continuance of the interest of the persons
making the statements.
17. Statements made by persons whose position or liability, it is necessary to prove
as against any party to the suit, are admissions, if such statements would be relevant as
against such persons in relation to such position or liability in a suit brought by or against
them, and if they are made whilst the person making them occupies such position or is
subject to such liability.
Illustration.
A undertakes to collect rents for B. B sues A for not collecting rent due from C to B. A
denies that rent was due from C to B. A statement by C that he owed B rent is an admission,
and is a relevant fact as against A, if A denies that C did owe rent to B.
18. Statements made by persons to whom a party to the suit has expressly referred
for information in reference to a matter in dispute are admissions.
Illustration.
The question is, whether a horse sold by A to B is sound.
A says to B—"Go and ask C, C knows all about it". C's statement is an admission.
19. Admissions are relevant and may be proved as against the person who makes
them, or his representative in interest; but they cannot be proved by or on behalf of the
person who makes them or by his representative in interest, except in the following cases,
namely:—
(1) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when
it is of such a nature that, if the person making it were dead, it would be relevant as
between third persons under sub-section ( 2) of section 23;
(2) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, when
it consists of a statement of the existence of any state of mind or body, relevant or in
issue, made at or about the time when such state of mind or body existed, and is
accompanied by conduct rendering its falsehood improbable;
(3) An admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it, if it is
relevant otherwise than as an admission.
Illustrations.
(a) The question between A and B is whether a certain deed is or is not forged. A
affirms that it is genuine, B that it is forged. A may prove a statement by B that the deed is
genuine, and B may prove a statement by A that deed is forged; but A cannot prove a
statement by himself that the deed is genuine, nor can B prove a statement by himself that
the deed is forged.
(b) A, the captain of a ship, is tried for casting her away. Evidence is given to show
that the ship was taken out of her proper course. A produces a book kept by him in the
ordinary course of his business showing observations alleged to have been taken by him
Admissions by
persons whose
position must
be proved as
against party
to suit.
Admissions by
persons
expressly
referred to by
party to suit.
Proof of
admissions
against persons
making them,
and by or on
their behalf.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

11
from day to day, and indicating that the ship was not taken out of her proper course. A may
prove these statements, because they would be admissible between third parties, if he were
dead, under sub-section (2) of section 23.
(c) A is accused of a crime committed by him at Kolkata. He produces a letter written
by himself and dated at Chennai on that day, and bearing the Chennai post-mark of that day.
The statement in the date of the letter is admissible, because, if A were dead, it would be
admissible under sub-section (2) of section 23.
(d) A is accused of receiving stolen goods knowing them to be stolen. He offers to
prove that he refused to sell them below their value. A may prove these statements, though
they are admissions, because they are explanatory of conduct influenced by facts in issue.
(e) A is accused of fraudulently having in his possession counterfeit currency which
he knew to be counterfeit. He offers to prove that he asked a skilful person to examine the
currency as he doubted whether it was counterfeit or not, and that person did examine it
and told him it was genuine. A may prove these facts for the reasons specified in
Illustration (e).
20. Oral admissions as to the contents of a document are not relevant, unless and
until the party proposing to prove them shows that he is entitled to give secondary evidence
of the contents of such document under the rules hereinafter contained, or unless the
genuineness of a document produced is in question.
21. In civil cases no admission is relevant, if it is made either upon an express condition
that evidence of it is not to be given, or under circumstances from which the Court can infer
that the parties agreed together that evidence of it should not be given.
Explanation.—Nothing in this section shall be taken to exempt any advocate from
giving evidence of any matter of which he may be compelled to give evidence under
sub-sections (1) and (2) of section 132.
22. A confession made by an accused person is irrelevant in a criminal proceeding, if
the making of the confession appears to the Court to have been caused by any inducement,
threat, coercion or promise having reference to the charge against the accused person,
proceeding from a person in authority and sufficient, in the opinion of the Court, to give the
accused person grounds which would appear to him reasonable for supposing that by
making it he would gain any advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature in reference to
the proceedings against him:
Provided that if the confession is made after the impression caused by any such
inducement, threat, coercion or promise has, in the opinion of the Court, been fully removed,
it is relevant:
Provided further that if such a confession is otherwise relevant, it does not become
irrelevant merely because it was made under a promise of secrecy, or in consequence of a
deception practised on the accused person for the purpose of obtaining it, or when he was
drunk, or because it was made in answer to questions which he need not have answered,
whatever may have been the form of those questions, or because he was not warned that he
was not bound to make such confession, and that evidence of it might be given against him.
23. (1) No confession made to a police officer shall be proved as against a person
accused of any offence.
(2) No confession made by any person while he is in the custody of a police officer,
unless it is made in the immediate presence of a Magistrate shall be proved against him:
When oral
admissions as
to contents of
documents are
relevant.
Admissions in
civil cases
when relevant.
Confession
caused by
inducement,
threat,
coercion or
promise, when
irrelevant in
criminal
proceeding.
Confession to
police officer.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

12
Provided that when any fact is deposed to as discovered in consequence of information
received from a person accused of any offence, in the custody of a police officer, so much
of such information, whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the
fact discovered, may be proved.
24. When more persons than one is being tried jointly for the same offence, and a
confession made by one of such persons affecting himself and some other of such persons
is proved, the Court may take into consideration such confession as against such other
person as well as against the person who makes such confession.
Explanation I.—"Offence", as used in this section, includes the abetment of, or
attempt to commit, the offence.
Explanation II.—A trial of more persons than one held in the absence of the accused
who has absconded or who fails to comply with a proclamation issued under section 82 of
the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 shall be deemed to be a joint trial for the
purpose of this section.
Illustrations.
(a) A and B are jointly tried for the murder of C. It is proved that A said "B and I
murdered C". The Court may consider the effect of this confession as against B.
(b) A is on his trial for the murder of C. There is evidence to show that C was murdered
by A and B, and that B said "A and I murdered C". This statement may not be taken into
consideration by the Court against A, as B is not being jointly tried.
25. Admissions are not conclusive proof of the matters admitted but they may operate
as estoppels under the provisions hereinafter contained.
Statements by persons who cannot be called as witnesses
26. Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made by a person who is dead, or
who cannot be found, or who has become incapable of giving evidence, or whose attendance
cannot be procured without an amount of delay or expense which under the circumstances
of the case appears to the Court unreasonable, are themselves facts in issue or relevant
facts in the following cases, namely:—
(1) When the statement is made by a person as to the cause of his death, or as
to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in
which the cause of that person's death comes into question. Such statements are
relevant whether the person who made them was or was not, at the time when they
were made, under expectation of death, and whatever may be the nature of the
proceeding in which the cause of his death comes into question.
(2) When the statement was made by such person in the ordinary course of
business, and in particular when it consists of any entry or memorandum made by him
in books kept in the ordinary course of business, or in the discharge of professional
duty; or of an acknowledgement written or signed by him of the receipt of money,
goods, securities or property of any kind; or of a document used in commerce written
or signed by him; or of the date of a letter or other document usually dated, written or
signed by him.
(3) When the statement is against the pecuniary or proprietary interest of the
person making it, or when, if true, it would expose him or would have exposed him to
a criminal prosecution or to a suit for damages.
(4) When the statement gives the opinion of any such person, as to the existence
of any public right or custom or matters of public or general interest, of the existence
of which, if it existed, he would have been likely to be aware, and when such statement
was made before any controversy as to such right, custom or matter had arisen.
Consideration
of proved
confession
affecting
person making
it and others
jointly under
trial for same
offence.
Admissions
not conclusive
proof, but
may estop.
Cases in which
statement of
facts in issue
or relevant
fact by person
who is dead or
cannot be
found, etc., is
relevant.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

13
(5) When the statement relates to the existence of any relationship by blood,
marriage or adoption between persons as to whose relationship by blood, marriage or
adoption the person making the statement had special means of knowledge, and
when the statement was made before the question in dispute was raised.
(6) When the statement relates to the existence of any relationship by blood,
marriage or adoption between persons deceased, and is made in any will or deed
relating to the affairs of the family to which any such deceased person belonged, or in
any family pedigree, or upon any tombstone, family portrait or other thing on which
such statements are usually made, and when such statement was made before the
question in dispute was raised.
(7) When the statement is contained in any deed, will or other document which
relates to any such transaction as is specified in clause ( a) of section 11.
(8) When the statement was made by a number of persons, and expressed
feelings or impressions on their part relevant to the matter in question.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A was murdered by B; or A die of injuries received in a
transaction in the course of which she was ravished. The question is whether she was
ravished by B; or the question is, whether A was killed by B under such circumstances that
a suit would lie against B by A's widow. Statements made by A as to the cause of his or her
death, referring respectively to the murder, the rape and the actionable wrong under
consideration, are relevant facts.
(b) The question is as to the date of A's birth. An entry in the diary of a deceased
surgeon regularly kept in the course of business, stating that, on a given day he attended
A's mother and delivered her of a son, is a relevant fact.
(c) The question is, whether A was in Nagpur on a given day. A statement in the diary
of a deceased solicitor, regularly kept in the course of business that on a given day the
solicitor attended A at a place mentioned, in Nagpur, for the purpose of conferring with him
upon specified business, is a relevant fact.
(d) The question is, whether a ship sailed from Mumbai harbour on a given day. A
letter written by a deceased member of a merchant's firm by which she was chartered to their
correspondents in Chennai, to whom the cargo was consigned, stating that the ship sailed
on a given day from Mumbai port, is a relevant fact.
(e) The question is, whether rent was paid to A for certain land. A letter from A's
deceased agent to A, saying that he had received the rent on A's account and held it at A's
orders is a relevant fact.
(f) The question is, whether A and B were legally married. The statement of a deceased
clergyman that he married them under such circumstances that the celebration would be a
crime is relevant.
(g) The question is, whether A, a person who cannot be found, wrote a letter on a
certain day. The fact that a letter written by him is dated on that day is relevant.
(h) The question is, what was the cause of the wreck of a ship. A protest made by the
captain, whose attendance cannot be procured, is a relevant fact.
(i) The question is, whether a given road is a public way. A statement by A, a deceased
Sarpanch of the Panchayat of the village, that the road was public, is a relevant fact.
(j) The question is, what was the price of grain on a certain day in a particular market.
A statement of the price, made by a deceased businessperson in the ordinary course of his
business, is a relevant fact.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

14
(k) The question is, whether A, who is dead, was the father of B. A statement by A that
B was his son, is a relevant fact.
(l) The question is, what was the date of the birth of A. A letter from A's deceased
father to a friend, announcing the birth of A on a given day, is a relevant fact.
(m) The question is, whether, and when, A and B were married. An entry in a
memorandum book by C, the deceased father of B, of his daughter's marriage with A on a
given date, is a relevant fact.
(n) A sues B for a libel expressed in a painted caricature exposed in a shop window.
The question is as to the similarity of the caricature and its libellous character. The remarks
of a crowd of spectators on these points may be proved.
27. Evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or before any person
authorised by law to take it, is relevant for the purpose of proving, in a subsequent judicial
proceeding, or in a later stage of the same judicial proceeding, the truth of the facts which
it states, when the witness is dead or cannot be found, or is incapable of giving evidence,
or is kept out of the way by the adverse party, or if his presence cannot be obtained without
an amount of delay or expense which, under the circumstances of the case, the Court
considers unreasonable:
Provided that the proceeding was between the same parties or their representatives in
interest; that the adverse party in the first proceeding had the right and opportunity to
cross-examine and the questions in issue were substantially the same in the first as in the
second proceeding.
Explanation.—A criminal trial or inquiry shall be deemed to be a proceeding between
the prosecutor and the accused within the meaning of this section.
Statements made under special circumstances
28. Entries in the books of account, including those maintained in an electronic form,
regularly kept in the course of business are relevant whenever they refer to a matter into
which the Court has to inquire, but such statements shall not alone be sufficient evidence
to charge any person with liability.
Illustration.
A sues B for one thousand rupees, and shows entries in his account book showing B
to be indebted to him to this amount. The entries are relevant, but are not sufficient, without
other evidence, to prove the debt.
29. An entry in any public or other official book, register or record or an electronic
record, stating a fact in issue or relevant fact, and made by a public servant in the discharge
of his official duty, or by any other person in performance of a duty specially enjoined by
the law of the country in which such book, register or record or an electronic record, is kept,
is itself a relevant fact.
30. Statements of facts in issue or relevant facts, made in published maps or charts
generally offered for public sale, or in maps or plans made under the authority of the Central
Government or any State Government, as to matters usually represented or stated in such
maps, charts or plans, are themselves relevant facts.
31. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence of any fact of a public
nature, any statement of it, made in a recital contained in any Central Act or State Act or in
a Central Government or State Government notification appearing in the respective Official
Gazette or in any printed paper or in electronic or digital form purporting to be such Gazette,
is a relevant fact.
Relevancy of
certain
evidence for
proving, in
subsequent
proceeding,
the truth of
facts therein
stated.
Entries in
books of
account when
relevant.
Relevancy of
entry in public
record or an
electronic
record made in
performance
of duty.
Relevancy of
statements in
maps, charts
and plans.
Relevancy of
statement as
to fact of
public nature
contained in
certain Acts or
notifications.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

15
32. When the Court has to form an opinion as to a law of any country, any statement
of such law contained in a book purporting to be printed or published including in electronic
or digital form under the authority of the Government of such country and to contain any
such law, and any report of a ruling of the Courts of such country contained in a book
including in electronic or digital form purporting to be a report of such rulings, is relevant.
How much of a statement is to be proved
33. When any statement of which evidence is given forms part of a longer statement,
or of a conversation or part of an isolated document, or is contained in a document which
forms part of a book, or is contained in part of electronic record or of a connected series of
letters or papers, evidence shall be given of so much and no more of the statement,
conversation, document, electronic record, book or series of letters or papers as the Court
considers necessary in that particular case to the full understanding of the nature and effect
of the statement, and of the circumstances under which it was made.
Judgments of Courts when relevant
34. The existence of any judgment, order or decree which by law prevents any Court
from taking cognizance of a suit or holding a trial, is a relevant fact when the question is
whether such Court ought to take cognizance of such suit or to hold such trial.
35. (1) A final judgment, order or decree of a competent Court or Tribunal, in the
exercise of probate, matrimonial, admiralty or insolvency jurisdiction, which confers upon
or takes away from any person any legal character, or which declares any person to be
entitled to any such character, or to be entitled to any specific thing, not as against any
specified person but absolutely, is relevant when the existence of any such legal character,
or the title of any such person to any such thing, is relevant.
(2) Such judgment, order or decree is conclusive proof that—
(i) any legal character, which it confers accrued at the time when such judgment,
order or decree came into operation;
(ii) any legal character to which it declares any such person to be entitled,
accrued to that person at the time when such judgment order or decree declares it to
have accrued to that person;
(iii) any legal character which it takes away from any such person ceased at the
time from which such judgment, order or decree declared that it had ceased or should
cease; and
(iv) anything to which it declares any person to be so entitled was the property
of that person at the time from which such judgment, order or decree declares that it
had been or should be his property.
36. Judgments, orders or decrees other than those mentioned in section 31 are relevant
if they relate to matters of a public nature relevant to the enquiry; but such judgments,
orders or decrees are not conclusive proof of that which they state.
Illustration.
A sues B for trespass on his land. B alleges the existence of a public right of way over
the land, which A denies. The existence of a decree in favour of the defendant, in a suit by
A against C for a trespass on the same land, in which C alleged the existence of the same
right of way, is relevant, but it is not conclusive proof that the right of way exists.
Relevancy of
statements as
to any law
contained in
law books
including
electronic or
digital form.
What evidence
to be given
when statement
forms part of a
conversation,
document,
electronic
record, book or
series of letters
or papers.
Previous
judgments
relevant to bar
a second suit
or trial.
Relevancy of
certain
judgments in
probate, etc.,
jurisdiction.
Relevancy and
effect of
judgments,
orders or
decrees, other
than those
mentioned in
section 31.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

16
37. Judgments or orders or decrees, other than those mentioned in sections 34, 35
and 36 are irrelevant, unless the existence of such judgment or order or decree is a fact in
issue, or is relevant under some other provision of this Adhiniyam.
Illustrations.
(a) A and B separately sue C for a libel which reflects upon each of them. C in each
case says that the matter alleged to be libellous is true, and the circumstances are such that
it is probably true in each case, or in neither. A obtains a decree against C for damages on the
ground that C failed to make out his justification. The fact is irrelevant as between B and C.
(b) A prosecutes B for adultery with C, A's wife. B denies that C is A's wife, but the
Court convicts B of adultery. Afterwards, C is prosecuted for bigamy in marrying B during
A's lifetime. C says that she never was A's wife. The judgment against B is irrelevant as
against C.
(c) A prosecutes B for stealing a cow from him. B is convicted. A afterwards sues C
for the cow, which B had sold to him before his conviction. As between A and C, the
judgment against B is irrelevant.
(d) A has obtained a decree for the possession of land against B. C, B's son, murders
A in consequence. The existence of the judgment is relevant, as showing motive for a crime.
(e) A is charged with theft and with having been previously convicted of theft. The
previous conviction is relevant as a fact in issue.
(f) A is tried for the murder of B. The fact that B prosecuted A for libel and that A was
convicted and sentenced is relevant under section 8 as showing the motive for the fact in
issue.
38. Any party to a suit or other proceeding may show that any judgment, order or
decree which is relevant under sections 34, 35 and 36, and which has been proved by the
adverse party, was delivered by a Court not competent to deliver it, or was obtained by
fraud or collusion.
Opinions of third persons when relevant
39. (1) When the Court has to form an opinion upon a point of foreign law or of
science or art, or any other field, or as to identity of handwriting or finger impressions, the
opinions upon that point, of persons specially skilled in such foreign law, science or art, or
any other field, or in questions as to identity of handwriting or finger impressions are
relevant facts and such persons are called experts.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether the death of A was caused by poison. The opinions of
experts as to the symptoms produced by the poison by which A is supposed to have died,
are relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A, at the time of doing a certain act, was, by reason of
unsoundness of mind, incapable of knowing the nature of the act, or that he was doing what
was either wrong or contrary to law. The opinions of experts upon the question whether the
symptoms exhibited by A commonly show unsoundness of mind, and whether such
unsoundness of mind usually renders persons incapable of knowing the nature of the acts
which they do, or of knowing that what they do is either wrong or contrary to law, are
relevant.
(c) The question is, whether a certain document was written by A. Another document
is produced which is proved or admitted to have been written by A. The opinions of experts
Judgments,
etc., other
than those
mentioned in
sections 34, 35
and 36 when
relevant.
Fraud or
collusion in
obtaining
judgment, or
incompetency
of Court, may
be proved.
Opinions of
experts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

17
on the question whether the two documents were written by the same person or by different
persons, are relevant.
(2) When in a proceeding, the court has to form an opinion on any matter relating to
any information transmitted or stored in any computer resource or any other electronic or
digital form, the opinion of the Examiner of Electronic Evidence referred to in section 79A of
the Information Technology Act, 2000, is a relevant fact.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section, an Examiner of Electronic Evidence
shall be an expert.
40. Facts, not otherwise relevant, are relevant if they support or are inconsistent
with the opinions of experts, when such opinions are relevant.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A was poisoned by a certain poison. The fact that other
persons, who were poisoned by that poison, exhibited certain symptoms which experts
affirm or deny to be the symptoms of that poison, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether an obstruction to a harbour is caused by a certain
sea-wall. The fact that other harbours similarly situated in other respects, but where there
were no such sea-walls, began to be obstructed at about the same time, is relevant.
41. (1) When the Court has to form an opinion as to the person by whom any document
was written or signed, the opinion of any person acquainted with the handwriting of the
person by whom it is supposed to be written or signed that it was or was not written or
signed by that person, is a relevant fact.
Explanation.—A person is said to be acquainted with the handwriting of another
person when he has seen that person write, or when he has received documents purporting
to be written by that person in answer to documents written by himself or under his authority
and addressed to that person, or when, in the ordinary course of business, documents
purporting to be written by that person have been habitually submitted to him.
Illustration.
The question is, whether a given letter is in the handwriting of A, a merchant in
Itanagar. B is a merchant in Bengaluru, who has written letters addressed to A and received
letters purporting to be written by him. C, is B's clerk whose duty it was to examine and file
B's correspondence. D is B's broker, to whom B habitually submitted the letters purporting
to be written by A for the purpose of advising with him thereon. The opinions of B, C and D
on the question whether the letter is in the handwriting of A are relevant, though neither B,
C nor D ever saw A write.
(2) When the Court has to form an opinion as to the electronic signature of any
person, the opinion of the Certifying Authority which has issued the Electronic Signature
Certificate is a relevant fact.
42. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence of any general custom
or right, the opinions, as to the existence of such custom or right, of persons who would be
likely to know of its existence if it existed, are relevant.
Explanation.—The expression "general custom or right" includes customs or rights
common to any considerable class of persons.
Illustration.
The right of the villagers of a particular village to use the water of a particular well is
a general right within the meaning of this section.
43. When the Court has to form an opinion as to—
(i) the usages and tenets of any body of men or family;
Facts bearing
upon opinions
of experts.
Opinion as to
handwriting
and digital
signature,
when relevant.
Opinion as to
existence of
general custom
or right, when
relevant.
Opinion as to
usages, tenets,
etc., when
relevant.
21 of 2000.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

18
(ii ) the constitution and governance of any religious or charitable
foundation; or
(iii) the meaning of words or terms used in particular districts or by particular
classes of people;
(iv) the opinions of persons having special means of knowledge thereon, are
relevant facts.
44. When the Court has to form an opinion as to the relationship of one person to
another, the opinion, expressed by conduct, as to the existence of such relationship, of any
person who, as a member of the family or otherwise, has special means of knowledge on the
subject, is a relevant fact:
Provided that such opinion shall not be sufficient to prove a marriage in proceedings
under the Divorce Act, 1869, or in prosecutions under section of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023.
Illustrations.
(a) The question is, whether A and B were married. The fact that they were usually
received and treated by their friends as husband and wife, is relevant.
(b) The question is, whether A was the legitimate son of B. The fact that A was always
treated as such by members of the family, is relevant.
45. Whenever the opinion of any living person is relevant, the grounds on which
such opinion is based are also relevant.
Illustration.
An expert may give an account of experiments performed by him for the purpose of
forming his opinion.
Character when relevant
46. In civil cases, the fact that the character of any person concerned is such as to
render probable or improbable any conduct imputed to him, is irrelevant, except insofar as
such character appears from facts otherwise relevant.
47. In criminal proceedings, the fact that the person accused is of a good character,
is relevant.
48. In a prosecution for an offence under section 64, section 65, section 67, section 68,
section 70, section 71, section 73, section 74, section 75, section 76 or section 77 of the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 or for attempt to commit any such offence, where
the question of consent is in issue, evidence of the character of the victim or of such
person's previous sexual experience with any person shall not be relevant on the issue of
such consent or the quality of consent.
49. In criminal proceedings, the fact that the accused has a bad character, is irrelevant,
unless evidence has been given that he has a good character, in which case it becomes
relevant.
Explanation 1.—This section does not apply to cases in which the bad character of
any person is itself a fact in issue.
Explanation 2.—A previous conviction is relevant as evidence of bad character.
Opinion on
relationship,
when relevant.
Grounds of
opinion, when
relevant.
In civil cases,
character to
prove conduct
imputed,
irrelevant.
In criminal
cases, previous
good character
relevant.
Evidence of
character or
previous sexual
experience not
relevant in
certain cases.
Previous bad
character not
relevant,
except in reply.
4 of 1869.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

19
50. In civil cases, the fact that the character of any person is such as to affect the
amount of damages which he ought to receive, is relevant.
Explanation.—In this and sections 46, 47 and 49, the word "character" includes both
reputation and disposition; but, except as provided in section 59, evidence may be given
only of general reputation and general disposition, and not of particular acts by which
reputation or disposition has been shown.
PART III
O
N PROOF
CHAPTER III
FACTS WHICH NEED NOT BE PROVED
51. No fact of which the Court will take judicial notice need be proved.
52. (1) The Court shall take judicial notice of the following facts, namely:—
(a) all laws in force in the territory of India including laws having extra-territorial
operation;
(b) international treaty, agreement or convention with country or countries by
India, or decisions made by India at the international associations or other bodies;
(c) the course of proceeding of the Constituent Assembly of India, of Parliament
of India and of the State Legislatures;
(d) the seals of all Courts and Tribunals;
(e) the seals of Courts of Admiralty and Maritime Jurisdiction, Notaries Public,
and all seals which any person is authorised to use by the Constitution, or by an Act
of Parliament or State Legislatures, or Regulations having the force of law in India;
(f) the accession to office, names, titles, functions, and signatures of the persons
filling for the time being any public office in any State, if the fact of their appointment
to such office is notified in any Official Gazette;
(g) the existence, title and national flag of every country or sovereign recognised
by the Government of India;
(h) the divisions of time, the geographical divisions of the world, and public
festivals, fasts and holidays notified in the Official Gazette;
(i) the territory of India;
(j) the commencement, continuance and termination of hostilities between the
Government of India and any other country or body of persons;
(k) the names of the members and officers of the Court, and of their deputies
and subordinate officers and assistants, and also of all officers acting in execution of
its process, and of advocates and other persons authorised by law to appear or act
before it;
(l) the rule of the road or land or at sea.
(2) In the cases referred to in sub-section (1) and also on all matters of public history,
literature, science or art, the Court may resort for its aid to appropriate books or documents
of reference and if the Court is called upon by any person to take judicial notice of any fact,
it may refuse to do so unless and until such person produces any such book or document
as it may consider necessary to enable it to do so.
Character as
affecting
damages.
Fact judicially
noticeable
need not be
proved.
Facts of which
Court shall
take judicial
notice.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

20
53. No fact need to be proved in any proceeding which the parties thereto or their
agents agree to admit at the hearing, or which, before the hearing, they agree to admit by
any writing under their hands, or which by any rule of pleading in force at the time they are
deemed to have admitted by their pleadings:
Provided that the Court may, in its discretion, require the facts admitted to be proved
otherwise than by such admissions.
CHAPTER IV
O
F ORAL EVIDENCE
54. All facts, except the contents of documents may be proved by oral evidence.
55. Oral evidence shall, in all cases whatever, be direct; if it refers to,—
(i) a fact which could be seen, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he
saw it;
(ii) a fact which could be heard, it must be the evidence of a witness who says
he heard it;
(iii) a fact which could be perceived by any other sense or in any other manner,
it must be the evidence of a witness who says he perceived it by that sense or in that
manner;
(iv) an opinion or to the grounds on which that opinion is held, it must be the
evidence of the person who holds that opinion on those grounds:
Provided that the opinions of experts expressed in any treatise commonly offered for
sale, and the grounds on which such opinions are held, may be proved by the production
of such treatises if the author is dead, or cannot be found, or has become incapable of
giving evidence, or cannot be called as a witness without an amount of delay or expense
which the Court regards as unreasonable:
Provided further that, if oral evidence refers to the existence or condition of any
material thing other than a document, the Court may, if it thinks fit, require the production of
such material thing for its inspection.
CHAPTER V
O
F DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
56. The contents of documents may be proved either by primary or by secondary
evidence.
57. Primary evidence means the document itself produced for the inspection of the
Court.
Explanation 1.—Where a document is executed in several parts, each part is primary
evidence of the document.
Explanation 2.—Where a document is executed in counterpart, each counterpart
being executed by one or some of the parties only, each counterpart is primary evidence as
against the parties executing it.
Explanation 3.—Where a number of documents are all made by one uniform process,
as in the case of printing, lithography or photography, each is primary evidence of the
contents of the rest; but, where they are all copies of a common original, they are not
primary evidence of the contents of the original.
Facts admitted
need not be
proved.
Proof of facts
by oral
evidence.
Oral evidence
to be direct.
Proof of
contents of
documents.
Primary
evidence.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

21
Explanation  4.—Where an electronic or digital record is created or stored, and such
storage occurs simultaneously or sequentially in multiple files, each such file is primary
evidence.
Explanation 5.—Where an electronic or digital record is produced from proper
custody, such electronic and digital record is primary evidence unless it is disputed.
Explanation 6.—Where a video recording is simultaneously stored in electronic
form and transmitted or broadcast or transferred to another, each of the stored recordings is
primary evidence.
Explanation 7.—Where an electronic or digital record is stored in multiple storage
spaces in a computer resource, each such automated storage, including temporary files, is
primary evidence.
Illustration.
A person is shown to have been in possession of a number of placards, all printed at
one time from one original. Any one of the placards is primary evidence of the contents of
any other, but no one of them is primary evidence of the contents of the original.
58. Secondary evidence includes—
(1) certified copies given under the provisions hereinafter contained;
(2) copies made from the original by mechanical processes which in themselves
ensure the accuracy of the copy, and copies compared with such copies;
(3) copies made from or compared with the original;
(4) counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not execute
them;
(5) oral accounts of the contents of a document given by some person who
has himself seen it;
(6) oral admissions;
(7) written admissions;
(8) evidence of a person who has examined a document, the original of which
consists of numerous accounts or other documents which cannot conveniently be
examined in Court, and who is skilled in the examination of such documents.
Illustration.
(a) A photograph of an original is secondary evidence of its contents, though the
two have not been compared, if it is proved that the thing photographed was the original.
(b) A copy compared with a copy of a letter made by a copying machine is secondary
evidence of the contents of the letter, if it is shown that the copy made by the copying
machine was made from the original.
(c) A copy transcribed from a copy, but afterwards compared with the original, is
secondary evidence; but the copy not so compared is not secondary evidence of the
original, although the copy from which it was transcribed was compared with the original.
(d) Neither an oral account of a copy compared with the original, nor an oral account
of a photograph or machine-copy of the original, is secondary evidence of the original.
59.  Documents shall be proved by primary evidence except in the cases hereinafter
mentioned.
Secondary
evidence.
Proof of
documents by
primary
evidence.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

22
60.  Secondary evidence may be given of the existence, condition, or contents of a
document in the following cases, namely: —
(a) when the original is shown or appears to be in the possession or power—
(i) of the person against whom the document is sought to be proved; or
(ii) of any person out of reach of, or not subject to, the process of the
Court; or
(iii) of any person legally bound to produce it,
and when, after the notice mentioned in section 64 such person does not produce it;
(b) when the existence, condition or contents of the original have been proved
to be admitted in writing by the person against whom it is proved or by his
representative in interest;
(c) when the original has been destroyed or lost, or when the party offering
evidence of its contents cannot, for any other reason not arising from his own default
or neglect, produce it in reasonable time;
(d) when the original is of such a nature as not to be easily movable;
(e) when the original is a public document within the meaning of section 74;
(f) when the original is a document of which a certified copy is permitted by this
Adhiniyam, or by any other law in force in India to be given in evidence;
(g) when the originals consist of numerous accounts or other documents which
cannot conveniently be examined in Court, and the fact to be proved is the general
result of the whole collection;
(h) when the genuineness of the document itself is in question.
Explanation.—For the purposes of,—
(i) clauses ( a), ( c) and ( d), any secondary evidence of the contents of the
document is admissible;
(ii) clause (b), the written admission is admissible;
(iii) clauses (e) or ( f), a certified copy of the document, but no other kind of
secondary evidence, is admissible;
(iv) clause (g), evidence may be given as to the general result of the documents
by any person who has examined them, and who is skilled in the examination of such
documents.
61. Nothing in the Adhiniyam shall apply to deny the admissibility of an electronic or
digital record in the evidence on the ground that it is an electronic or digital record and such
record shall have the same legal effect, validity and enforceability as paper records.
62. The contents of electronic records may be proved in accordance with the
provisions of section 59.
63. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Adhiniyam, any information
contained in an electronic record which is printed on paper, stored, recorded or copied in
optical or magnetic media or semiconductor memory which is produced by a computer or
any communication device or otherwise stored, recorded or copied in any electronic form
(hereinafter referred to as the computer output) shall be deemed to be also a document, if
the conditions mentioned in this section are satisfied in relation to the information and
Cases in which
secondary
evidence
relating to
documents may
be given.
Admissibility of
electronic or
digital record.
Special
provisions as to
evidence
relating to
electronic
record.
Admissibility
of electronic
records.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

23
computer in question and shall be admissible in any proceedings, without further proof or
production of the original, as evidence or any contents of the original or of any fact stated
therein of which direct evidence would be admissible.
(2) The conditions referred to in sub-section (1) in respect of a computer output shall
be the following, namely:—
(a) the computer output containing the information was produced by the
computer or communication device during the period over which the computer was
used regularly to create, store or process information for the purposes of any activity
regularly carried on over that period by the person having lawful control over the use
of the computer or communication device;
(b) during the said period, information of the kind contained in the electronic
record or of the kind from which the information so contained is derived was regularly
fed into the computer in the ordinary course of the said activities;
(c) throughout the material part of the said period, the computer or
communication device was operating properly or, if not, then in respect of any period
in which it was not operating properly or was out of operation during that part of the
period, was not such as to affect the electronic record or the accuracy of its contents;
and
(d) the information contained in the electronic record reproduces or is derived
from such information fed into the computer in the ordinary course of the said activities.
(3) Where over any period, the function of creating, storing or processing information
for the purposes of any activity regularly carried on over that period as mentioned in
clause (a) of sub-section (2) was regularly performed by means of one or more computers or
communication device, whether—
(a) in standalone mode; or
(b) on a computer system; or
(c) on a computer network; or
(d) on a computer resource enabling information-creation or providing
information—processing and storage; or
(e) through an intermediary.
Explanation.—All the computers used for that purpose during that period shall be
treated for the purposes of this section as constituting a single computer; and references in
this section to a computer shall be construed accordingly.
(4) In any proceeding where it is desired to give a statement in evidence by virtue of
this section, a certificate doing any of the following things shall be submitted along with the
electronic record at each instance where it is being submitted for admission, namely:—
(a) identifying the electronic record containing the statement and describing
the manner in which it was produced;
(b) giving such particulars of any device involved in the production of that
electronic record as may be appropriate for the purpose of showing that the electronic
record was produced by a computer or a communication device referred to in clauses (a)
to (e) of sub-section (3);
(c) dealing with any of the matters to which the conditions mentioned in
sub-section ( 2) relate, and purporting to be signed by a person in charge of the
computer or communication device and an expert (whichever is appropriate) shall be
evidence of any matter stated in the certificate; and for the purposes of this sub-section
it shall be sufficient for a matter to be stated to the best of the knowledge and belief
of the person stating it in the form specified in the Schedule.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

24
(5) For the purposes of this section,—
(a) information shall be taken to be supplied to a computer or communication
device if it is supplied thereto in any appropriate form and whether it is so supplied
directly or (with or without human intervention) by means of any appropriate
equipment;
(b) a computer output shall be taken to have been produced by a computer or
communication device whether it was produced by it directly or (with or without
human intervention) by means of any appropriate equipment or by other electronic
means as referred to in clauses (a) to (e) of sub-section (3).
64. Secondary evidence of the contents of the documents referred to in clause (a) of
section 60, shall not be given unless the party proposing to give such secondary evidence
has previously given to the party in whose possession or power the document is, or to his
advocate or representative, such notice to produce it as is prescribed by law; and if no
notice is prescribed by law, then such notice as the Court considers reasonable under the
circumstances of the case:
Provided that such notice shall not be required in order to render secondary evidence
admissible in any of the following cases, or in any other case in which the Court thinks fit to
dispense with it: —
(a) when the document to be proved is itself a notice;
(b) when, from the nature of the case, the adverse party must know that he will
be required to produce it;
(c) when it appears or is proved that the adverse party has obtained possession
of the original by fraud or force;
(d) when the adverse party or his agent has the original in Court;
(e) when the adverse party or his agent has admitted the loss of the document;
(f) when the person in possession of the document is out of reach of, or not
subject to, the process of the Court.
65. If a document is alleged to be signed or to have been written wholly or in part by
any person, the signature or the handwriting of so much of the document as is alleged to be
in that person's handwriting must be proved to be in his handwriting.
66. Except in the case of a secure electronic signature, if the electronic signature of
any subscriber is alleged to have been affixed to an electronic record, the fact that such
electronic signature is the electronic signature of the subscriber must be proved.
67. If a document is required by law to be attested, it shall not be used as evidence
until one attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose of proving its execution,
if there be an attesting witness alive, and subject to the process of the Court and capable of
giving evidence:
Provided that it shall not be necessary to call an attesting witness in proof of the
execution of any document, not being a Will, which has been registered in accordance with
the provisions of the Indian Registration Act, 1908, unless its execution by the person by
whom it purports to have been executed is specifically denied.
68. If no such attesting witness can be found, it must be proved that the attestation
of one attesting witness at least is in his handwriting, and that the signature of the person
executing the document is in the handwriting of that person.
Rules as to
notice to
produce.
Proof of
signature and
handwriting of
person alleged
to have signed
or written
document
produced.
Proof as to
electronic
signature.
Proof of
execution of
document
required by law
to be attested.
Proof where
no attesting
witness found.
16 of 1908.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

25
69. The admission of a party to an attested document of its execution by himself
shall be sufficient proof of its execution as against him, though it be a document required by
law to be attested.
70. If the attesting witness denies or does not recollect the execution of the document,
its execution may be proved by other evidence.
71. An attested document not required by law to be attested may be proved as if it
was unattested.
72. (1) In order to ascertain whether a signature, writing, or seal is that of the person
by whom it purports to have been written or made, any signature, writing, or seal admitted
or proved to the satisfaction of the Court to have been written or made by that person may
be compared with the one which is to be proved, although that signature, writing, or seal
has not been produced or proved for any other purpose.
(2) The Court may direct any person present in Court to write any words or figures for
the purpose of enabling the Court to compare the words or figures so written with any
words or figures alleged to have been written by such person.
(3) This section applies also, with any necessary modifications, to finger impressions.
73. In order to ascertain whether a digital signature is that of the person by whom it
purports to have been affixed, the Court may direct—
(a) that person or the Controller or the Certifying Authority to produce the
Digital Signature Certificate;
(b) any other person to apply the public key listed in the Digital Signature
Certificate and verify the digital signature purported to have been affixed by that
person.
Public documents
74. (1) The following documents are public documents:—
(a) documents forming the acts, or records of the acts—
(i) of the sovereign authority;
(ii) of official bodies and tribunals; and
(iii) of public officers, legislative, judicial and executive of India or of a
foreign country;
(b) public records kept in any State or Union territory of private documents.
(2) All other documents except the documents referred to in sub-section ( 1) are
private.
75. Every public officer having the custody of a public document, which any person
has a right to inspect, shall give that person on demand a copy of it on payment of the legal
fees therefor, together with a certificate written at the foot of such copy that it is a true copy
of such document or part thereof, as the case may be, and such certificate shall be dated and
subscribed by such officer with his name and his official title, and shall be sealed, whenever
such officer is authorised by law to make use of a seal; and such copies so certified shall be
called certified copies.
Admission of
execution by
party to
attested
document.
Proof when
attesting
witness denies
the execution.
Proof of
document not
required by law
to be attested.
Comparison
of signature,
writing or seal
with others
admitted or
proved.
Proof as to
verification of
digital
signature.
Public and
private
documents.
Certified
copies of
public
documents.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

26
Explanation.—Any officer who, by the ordinary course of official duty, is authorised
to deliver such copies, shall be deemed to have the custody of such documents within the
meaning of this section.
76. Such certified copies may be produced in proof of the contents of the public
documents or parts of the public documents of which they purport to be copies.
77. The following public documents may be proved as follows:—
(a) Acts, orders or notifications of the Central Government in any of its Ministries
and Departments or of any State Government or any Department of any State
Government or Union territory Administration,—
(i) by the records of the Departments, certified by the head of those
Departments respectively; or
(ii) by any document purporting to be printed by order of any such
Government;
(b) the proceedings of Parliament or a State Legislative Assembly, by the journals
of those bodies respectively, or by published Acts or abstracts, or by copies purporting
to be printed by order of the Government concerned;
(c) proclamations, orders or regulations issued by the President of India or the
Governor of a State or the Administrator or Lieutenant Governor of a Union territory,
by copies or extracts contained in the Official Gazette;
(d) the Acts of the Executive or the proceedings of the Legislature of a foreign
country, by journals published by their authority, or commonly received in that country
as such, or by a copy certified under the seal of the country or sovereign, or by a
recognition thereof in some Central Act;
(e) the proceedings of a municipal or local body in a State, by a copy of such
proceedings, certified by the legal keeper thereof, or by a printed book purporting to
be published by the authority of such body;
(f) public documents of any other class in a foreign country, by the original or
by a copy certified by the legal keeper thereof, with a certificate under the seal of a
Notary Public, or of an Indian Consul or diplomatic agent, that the copy is duly
certified by the officer the legal custody of the original, and upon proof of the character
of the document according to the law of the foreign country.
Presumptions as to documents
78. (1) The Court shall presume to be genuine every document purporting to be a
certificate, certified copy or other document, which is by law declared to be admissible as
evidence of any particular fact, and which purports to be duly certified by any officer of the
Central Government or of a State Government:
Provided that such document is substantially in the form and purports to be executed
in the manner directed by law in that behalf.
(2) The Court shall also presume that any officer by whom any such document
purports to be signed or certified, held, when he signed it, the official character which he
claims in such paper.
79. Whenever any document is produced before any Court, purporting to be a record
or memorandum of the evidence, or of any part of the evidence, given by a witness in a
judicial proceeding or before any officer authorised by law to take such evidence or to be a
statement or confession by any prisoner or accused person, taken in accordance with law,
Proof of
documents by
production of
certified
copies.
Proof of other
official
documents.
Presumption
as to
genuineness of
certified
copies.
Presumption as
to documents
produced as
record of
evidence, etc.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

27
and purporting to be signed by any Judge or Magistrate, or by any such officer as aforesaid,
the Court shall presume that—
(i) the document is genuine;
(ii) any statements as to the circumstances under which it was taken, purporting
to be made by the person signing it, are true; and
(iii) such evidence, statement or confession was duly taken.
80. The Court shall presume the genuineness of every document purporting to be
the Official Gazette, or to be a newspaper or journal, and of every document purporting to be
a document directed by any law to be kept by any person, if such document is kept
substantially in the form required by law and is produced from proper custody.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section and section 92, document is said to
be in proper custody if it is in the place in which, and looked after by the person with whom
such document is required to be kept; but no custody is improper if it is proved to have had
a legitimate origin, or if the circumstances of the particular case are such as to render that
origin probable.
81. The Court shall presume the genuineness of every electronic or digital record
purporting to be the Official Gazette, or purporting to be electronic or digital record directed
by any law to be kept by any person, if such electronic or digital record is kept substantially
in the form required by law and is produced from proper custody.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section and section 96 electronic records are
said to be in proper custody if they are in the place in which, and looked after by the person
with whom such document is required to be kept; but no custody is improper if it is proved
to have had a legitimate origin, or the circumstances of the particular case are such as to
render that origin probable.
82. The Court shall presume that maps or plans purporting to be made by the authority
of the Central Government or any State Government were so made, and are accurate; but
maps or plans made for the purposes of any cause must be proved to be accurate.
83. The Court shall presume the genuineness of, every book purporting to be printed
or published under the authority of the Government of any country, and to contain any of
the laws of that country, and of every book purporting to contain reports of decisions of the
Courts of such country.
84. The Court shall presume that every document purporting to be a power-of-
attorney, and to have been executed before, and authenticated by, a Notary Public, or any
Court, Judge, Magistrate, Indian Consul or Vice-Consul, or representative of the Central
Government, was so executed and authenticated.
85. The Court shall presume that every electronic record purporting to be an agreement
containing the electronic or digital signature of the parties was so concluded by affixing the
electronic or digital signature of the parties.
86. (1) In any proceedings involving a secure electronic record, the Court shall presume
unless contrary is proved, that the secure electronic record has not been altered since the
specific point of time to which the secure status relates.
(2) In any proceedings, involving secure digital signature, the Court shall presume
unless the contrary is proved that—
(a) the secure electronic signature is affixed by subscriber with the intention of
signing or approving the electronic record;
(b) except in the case of a secure electronic record or a secure electronic signature,
nothing in this section shall create any presumption, relating to authenticity and
integrity of the electronic record or any electronic signature.
Presumption
as to Gazettes,
newspapers,
and other
documents.
Presumption
as to Gazettes
in electronic
or digital
record.
Presumption
as to maps or
plans made by
authority of
Government.
Presumption as
to collections
of laws and
reports of
decisions.
Presumption
as to powers-
of-attorney.
Presumption as
to electronic
agreements.
Presumption
as to
electronic
records and
electronic
signatures.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

28
87. The Court shall presume, unless contrary is proved, that the information listed in
an Electronic Signature Certificate is correct, except for information specified as subscriber
information which has not been verified, if the certificate was accepted by the subscriber.
88. (1) The Court may presume that any document purporting to be a certified copy of
any judicial record of any country beyond India is genuine and accurate, if the document
purports to be certified in any manner which is certified by any representative of the Central
Government, in or for such country, to be the manner commonly in use in that country for
the certification of copies of judicial records.
(2) An officer who, with respect to any territory or place outside India is a Political
Agent therefor, as defined in clause (43) of section 3 of the General Clauses Act, 1897, shall,
for the purposes of this section, be deemed to be a representative of the Central Government
in and for the country comprising that territory or place.
89. The Court may presume that any book to which it may refer for information on
matters of public or general interest, and that any published map or chart, the statements of
which are relevant facts, and which is produced for its inspection, was written and published
by the person, and at the time and place, by whom or at which it purports to have been
written or published.
90. The Court may presume that an electronic message, forwarded by the originator
through an electronic mail server to the addressee to whom the message purports to be
addressed corresponds with the message as fed into his computer for transmission; but the
Court shall not make any presumption as to the person by whom such message was sent.
91. The Court shall presume that every document, called for and not produced after
notice to produce, was attested, stamped and executed in the manner required by law.
92. Where any document, purporting or proved to be thirty years old, is produced
from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper, the Court may
presume that the signature and every other part of such document, which purports to be in
the handwriting of any particular person, is in that person's handwriting, and, in the case of
a document executed or attested, that it was duly executed and attested by the persons by
whom it purports to be executed and attested.
Explanation to section 83 shall also apply to this section.
Illustration.
(a) A has been in possession of landed property for a long time. He produces from
his custody deeds relating to the land showing his titles to it. The custody shall be proper.
(b) A produces deeds relating to landed property of which he is the mortgagee. The
mortgagor is in possession. The custody shall be proper.
(c) A, a connection of B, produces deeds relating to lands in B's possession, which
were deposited with him by B for safe custody. The custody shall be proper.
93. Where any electronic record, purporting or proved to be five years old, is produced
from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper, the Court may
presume that the electronic signature which purports to be the electronic signature of any
particular person was so affixed by him or any person authorised by him in this behalf.
Explanation to section 84 shall also apply to this section.
Presumption as
to Electronic
Signature
Certificates.
Presumption
as to certified
copies of
foreign judicial
records.
Presumption
as to books,
maps and
charts.
Presumption
as to
electronic
messages.
Presumption as
to due
execution, etc.,
of documents
not produced.
Presumption
as to
documents
thirty years
old.
Presumption
as to
electronic
records five
years old.
10 of 1897.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

29
CHAPTER VI
OF THE EXCLUSION OF ORAL EVIDENCE BY DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE
94. When the terms of a contract, or of a grant, or of any other disposition of property,
have been reduced to the form of a document, and in all cases in which any matter is
required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, no evidence shall be given in proof
of the terms of such contract, grant or other disposition of property, or of such matter,
except the document itself, or secondary evidence of its contents in cases in which secondary
evidence is admissible under the provisions hereinbefore contained.
Exception 1.—When a public officer is required by law to be appointed in writing,
and when it is shown that any particular person has acted as such officer, the writing by
which he is appointed need not be proved.
Exception 2.—Wills admitted to probate in India may be proved by the probate.
Explanation 1.—This section applies equally to cases in which the contracts, grants
or dispositions of property referred to are contained in one document, and to cases in which
they are contained in more documents than one.
Explanation 2.— Where there are more originals than one, one original only need be
proved.
Explanation 3.— The statement, in any document whatever, of a fact other than the
facts referred to in this section, shall not preclude the admission of oral evidence as to the
same fact.
Illustration.
(a) If a contract be contained in several letters, all the letters in which it is contained
must be proved.
(b) If a contract is contained in a bill of exchange, the bill of exchange must be
proved.
(c) If a bill of exchange is drawn in a set of three, one only need be proved.
(d) A contracts in writing with B, for the delivery of indigo upon certain terms. The
contract mentions the fact that B had paid A the price of other indigo contracted for verbally
on another occasion. Oral evidence is offered that no payment was made for the other
indigo. The evidence is admissible.
(e) A gives B a receipt for money paid by B. Oral evidence is offered of the payment.
The evidence is admissible.
95. When the terms of any such contract, grant or other disposition of property, or
any matter required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, have been proved
according to the last section, no evidence of any oral agreement or statement shall be
admitted, as between the parties to any such instrument or their representatives in interest,
for the purpose of contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting from, its terms:
Provided that any fact may be proved which would invalidate any document, or
which would entitle any person to any decree or order relating thereto; such as fraud,
intimidation, illegality, want of due execution, want of capacity in any contracting party,
want or failure of consideration, or mistake in fact or law:
Provided further that the existence of any separate oral agreement as to any matter on
which a document is silent, and which is not inconsistent with its terms, may be proved. In
considering whether or not this proviso applies, the Court shall have regard to the degree
of formality of the document:
Provided also that the existence of any separate oral agreement, constituting a condition
precedent to the attaching of any obligation under any such contract, grant or disposition
of property, may be proved:
Provided also that the existence of any distinct subsequent oral agreement to rescind
or modify any such contract, grant or disposition of property, may be proved, except in
Evidence of
terms of
contracts,
grants and
other
dispositions of
property
reduced to form
of document.
Exclusion of
evidence of
oral
agreement.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50

30
cases in which such contract, grant or disposition of property is by law required to be in
writing, or has been registered according to the law in force for the time being as to the
registration of documents:
Provided also that any usage or custom by which incidents not expressly mentioned
in any contract are usually annexed to contracts of that description, may be proved:
Provided also that the annexing of such incident would not be repugnant to, or
inconsistent with, the express terms of the contract:
Provided also that any fact may be proved which shows in what manner the language
of a document is related to existing facts.
Illustration.
(a) A policy of insurance is effected on goods "in ships from Kolkata to
Vishakhapatnam". The goods are shipped in a particular ship which is lost. The fact that
particular ship was orally excepted from the policy, cannot be proved.
(b) A agrees absolutely in writing to pay B one thousand rupees on the 1st March,
2023. The fact that, at the same time, an oral agreement was made that the money should not
be paid till the 31st March, 2023, cannot be proved.
(c) An estate called "the Rampur tea estate" is sold by a deed which contains a map
of the property sold. The fact that land not included in the map had always been regarded
as part of the estate and was meant to pass by the deed cannot be proved.
(d) A enters into a written contract with B to work certain mines, the property of B,
upon certain terms. A was induced to do so by a misrepresentation of B's as to their value.
This fact may be proved.
(e) A institutes a suit against B for the specific performance of a contract, and also
prays that the contract may be reformed as to one of its provisions, as that provision was
inserted in it by mistake. A may prove that such a mistake was made as would by law entitle
him to have the contract reformed.
(f) A orders goods of B by a letter in which nothing is said as to the time of payment,
and accepts the goods on delivery. B sues A for the price. A may show that the goods were
supplied on credit for a term still unexpired.
(g) A sells B a horse and verbally warrants him sound. A gives B a paper in these
words: "Bought of A a horse for thirty thousand rupees". B may prove the verbal warranty.
(h) A hires lodgings of B, and gives B a card on which is written—"Rooms, ten
thousand rupees a month." A may prove a verbal agreement that these terms were to
include partial board. A hires lodging of B for a year, and a regularly stamped agreement,
drawn up by an advocate, is made between them. It is silent on the subject of board. A may
not prove that board was included in the term verbally.
(i) A applies to B for a debt due to A by sending a receipt for the money. B keeps the
receipt and does not send the money. In a suit for the amount, A may prove this.
(j) A and B make a contract in writing to take effect upon the happening of a certain
contingency. The writing is left with B who sues A upon it. A may show the circumstances
under which it was delivered.
96. When the language used in a document is, on its face, ambiguous or defective,
evidence may not be given of facts which would show its meaning or supply its defects.
Illustrations.
(a) A agrees, in writing, to sell a horse to B for "one lakh rupees or one lakh fifty
thousand rupees". Evidence cannot be given to show which price was to be given.
(b) A deed contains blanks. Evidence cannot be given of facts which would show
how they were meant to be filled.
Exclusion of
evidence to
explain or
amend
ambiguous
document.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

31
97. When language used in a document is plain in itself, and when it applies accurately
to existing facts, evidence may not be given to show that it was not meant to apply to such
facts.
Illustration.
A sells to B, by deed, "my estate at Rampur containing one hundred bighas". A has an
estate at Rampur containing one hundred bighas. Evidence may not be given of the fact
that the estate meant to be sold was one situated at a different place and of a different size.
98. When language used in a document is plain in itself, but is unmeaning in reference
to existing facts, evidence may be given to show that it was used in a peculiar sense.
Illustration.
A sells to B, by deed, "my house in Kolkata". A had no house in Kolkata, but it
appears that he had a house at Howrah, of which B had been in possession since the
execution of the deed. These facts may be proved to show that the deed related to the
house at Howrah.
99. When the facts are such that the language used might have been meant to apply
to any one, and could not have been meant to apply to more than one, of several persons or
things, evidence may be given of facts which show which of those persons or things it was
intended to apply to.
Illustration.
(a) A agrees to sell to B, for one thousand rupees, "my white horse". A has two white
horses. Evidence may be given of facts which show which of them was meant.
(b) A agrees to accompany B to Ramgarh. Evidence may be given of facts showing
whether Ramgarh in Rajasthan or Ramgarh in Uttarakhand was meant.
100. When the language used applies partly to one set of existing facts, and partly to
another set of existing facts, but the whole of it does not apply correctly to either, evidence
may be given to show to which of the two it was meant to apply.
Illustration.
A agrees to sell to B "my land at X in the occupation of  Y". A has land at X, but not
in the occupation of Y , and he has land in the occupation of Y but it is not at X. Evidence
may be given of facts showing which he meant to sell.
101. Evidence may be given to show the meaning of illegible or not commonly
intelligible characters, of foreign, obsolete, technical or local and regional expressions, of
abbreviations and of words used in a peculiar sense.
Illustration.
A, sculptor, agrees to sell to B, "all my mods". A has both models and modelling tools.
Evidence may be given to show which he meant to sell.
102. Persons who are not parties to a document, or their representatives in interest,
may give evidence of any facts tending to show a contemporaneous agreement varying the
terms of the document.
Illustration.
A and B make a contract in writing that B shall sell A certain cotton, to be paid for on
delivery. At the same time, they make an oral agreement that three months credit shall be
given to A. This could not be shown as between A and B, but it might be shown by C, if it
affected his interests.
103. Nothing in this Chapter contained shall be taken to affect any of the provisions
of the Indian Succession Act, 1925 as to the construction of Wills.
Exclusion of
evidence
against
application of
document to
existing facts.
Evidence as to
document
unmeaning
reference to
existing facts.
Evidence as to
application of
language which
can apply to
one only of
several persons.
Evidence as to
application of
language to one
of two sets of
facts, to
neither of
which the
whole correctly
applies.
Evidence as to
meaning of
illegible
characters,
etc.
Saving of
provisions of
Indian
Succession Act
relating to
Wills.
Who may
give evidence
of agreement
varying terms
of document.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
39 of 1925.

32
PART IV
PRODUCTION AND EFFECT OF EVIDENCE
CHAPTER VII
OF THE BURDEN OF PROOF
104. Whoever desires any Court to give judgment as to any legal right or liability
dependent on the existence of facts which he asserts must prove that those facts exist, and
when a person is bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is said that the burden of proof
lies on that person.
Illustration.
(a) A desires a Court to give judgment that B shall be punished for a crime which A
says B has committed. A must prove that B has committed the crime.
(b) A desires a Court to give judgment that he is entitled to certain land in the
possession of B, by reason of facts which he asserts, and which B denies, to be true. A must
prove the existence of those facts.
105. The burden of proof in a suitor proceeding lies on that person who would fail if
no evidence at all were given on either side.
Illustration.
(a) A sues B for land of which B is in possession, and which, as A asserts, was left to
A by the Will of C, B's father. If no evidence were given on either side, B would be entitled
to retain his possession. Therefore, the burden of proof is on A.
(b) A sues B for money due on a bond. The execution of the bond is admitted, but B
says that it was obtained by fraud, which A denies. If no evidence were given on either side,
A would succeed, as the bond is not disputed and the fraud is not proved. Therefore, the
burden of proof is on B.
106. The burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on that person who wishes the
Court to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law that the proof of that fact
shall lie on any particular person.
Illustration.
(a)  A prosecutes B for theft, and wishes the Court to believe that B admitted the theft
to C. A must prove the admission.
(b) B wishes the Court to believe that, at the time in question, he was elsewhere. He
must prove it.
107. The burden of proving any fact necessary to be proved in order to enable any
person to give evidence of any other fact is on the person who wishes to give such
evidence.
Illustration.
(a) A wishes to prove a dying declaration by B. A must prove B's death.
(b) A wishes to prove, by secondary evidence, the contents of a lost document. A
must prove that the document has been lost.
108. When a person is accused of any offence, the burden of proving the existence of
circumstances bringing the case within any of the General Exceptions in the Bharatiya
Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or within any special exception or proviso contained in any other part
of the said Sanhita, or in any law defining the offence, is upon him, and the Court shall
presume the absence of such circumstances.
Burden of
proof.
On whom
burden of
proof lies.
Burden of
proof as to
particular fact.
Burden of
proving fact
to be proved
to make
evidence
admissible.
Burden of
proving that
case of accused
comes within
exceptions.
32
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

33
Illustration.
(a) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by reason of unsoundness of mind, he did not
know the nature of the act. The burden of proof is on A.
(b) A, accused of murder, alleges that, by grave and sudden provocation, he was
deprived of the power of self-control. The burden of proof is on A.
(c) Section 325 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 provides that whoever, except in
the case provided for by section 335, voluntarily causes grievous hurt, shall be subject to
certain punishments. A is charged with voluntarily causing grievous hurt under
section 115. The burden of proving the circumstances bringing the case under said
section 120 lies on A.
109. When any fact is especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of
proving that fact is upon him.
Illustration.
(a) When a person does an act with some intention other than that which the character
and circumstances of the act suggest, the burden of proving that intention is upon him.
(b) A is charged with travelling on a railway without a ticket. The burden of proving
that he had a ticket is on him.
110. When the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is shown that he was
alive within thirty years, the burden of proving that he is dead is on the person who affirms
it.
111. When the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is proved that he has
not been heard of for seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him if he had
been alive, the burden of proving that he is alive is shifted to the person who affirms it.
112. When the question is whether persons are partners, landlord and tenant, or
principal and agent, and it has been shown that they have been acting as such, the burden
of proving that they do not stand, or have ceased to stand, to each other in those
relationships respectively, is on the person who affirms it.
113. When the question is whether any person is owner of anything of which he is
shown to be in possession, the burden of proving that he is not the owner is on the person
who affirms that he is not the owner.
114. Where there is a question as to the good faith of a transaction between parties,
one of whom stands to the other in a position of active confidence, the burden of proving
the good faith of the transaction is on the party who is in a position of active confidence.
Illustration.
(a) The good faith of a sale by a client to an advocate is in question in a suit brought
by the client. The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the advocate.
(b) The good faith of a sale by a son just come of age to a father is in question in a suit
brought by the son. The burden of proving the good faith of the transaction is on the father.
Burden of
proving fact
especially
within
knowledge.
Burden of
proving death
of person
known to
have been
alive within
thirty years.
Burden of
proving that
person is alive
who has not
been heard of
for seven
years.
Burden of
proof as to
relationship in
the cases of
partners,
landlord and
tenant,
principal and
agent.
Burden of
proof as to
ownership.
Proof of good
faith in
transactions
where one
party is in
relation of
active
confidence.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35

34
115. (1) Where a person is accused of having committed any offence specified in
sub-section (2), in—
(a) any area declared to be a disturbed area under any enactment for the time
being in force, making provision for the suppression of disorder and restoration and
maintenance of public order; or
(b) any area in which there has been, over a period of more than one-month,
extensive disturbance of the public peace,
and it is shown that such person had been at a place in such area at a time when firearms or
explosives were used at or from that place to attack or resist the members of any armed
forces or the forces charged with the maintenance of public order acting in the discharge of
their duties, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is shown, that such person had
committed such offence.
(2) The offences referred to in sub-section (1) are the following, namely:—
(a) an offence under section 145, section 146, section 147 or section 148 of the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023;
(b) criminal conspiracy or attempt to commit, or abetment of, an offence under
section 147 or section 148 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
116. The fact that any person was born during the continuance of a valid marriage
between his mother and any man, or within two hundred and eighty days after its dissolution,
the mother remaining unmarried, shall be conclusive proof that he is the legitimate child of
that man, unless it can be shown that the parties to the marriage had no access to each other
at any time when he could have been begotten.
117. When the question is whether the commission of suicide by a woman had been
abetted by her husband or any relative of her husband and it is shown that she had
committed suicide within a period of seven years from the date of her marriage and that her
husband or such relative of her husband had subjected her to cruelty, the court may presume,
having regard to all the other circumstances of the case, that such suicide had been abetted
by her husband or by such relative of her husband.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "cruelty" shall have the same meaning
as in section 84 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
118. When the question is whether a person has committed the dowry death of a
woman and it is shown that soon before her death, such woman had been subjected by
such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the
court shall presume that such person had caused the dowry death.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this section, "dowry death" shall have the same
meaning as in section 79 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
119. (1) The Court may presume the existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have
happened, regard being had to the common course of natural events, human conduct and
public and private business, in their relation to the facts of the particular case.
Illustration.
The Court may presume that—
(a) a man who is in possession of stolen goods soon, after the theft is either the
thief or has received the goods knowing them to be stolen, unless he can account for
his possession;
(b) an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in material
particulars;
Presumption
as to certain
offences.
Birth during
marriage,
conclusive
proof of
legitimacy.
Presumption
as to abetment
of suicide by a
married
woman.
Presumption
as to dowry
death.
Court may
presume
existence of
certain facts.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

35
(c) a bill of exchange, accepted or endorsed, was accepted or endorsed for good
consideration;
(d) a thing or state of things which has been shown to be in existence within a
period shorter than that within which such things or states of things usually cease to
exist, is still in existence;
(e) judicial and official acts have been regularly performed;
(f) the common course of business has been followed in particular cases;
(g) evidence which could be and is not produced would, if produced, be
unfavourable to the person who withholds it;
(h) if a man refuses to answer a question which he is not compelled to answer
by law, the answer, if given, would be unfavourable to him;
(i) when a document creating an obligation is in the hands of the obligor, the
obligation has been discharged.
(2) The Court shall also have regard to such facts as the following, in considering
whether such maxims do or do not apply to the particular case before it: —
(i) as to Illustration.. (a)—a shop-keeper has in his bill a marked rupee soon after it
was stolen, and cannot account for its possession specifically, but is continually receiving
rupees in the course of his business;
(ii) as to Illustration.. (b)—A, a person of the highest character, is tried for causing
a man's death by an act of negligence in arranging certain machinery. B, a person of
equally good character, who also took part in the arrangement, describes precisely what
was done, and admits and explains the common carelessness of A and himself;
(iii) as to Illustration.. (b)—a crime is committed by several persons. A, B and C,
three of the criminals, are captured on the spot and kept apart from each other. Each gives
an account of the crime implicating D, and the accounts corroborate each other in such
a manner as to render previous concert highly improbable;
(iv) as to Illustration.. (c)—A, the drawer of a bill of exchange, was a man of business.
B, the acceptor, was a young and ignorant person, completely under A's influence;
(v) as to Illustration.. (d)—it is proved that a river ran in a certain course five years
ago, but it is known that there have been floods since that time which might change its
course;
(vi) as to Illustration.. (e)—a judicial act, the regularity of which is in question, was
performed under exceptional circumstances;
(vii) as to Illustration.. (f)—the question is, whether a letter was received. It is shown
to have been posted, but the usual course of the post was interrupted by disturbances;
(viii) as to  Illustration.. (g)—a man refuses to produce a document which would
bear on a contract of small importance on which he is sued, but which might also injure
the feelings and reputation of his family;
(ix) as to Illustration.. (h)—a man refuses to answer a question which he is not
compelled by law to answer, but the answer to it might cause loss to him in matters
unconnected with the matter in relation to which it is asked;
(x) as to Illustration.. (i)—a bond is in possession of the obligor, but the circumstances
of the case are such that he may have stolen it.
120. In a prosecution for rape under clause ( a), clause ( b), clause ( c), clause ( d),
clause ( e), clause ( f), clause ( g), clause ( h), clause ( i), clause ( j), clause ( k), clause ( l),
clause ( m) or clause ( n) of sub-section ( 2) of section 64 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023, where sexual intercourse by the accused is proved and the question is
whether it was without the consent of the woman alleged to have been raped and such
Presumption
as to absence
of consent in
certain
prosecution
for rape.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

36
woman states in her evidence before the court that she did not consent, the court shall
presume that she did not consent.
Explanation. —In this section, "sexual intercourse" shall mean any of the acts
mentioned in clauses ( a) to (d) of section 63 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita,
2023.
CHAPTER VIII
ESTOPPEL
121. When one person has, by his declaration, act or omission, intentionally caused
or permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon such belief, neither
he nor his representative shall be allowed, in any suit or proceeding between himself and
such person or his representative, to deny the truth of that thing.
Illustration.
A intentionally and falsely leads B to believe that certain land belongs to A, and
thereby induces B to buy and pay for it. The land afterwards becomes the property of A,
and A seeks to set aside the sale on the ground that, at the time of the sale, he had no title.
He must not be allowed to prove his want of title.
122. No tenant of immovable property, or person claiming through such tenant, shall,
during the continuance of the tenancy or any time thereafter, be permitted to deny that the
landlord of such tenant had, at the beginning of the tenancy, a title to such immovable
property; and no person who came upon any immovable property by the licence of the
person in possession thereof shall be permitted to deny that such person had a title to such
possession at the time when such licence was given.
123. No acceptor of a bill of exchange shall be permitted to deny that the drawer had
authority to draw such bill or to endorse it; nor shall any bailee or licensee be permitted to
deny that his bailor or licensor had, at the time when the bailment or licence commenced,
authority to make such bailment or grant such licence.
Explanation 1.—The acceptor of a bill of exchange may deny that the bill was really
drawn by the person by whom it purports to have been drawn.
Explanation 2.—If a bailee delivers the goods bailed to a person other than the
bailor, he may prove that such person had a right to them as against the bailor.
CHAPTER IX
O
F WITNESSES
124. All persons shall be competent to testify unless the Court considers that they
are prevented from understanding the questions put to them, or from giving rational answers
to those questions, by tender years, extreme old age, disease, whether of body or mind, or
any other cause of the same kind.
Explanation.—A person with mental illness is not incompetent to testify, unless he
is prevented by his mental illness from understanding the questions put to him and giving
rational answers to them.
125. A witness who is unable to speak may give his evidence in any other manner in
which he can make it intelligible, as by writing or by signs; but such writing must be written
and the signs made in open Court and evidence so given shall be deemed to be oral
evidence:
Provided that if the witness is unable to communicate verbally, the Court shall take
the assistance of an interpreter or a special educator in recording the statement, and such
statement shall be video graphed.
Estoppel.
Estoppel of
tenants and of
licensee of
person in
possession.
Estoppel of
acceptor of
bill of
exchange,
bailee or
licensee.
Who may
testify.
Witness
unable to
communicate
verbally.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

37
126. (1) In all civil proceedings the parties to the suit, and the husband or wife of any
party to the suit, shall be competent witnesses.
(2) In criminal proceedings against any person, the husband or wife of such person,
respectively, shall be a competent witness.
127. No Judge or Magistrate shall, except upon the special order of some Court to
which he is subordinate, be compelled to answer any questions as to his own conduct in
Court as such Judge or Magistrate, or as to anything which came to his knowledge in Court
as such Judge or Magistrate; but he may be examined as to other matters which occurred in
his presence whilst he was so acting.
Illustration.
(a) A, on his trial before the Court of Session, says that a deposition was improperly
taken by B, the Magistrate. B cannot be compelled to answer questions as to this, except
upon the special order of a superior Court.
(b) A is accused before the Court of Session of having given false evidence before B,
a Magistrate. B cannot be asked what A said, except upon the special order of the superior
Court.
(c) A is accused before the Court of Session of attempting to murder a police-officer
whilst on his trial before B, a Sessions Judge. B may be examined as to what occurred.
128. No person who is or has been married, shall be compelled to disclose any
communication made to him during marriage by any person to whom he is or has been
married; nor shall he be permitted to disclose any such communication, unless the person
who made it, or his representative in interest, consents, except in suits between married
persons, or proceedings in which one married person is prosecuted for any crime committed
against the other.
129. No one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from unpublished official
records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the officer at the head
of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission as he thinks fit.
130. No public officer shall be compelled to disclose communications made to him in
official confidence, when he considers that the public interests would suffer by the disclosure.
131. No Magistrate or police-officer shall be compelled to say when he got any
information as to the commission of any offence, and no revenue-officer shall be compelled
to say when he got any information as to the commission of any offence against the public
revenue.
Explanation.—"revenue-officer" means any officer employed in or about the business
of any branch of the public revenue.
132. (1) No advocate, shall at any time be permitted, unless with his client's express
consent, to disclose any communication made to him in the course and for the purpose of
his service as such advocate, by or on behalf of his client, or to state the contents or
condition of any document with which he has become acquainted in the course and for the
purpose of his professional service, or to disclose any advice given by him to his client in
the course and for the purpose of such service:
Provided that nothing in this section shall protect from disclosure of—
(a) any such communication made in furtherance of any illegal purpose;
(b) any fact observed by any advocate, in the course of his service as such,
showing that any crime or fraud has been committed since the commencement of his
service.
Competency
of husband and
wife as
witnesses in
certain cases.
Judges and
Magistrates.
Communications
during
marriage.
Evidence as to
affairs of
State.
Official
communications.
Information
as to
commission of
offences.
Professional
communications.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

38
(2) It is immaterial whether the attention of such advocate referred to in the proviso to
sub-section (1), was or was not directed to such fact by or on behalf of his client.
Explanation.—The obligation stated in this section continues after the professional
service has ceased.
Illustration.
(a) A, a client, says to B, an advocate—"I have committed forgery, and I wish you to
defend me." As the defence of a man known to be guilty is not a criminal purpose, this
communication is protected from disclosure.
(b) A, a client, says to B, an advocate—"I wish to obtain possession of property by
the use of a forged deed on which I request you to sue." This communication, being made
in furtherance of a criminal purpose, is not protected from disclosure.
(c) A, being charged with embezzlement, retains B, an advocate, to defend him. In the
course of the proceedings, B observes that an entry has been made in A's account book,
charging A with the sum said to have been embezzled, which entry was not in the book at
the commencement of his professional service. This being a fact observed by B in the
course of his service, showing that a fraud has been committed since the commencement of
the proceedings, it is not protected from disclosure.
(3) The provisions of this section shall apply to interpreters, and the clerks or
employees of advocates.
133. If any party to a suit gives evidence therein at his own instance or otherwise, he
shall not be deemed to have consented thereby to such disclosure as is mentioned in
section 132; and, if any party to a suit or proceeding calls any such advocate, as a witness,
he shall be deemed to have consented to such disclosure only if he questions such advocate,
on matters which, but for such question, he would not be at liberty to disclose.
134. No one shall be compelled to disclose to the Court any confidential communication
which has taken place between him and his legal adviser, unless he offers himself as a
witness, in which case he may be compelled to disclose any such communications as may
appear to the Court necessary to be known in order to explain any evidence which he has
given, but no others.
135. No witness who is not a party to a suit shall be compelled to produce his title-
deeds to any property, or any document in virtue of which he holds any property as pledge
or mortgagee or any document the production of which might tend to criminate him, unless
he has agreed in writing to produce them with the person seeking the production of such
deeds or some person through whom he claims.
136. No one shall be compelled to produce documents in his possession or electronic
records under his control, which any other person would be entitled to refuse to produce if
they were in his possession or control, unless such last-mentioned person consents to
their production.
137. A witness shall not be excused from answering any question as to any matter
relevant to the matter in issue in any suit or in any civil or criminal proceeding, upon the
ground that the answer to such question will criminate, or may tend directly or indirectly to
criminate, such witness, or that it will expose, or tend directly or indirectly to expose, such
witness to a penalty or forfeiture of any kind:
Provided that no such answer, which a witness shall be compelled to give, shall
subject him to any arrest or prosecution, or be proved against him in any criminal proceeding,
except a prosecution forgiving false evidence by such answer.
Privilege not
waived by
volunteering
evidence.
Confidential
communication
with legal
advisers.
Production of
title-deeds of
witness not a
party.
Production of
documents or
electronic
records which
another
person, having
possession,
would refuse
to produce.
Witness not
excused from
answering on
ground that
answer will
criminate.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

39
138. An accomplice shall be a competent witness against an accused person; and a
conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the uncorroborated testimony of
an accomplice.
139. No particular number of witnesses shall in any case be required for the proof of
any fact.
CHAPTER X
OF EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES
140. The order in which witnesses are produced and examined shall be regulated by
the law and practice for the time being relating to civil and criminal procedure respectively,
and, in the absence of any such law, by the discretion of the Court.
141. (1) When either party proposes to give evidence of any fact, the Judge may ask
the party proposing to give the evidence in what manner the alleged fact, if proved, would
be relevant; and the Judge shall admit the evidence if he thinks that the fact, if proved,
would be relevant, and not otherwise.
(2) If the fact proposed to be proved is one of which evidence is admissible only upon
proof of some other fact, such last mentioned fact must be proved before evidence is given
of the fact first mentioned, unless the party undertakes to give proof of such fact, and the
Court is satisfied with such undertaking.
(3) If the relevancy of one alleged fact depends upon another alleged fact being first
proved, the Judge may, in his discretion, either permit evidence of the first fact to be given
before the second fact is proved, or require evidence to be given of the second fact before
evidence is given of the first fact.
Illustration.
(a) It is proposed to prove a statement about a relevant fact by a person alleged to be
dead, which statement is relevant under section 32. The fact that the person is dead must be
proved by the person proposing to prove the statement, before evidence is given of the
statement.
(b) It is proposed to prove, by a copy, the contents of a document said to be lost. The
fact that the original is lost must be proved by the person proposing to produce the copy,
before the copy is produced.
(c) A is accused of receiving stolen property knowing it to have been stolen. It is
proposed to prove that he denied the possession of the property. The relevancy of the
denial depends on the identity of the property. The Court may, in its discretion, either
require the property to be identified before the denial of the possession is proved, or permit
the denial of the possession to be proved before the property is identified.
(d) It is proposed to prove a fact (A) which is said to have been the cause or effect of
fact in issue. There are several intermediate facts (B, C and D) which must be shown to exist
before the fact (A) can be regarded as the cause or effect of the fact in issue. The Court may
either permit A to be proved before B, C or D is proved, or may require proof of B, C and D
before permitting proof of A.
142. (1) The examination of witness by the party who calls him shall be called his
examination-in-chief.
(2) The examination of a witness by the adverse party shall be called his cross-
examination.
(3) The examination of a witness, subsequent to the cross-examination, by the party
who called him, shall be called his re-examination.
Accomplice.
Number of
witnesses.
Order of
production
and
examination
of witnesses.
Judge to decide
as to
admissibility
of evidence.
Examination
of witnesses.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

40
143. ( 1) Witnesses shall be first examined-in-chief, then (if the adverse party so
desires) cross-examined, then (if the party calling him so desires) re-examined.
(2) The examination-in-chief and cross-examination must relate to relevant facts, but
the cross-examination need not be confined to the facts to which the witness testified on
his examination-in-chief.
(3) The re-examination shall be directed to the explanation of matters referred to in
cross-examination; and, if new matter is, by permission of the Court, introduced in re-
examination, the adverse party may further cross-examine upon that matter.
144. A person summoned to produce a document does not become a witness by the
mere fact that he produces it, and cannot be cross-examined unless and until he is called as
a witness.
145. Witnesses to character may be cross-examined and re-examined.
146. (1) Any question suggesting the answer which the person putting it wishes or
expects to receive, is called a leading question.
(2) Leading questions must not, if objected to by the adverse party, be asked in an
examination-in-chief, or in a re-examination, except with the permission of the Court.
(3) The Court shall permit leading questions as to matters which are introductory or
undisputed, or which have, in its opinion, been already sufficiently proved.
(4) Leading questions may be asked in cross-examination.
147. Any witness may be asked, while under examination, whether any contract,
grant or other disposition of property, as to which he is giving evidence, was not contained
in a document, and if he says that it was, or if he is about to make any statement as to the
contents of any document, which, in the opinion of the Court, ought to be produced, the
adverse party may object to such evidence being given until such document is produced,
or until facts have been proved which entitle the party who called the witness to give
secondary evidence of it.
Explanation.—A witness may give oral evidence of statements made by other persons
about the contents of documents if such statements are in themselves relevant facts.
Illustration.
The question is, whether A assaulted B. C deposes that he heard A say to D—"B
wrote a letter accusing me of theft, and I will be revenged on him." This statement is
relevant, as showing A's motive for the assault, and evidence may be given of it, though no
other evidence is given about the letter.
148. A witness may be cross-examined as to previous statements made by him in
writing or reduced into writing, and relevant to matters in question, without such writing
being shown to him, or being proved; but, if it is intended to contradict him by the writing,
his attention must, before the writing can be proved, be called to those parts of it which are
to be used for the purpose of contradicting him.
149. When a witness is cross-examined, he may, in addition to the questions
hereinbefore referred to, be asked any questions which tend—
(a) to test his veracity;
(b) to discover who he is and what is his position in life; or
(c) to shake his credit, by injuring his character, although the answer to such
questions might tend directly or indirectly to criminate him, or might expose or tend
directly or indirectly to expose him to a penalty or forfeiture:
Order of
examinations.
Cross-
examination
of person
called to
produce a
document.
Witnesses to
character.
Leading
questions.
Evidence as to
matters in
writing.
Cross-
examination
as to previous
statements in
writing.
Questions
lawful in
cross-
examination.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

41
Provided that in a prosecution for an offence under section 64, section 65, section 67,
section 68, section 70, or section 71 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 or for
attempt to commit any such offence, where the question of consent is an issue, it shall not
be permissible to adduce evidence or to put questions in the cross-examination of the
victim as to the general immoral character, or previous sexual experience, of such victim with
any person for proving such consent or the quality of consent.
150. If any such question relates to a matter relevant to the suit or proceeding, the
provisions of section 137 shall apply thereto.
151. (1) If any such question relates to a matter not relevant to the suit or proceeding,
except in so far as it affects the credit of the witness by injuring his character, the Court shall
decide whether or not the witness shall be compelled to answer it, and may, if it thinks fit,
warn the witness that he is not obliged to answer it.
(2) In exercising its discretion, the Court shall have regard to the following
considerations, namely:—
(a) such questions are proper if they are of such a nature that the truth of the
imputation conveyed by them would seriously affect the opinion of the Court as to
the credibility of the witness on the matter to which he testifies;
(b) such questions are improper if the imputation which they convey relates to
matters so remote in time, or of such a character, that the truth of the imputation would
not affect, or would affect in a slight degree, the opinion of the Court as to the
credibility of the witness on the matter to which he testifies;
(c) such questions are improper if there is a great disproportion between the
importance of the imputation made against the witness's character and the importance
of his evidence;
(d) the Court may, if it sees fit, draw, from the witness's refusal to answer, the
inference that the answer if given would be unfavourable.
152. No such question as is referred to in section 151 ought to be asked, unless the
person asking it has reasonable grounds for thinking that the imputation which it conveys
is well-founded.
Illustration.
(a) An advocate is instructed by another advocate that an important witness is a
dacoit. This is a reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he is a dacoit.
(b) An advocate is informed by a person in Court that an important witness is a dacoit.
The informant, on being questioned by the advocate, gives satisfactory reasons for his
statement. This is a reasonable ground for asking the witness whether he is a dacoit.
(c) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, is asked at random whether he is
a dacoit. There are here no reasonable ground for the question.
(d) A witness, of whom nothing whatever is known, being questioned as to his mode
of life and means of living, gives unsatisfactory answers. This may be a reasonable ground
for asking him if he is a dacoit.
153. If the Court is of opinion that any such question was asked without reasonable
grounds, it may, if it was asked by any advocate, report the circumstances of the case to the
High Court or other authority to which such advocate, is subject in the exercise of his
profession.
When witness
to be
compelled to
answer.
Court to
decide when
question shall
be asked and
when witness
compelled to
answer.
Question not
to be asked
without
reasonable
grounds.
Procedure of
Court in case
of question
being asked
without
reasonable
grounds.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

42
154. The Court may forbid any questions or inquiries which it regards as indecent or
scandalous, although such questions or inquiries may have some bearing on the questions
before the Court, unless they relate to facts in issue, or to matters necessary to be known in
order to determine whether or not the facts in issue existed.
155. The Court shall forbid any question which appears to it to be intended to insult
or annoy, or which, though proper in itself, appears to the Court needlessly offensive in
form.
156. When a witness has been asked and has answered any question which is relevant
to the inquiry only in so far as it tends to shake his credit by injuring his character, no
evidence shall be given to contradict him; but, if he answers falsely, he may afterwards be
charged with giving false evidence.
Exception 1.—If a witness is asked whether he has been previously convicted of any
crime and denies it, evidence may be given of his previous conviction.
Exception 2.—If a witness is asked any question tending to impeach his impartiality,
and answers it by denying the facts suggested, he may be contradicted.
Illustration.
(a) A claim against an underwriter is resisted on the ground of fraud. The claimant is
asked whether, in a former transaction, he had not made a fraudulent claim. He denies it.
Evidence is offered to show that he did make such a claim. The evidence is inadmissible.
(b) A witness is asked whether he was not dismissed from a situation for dishonesty.
He denies it. Evidence is offered to show that he was dismissed for dishonesty. The evidence
is not admissible.
(c) A affirms that on a certain day he saw B at Goa. A is asked whether he himself was
not on that day at Varanasi. He denies it. Evidence is offered to show that A was on that day
at V aranasi. The evidence is admissible, not as contradicting A on a fact which affects his
credit, but as contradicting the alleged fact that B was seen on the day in question in Goa.
In each of these cases, the witness might, if his denial was false, be charged with giving
false evidence.
(d) A is asked whether his family has not had a blood feud with the family of B against
whom he gives evidence. He denies it. He may be contradicted on the ground that the
question tends to impeach his impartiality.
157. (1) The Court may, in its discretion, permit the person who calls a witness to put
any questions to him which might be put in cross-examination by the adverse party.
(2) Nothing in this section shall disentitle the person so permitted under
sub-section (1), to rely on any part of the evidence of such witness.
158. The credit of a witness may be impeached in the following ways by the adverse
party, or, with the consent of the Court, by the party who calls him—
(a) by the evidence of persons who testify that they, from their knowledge of
the witness, believe him to be unworthy of credit;
(b) by proof that the witness has been bribed, or has accepted the offer of a
bribe, or has received any other corrupt inducement to give his evidence;
(c) by proof of former statements inconsistent with any part of his evidence
which is liable to be contradicted;
Explanation.—A witness declaring another witness to be unworthy of credit may
not, upon his examination-in-chief, give reasons for his belief, but he may be asked his
reasons in cross-examination, and the answers which he gives cannot be contradicted,
though, if they are false, he may afterwards be charged with giving false evidence.
Indecent and
scandalous
questions.
Questions
intended to
insult or
annoy.
Exclusion of
evidence to
contradict
answers to
questions
testing
veracity.
Question by
party to his
own witness.
Impeaching
credit of
witness.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

43
Illustration.
(a) A sues B for the price of goods sold and delivered to B. C says that he delivered
the goods to B. Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous occasion, he said that he
had not delivered goods to B. The evidence is admissible.
(b) A is accused of the murder of B. C says that B, when dying, declared that A had
given B the wound of which he died. Evidence is offered to show that, on a previous
occasion, C said that B, when dying, did not declare that A had given B the wound of which
he died. The evidence is admissible.
159. When a witness whom it is intended to corroborate gives evidence of any
relevant fact, he may be questioned as to any other circumstances which he observed at or
near to the time or place at which such relevant fact occurred, if the Court is of opinion that
such circumstances, if proved, would corroborate the testimony of the witness as to the
relevant fact which he testifies.
Illustration.
A, an accomplice, gives an account of a robbery in which he took part. He describes
various incidents unconnected with the robbery which occurred on his way to and from the
place where it was committed. Independent evidence of these facts may be given in order to
corroborate his evidence as to the robbery itself.
160. In order to corroborate the testimony of a witness, any former statement made by
such witness relating to the same fact, at or about the time when the fact took place, or
before any authority legally competent to investigate the fact, may be proved.
161. Whenever any statement, relevant under section 26 or 27, is proved, all matters
may be proved either in order to contradict or to corroborate it, or in order to impeach or
confirm the credit of the person by whom it was made, which might have been proved if that
person had been called as a witness and had denied upon cross-examination the truth of the
matter suggested.
162. (1) A witness may, while under examination, refresh his memory by referring to
any writing made by himself at the time of the transaction concerning which he is questioned,
or so soon afterwards that the Court considers it likely that the transaction was at that time
fresh in his memory:
Provided that the witness may also refer to any such writing made by any other
person, and read by the witness within the time aforesaid, if when he read it, he knew it to be
correct.
(2) Whenever a witness may refresh his memory by reference to any document, he
may, with the permission of the Court, refer to a copy of such document:
Provided that the Court be satisfied that there is sufficient reason for the
non-production of the original:
Provided further that an expert may refresh his memory by reference to professional
treatises.
163. A witness may also testify to facts mentioned in any such document as is
mentioned in section 162, although he has no specific recollection of the facts themselves,
if he is sure that the facts were correctly recorded in the document.
Questions
tending to
corroborate
evidence of
relevant fact,
admissible.
Former
statements of
witness may
be proved to
corroborate
later
testimony as
to same fact.
What matters
may be proved
in connection
with proved
statement
relevant under
section 26 or
27.
Refreshing
memory.
Testimony to
facts stated in
document
mentioned in
section162.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40

44
Illustration.
A book-keeper may testify to facts recorded by him in books regularly kept in the
course of business, if he knows that the books were correctly kept, although he has forgotten
the particular transactions entered.
164. Any writing referred to under the provisions of the two last preceding sections
must be produced and shown to the adverse party if he requires it; such party may, if he
pleases, cross-examine the witness thereupon.
165. (1) A witness summoned to produce a document shall, if it is in his possession or
power, bring it to Court, notwithstanding any objection which there may be to its production
or to its admissibility:
Provided that the validity of any such objection shall be decided on by the Court.
(2) The Court, if it sees fit, may inspect the document, unless it refers to matters of
State, or take other evidence to enable it to determine on its admissibility.
(3) If for such a purpose it is necessary to cause any document to be translated, the
Court may, if it thinks fit, direct the translator to keep the contents secret, unless the
document is to be given in evidence and, if the interpreter disobeys such direction, he shall
be held to have committed an offence under section 196 of the Bharatiya Nyaya
Sanhita, 2023:
Provided that no Court shall require any privilege communication between the
Ministers and the President of India to be produced before it.
166. When a party calls for a document which he has given the other party notice to
produce, and such document is produced and inspected by the party calling for its
production, he is bound to give it as evidence if the party producing it requires him to do so.
167. When a party refuses to produce a document which he has had notice to produce,
he cannot afterwards use the document as evidence without the consent of the other party
or the order of the Court.
Illustration.
A sues B on an agreement and gives B notice to produce it. At the trial, A calls for the
document and B refuses to produce it. A gives secondary evidence of its contents. B seeks
to produce the document itself to contradict the secondary evidence given by A, or in order
to show that the agreement is not stamped. He cannot do so.
168. The Judge may, in order to discover or obtain proof of relevant facts, ask any
question he considers necessary, in any form, at any time, of any witness, or of the parties
about any fact; and may order the production of any document or thing; and neither the
parties nor their representatives shall be entitled to make any objection to any such question
or order, nor, without the leave of the Court, to cross-examine any witness upon any answer
given in reply to any such question:
Provided that the exercise of the powers conferred herein must be based upon facts
declared by this Act to be relevant, and duly proved:
Provided further that this section shall not authorise any Judge to compel any witness
to answer any question, or to produce any document which such witness would be entitled
to refuse to answer or produce under sections 136 to 140, both inclusive, if the question
were asked or the document were called for by the adverse party; nor shall the Judge ask
any question which it would be improper for any other person to ask under section 157 or
158; nor shall he dispense with primary evidence of any document, except in the cases
hereinbefore excepted.
Right of
adverse party
as to writing
used to refresh
memory.
Production of
documents.
Giving, as
evidence, of
document
called for and
produced on
notice.
Using, as
evidence, of
document
production of
which was
refused on
notice.
Judge's power
to put
questions or
order
production.
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45

45
CHAPTER XI
OF IMPROPER ADMISSION AND REJECTION OF EVIDENCE
169. The improper admission or rejection of evidence shall not be ground of itself for
a new trial or reversal of any decision in any case, if it shall appear to the Court before which
such objection is raised that, independently of the evidence objected to and admitted, there
was sufficient evidence to justify the decision, or that, if the rejected evidence had been
received, it ought not to have varied the decision.
170. (1) The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 is hereby repealed.
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, if, immediately before the date on which this Act
comes into force, there is any trial, application, trial, inquiry, investigation, proceeding or
appeal pending, then, such application, trial, inquiry, investigation, proceeding or appeal
shall be dealt with under the provisions of the Evidence Act, 1872, as in force immediately
before such commencement, as if this Act had not come into force.
No new trial
for improper
admission or
rejection of
evidence.
Repeal and
savings.
1 of 1872.
1 of 1872.
5
10

THE SCHEDULE
CERTIFICATE
[See Section 63(4)]
PART A
(To be filled by the Party)
1.  I, ____________________ _____________________ ____ ____(name), Son/daughter/
spouse of ___________________ residing________________________________/
employed at ___________________________________________________________
do hereby solemnly affirm and sincerely state and submit as follows:—
2.  I state that I have produced the output of the digital record taken from the following device
or the source (tick mark):
Computer / Storage Media                                   DVR                        Mobile
Flash Drive                                                    CD/DVD                   Server
Cloud                                            Other
Other:
________________________________________
(specify)
Make & Model: _______________                            Color: _______________
Serial Number: _______________
IMEI/UIN/UID/MAC/Cloud ID_______________________ (as applicable)
and any other relevant information, if any, about the device or the
source____________________________________.
3. The device or the source was in such a state wherein digital record could be retrieved.
The digital device is:
Owned                             Maintained                          Managed
Operated
by me (select as applicable).
46

47
PART B
(To be filled by the Expert)
1.  I, ____________________ _____________________ ____ ____(name), Son/daughter/
spouse of ___________________ residing________________________________/
employed at ___________________________________________________________
do hereby solemnly affirm and sincerely state and submit as follows:—
2.  I state that I have produced the output of the digital record taken from the following device
or the source (tick mark):
Computer / Storage Media                                   DVR                        Mobile
Flash Drive                                                    CD/DVD                   Server
Cloud                                            Other
Other:
________________________________________
(specify)
Make & Model: _______________                            Color: _______________
Serial Number: _______________
IMEI/UIN/UID/MAC/Cloud ID_______________________ (as applicable)
and any other relevant information, if any, about the device or the
source____________________________________.
3. The device or the source was in such a state wherein digital record could be retrieved.
The digital device is:
Owned                             Maintained                          Managed
Operated
by me (select as applicable).
4.  I state that while taking the digital record/output of the digital record the device was
operating properly without affecting the contents of the electronic record or its accuracy or
its contents and the hash value of the digital record is reproduced below in a sealed or
packed cover in storage media as below:
Make and Model: ____________________________________
Serial Number: _____________________________________
Hash Value:
Hashing Algorithm:
SHA1:
SHA256:
MD5:
Other:_____________________ (Legally applicable standard)

48
Date (DD/MM/YYYY) : __________
Time (IST): ____________ hours (In 24 hours format)
Place: ______________
            (Hash report to be enclosed with the certificate)
Seal:    (Name, Designation, Signature)
Place:
Date:
Note :
1. Box to be ticked mark           if applicable or crossed if not applicable            .
2. IMEI : International Mobile Equipment Identity can be found from any mobile device
using Dial *#06#
3. UIN: Unique Identification Number issued by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation,
Government of India (Only applicable in the case of Drone).
4. UID: Unique Identification numbers - This could be Serial number of Mobile, Computer,
Laptop, Storage Media, CCTV , Flash Drive or any Hardware.

STATEMENT  OF  OBJECTS  AND  REASONS
The Evidence Act was enacted in the year 1872 with a view to consolidate the
law relating to evidence on which the court could come to the conclusion about the
fact of the case and then pronounce judgment thereupon and it came into force on
1st September, 1872.
2. The experience of seven decades of Indian democracy calls for comprehensive
review of our criminal laws including Indian Evidence Act and adopt them in accordance
with the contemporary needs and aspirations of people. The law of evidence (not being
substantive or procedural law), falls in the category of 'adjective law', that defines the
pleading and methodology by which the substantive or procedural laws are operationalised.
The existing law does not address the technological advancement undergone in the country
during the last few decades.
3. The proposed legislation, namely "Bhartiya Sakshya Adhiniyam", inter alia ,
provides as under,—
(i) it provides that 'evidence' includes any information given electronically,
which would permit appearance of witnesses, accused, experts and victims through
electronic means;
(ii) it provides for admissibility of an electronic or digital record as evidence
and it shall have the same legal effect, validity and enforceability as paper records;
(iii) it seeks to expand the scope of secondary evidence to include copies made
from original by mechanical processes, copies made from or compared with the original,
counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not execute them and oral
accounts of the contents of a document given by some person who has himself seen
it and giving matching hash # value of original record will be admissible as proof of
evidence in the form of secondary evidence;
(iv) it seeks to puts limits on the facts which are admissible and its certification
as such in the courts. The proposed Bill introduces more precise and uniform rules of
practice of courts in dealing with facts and circumstances of the case by means of
evidence.
4. The Notes on Clauses explains the various provisions of the Bill.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objectives.
N
EW DELHI; AMIT SHAH.
The  9th August, 2023.
49

Notes on clauses
Clause 1 of the Bill seeks to provide for short title, application and commencement.
Clause 2 of the Bill seeks to provide definitions. This clause seeks to provide for
definition of certain expressions used in the proposed Legislation.
Clause 3 of the Bill relates to evidence given of facts in issue and relevant facts.
This clause seeks to provide evidence may be given in any suit or proceeding of the
existence or non-existence of every fact in issue and of such other facts declared to be
relevant, and of no others.
Clause 4 of the Bill relates to relevancy of facts forming part of same transaction.
This clause seeks to provide that facts which, though not in issue, are so connected
with a fact in issue or a relevant fact as to form part of the same transaction, are relevant,
whether they occurred at the same time and place or at different times and places.
Clause 5 of the Bill relates to facts which are the occasion, cause or effect of facts in
issue or relevant facts.
This clause seeks to provide that facts which are the occasion, cause or effect, immediate
or otherwise, of relevant facts, or facts in issue, or which constitute the state of things under
which they happened, or which afforded an opportunity for their occurrence or transaction,
are relevant.
Clause 6 of the Bill relates to motive, preparation and previous or subsequent conduct.
This clause seeks to provides that any fact is relevant which shows or constitutes a
motive or preparation for any fact in issue or relevant fact.
It is proposed that the conduct of any party, or of any agent to any party, to any suit
or proceeding, in reference to such suit or proceeding, or in reference to any fact in issue
therein or relevant thereto, and the conduct of any person, an offence against whom is the
subject of any proceeding, is relevant, if such conduct influences or is influenced by any fact
in issue or relevant fact, and whether it was previous or subsequent thereto. It is further
proposed to insert Explanation 1 and 2 so as to explain the expression of the word "conduct".
Clause 7 of the Bill relates to facts necessary to explain or introduce fact in issue or
relevant facts.
This clause seeks to provides that facts necessary to explain or introduce a fact in
issue or relevant fact, or which support or rebut an inference suggested by a fact in issue or
a relevant fact, or which establish the identity of anything, or person whose identity, is
relevant, or fix the time or place at which any fact in issue or relevant fact happened, or which
show the relation of parties by whom any such fact was transacted, are relevant insofar as
they are necessary for that purpose.
Clause 8 of the Bill relates to things said, done by conspirator in reference to common
design.
This clause seeks to provide that there is reasonable ground to believe that two or
more persons have conspired together to commit an offence or an actionable wrong, anything
said, done or written by any one of such persons in reference to their common intention, after
the time when such intention was first entertained by any one of them, is a relevant fact as
against each of the persons believed to be so conspiring, as well for the purpose of proving
the existence of the conspiracy as for the purpose of showing that any such person was a
party to it.
50

51
Clause 9 of the Bill relates to facts not otherwise relevant become relevant.
This clause seeks to facts not otherwise relevant are relevant that if they are inconsistent
with any fact in issue or relevant fact and if by themselves or in connection with other facts
they make the existence or non-existence of any fact in issue or relevant fact highly probable
or improbable.
Clause 10 of the Bill relates to facts tending to enable Court to determine amount are
relevant in suits for damages.
This clause, inter alia, provides that suits in which damages are claimed, any fact
which will enable the Court to determine the amount of damages which ought to be awarded
is relevant.
Clause 11 of the Bill relates to facts relevant when right or custom is in question.
This clause deals with the question of the existence of any right or custom, the facts
are relevant that any transaction by which the right or custom in question was created,
claimed, modified, recognised, asserted or denied, or which was inconsistent with its existence
and particular instances in which the right or custom was claimed, recognised or exercised, or
in which its exercise was disputed, asserted or departed from.
Clause 12 of the Bill relates to facts showing existence of state of mind, or of body of
bodily feeling.
This clause seeks to provide that facts showing the existence of any state of mind
such as intention, knowledge, good faith, negligence, rashness, ill-will or goodwill towards
any particular person, or showing the existence of any state of body or bodily feeling, are
relevant, when the existence of any such state of mind or body or bodily feeling is in issue or
relevant.
It is further proposed to insert Explanation 1 and 2 so as to explain the relevant state
of mind and previous commission by the accused of an offence is relevant fact.
Clause 13 of the Bill relates to facts bearing on question whether act was accidental or
intentional.
This clause seeks to provide that there is a question whether an act was accidental or
intentional, or done with a particular knowledge or intention, the fact that such act formed
part of a series of similar occurrences, in each of which the person doing the act was concerned,
is relevant.
Clause 14 of the Bill relates to existence of course of business when relevant.
This clause seeks to provide that there is a question whether a particular act was done,
the existence of any course of business, according to which it naturally would have been
done, is a relevant fact.
Clause 15 of the Bill defined the term "Admission".
This clause defined that an admission is a statement, oral or documentary or contained
in electronic form, which suggests any inference as to any fact in issue or relevant fact, and
which is made by any of the persons, and under the circumstances, hereinafter mentioned.
Clause 16 of the Bill relates to Admission by party to proceeding or his agent.
This clause, inter alia, provides that the statements made by a party to the proceeding,
or by an agent to any such party, whom the Court regards, under the circumstances of the
case, as expressly or impliedly authorised by him to make them, are admissions.
It is further proposed that statements made in suits in a representative character, are
not admissions, unless they were made while the party making them held that character and
further persons who have any proprietary or pecuniary interest in the subject matter of the
proceeding, and who make the statement in their character of persons so interested, or

52
persons from whom the parties to the suit have derived their interest in the subject matter of
the suit, are admissions, if they are made during the continuance of the interest of the
persons making the statements.
Clause 17 of the Bill relates to admissions by persons whose position must be proved
as against party to suit.
This clause seeks to provide that the statements made by persons whose position or
liability, it is necessary to prove as against any party to the suit, are admissions, if such
statements would be relevant as against such persons in relation to such position or liability
in a suit brought by or against them, and if they are made whilst the person making them
occupies such position or is subject to such liability.
Clause 18 of the Bill relates to admissions by persons expressly referred to by party to
suit.
This clause deals with the statements made by persons to whom a party to the suit has
expressly referred for information in reference to a matter in dispute are admissions.
Clause 19 of the Bill relates to admissibility of proof of admissions against persons
making them, and by or on their behalf.
This clause provides that the admissions are relevant and may be proved as against
the person who makes them, or his representative in interest; but they cannot be proved by
or on behalf of the person who makes them or by his representative in interest.
This clause further provides exception in certain cases in which statement of facts in
issue or relevant fact by person who is dead or cannot be found. It is also exempted that
where an admission may be proved by or on behalf of the person making it when it consists
of a statement of the existence of any state of mind or body, relevant or in issue, made at or
about the time when such state of mind or body existed, and is accompanied by conduct
rendering its falsehood improbable and if it is relevant otherwise than as an admission.
Clause 20 of the Bill deals when an oral admissions as to contents of documents are
relevant.
This clause provides that oral admissions as to the contents of a document are not
relevant, unless and until the party proposing to prove them shows that he is entitled to give
secondary evidence of the contents of such document under the rules hereinafter contained,
or unless the genuineness of a document produced is in question.
Clause 21 of the Bill deals as to admissions in civil cases when relevant.
This clause provides that in civil cases no admission is relevant, if it is made either
upon an express condition that evidence of it is not to be given, or under circumstances from
which the Court can infer that the parties agreed together that evidence of it should not be
given.
Clause 22 of the Bill relates to confession caused by inducement, threat, coercion or
promise, when irrelevant in criminal proceeding.
This clause provides that confession made by an accused person is irrelevant in a
criminal proceeding, have been caused by any inducement, threat, coercion or promise
having reference to the charge against the accused person, proceeding from a person in
authority and sufficient, in the opinion of the Court, to give the accused person grounds
which would appear to him reasonable for supposing that by making it he would gain any
advantage or avoid any evil of a temporal nature in reference to the proceedings against him.
Clause 23 of the Bill deals with the confession to police officer.
This clause explains that no confession made to a police officer shall be proved as
against a person accused of any offence, unless it is made in the immediate presence of a
Magistrate shall be proved against him:

53
Further it is also provided to insert a proviso that when any fact is deposed to as
discovered in consequence of information received from a person accused of any offence, in
the custody of a police officer, so much of such information, whether it amounts to a
confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact thereby discovered, may be proved.
Clause 24 of the Bill relates to consideration of proved confession affecting person
making it and others jointly under trial for same offence.
This clause provides that when more persons than one is being tried jointly for the
same offence, and a confession made by one of such persons affecting himself and some
other of such persons is proved, the Court may take into consideration such confession as
against such other person as well as against the person who makes such confession. It is
further proposed to insert Explanation I for the term "Offence" and Explanation II for the
trial conducted in the absence of an accused under section 82 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 is deemed to be a joint trial.
Clause 25 of the Bill deals that admissions not conclusive proof, but may estop.
This clause provides that admissions are not conclusive proof of the matters admitted
but they may operate as estoppels.
Clause 26 of the Bill relates to the cases in which statement of facts in issue or relevant
fact by person who is dead or cannot be found, etc., is relevant.
This clause provides, inter alia, deals with statements, written or verbal, of relevant
facts made by a person who is dead, or who cannot be found, or who has become incapable
of giving evidence, or whose attendance cannot be procured without an amount of delay or
expense which under the circumstances of the case appears to the Court unreasonable, are
themselves facts in issue or relevant facts, in case of statement of a person, resulted in his
death; in the ordinary course of business; against the pecuniary or proprietary interest of the
person; the opinion of any such person, as to the existence of any public right or custom or
matters of public or general interest; the existence of any relationship by blood, marriage or
adoption between persons.
Clause 27 of the Bill deals with the relevancy of certain evidence for proving, in
subsequent proceeding.
This clause provides that evidence given by a witness in a judicial proceeding, or
before any person authorised by law to take it, is relevant for the purpose of proving, in a
subsequent judicial proceeding, the proceeding was between the same parties or their
representatives in interest; that the adverse party in the first proceeding had the right and
opportunity to cross-examine and the questions in issue were substantially the same in the
first as in the second proceeding.
Clause 28 of the Bill relates to entries in books of account when relevant.
This clause provides that the entries in the books of account, including those maintained
in an electronic form, regularly kept in the course of business are relevant whenever they
refer to a matter into which the Court has to inquire, but such statements shall not alone be
sufficient evidence to charge any person with liability.
Clause 29 of the Bill relates to relevancy of entry in public record or an electronic
record made in performance of duty.
This clause provides that an entry made in any public or other official book, register or
record or an electronic record, stating a fact in issue or relevant fact, and made by a public
servant in the discharge of his official duty, or by any other person in performance of a duty
specially enjoined by the law of the country in which such book, register or record or an
electronic record, is kept, is itself a relevant fact.
Clause 30 of the Bill relates to relevancy of statements in maps, charts and plans.

54
This clause provides that the Statements of facts in issue or relevant facts, made in
published maps or charts generally offered for public sale, or in maps or plans made under
the authority of the Central Government or any State Government, as to matters usually
represented or stated in such maps, charts or plans, are themselves relevant facts.
Clause 31 of the Bill relates to relevancy of statement as to fact of public nature
contained in certain Acts or notifications.
This clause provides that when the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence of
any fact of a public nature, any statement of it, made in a recital contained in any Central Act
or State Act or in a Central Governmentor State Government notification appearing in the
respective Official Gazette or in any printed paper or in electronic or digital form purporting
to be such Gazette, is a relevant fact.
Clause 32 of the Bill relates to relevancy of statements as to any law contained in law
books including electronic or digital form.
This clause provides that when the Court has to form an opinion as to a law of any
country, any statement of such law contained in a book purporting to be printed or published
including in electronic or digital form under the authority of the Government of such country
and to contain any such law, and any report of a ruling of the Courts of such country
contained in a book including in electronic or digital form purporting to be a report of such
rulings, is relevant.
Clause 33 of the Bill relates to evidence to be given when statement forms part of a
conversation, document, electronic record, book or series of letters or papers.
This clause provides that any statement of which evidence is given forms part of a
longer statement, or of a conversation or part of an isolated document, or is contained in a
document which forms part of a book, or is contained in part of electronic record or of a
connected series of letters or papers, evidence shall be given of so much and no more of the
statement, conversation, document, electronic record, book or series of letters or papers as
the Court considers necessary in that particular case to the full understanding of the nature
and effect of the statement, and of the circumstances under which it was made.
Clause 34 of the Bill relates to previous judgments relevant to bar a second suit or trial.
This clause provides that the existence of any judgment, order or decree which by law
prevents any Court from taking cognizance of a suit or holding a trial, is a relevant fact when
the question is whether such Court ought to take cognizance of such suit or to hold such
trial.
Clause 35 of the Bill relates to relevancy of certain judgements in exercise of jurisdiction
in execution of probate, etc.
This clause, inter alia, provide relevancy of final judgment, order or decree of a
competent Court or Tribunal, in the exercise of probate, matrimonial, admiralty or insolvency
jurisdiction, which confers upon or takes away from any person any legal character, or which
declares any person to be entitled to any such character, or to be entitled to any specific
thing, not as against any specified person but absolutely, is relevant when the existence of
any such legal character, or the title of any such person to any such thing, is relevant and the
said judgment, order, decree is conclusive proof.
Clause 36 of the Bill relates to relevancy and effect of judgements, orders or decrees,
other those mentioned in clause 35.
This clause provides that Judgments, orders or decrees other than those mentioned in
clause 35 are relevant if they relate to matters of a public nature relevant to the enquiry; but
such judgments, orders or decrees are not conclusive proof of that which they state.
Clause 37 of the Bill relates to Judgments, orders or decrees, other than those mentioned
in clauses 34, 35 and 36 when relevant.

55
This clause provides that the judgments or orders or decrees, other than those
mentioned in clauses 34, 35 and 36 are irrelevant, unless the existence of such judgment or
order or decree is a fact in issue, or is relevant under some other provision of this Adhiniyam.
Clause 38 of the Bill relates to Fraud or collusion in obtaining judgment, or incompetency
of Court, may be proved.
This clause provides that any party to a suit or other proceeding may show that any
judgment, order or decree which is relevant under clauses 34, 35 and 36, and which has been
proved by the adverse party, was delivered by a Court not competent to deliver it, or was
obtained by fraud or collusion.
Clause 39 of the Bill relates to opinions of experts.
This clause provides that the Court has to form an opinion of the experts upon a point
of foreign law or of science, or art, or any other field, or as to identity of handwriting or finger
impressions are relevant facts and such persons are called experts, and matters relating to
any information transmitted or stored in any computer resource or any other electronic or
digital form, the opinion of the Examiner of Electronic Evidence referred to in section 79A of
the Information Technology Act, 2000, is a relevant fact.
Clause 40 of the Bill relates to the facts bearing upon opinions of experts.
This clause provides that the facts, not otherwise relevant, are relevant if they support
or are inconsistent with the opinions of experts, when such opinions are relevant.
Clause 41 of the Bill relates to the opinion as to hand-writing and digital signature,
when relevant.
This clause provides that the Court has to form an opinion as to the person by whom
any document was written or signed, the opinion of any person acquainted with the
handwriting of the person by whom it is supposed to be written or signed that it was or was
not written or signed by that person and electronic signature of any person, is a relevant fact.
Clause 42 of the Bill relates to relevancy of opinion as to existence of general custom
or right.
This clause provides that the Court has to form an opinion as to the existence of any
general custom or right, the opinions, as to the existence of such custom or right, of persons
who would be likely to know of its existence if it existed, are relevant.
Clause 43 of the Bill relates to relevancy of opinion as to usage, tenets, etc.
This clause provides that the Court has to form an opinion as to the usages and tenets,
the constitution and governance of any religious or charitable foundation, or the meaning of
words or terms used in particular districts or by particular classes of people, and the opinions
of persons having special means of knowledge thereon, are relevant facts.
Clause 44 of the Bill relates to relevancy of opinion on relationship.
This clause provides that the Court has to form an opinion as to the relationship of
persons on the opinion, expressed by conduct, as to the existence of such relationship, of
any person who, as a member of the family or otherwise, has special means of knowledge on
the subject, is a relevant fact, provided that such opinion shall not be sufficient to prove a
marriage in proceedings under the Divorce Act, 1869, or in prosecutions under section 81 of 83
of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
Clause 45 of the Bill relates to relevancy of grounds of opinion.
This clause provides that opinion of any living person is relevant, the grounds on
which such opinion is based are also relevant.
Clause 46 of the Bill relates to civil cases character to prove conduct imputed, irrelevant.

56
This clause provides that in civil cases, the fact that the character of any person
concerned is such as to render probable or improbable any conduct imputed to him, is
irrelevant, except insofar as such character appears from facts otherwise relevant.
Clause 47 of the Bill relates to criminal cases previous good character relevant.
This clause provides that in criminal proceedings, the fact that the person accused is
of a good character, is relevant.
Clause 48 of the Bill relates to the evidence of character or previous sexual experience
not relevant in certain cases.
This clause provides that in a prosecution for an offence under section 64, section 65,
section 67, section 66, section 67, section 70, section 71, section 73, section 74, section 75,
section 76 or section 77 of the Bharatiya Jan Suraksha Avam Garima Sanhita, 2023 or for
attempt to commit any such offence, where the question of consent is in issue, evidence of
the character of the victim or of such person's previous sexual experience with any person
shall not be relevant on the issue of such consent or the quality of consent.
Clause 49 of the Bill relates to relevancy of previous bad character not relevant, except
in reply.
This clause provides that in criminal proceedings, the fact that the accused has a bad
character, is irrelevant, unless evidence has been given that he has a good character, in
which case it becomes relevant.
Clause 50 of the Bill relatesto character of any person is such as to affect the amount
of damages which he ought to receive, is relevant in civil cases.
Clause 51 of the Bill provides that no fact of which the Court will take judicial notice
need to be proved.
Clause 52 of the Bill relates to the facts of which Court shall take judicial notice.
This clause provides that the Court shall take judicial notice all laws in force in the
territory of India including laws having extra-territorial operation; international treaty,
agreement or convention with country or countries by India, or decisions made by India at
the international associations or other bodies; the course of proceeding of the Constituent
Assembly of India, of Parliament of India and of the State Legislatures; the seals of all Courts
and Tribunals; the seals of Courts of Admiralty and Maritime Jurisdiction, Notaries Public,
and all seals which any person is authorised to use by the Constitution, or by an Act of
Parliament or State Legislatures, or Regulations having the force of law in India; the accession
to office, names, titles, functions, and signatures of the persons filling for the time being any
public office in any State, if the fact of their appointment to such office is notified in any
Official Gazette; the existence, title and national flag of every country or sovereign recognised
by the Government of India; the divisions of time, the geographical divisions of the world,
and public festivals, fasts and holidays notified in the Official  Gazette; the territory of India;
the commencement, continuance and termination of  hostilities between the Government of
India and any other country or body of persons; the names of the members and officers of
the Court, and of their deputies and subordinate officers and assistants, and also of all
officers acting in execution of its process, and of advocates and other persons authorised by
law to appear or act before it and the rule of the road or land or at sea.
This clause further provides that on all matters of public history, literature, science or
art, the Court may resort for its aid to appropriate books or documents of reference and if the
Court is called upon by any person to take judicial notice of any fact, it may refuse to do so
unless and until such person produces any such book or document.
Clause 53 of the Bill relates to the facts admitted need not be proved.
This clause provides that no fact need be proved in any proceeding which the parties
thereto or their agents agree to admit at the hearing, or which, before the hearing, they agree

57
to admit by any writing under their hands, or which by any rule of pleading in force at the time
they are deemed to have admitted by their pleadings, subject to the condition that the Court
may, in its discretion, require the facts admitted to be proved otherwise than by such
admissions.
Clause 54 of the Bill relates to all facts, except the contents of documents may be
proved by oral evidence.
Clause 55 of the Bill relates to the oral evidence to be direct.
This clause provides that Oral evidence shall, in all cases whatever, be direct; if it refers
toa fact which could be seen, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he saw it; a fact
which could be heard, it must be the evidence of a witness who says he heard it; a fact which
could be perceived by any other sense or in any other manner, it must be the evidence of a
witness who says he perceived it by that sense or in that manner; an opinion or to the
grounds on which that opinion is held, it must be the evidence of the person who holds that
opinion on those grounds, subject to the opinions of experts expressed in any treatise
commonly offered for sale, and the grounds on which such opinions are held, may be proved
by the production of such treatises if the author is dead, or cannot be found, or has become
incapable of giving evidence, or cannot be called as a witness without an amount of delay or
expense which the Court regards as unreasonable and further that, if oral evidence refers to
the existence or condition of any material thing other than a document, the Court may, if it
thinks fit, require the production of such material thing for its inspection.
Clause 56 of the Bill relates to the contents of documents may be proved either by
primary or by secondary evidence.
Clause 57 of the Bill relates to the primary evidence.
This clause provides that the primary evidence means the document itself produced
for the inspection of the Court.
Clause 58 of the Bill relates to the secondary evidence.
This clause provides that the secondary evidence includes certified copies; copies
made from the original by mechanical processes which in themselves ensure the accuracy of
the copy, and copies compared with such copies; copies made from or compared with the
original; counterparts of documents as against the parties who did not execute them; oral
accounts of the contents of a document given by some person who has himself seen it; oral
admissions; written admissions and evidence of a person who has examined a document, the
original of which consists of numerous accounts or other documents which cannot
conveniently be examined in Court, and who is skilled in the examination of such documents.
Clause 59 of the Bill relates to the documents shall be proved by primary evidence
except in the cases hereinafter mentioned.
Clause 60 of the Bill relates to Cases in which secondary evidence may be given of the
existence, condition, or contents of a document.
Clause 61 of the Bill relates to the admissibility of electronic or digital record.
This clause provides that nothing in the Adhiniyam shall apply to deny the admissibility
of an electronic or digital record in the evidence on the ground that it is an electronic or
digital record and such record shall have the same legal effect, validity and enforceability as
paper records.
Clause 62 of the Bill relates to special provisions as to evidence relating to electronic
record.
This clause provides that the contents of electronic records may be proved in accordance
with the provisions of clause 64.
Clause 63 of the Bill relates to admissibility of electronic records.

58
This clause provides that any information contained in an electronic record which is
printed on paper, stored, recorded or copied in optical or magnetic media or semiconductor
memory which is produced by a computer or any communication device or otherwise stored,
recorded or copied in any electronic shall be deemed to be also a document and computer in
question and shall be admissible in any proceedings, without further proof or production of
the original, as evidence or any contents of the original or of any fact stated therein of which
direct evidence would be admissible.
Clause 64 of the Bill relates to rules as to notice to produce.
This clause provides that the secondary evidence of the contents of the documents,
shall not be given unless the party proposing to give such secondary evidence has previously
given to the party in whose possession or power the document is, or to his advocate or
representative, such notice to produce it as is prescribed by law; and if no notice is prescribed
by law, then such notice as the Court considers reasonable under the circumstances of the
case, subject to the condition such notice shall not be required in order to render secondary
evidence admissible.
Clause 65 of the Bill relates to proof of signature and handwriting of person alleged to
have signed or written document produced.
This clause provides that the document is alleged to be signed or to have been written
wholly or in part by any person, the signature or the handwriting of so much of the document
as is alleged to be in that person's handwriting must be proved to be in his handwriting.
Clause 66 of the Bill relates to proof as to electronic signature.
This clause provides that the electronic signature of any subscriber is alleged to have
been affixed to an electronic record, such electronic signature is the electronic signature of
the subscriber must be proved.
Clause 67 of the Bill relates to proof of execution of document required by law to be
attested.
This clause provides that the document is required by law to be attested, it shall not be
used as evidence until one attesting witness at least has been called for the purpose of
proving its execution, subject to the call an attesting witness in proof of the execution of any
document, not being a Will, which has been registered in accordance with the provisions of
the Indian Registration Act, 1908, unless its execution by the person by whom it purports to
have been executed is specifically denied.
Clause 68 of the Bill relates to proof where no attesting witness found.
This clause provides that no such attesting witness can be found, it must be proved
that the attestation of one attesting witness at least is in his handwriting, and that the
signature of the person executing the document is in the handwriting of that person.
Clause 69 of the Bill relates to admission of execution by party to attested document.
This clause provides that admission of a party to an attested document of its execution
by himself shall be sufficient proof of its execution as against him, though it be a document
required by law to be attested.
Clause 70 of the Bill relates to the attesting witness denies or does not recollect the
execution of the document, its execution may be proved by other evidence.
Clause 71 of the Bill relates to an attested document not required by law to be attested
may be proved as if it was unattested.
Clause 72 of the Bill relates to the comparison of signature, writing or seal with others
admitted or proved.
This clause provides to ascertain a signature, writing, or seal admitted or proved to the
satisfaction of the Court to have been written or made by that person may be compared with

59
the one which is to be proved, although that signature, writing, or seal has not been produced
or proved for any other purpose. It further provides that the Court may direct any person
present in Court to write any words or figures for the purpose of enabling the Court to
compare the words or figures so written with any words or figures alleged to have been
written by such person and applies with any necessary modifications, to finger impressions.
Clause 73 of the Bill relates to proof as to verification of digital signature.
This clause provides that to ascertain a digital signature is that of the person by whom
it purports to have been affixed, the Court may direct the person or the Controller or the
Certifying Authority to produce the Digital Signature Certificate and any other person to
apply the public key listed in the Digital Signature Certificate and verify the digital signature
purported to have been affixed by that person.
Clause 74 of the Bill relates to public and private documents.
This clause provides public documents includes documents forming the acts, or records
of the acts of the sovereign authority; official bodies and tribunals; public officers, legislative,
judicial and executive of India or of a foreign country; and public records kept in any State or
Union territory of private documents. Except all the above others are private documents.
Clause 75 of the Bill relates to the certified copies of public documents.
This clause provides that public officer having the custody of a public document shall
be called certified copies.
Clause 76 of the Bill relates to the proof of documents by production of certified
copies.
This clause provides that certified copies may be produced in proof of the contents of
the public documents or parts of the public documents of which they purport to be copies.
Clause 77 of the Bill relates to the proof of other official documents.
Clause 78 of the Bill relates to the presumption as to genuineness of certified copies.
This clause provides that the Court shall presume to be genuine every document
purporting to be a certificate, certified copy or other document, which is by law declared to
be admissible as evidence of any particular fact, and which purports to be duly certified by
any officer of the Central Government or of a State Government, subject to the document is
substantially in the form and purports to be executed in the manner directed by law in that
behalf and the Court shall also presume that any officer by whom any such document
purports to be signed or certified, held, when he signed it, the official character which he
claims in such paper.
Clause 79 of the Bill relates to presumption as to documents produced as record of
evidence, etc.
This clause provides that the any document is produced before any Court, purporting
to be a record or memorandum of the evidence, or of any part of the evidence, given by a
witness in a judicial proceeding or before any officer authorised by law to take such evidence
or to be a statement or confession by any prisoner or accused person, taken in accordance
with law, and purporting to be signed by any Judge or Magistrate, or by any such officer as
aforesaid, the Court shall presume thatthe document is genuine; any statements as to the
circumstances under which it was taken, purporting to be made by the person signing it, are
true; andsuch evidence, statement or confession was duly taken.
Clause 80 of the Bill relates to presumption as to Gazettes, newspapers, and other
documents.
This clause provides that the Court shall presume the genuineness of every document
purporting to be the Official Gazette, or to be a newspaper or journal, and of every document
purporting to be a document directed by any law to be kept by any person, if such document
is kept substantially in the form required by law and is produced from proper custody.

60
Clause 81 of the Bill relates to the presumption as to Gazettes in electronic or digital
record.
This clause provides that the Court shall presume the genuineness of every electronic
or digital record purporting to be the Official Gazette, or purporting to be electronic or digital
record directed by any law to be kept by any person, if such electronic or digital record is
kept substantially in the form required by law and is produced from proper custody.
Clause 82 of the Bill relates to the presumption as to maps or plans made by authority
of Government.
This clause provides that the Court shall presume that maps or plans purporting to be
made by the authority of the Central Government or any State Government were so made,
and are accurate; but maps or plans made for the purposes of any cause must be proved to
be accurate.
Clause 83 of the Bill relates to the presumption as to collections of laws and reports of
decisions.
This clause provides that the Court shall presume the genuineness of, every book
purporting to be printed or published under the authority of the Government of any country,
and to contain any of the laws of that country, and of every book purporting to contain
reports of decisions of the Courts of such country.
Clause 84 of the Bill relates to the presumption as to powers-of-attorney.
This clause provides that the Court shall presume that every document purporting to
be a power-of-attorney, and to have been executed before, and authenticated by, a Notary
Public, or any Court, Judge, Magistrate, Indian Consul or Vice-Consul, or representative of
the Central Government, was so executed and authenticated.
Clause 85 of the Bill relates to the presumption as to electronic agreements.
This clause provides that the Court shall presume that every electronic record
purporting to be an agreement containing the electronic or digital signature of the parties
was so concluded by affixing the electronic or digital signature of the parties.
Clause 86 of the Bill relates to the presumption as to electronic records and electronic
signatures.
This clause provides that any proceedings involving a secure electronic record, the
Court shall presume unless contrary is proved, that the secure electronic record has not been
altered since the specific point of time to which the secure status relates.
Further provides that the case involving secure digital signature, the Court shall presume
secure electronic signature is affixed by subscriber with the intention of signing or approving
the electronic record and nothing in this section shall create any presumption, relating to
authenticity and integrity of the electronic record or any electronic signature.
Clause 87 of the Bill relates to presumption as to Electronic Signature Certificates.
This clause provides that the information listed in an Electronic Signature Certificate is
correct, except for information specified as subscriber information which has not been verified,
if the certificate was accepted by the subscriber.
Clause 88 of the Bill relates to presumption as to certified copies of foreign judicial
records.
This clause provides that the Court may presume that any document purporting to be
a certified copy of any judicial record of any country beyond India is genuine and accurate,
if the document purports to be certified in any manner which is certified by any representative
of the Central Government, in or for such country, to be the manner commonly in use in that
country for the certification of copies of judicial records.

61
Clause 89 of the Bill relates to presumption as to books, maps and charts.
This clause provides that the Court may presume that any book to which it may refer
for information on matters of public or general interest, and that any published map or chart,
the statements of which are relevant facts, and which is produced for its inspection, was
written and published by the person, and at the time and place, by whom or at which it
purports to have been written or published.
Clause 90 of the Bill relates to presumption as to electronic messages.
This clause provides that the Court may presume that an electronic message, forwarded
by the originator through an electronic mail server to the addressee to whom the message
purports to be addressed corresponds with the message as fed into his computer for
transmission; but the Court shall not make any presumption as to the person by whom such
message was sent.
Clause 91 of the Bill relates to presumption as to due execution of documents not
produced.
This clause provides that the Court shall presume that every document, called for and
not produced after notice to produce, was attested, stamped and executed in the manner
required by law.
Clause 92 of the Bill relates to presumption as to documents thirty years old.
This clause provides that any document, purporting or proved to be thirty years old,
is produced from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper, the
Court may presume that the signature and every other part of such document, which purports
to be in the handwriting of any particular person, is in that person's handwriting, and, in the
case of a document executed or attested, that it was duly executed and attested by the
persons by whom it purports to be executed and attested.
Clause 93 of the Bill relates to presumption as to electronic records five years old.
This clause provides that any electronic record, purporting or proved to be five years
old, is produced from any custody which the Court in the particular case considers proper,
the Court may presume that the electronic signature which purports to be the electronic
signature of any particular person was so affixed by him or any person authorised by him in
this behalf.
Clause 94 of the Bill relates to evidence of terms of contracts, grants and other
dispositions of property reduced to form of document.
This clause provides that the terms of a contract, or of a grant, or of any other disposition
of property, have been reduced to the form of a document, and in all cases in which any
matter is required by law to be reduced to the form of a document, no evidence shall be given
in proof of the terms of such contract, grant or other disposition of property, or of such
matter, except the document itself, or secondary evidence of its contents in cases in which
secondary evidence is admissible under the provisions and with few exceptions.
Clause 95 of the Bill relates to exclusion of evidence of oral agreement.
This clause provides that no evidence of any oral agreement or statement shall be
admitted, as between the parties to any such instrument or their representatives in interest,
for the purpose of contradicting, varying, adding to, or subtracting from the proved evidence.
Clause 96 of the Bill relates to exclusion of evidence to explain or amend ambiguous
document.
This clause provides thatthe language used in a document is, on its face, ambiguous
or defective, evidence may not be given of facts which would show its meaning or supply its
defects.

62
Clause 97 of the Bill relates to exclusion of evidence against application of document
to existing facts.
This clause provides that the language used in a document is plain in itself, and when
it applies accurately to existing facts, evidence may not be given to show that it was not
meant to apply to such facts.
Clause 98 of the Bill relates to evidence as to document unmeaning reference to
existing facts.
This clause provides that the language used in a document is plain in itself, but is
unmeaning in reference to existing facts, evidence may be given to show that it was used in
a peculiar sense.
Clause 99 of the Bill relates to evidence as to application of language which can apply
to one only of several persons.
This clause provides that the facts are such that the language used might have been
meant to apply to any one, and could not have been meant to apply to more than one, of
several persons or things, evidence may be given of facts which show which of those
persons or things it was intended to apply to.
Clause 100 of the Bill relates to evidence as to application of language to one of two
sets of facts, to neither of which the whole correctly applies.
This clause provides that the language used applies partly to one set of existing facts,
and partly to another set of existing facts, but the whole of it does not apply correctly to
either, evidence may be given to show to which of the two it was meant to apply.
Clause 101 of the Bill relates to evidence as to meaning of illegible characters.
This clause provides that evidence may be given to show the meaning of illegible or
not commonly intelligible characters, of foreign, obsolete, technical or local and regional
expressions, of abbreviations and of words used in a peculiar sense.
Clause 102 of the Bill relates to the person give evidence of agreement varying terms
of document.
This clause provides that persons who are not parties to a document, or their
representatives in interest, may give evidence of any facts tending to show a contemporaneous
agreement varying the terms of the document.
Clause 103 of the Bill relates to saving of provisions of Indian Succession Act relating
to Wills
Clause 104 of the Bill relates to burden of proof.
This clause provides that person is bound to prove the existence of any fact, it is said
that the burden of proof lies on that person.
Clause 105 of the Bill relates to the person with whom burden of proof lies.
This clause provides that the burden of proof in a suitor proceeding lies on that person
who would fail if no evidence at all were given on either side.
Clause 106 of the Bill relates to the burden of proof as to particular fact.
This clause provides that the burden of proof as to any particular fact lies on that
person who wishes the Court to believe in its existence, unless it is provided by any law that
the proof of that fact shall lie on any particular person.
Clause 107 of the Bill relates to the burden of proving fact to be proved to make
evidence admissible.

63
This clause provides that the burden of proving any fact necessary to be proved in
order to enable any person to give evidence of any other fact is on the person who wishes to
give such evidence.
Clause 108 of the Bill relates to the burden of proving that case of accused comes
within exceptions.
This clause provides that the accused of any offence, the burden of proving the
existence of circumstances bringing the case within any of the general exceptions in the
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023 or within any special exception or proviso contained in any
other part of the said Sanhita, or in any law defining the offence, is upon him, and the Court
shall presume the absence of such circumstances.
Clause 109 of the Bill relates to burden of proving fact especially within knowledge.
This clause provides that any fact is especially within the knowledge of any person,
the burden of proving that fact is upon him.
Clause 110 of the Bill relates to burden of proving death of person known to have been
alive within thirty years.
This clause provides that the question is whether a man is alive or dead, and it is
shown that he was alive within thirty years, the burden of proving that he is dead is on the
person who affirms it.
Clause 111 of the Bill relates to burden of proving that person is alive who has not
been heard of for seven years.
This clause provides that a man is alive or dead, and it is proved that he has not been
heard of for seven years by those who would naturally have heard of him if he had been alive,
the burden of proving that he is alive is shifted to the person who affirms it.
Clause 112 of the Bill relates to burden of proof as to relationship in the cases of
partners, landlord and tenant, principal and agent.
This clause provides that thepersons are partners, landlord and tenant, or principal
and agent, and it has been shown that they have been acting as such, the burden of proving
that they do not stand, or have ceased to stand, to each other in those relationships
respectively, is on the person who affirms it.
Clause 113 of the Bill relates to burden of proof as to ownership.
This clause provides that any person is owner of anything of which he is shown to be
in possession, the burden of proving that he is not the owner is on the person who affirms
that he is not the owner.
Clause 114 of the Bill relates to proof of good faith in transactions where one party is
in relation of active confidence.
This clause provides that the good faith of a transaction between parties, one of whom
stands to the other in a position of active confidence, the burden of proving the good faith
of the transaction is on the party who is in a position of active confidence.
Clause 115 of the Bill relates to presumption as to certain offences.
Clause 116 of the Bill relates to birth during marriage, conclusive proof of legitimacy.
This clause provides that the fact that any person was born during the continuance of
a valid marriage between his mother and any man, or within two hundred and eighty days
after its dissolution, the mother remaining unmarried, shall be conclusive proof that he is the
legitimate child of that man.
Clause 117 of the Bill relates to presumption as to abetment of suicide by a married
woman.

64
This clause provides that a woman committed suicide had been abetted by her husband
or any relative of her husband and it is shown that she had committed suicide within a period
of seven years from the date of her marriage and that her husband or such relative of her
husband had subjected her to cruelty, the court may presume, having regard to all the other
circumstances of the case, that such suicide had been abetted by her husband or by such
relative of her husband.
Clause 118 of the Bill relates to presumption as to dowry death.
This clause provides that a person has committed the dowry death of a woman and it
is shown that soon before her death, such woman had been subjected by such person to
cruelty or harassment for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the court shall
presume that such person had caused the dowry death.
Clause 119 of the Bill relates to Court may presume existence of certain facts.
This clause provides that the Court may presume the existence of any fact which it
thinks likely to have happened, regard being had to the common course of natural events,
human conduct and public and private business, in their relation to the facts of the particular
case.
Clause 120 of the Bill relates to presumption as to absence of consent in certain
prosecution for rape.
This clause provides that the prosecution for rape, where sexual intercourse by the
accused is proved and the question is whether it was without the consent of the woman
alleged to have been raped and such woman states in her evidence before the court that she
did not consent, the court shall presume that she did not consent.
Clause 121 of the Bill relates to Estoppel.
This clause provides that one person has, by his declaration, act or omission,
intentionally caused or permitted another person to believe a thing to be true and to act upon
such belief, neither he nor his representative shall be allowed, in any suit or proceeding
between himself and such person or his representative, to deny the truth of that thing.
Clause 122 of the Bill relates to Estoppel of tenants and of licensee of person in
possession.
This clause provides that no tenant of immovable property, or person claiming through
such tenant, shall, during the continuance of the tenancy or any time thereafter, be permitted
to deny that the landlord of such tenant had, at the beginning of the tenancy, a title to such
immovable property; and no person who came upon any immovable property by the licence
of the person in possession thereof shall be permitted to deny that such person had a title to
such possession at the time when such licence was given.
Clause 123 of the Bill relates to Estoppel of acceptor of bill of exchange, bailee or
licensee.
This clause provides that acceptor of a bill of exchange shall be permitted the drawer
had authority to draw such bill or to endorse it; nor shall any bailee or licensee be permitted
to deny that his bailor or licensor had, at the time when the bailment or licence commenced,
authority to make such bailment or grant such licence.
Clause 124 of the Bill relates to the person who may testify.
This clause provides that all persons shall be competent to testify unless the Court
considers that they are prevented from understanding the questions put to them, or from
giving rational answers to those questions, by tender years, extreme old age, disease, whether
of body or mind, or any other cause of the same kind.
Clause 125 of the Bill relates to witness unable to communicate verbally.

65
This clause provides that a witness who is unable to speak may give his evidence in
any other manner in which he can make it intelligible, as by writing or by signs; but such
writing must be written and the signs made in open Court and evidence so given shall be
deemed to be oral evidence, subject to the assistance of interpreter.
Clause 126 of the Bill relates to competency of husband and wife as witnesses in
certain cases.
This clause provides that in all civil proceedings the parties to the suit, and the husband
or wife of any party to the suit, shall be competent witnesses and in criminal proceedings
against any person, the husband or wife of such person, respectively, shall be a competent
witness.
Clause 127 of the Bill relates to Judges and Magistrates.
This clause provides that the no Judge or Magistrate shall, except upon the special
order of some Court to which he is subordinate, be compelled to answer any questions as to
his own conduct in Court as such Judge or Magistrate, or as to anything which came to his
knowledge in Court as such Judge or Magistrate; but he may be examined as to other matters
which occurred in his presence whilst he was so acting.
Clause 128 of the Bill relates to communications during marriage.
This clause provides that the no person who is or has been married, shall be compelled
to disclose any communication made to him during marriage by any person to whom he is or
has been married; nor shall he be permitted to disclose any such communication, unless the
person who made it, or his representative in interest, consents, except in suits between
married persons, or proceedings in which one married person is prosecuted for any crime
committed against the other.
Clause 129 of the Bill relates to evidence as to affairs of State.
This clause provides that no one shall be permitted to give any evidence derived from
unpublished official records relating to any affairs of State, except with the permission of the
officer at the head of the department concerned, who shall give or withhold such permission
as he thinks fit.
Clause 130 of the Bill relates to the official communications.
This clause provides that no public officer shall be compelled to disclose
communications made to him in official confidence, when he considers that the public interests
would suffer by the disclosure.
Clause 131 of the Bill relates to the information as to commission of offences.
This clause provides that no Magistrate or police-officer shall be compelled to say
when he got any information as to the commission of any offence, and no revenue-officer
shall be compelled to say when he got any information as to the commission of any offence
against the public revenue.
Clause 132 of the Bill relates to professional communications.
This clause provides that no advocate, shall at any time be permitted, unless with his
client's express consent, to disclose any communication made to him in the course and for
the purpose of his service as such advocate, by or on behalf of his client, or to state the
contents or condition of any document with which he has become acquainted in the course
and for the purpose of his professional service, or to disclose any advice given by him to his
client in the course and for the purpose of such service.
Clause 133 of the Bill relates to privilege not waived by volunteering evidence.
This clause provides that any party to a suit gives evidence therein at his own instance
or otherwise, he shall not be deemed to have consented thereby to such disclosure as is

66
mentioned in section 132; and, if any party to a suit or proceeding calls any such advocate,
as a witness, he shall be deemed to have consented to such disclosure only if he questions
such advocate, on matters which, but for such question, he would not be at liberty to
disclose.
Clause 134 of the Bill relates to confidential communication with legal advisers.
This clause provides that no one shall be compelled to disclose to the Court any
confidential communication which has taken place between him and his legal adviser, unless
he offers himself as a witness, in which case he may be compelled to disclose any such
communications as may appear to the Court necessary to be known in order to explain any
evidence which he has given, but no others.
Clause 135 of the Bill relates to production of title-deeds of witness not a party.
This clause provides that no witness who is not a party to a suit shall be compelled to
produce his title-deeds to any property, or any document in virtue of which he holds any
property as pledge or mortgagee or any document the production of which might tend to
criminate him, unless he has agreed in writing to produce them with the person seeking the
production of such deeds or some person through whom he claims.
Clause 136 of the Bill relates to production of documents or electronic records which
another person, having possession, would refuse to produce.
This clause provides that no one shall be compelled to produce documents in his
possession or electronic records under his control, which any other person would be entitled
to refuse to produce if they were in his possession or control, unless such last-mentioned
person consents to their production.
Clause 137 of the Bill relates to witness not excused from answering on ground that
answer will criminate.
This clause provides that the witness shall not be excused from answering any question
as to any matter relevant to the matter in issue in any suit or in any civil or criminal proceeding,
upon the ground that the answer to such question will criminate, or may tend directly or
indirectly to criminate, such witness, or that it will expose, or tend directly or indirectly to
expose, such witness to a penalty or forfeiture of any kind:
Clause 138 of the Bill relates to accomplice.
This clause provides that the accomplice shall be a competent witness against an
accused person; and a conviction is not illegal merely because it proceeds upon the
uncorroborated testimony of an accomplice.
Clause 139 of the Bill relates to number of witnesses.
This clause provides that no particular number of witnesses shall in any case be
required for the proof of any fact.
Clause 140 of the Bill relates to order of production and examination of witnesses.
This clause provides that theorder in which witnesses are produced and examined
shall be regulated by the law and practice for the time being relating to civil and criminal
procedure respectively, and, in the absence of any such law, by the discretion of the Court.
Clause 141 of the Bill relates to Judge to decide as to admissibility of evidence.
This clause provides that the Judge shall admit the evidence if he thinks that the fact,
if proved, would be relevant, and not otherwise and the fact proposed to be proved is one of
which evidence is admissible only upon proof of some other fact, such last mentioned fact
must be proved before evidence is given of the fact first mentioned, unless the party undertakes
to give proof of such fact, and the Court is satisfied with such undertaking.
It further provides that if the relevancy of one alleged fact depends upon another

67
alleged fact being first proved, the Judge may, in his discretion, either permit evidence of the
first fact to be given before the second fact is proved, or require evidence to be given of the
second fact before evidence is given of the first fact.
Clause 142 of the Bill relates to examination of witnesses.
This clause provides that the examination of witness as examination-in-chief and the
examination of a witness by the adverse party shall be called his cross-examination and
subsequent to the cross-examination, by the party who called him, shall be called his
re-examination.
Clause 143 of the Bill relates to order of examinations.
This clause provides that the witnesses shall be first examined-in-chief, then
cross-examined on the relevant facts and then re-examined, but the cross-examination need
not be confined to the facts to which the witness testified on his examination-in-chief.
It further provides that re-examination shall be directed to the explanation of matters
referred to in cross-examination; and, if new matter is, by permission of the Court, introduced
in re-examination, the adverse party may further cross-examine upon that matter.
Clause 144 of the Bill relates to cross-examination of person called to produce a
document.
This clause provides that a person summoned to produce a document does not become
a witness by the mere fact that he produces it, and cannot be cross-examined unless and until
he is called as a witness.
Clause 145 of the Bill relates to witnesses to character may be cross-examined and re-
examined.
Clause 146 of the Bill relates to leading questions.
This clause provides that the definition for leading questions and when it raise it can
be raised in the examination of witness and the circumstances court may permit for leading
questions.
Clause 147 of the Bill relates to evidence as to matters in writing.
This clause provides that any witness may be asked, while under examination, whether
any contract, grant or other disposition of property, as to which he is giving evidence, was
not contained in a document, and if he says that it was, or if he is about to make any
statement as to the contents of any document, which, in the opinion of the Court, ought to
be produced, the adverse party may object to such evidence being given until such document
is produced, or until facts have been proved which entitle the party who called the witness
to give secondary evidence of it.
Clause 148 of the Bill relates to cross-examination as to previous statements in writing.
This clause provides that a witness may be cross-examined as to previous statements
made by him in writing or reduced into writing, and relevant to matters in question, without
such writing being shown to him, or being proved; but, if it is intended to contradict him by
the writing, his attention must, before the writing can be proved, be called to those parts of
it which are to be used for the purpose of contradicting him.
Clause 149 of the Bill relates to questions lawful in cross-examinations.
This clause provides for testing the veracity of the witness during cross-examination
and to discover his position in life and to say his credit and it is not permissible for cross-
examination of prosecutrix in cases filed under 64 of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita, 2023.
Clause 150 of the Bill relates to circumstances when witness to compel to answer.

68
Clause 151 of the Bill relates to Court to decide when question shall be asked and
when witness compelled to answer.
Clause 152 of the Bill relates to question not to be asked without reasonable grounds.
Clause 153 of the Bill relates to procedure of Court in case of question being asked
without reasonable grounds.
This clause provides that the Court is of opinion that any question was asked without
reasonable grounds, it may, if it was asked by any advocate, report the circumstances of the
case to the High Court or other authority to which such advocate, is subject in the exercise
of his profession.
Clause 154 of the Bill relates to indecent and scandalous questions.
This clause provides that the Court may forbid any questions or inquiries which it
regards as indecent or scandalous, although such questions or inquiries may have some
bearing on the questions before the Court, unless they relate to facts in issue, or to matters
necessary to be known in order to determine whether or not the facts in issue existed.
Clause 155 of the Bill relates to questions intended to insult or annoy.
This clause provides that the Court shall forbid any question which appears to it to be
intended to insult or annoy, or which, though proper in itself, appears to the Court needlessly
offensive in form.
Clause 156 of the Bill relates to exclusion of evidence to contradict answers to questions
testing veracity.
Clause 157 of the Bill relates to question by party to his own witness.
This clause provides that the Court may, in its discretion, permit the person who calls
a witness to put any questions to him which might be put in cross-examination by the
adverse party.
Clause 158 of the Bill relates to impeaching credit of witness.
This clause provides that the credit of a witness may be impeached in by the adverse
party or with the consent of the Court.
Clause 159 of the Bill relates to questions tending to corroborate evidence of relevant
fact, admissible.
This clause provides that a witness whom it is intended to corroborate gives evidence
of any relevant fact, he may be questioned as to any other circumstances which he observed
at or near to the time or place at which such relevant fact occurred, if the Court is of opinion
that such circumstances, if proved, would corroborate the testimony of the witness as to the
relevant fact which he testifies.
Clause 160 of the Bill relates to former statements of witness may be proved to
corroborate later testimony as to same fact.
This clause provides that in order to corroborate the testimony of a witness, any
former statement made by such witness relating to the same fact, at or about the time when
the fact took place, or before any authority legally competent to investigate the fact, may be
proved.
Clause 161 of the Bill relates to matters may be proved in connection with proved
statement relevant under section 26 or 27.
Clause 162 of the Bill relates to refreshing memory of the witness.
This clause provides that a witness may, while under examination, refresh his memory
by referring to any writing made by himself at the time of the transaction concerning which
he is questioned, or so soon afterwards that the Court considers it likely that the transaction

69
was at that time fresh in his memory and further a witness may refresh his memory by
reference to any document, he may, with the permission of the Court, refer to a copy of
document.
Clause 163 of the Bill relates to testimony to facts stated in document mentioned in
clause 162.
This clause provides that a witness may also testify to facts mentioned in any such
document as is mentioned in clause 162, although he has no specific recollection of the facts
themselves, if he is sure that the facts were correctly recorded in the document.
Clause 164 of the Bill relates to right of adverse party as to writing used to refresh
memory.
This clause provides that any writing referred to under the provisions of the two last
preceding sections must be produced and shown to the adverse party if he requires it; such
party may, if he pleases, cross-examine the witness thereupon.
Clause 165 of the Bill relates to production of documents.
This clause provides that a witness summoned to produce a document in possession
or power, bring it subject to the decision of the Court and further determine on its admissibility.
Clause 166 of the Bill relates to giving, as evidence, of document called for and produced
on notice.
This clause provides that a party calls for a document which he has given the other
party notice to produce, and such document is produced and inspected by the party calling
for its production, he is bound to give it as evidence if the party producing it requires him to
do so.
Clause 167 of the Bill relates to using, as evidence, of document production of which
was refused on notice.
This clause provides that a party refuses to produce a document which he has had
notice to produce, he cannot afterwards use the document as evidence without the consent
of the other party or the order of the Court.
Clause 168 of the Bill relates to Judge's power to put questions or order production.
This clause provides that the Judge may, in order to discover or obtain proof of
relevant facts, ask any question he considers necessary, in any form, at any time, of any
witness, or of the parties about any fact; and may order the production of any document or
thing; and neither the parties nor their representatives shall be entitled to make any objection
to any such question or order, nor, without the leave of the Court, to cross-examine any
witness upon any answer given in reply to any such question
Clause 169 of the Bill relates to no new trial for improper admission or rejection of
evidence.
This clause provides that the improper admission or rejection of evidence shall not be
ground of itself for a new trial or reversal of any decision in any case, if it shall appear to the
Court before which such objection is raised that, independently of the evidence objected to
and admitted, there was sufficient evidence to justify the decision, or that, if the rejected
evidence had been received, it ought not to have varied the decision.
Clause 170 of the Bill relates to repeal and savings.

FINANCIAL  MEMORANDUM
The Bharatiya Sakshya Bill, 2023, if enacted, is not likely to involve any expenditure,
either recurring or non-recurring, from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
70

LOK  SABHA
————
A
BILL
to consolidate and to provide for general rules and principles of evidence for fair trail.
————
(Shri Amit Shah, Minister of Home Affairs and Cooperation)
MGIPMRND—276LS—10-08-2023.

Annexure-II 
List of Domain Experts 
1. Shri Praveen Sinha, Ex-Special Director, Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) 
2. Dr. Padmini Singh, Joint Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs 
3. Smt. Anupama Nilekar Chandra, Additional Director General (ADG), Bureau of 
Police Research & Development (BPR&D) 
4. Dr. Vikram Singh, Former Director General of Police (DGP) 
5. Prof. Naveen Chaudhary, National Forensic Sciences University, Gandhinagar, 
Gujarat 
6. Ms. Sonia Mathur, Senior Advocate 
7. Shri Jagdish Rana, Advocate 
8. Shri Anand Dey, Advocate 
9. Dr. Pinky Anand, Senior Advocate and Former Additional Solicitor General of India 
10. Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi, Chairman, Law Commission of India 
11. Dr. Adish C. Aggarwala, Senior Advocate, President, Supreme Court Bar Association 
12. Justice (Retd.) Satish Chandra 
13. Shri Utkarsh Sharma, Advocate 
14. Shri K.L. Janjani, Senior Advocate 
15. Shri Sanjeev Deshpande, Senior Advocate 
16. Prof. (Dr.) Faizan Mustafa, Former Vice-Chancellor, National Academy of Legal 
Studies and Research (NALSAR) 
17. Dr. Aditya Sondhi, Senior Advocate 
18. Shri Amit Desai, Senior Advocate 
19. Shri Priyank Kanoongo, Chairperson, National Commission for Protection of Child 
Rights (NCPCR) 